Understand Psychology

This book is dedicated to Professor Steven Rose, who ﬁrst introduced me
to levels of analysis as an alternative to reductionism.

Understand Psychology Nicky Hayes

For UK order enquiries: please contact Bookpoint Ltd, 130 Milton Park,
Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4SB. Telephone: +44 (0) 1235 827720. Fax: +44 (0)
1235 400454. Lines are open 09.00--17.00, Monday to Saturday, with a
24-hour message answering service. Details about our titles and how to
order are available at www.teachyourself.com For USA order enquiries:
please contact McGraw-Hill Customer Services, PO Box 545, Blacklick, OH
43004-0545, USA. Telephone: 1-800-722-4726. Fax: 1-614-755-5645. For
Canada order enquiries: please contact McGraw-Hill Ryerson Ltd, 300
Water St, Whitby, Ontario L1N 9B6, Canada. Telephone: 905 430 5000. Fax:
905 430 5020. Long renowned as the authoritative source for self-guided
learning -- with more than 50 million copies sold worldwide -- the Teach
Yourself series includes over 500 titles in the ﬁelds of languages,
crafts, hobbies, business, computing and education. British Library
Cataloguing in Publication Data: a catalogue record for this title is
available from the British Library. Library of Congress Catalog Card
Number: on ﬁle. First published in UK 1994 by Hodder Education, part of
Hachette UK, 338 Euston Road, London NW1 3BH. First published in US 1994
by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. This edition published 2010.
Previously published as Teach Yourself Psychology. The Teach Yourself
name is a registered trade mark of Hodder Headline. Copyright © 1994,
2002, 2003, 2008, 2010 Nicky Hayes In UK: All rights reserved. Apart
from any permitted use under UK copyright law, no part of this
publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any
information, storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher or under licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency
Limited. Further details of such licences (for reprographic
reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing Agency
Limited, of Saffron House, 6--10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. In US:
All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States
Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Typeset by Macmillan Publishing Solutions. Printed in Great Britain for
Hodder Education, an Hachette UK Company, 338 Euston Road, London NW1
3BH, by CPI Cox & Wyman, Reading, Berkshire RG1 8EX. The publisher has
used its best endeavours to ensure that the URLs for external websites
referred to in this book are correct and active at the time of going to
press. However, the publisher and the author have no responsibility for
the websites and can make no guarantee that a site will remain live or
that the content will remain relevant, decent or appropriate. Hachette
UK's policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable and recyclable
products and made from wood grown in sustainable forests. The logging
and manufacturing processes are expected to conform to the environmental
regulations of the country of origin. Impression number

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Year

2014 2013 2012 2011 2010

Any ancillary media packaged with the printed version of this book will
not be included in this eBook2

Acknowledgements My thanks are due to Usha Patel, Colin Smith, Graham
Gibbs and Christine Sefton, whose different kinds of support helped me
so much in the preparation of the ﬁrst edition of this book; and to
David Griggs whose support has been invaluable in the preparation of
subsequent editions.

Acknowledgements

v

Contents

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

vi

Meet the author Only got a minute? Only got ﬁve minutes? Introducing
psychology Understanding the mind Levels of explanation Areas of
psychology Self and others The ﬁrst relationships The self-concept
Cultural and social inﬂuences Understanding other people Co-operation,
compliance and obedience Understanding other people Social
representations Emotional living Emotions Negative emotions Stress and
coping Positive psychology Consciousness and the brain Biological
rhythms Drugs and consciousness Sleep and dreaming Motivation Physical
motives Behavioural motives Cognitive motives Social motivation
Cognition Thinking Perception Memory

viii x xii 1 1 5 8 12 12 18 24 33 33 41 48 56 56 63 72 78 84 85 89 102
109 110 111 113 119 133 134 139 146

8

Evolution, genetics and learning Evolution Genetic mechanisms Levels of
learning 9 Learning and intelligence Forms of learning Social learning
Intelligence 10 Childhood and adolescence Childhood Adolescence 11
Adulthood, retirement and ageing Adulthood Retirement Ageing 12 Working
life Why do people work? Human resource management Organizational
culture 13 Leisure Watching TV Computer games Sport psychology 14
Education and health The psychology of teaching and learning Counselling
and therapy Health psychology 15 Living in the world Proxemics and
privacy Sources of environmental stress Disasters and accidents 16
Developing psychological understanding What do psychologists do?
Developing psychological knowledge Conducting psychological research
Taking it further Index

157 159 169 175 183 183 189 200 209 209 227 234 234 240 246 255 256 263
270 275 276 282 291 305 306 318 322 327 328 333 339 349 350 352 355 365
368

Contents

vii

Meet the author Welcome to Understand Psychology! Psychology, in
general, is about ordinary people -- how we think, act and make sense of
our worlds. It's a subject which concerns us all, being mainly about
ourselves, and in this book I have tried to give you a straightforward
and easy introduction to some of its main areas. Human beings, as you
know, are complicated things, and what this book won't do is to tell you
everything you need to know about people. No book could do that, because
everybody's different. But what it will do is show you some of the
processes and inﬂuences which make us who we are and, with luck, it will
give you a little insight into your personal life too. It's quite
amazing how even small psychological insights can help us to realize
what is going on, and it doesn't hurt any of us to understand ourselves
a bit better -- let alone other people. We'll begin our investigation of
psychology by looking at psychology in general -- how it has developed
and some of its main areas. Then we'll go on to look at ourselves: in
particular, how we connect with the social world in which we ﬁnd
ourselves, and how we understand other people. Then we will go on to
explore more personal matters -- emotions, states of mind, motivation
and cognitions. Following that, we'll be looking at how our biological
heritage inﬂuences us, in terms of evolution, genetics, and also in
terms of the many different ways that human beings are able to learn.
Then we will look at some of the broad patterns of development which are
apparent during childhood and adolescence, and on throughout our life
spans. The ﬁrst 11 chapters, therefore, mainly cover psychological
knowledge obtained from academic research. In the following four
chapters you will have a taste of applied psychology -- not in as much
detail as in Understand Applied Psychology, of course, but enough to get
a general

viii

idea of how psychologists have looked at working life, leisure,
education and health, and the environment. Finally, Chapter 16 will
explore how psychologists go about their research, and what is involved
in becoming a professional psychologist. This book can't possibly tell
you everything about psychology -- it would need to be far more massive
than it is to do that -- but it will give you a taste of what psychology
is about. Speaking personally, I have always found psychology to be a
fascinating subject, ranging as it does from brain chemistry to social
cultures, and covering so much personal stuff in between. I know that a
lot of other people share my interest too, without necessarily wanting
to become professional psychologists themselves. So enjoy this book, and
if you ﬁnd yourself wanting to know more about what professional
psychologists do, then think about following it up with Understand
Applied Psychology. Have fun! Nicky Hayes

Meet the author

ix

Only got a minute? Psychology is about understanding people -- ordinary
people as well as people who are extraordinary or special in some way.
Psychologists study how the mind works, and why we do the things that we
do. That doesn't mean, though, that studying psychology gives you an
instant knowledge of how people think. People work on so many levels and
everyone is so different from everyone else that nobody could possibly
know everything about even one other person. But we can know a few
general things which are helpful in understanding people. More
importantly, we can ﬁnd out about how aspects of our psychology develop,
what they are inﬂuenced by, how we make sense of our worlds and how we
go about gathering knowledge. Knowing the processes which inﬂuence the
workings of our minds can give us a great deal of insight when we are
trying to understand how one person has developed.

x

We have social and personal needs to satisfy. Our cognition is affected
by memory, perception and thinking. Social learning, through children's
play and adults' work, inﬂuences our development. Professional
psychologists work in many ways to enhance educational achievement and
physical health, as well as helping people with problems in living.
Crowding, invasion of personal space, pollution and noise can cause
stress; human error and poor planning can cause disasters, resulting in
post-traumatic stress disorder and economic loss. Psychology's breadth
and depth provides us with a systematic, research-based understanding of
many different areas of life.

Only got a minute?

xi

5

Only got ﬁve minutes?

Human beings are social animals, and our ﬁrst relationships are
important -- the human infant cannot survive without other people so we
are geared towards sociability from birth. As we grow older, our sense
of self is also linked with our social experience: both through our
interactions with other people, and through the cultural beliefs with
which we make sense of our experiences. We are able to communicate using
both verbal and non-verbal signals, and the social groups we belong to
quickly develop shared beliefs. Maintaining social harmony is important
to us, so we try to co-operate with others as much as we can. The mass
media over-emphasizes negative emotions and underplays positive ones,
meaning that people neglect the positive aspects of their lives.
Positive psychology emphasizes pleasant and interesting emotions, and
demonstrates how positive thinking patterns can enhance everyday life.
But we are also dominated by our biological rhythms: daylight has an
effect on the brain and alters our patterns of alertness and
consciousness; the effects of drugs show how consciousness can be
adjusted by subtle biochemical changes; the time we spend dreaming is
important for organizing the mass of information we have been bombarded
with during our waking hours. Human motivation is multi-level and
complex. Our physiological needs can inﬂuence our perceptions and
awareness if unsatisﬁed. The way that we make sense of our worlds has a
direct inﬂuence on what we do and how we interact with others -- our
need for social acceptance and respect are essential motivators for how
we behave with others. Concepts and schemas help us to store our
experiences so we can use that knowledge for new purposes, or in new
contexts. Studies of both problem-solving and perception show how much
mental readiness can affect or even distort our cognition. Memory for
factual information can be enhanced by

xii

working with it and processing the material, but memory, too, is a much
more active process than people realize. Understanding evolutionary
processes is important for recognizing how the human being has
developed. Although simplistic similarities have been drawn with other
animals, the key in human evolution is our adaptability, which allows us
to survive in very different environments -- the environment shapes
which parts of our genetic information will be inﬂuential in our
development. The capacity to learn is also genetically shaped. In human
beings, learning takes many forms, from basic conditioning to
sophisticated social or cognitive analysis. Conditioning is simply
associating a stimulus with some kind of behavioural response, and can
be learned by almost all animals. Babies and children are particularly
ready to learn from adults, and use social learning mechanisms to do so,
while at all ages skills are learned by practice, which automatizes
actions so that they become ﬂuent and adaptable. Intelligence is now
recognized to consist of many different skills and abilities, rather
than being a single measurable quantity. Children's play reﬂects the
many skills that they will need as adults, allowing them to practise
cognitive, physical and social skills. Interacting with siblings or
other children can help pre-schoolers develop their emotional skills,
although adult guidance is always needed to shape reactions. Similarly,
achievement motivation is closely bound in with social support from
adults and the fostering of high self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Adolescence is a
time of change and transition, particularly in terms of the increasing
number of social roles. Retirement brings its own challenges, and a
constructive retirement needs the person to be able to ﬁnd replacements
for the structures and roles of working life. When we look at ageing we
ﬁnd a more positive picture than is generally believed, with practice
producing improvements in some skills rather than ageing being just an
inevitable decline. Recent psychological research shows the importance
of social interactions and positive leadership at work. Organizational
cultures, however, are multi-layered, reﬂecting underlying social

Only got ﬁve minutes?

xiii

representations shared by the organization's members. Modern lives
include signiﬁcant time for leisure activity, with TV being a popular
choice. The inﬂuence of TV watching depends mainly on its content.
Prosocial programmes not surprisingly produce prosocial effects, while
the dangers of negative messages arise more from the inﬂuence of the
social scripts portrayed than from the modelling of individual actions.
Computer games are not inevitably damaging, and can enhance self-efﬁcacy
beliefs and other abilities, although too much physical passivity in
leisure time will inevitably produce harmful physical effects. Sport
psychology has tended to focus on the learning of skills and the
importance of positive thinking in encouraging successful performance.
Education and health are also important aspects of our lives. Teaching
and learning are social as well as cognitive activities, and a warm and
supportive learning environment can result in unexpectedly high
achievement. Cognitive psychology shows us how processing information
and having opportunities for success are also signiﬁcant factors in
successful learning. Educational psychologists identify and develop
support programmes for children with learning disorders, and also help
with social issues like bullying, while health psychologists help to
develop ways of maximizing our physical health. Environmental psychology
is concerned with the social world, the effects of crowding or invasion
of personal space, as well as the design of living areas. Stress can be
produced by a number of environmental sources, such as noise, pollution
and temperature. Psychological research into major disasters has
identiﬁed several sources of error, as well as the diagnosis and
treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder. The broad knowledge of
psychologists means that they can contribute to many different areas of
life. A lot of psychological research involves observations, including
surveys and information from psychometric tests. More recently, in-depth
interviewing and account analysis have become popular methods, as they
can give us an insight into people's own experience.

xiv

1 Introducing psychology In this chapter you will learn: • how
'psychology ' can be deﬁned • the importance of levels of explanation •
about some major areas of psychology. What is psychology? Different
psychologists would answer that question in different ways. But the most
straightforward answer is probably that psychology is about
understanding people: how they think, what they say, and why they do
what they do. It's about ﬁnding out what motivates people, what is
important to us, and why we are all so individual. Not every
psychologist would say that, because psychologists work in lots of
different ﬁelds, and for some their main interest is in understanding
animals, or brain cells, or something similar. But in essence,
psychology and psychologists are all about understanding people.

Understanding the mind The problem with trying to understand people,
though, is that people are complex, and change all the time. We learn
from our experiences, we form good intentions, and we are affected by
circumstances. So what we do can be inﬂuenced by a great many different
factors. Also, everyone has their own ideas and opinions about what
people are really like. Those ideas inﬂuence what we

1.  Introducing psychology

1

do far more than we realize, and they also determine how we interpret
what other people are doing. Since each of us has had a different life,
with different experiences, these ideas can be very different from one
person to the next.

Insight There's never just one reason why somebody does something.
People do things for lots of reasons, and some of them are completely
unconscious. So looking for a single reason for someone's actions is
always a misjudgement of some sort -- and sometimes it can be quite a
serious one. The ﬁrst part of the word 'psychology' comes from the Greek
word psyche, which means 'the soul', or 'the essence of life' and is
sometimes portrayed as a female ﬁgure representing the mind. The second
part of the word also comes from the Greek language, logos, and
indicates knowledge or science. So combining the two gives us the idea
of psychology as being the science of the mind and this is what modern
psychology is mainly focused on. The human mind, though, is more complex
than people realize, and it is easy to over-simplify what it is really
like. People often say, for example, that the brain is like a computer,
which works by lots of neurones switching on and off and producing
thoughts as a result. This is partly true, but it doesn't explain how
the human mind itself works -- or at least, only on a very simple level.
Which neurones ﬁre, and what thoughts they produce, is affected by our
physiological state, our physical experiences, our social situations,
our past experiences, and the different human cultures and groups which
we encounter in our lives. A science which tries to understand the human
mind has to deal with many levels of understanding, and bring together
an unbelievable range of different factors. What this means is that
there are no easy answers to understanding people. Any one person's mind
is so complex that we could only understand it by knowing everything
about their whole life -- and

2

also knowing how their previous learning had led them to interpret and
make sense of the experiences that they have had. What we can
understand, though, are some of the ways that the mind works, and how
different factors combine together. As the science of psychology has
developed over the past 150 years or so, psychologists have taken many
different approaches to understanding the human mind -- often believing
that their particular approach would provide all the answers. Nobody has
managed that, but each approach has helped to throw light on different
parts of the puzzle, and so contribute to the whole picture.
Psychological knowledge, then, is more about processes than predictions.
We know, for instance, what is happening when we dream -- how the mind
takes the jumble of information, memories and thoughts which constitute
our experience during the waking day, sifts through it all, making
connections with what we already know, and ﬁles it away in our memories.
That doesn't mean we know what someone is going to dream about, or what
dream objects stand for, because everyone is different and symbols mean
different things to different people. But it does help us to make sense
of real dreams that people have had, and to identify anxieties and
concerns reﬂected in the dream's content. STUDYING THE MIND Early
psychologists explored how the mind works by thinking about it, and
trying to analyse the thoughts and feelings they were experiencing. This
is known as introspection, and this method gave us quite a few insights
into memory, attention, how our emotions affect us, and other aspects of
our experience. But the mind has many layers, and we are not directly
aware of a lot of what it does. Some -- probably most -- of what it does
happens unconsciously, so thinking consciously about our experiences
can't tell us everything. Psychiatrists like Freud, at the beginning of
the twentieth century, showed how unconscious experiences and memories
can lead to disturbances in adult behaviour, and even to mental illness.
But they, too, are only a small part of what goes on.

1.  Introducing psychology

3

The ﬁrst half of the twentieth century was strongly inﬂuenced by what is
known as modernism -- a rejection of traditional thinking, and an
emphasis on building a new society by starting from the basics. Science,
it was felt, could sort out most of the world's problems, using
knowledge it had developed from understanding how basic building blocks
such as cells, genes, atoms or elements combined to produce the world we
live in. The American psychologist J. B. Watson argued that psychology
too had its basic building block: the learning unit -- the connection
between stimulus and response. Psychology, Watson argued, should be
objective, dealing only with information which can be directly observed
and measured -- in other words, with people's behaviour, not their
minds. Watson called this behaviorism, and as the approach developed, it
became a powerful force within psychology. Some behaviourists, such as
B. F. Skinner, insisted that behaviour was the only thing that mattered,
and that thoughts, feelings or personal experiences were unimportant --
even illusions -- because you couldn't study them directly. Over time,
other psychologists objected to this mechanistic approach, and began to
explore more holistic or social aspects of human experiences. Gradually,
psychologists became better at studying experience as well as behaviour.
They began conducting research which allowed them to investigate in a
careful, scientiﬁc way how people think, and how we make sense of our
experience. Modern psychologists don't use the same methods as those
early psychologists, of course, but they are just as interested in
understanding the human mind as they are in understanding people's
behaviour. A modern deﬁnition of psychology would probably refer to it
as the scientiﬁc study of experience and behaviour. That means that as
psychologists we are interested in what people experience as well as
what they actually do. More recently, too, psychologists have begun to
understand the importance of the social inﬂuences in our lives -- both
directly, through the groups, families and communities that we
participate in, and indirectly, through our social experience and
understanding. We need to put all these types of knowledge together if
we really want to understand human beings.

4

Psychologists, of course, aren't the only people who are trying to
understand human beings. A sociologist, for example, will try to
understand human beings from the point of view of people in society, and
how groups of people and social trends emerge, whereas a psychologist is
interested mainly in the individual person. That doesn't mean that we
can ignore society: as we will see in the next chapter and elsewhere in
this book, it simply isn't realistic to try to understand an individual
person as if their society or culture had nothing to do with what they
were like. But it means that in psychology we take the individual
person, rather than society as a whole, as our starting point.

Levels of explanation One of the most important lessons that we have
learned from the history of psychology is that just looking at one
single aspect of experience or behaviour isn't enough. People do things
for lots of different reasons, and usually for several reasons at once.
If we try to single out just one of those reasons, as if that were the
only explanation, then we hit problems straight away. Saying, 'Oh,
they're really intelligent' to explain why someone became a research
physicist doesn't answer the whole question, because it doesn't tell us
why they became interested in science in the ﬁrst place -- or even why
they went into an academic career at all, instead of becoming a
politician or going into business. Instead, we have to look at what
people do from several different angles, to see how all the different
factors and inﬂuences work together to produce the ﬁnal outcome. This is
where we come to the idea of levels of explanation, or levels of
analysis. Anything that we do can be studied from several different
levels. Imagine, for instance, that you came across someone reading this
book. If you wanted to understand what was going on there, you could
look at it from a number of different levels. You might ask what is
going on in the actual process of reading. How do people look at a set
of marks on a printed page and respond to them as if they were words
that someone has spoken? Understanding that would be part of an
explanation of what was going on.

1.  Introducing psychology

5

But it wouldn't be the whole answer. There would also be the question of
why the person was reading this particular book, rather than, say, a
book about car mechanics. This would lead us into questions about their
own personal experience and why they had developed some interests rather
than others. We might also ask why they were reading in the ﬁrst place,
rather than, say, cultivating rice or watching TV. This would lead us
into a different set of questions, which would include questions about
their particular culture as well as questions about personal habits,
beliefs and moods.

Insight Understanding what the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle are made of
won't tell you anything at all about what the picture represents. In the
same way, understanding how brain cells work won't tell you what someone
is thinking. In other words, we can look at the same thing using
different levels of explanation. One psychologist studying reading might
use a very general level, such as looking at cultural inﬂuences on human
behaviour. Another might approach it at the level of social inﬂuence, by
looking at how family or similar groups affect what we do, and also how
we conform to social expectations -- or don't, as the case may be. Some
psychologists might look at it in terms of personal habits and past
experiences, while others would seek to understand how the visual
information is processed in the brain. All of these, and many others,
are levels of explanation that we can use in our attempt to understand
human beings. Psychologists know that no single level of explanation is
going to be enough in itself, but researchers focus on one single level
in their work because trying to deal with everything all at once would
simply be too much. EMERGENT PROPERTIES Understanding everything about
one level of explanation couldn't give us the whole answer, because each
level of explanation is more than just the sum of the lower level.
Sometimes, for instance, you hear people claiming that once we know
about all the different nerve cells in the brain, then we will know all
there is to know about how the brain

6

works. But this isn't true, because there are often entirely new
properties which emerge when the different parts are combined into a
whole system. And these emergent properties can make all the difference.
Perhaps this will be clearer if I take an everyday example. A cake is
made up of everyday ingredients: ﬂour, egg, butter, and so on. To
understand what a cake is, you would have to know about these. But
knowing about them wouldn't tell you everything about the cake, because
a cake has properties which the single ingredients on their own don't
have. At the simplest level, it has a taste and texture which are not
present in the single ingredients. At higher levels, it may have
cultural or symbolic signiﬁcance. It might be a birthday or a wedding
cake, or symbolize a particular religious festival. None of these can be
deduced simply by studying the ingredients. It's the same with human
beings. We can learn a great deal about people by studying the brain and
how it works, but we can't learn everything. We may be able to trace
which nerve cells in the brain are active when we are solving a problem,
but this doesn't tell us how we are working out a solution, or why we
are thinking about the problem in the ﬁrst place. We need to bring
together as many levels of explanation as possible, and to study the
emergent properties of each new level, to make any sense of the human
mind. Table 1.1 shows some of the main levels of explanation which
psychologists use in analysing problems. A professional psychologist,
dealing with real people, needs to be aware of how all of these levels
of explanation interact. This is partly why professional training as a
psychologist takes so many years. Academic psychologists, though, use a
more limited number of levels of explanation at any one time, because
they are trying to analyse and understand psychological processes,
rather than whole people. Understanding the individual person, then, is
a pretty massive task, and it would be unrealistic to think that we know
everything there is to know. When it comes to human beings, there aren't
any easy answers. After reading this book, you won't ﬁnd that you can
understand everyone you've ever met. But what you will ﬁnd,

1.  Introducing psychology

7

I hope, is that you know a great deal more about people than you knew
before; and you may also ﬁnd that it sometimes helps you to understand
the people around you a little better. Table 1.1 Levels of explanation.
Cultural inﬂuences Socio-political inﬂuences Subculture and social
status Social cognition Social groups, family etc. Interpersonal
interaction Intentions and motives Cognition and emotion Habits and
learned associations Genetics and evolution Physiology Cellular biology
Organic chemistry Quantum physics

冎

Main area of psychological interest

冎

Range of psychological interest

Areas of psychology Psychology, as we've seen, is about people. But
people have complex lives, and we need to gather information about them
in many different ways. So professional psychologists need to understand
the different areas of psychology, and how each of them contributes to
our understanding. There are six of these, roughly speaking, and each
one gives us a different kind of information.

Insight The amount of psychological knowledge which has been accumulated
over the past century is so large that modern psychologists have to
specialize -- nobody could know everything there is to know about
psychology because there's just too much of it.

8

One of the areas of modern psychological knowledge is known as cognitive
psychology. This has to do, in essence, with how we think. It includes
mental processes such as taking in information and making sense of it (a
process we call perception), remembering things, or recognizing them,
and also thinking and reasoning. These mental processes are known as
cognition, which is how cognitive psychology gets its name.
Psychologists studying cognition have discovered a great deal about how
people's minds work, and that information is often useful when we are
trying to understand why someone is acting in a particular way. Another
important branch of modern psychology is concerned with other people --
how they inﬂuence us, and how we inﬂuence them in turn. This is known as
social psychology. It ranges from looking at our body language to
understanding cultural norms and expectations, or why people obey those
in authority, or when someone will or won't help a person in need.
Social psychologists are also interested in how we make sense of our
social experience. That part of social psychology is about the mental
side of social life, so it is known as social cognition. Some
psychologists focus on what makes people different from one another.
Some people seem to be more intelligent than others; some people are
highly creative while other people are not, and each of us has our own
special personality. We also differ in motivation: some of us are keen
to get ahead in life, while others are concerned mainly with
establishing a happy home and family. Individual psychology is concerned
with what motivates people, as well as with how people are different
from one another. All this makes it seem as though understanding people
is really just about looking at what they do, or how they process
information. And that is a large part of it. But, sometimes, what we do
or how we think is also inﬂuenced by our physical state. If we are tired
or stressed, for instance, we often don't make decisions very well, or
we can become irritable with the people around us. So an important part
of psychology is concerned with understanding how our physiological
state inﬂuences us, and this is known as

1.  Introducing psychology

9

physiological psychology or, sometimes, bio-psychology. Physiological
psychologists look at areas like the effects of brain damage, how drugs
work, sleep and dreaming, or understanding stress. Each year that passes
adds its store of experience and knowledge, but how do we use that
experience? And do we inevitably decline as we get older? Developmental
psychology is concerned with understanding how changes in childhood,
adolescence, adulthood, and old age affect us, and what those changes
actually involve. Interestingly, the picture which emerges when we
really begin studying the processes of maturity and ageing is much more
optimistic than society often assumes -- but we will look into that in
more detail in Chapter 11. Comparative psychology, as its name suggests,
is all about making comparisons. But what are we comparing ourselves
with? As we know from evolutionary biology, human beings are a kind of
animal -- even if rather a special one. So that leads us to some very
interesting questions about how close we are to other animals, and
whether we have anything in common with them -- or whether they have
anything in common with us. Comparative psychologists are interested in
animal behaviour in its own right, but they are also interested in
studying how animals interact with one another because this might give
us some clues to understanding human beings. We can see, then, that
psychology is really quite a broad topic. It covers a great many levels
of explanation, ranging from research at the molecular level as
physiological psychologists investigate how drugs work in the brain, to
research into the shared beliefs of whole cultures, as social
psychologists investigate social representations. And it tries to bring
together the insights obtained from these levels, and from the different
areas of psychological research, to make sense of what people do and how
they understand their worlds.

10

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Psychology is about understanding people. People
are complicated and there are no simple answers. 2 Early psychologists
used introspection -- analyzing their own thoughts and reactions
subjectively. 3 The behaviourists claimed that studying behaviour was
the only scientiﬁc approach. 4 Modern psychology includes the study of
experience as well as behaviour. 5 Psychology can be studied at many
levels, ranging from molecular to societal, but most psychologists
conduct research on just one level of analysis at a time. 6 There are
emergent properties at higher levels which cannot be predicted by
studying lower ones. 7 Psychology has six major research areas:
cognitive and social psychologists explore how the mind and our social
inﬂuences affect us. 8 Individual and physiological psychologists
explore abilities and mechanisms of the body. 9 Developmental and
comparative psychology are both concerned with aspects of development:
our personal development and our evolutionary history. 10 Most
psychologists work in applied psychology rather than in a 'pure'
research area.

1.  Introducing psychology

11

2 Self and others In this chapter you will learn: • why sociability in
human babies is so important • how other people can change the way we
feel about ourselves • to identify three different cultural approaches
to understanding ourselves. This chapter is about who we are and how we
come to be that way. Each of us has different life experiences and we
were each born with our own particular temperament and physique, which
have shaped those experiences. These things all help to make us
different from one another. Even newborn babies differ in their likes
and dislikes. So we are all different from the start. But we also live
in society, and as part of that, we learn how to act with other people,
and how to recognize experiences that we have in common. We inherit a
powerful tendency to be sociable and to learn from other people who
matter to us. And that, just as much as our physical characteristics or
temperament, is crucially important in who we are.

The ﬁrst relationships All over the world, babies are brought up in
different ways. The experience of an Inuit child, living in a
traditional community in the Arctic regions of northern Canada, are
widely different from the everyday experiences of an infant growing up
in Papua

12

New Guinea; and both of these are different from the experiences of a
child growing up in modern Britain. In some communities babies are kept
tightly wrapped up (swaddled), in others they wear few if any clothes;
in some communities they are carried around continuously, while in
others they spend most of their day in cots or beds. And in some
communities they spend all their time with their mothers, while in
others they are looked after by relatives, friends, or even older
children. Yet despite all these different conditions all over the world,
babies grow and, if they survive, generally develop into mature,
balanced adults. Human babies can adapt to a tremendous range of
different environments and conditions. These differences in how they are
looked after don't really matter, as long as a baby gets what it really
needs for healthy development. And what it needs most of all is other
people.

Insight Humans are the most widely adaptable creatures on Earth, but we
adapt by modifying our environments rather than our bodies, and passing
on that knowledge to the next generation. So being able to learn from
others is our most important survival skill. Human infants, when they
are ﬁrst born, are totally helpless physically. They have to be fed,
cleaned and carried around by other, older humans, and without this they
would not be able to survive. This physical helplessness continues for a
very long time -- far longer than in any other animal. On the face of
it, it would seem as if luck, as much as anything else, is what helps
babies to get through. But nature doesn't really work that way. As we
will see in Chapter 8, the process of evolution means that we would
develop only in a certain kind of way if it gave us an increased chance
of surviving. And the human infant is actually a long way from being as
helpless as it looks. Human infants are born supremely adapted for
sociability. Being unable to move themselves, as well as being unable to
cling

2.  Self and others

13

to their mothers as many animals do, they depend completely on other
people. Because of this, they are very strongly predisposed to interact
with people -- and this is true of babies all over the world. For
example, when an infant is ﬁrst born it is unable to change the focus of
its eyes. However, those eyes have a ﬁxed focus at just the right
distance to allow the child to look at its mother's face while it is
breastfeeding -- and this is from the ﬁrst day after birth. Human
infants also begin to make facial expressions very soon after birth.
These movements are often quite tiny, but their parents, who are used to
the baby's face, can recognize them. A human infant inherits a tendency
to smile when it sees something which resembles a human face -- and as
it gets older, the resemblance needs to be more and more exact. Ahrens
(1954) showed that very young babies, in their ﬁrst month or so, would
smile when they saw an oval shape with two dots in it for eyes; but as
the baby grew older, more detail was needed until by four months the
infant would smile only at a real human face, or a very realistic
picture. For a parent, of course, being looked at and smiled at by your
baby is an extremely special experience. It is very rewarding and so it
means that the parent is more likely to want to spend time with the
baby, playing with it and talking to it. And that interaction, as we
will see, forms a strong foundation for the future relationship between
a parent and its child.

Insight Smiling and responding to others are good ways of making sure
that other people will get satisfaction from giving an infant the
attention it needs. If looking after an infant is a satisfying,
rewarding process, then it gives that infant the best chance of
survival. Babies also have a very good way of summoning help when they
need it. Since the human infant can't run for help itself, it needs to
have a way of summoning help from its caretaker quickly. And it has. A
baby's crying can carry for a very long distance, and people

14

quickly learn to recognize the sound of their own baby's crying as
opposed to that of any other infant. Some psychologists believe, too,
that there are special harmonics in a baby's cry which activate the
autonomic nervous system, so that adults ﬁnd it particularly disturbing.
This means that they are particularly likely to hurry to the baby and
try to calm it down. It might also account for the intense degree of
frustration on the part of parents who are living with a continuously
crying child, and who may sometimes become so frustrated and upset that
they injure the child. We don't know whether this is really the case. We
do know that people ﬁnd baby cries extremely disturbing -- that isn't
under question -- but it is possible that they disturb us because they
are associated with pain and distress, and not because of the harmonic
qualities of the sound. In either case, though, the fact is that very
few people can really ignore a crying baby. It is a very good way for
the infant to communicate to other people that it needs help. Moreover,
infants can communicate more than one message through crying. Back in
the 1960s, Wolff recorded baby cries and analysed them using a sound
spectrograph, showing that there were at least three different types of
cry, with three different patterns of sound: one for pain, one for
hunger, and one for anger. And the mothers were perfectly able to
recognize the message in their own baby's crying.

Insight Crying is a powerful survival mechanism, because it lets a
helpless infant summon help from a long distance away. Since the infant
can't defend itself, only other people will be able to help if it is in
pain or frightened. So even an apparently helpless infant is equipped to
interact with other people -- in other words, to be sociable. Babies
will respond to the sound of people's voices, they show pleasure when
people are nearby and socializing with them, and they can summon help if
they need it. The baby's physical survival depends on the people around
it, and the baby's ability to communicate helps

2.  Self and others

15

people around it to know what to do. But babies are even more
sophisticated at interacting with other people than just communicating
pleasure or discomfort. PARENT-- INFANT INTERACTION As it grows older,
the baby's tendency towards sociability becomes even more apparent.
Babies delight in even the simplest repetitive games with another
person. As any parent knows, they will play games like 'peek-a-boo', or
'throw-your-teddy-out-of-the-cot-andsee-daddy-pick-it-up' for as long as
the adult is prepared to carry on playing, even though they rarely show
so much persistence with the games that they play on their own, such as
with rattles or toys. Parents and other adults almost automatically seem
to adapt themselves to these baby games. Psychologists have conducted
many observations of parent--child interaction, and found that most of
the things which parents and infants do when they are playing together
help the baby to learn skills it will need in childhood and later life.
But for many people, this is entirely unconscious: we do it
automatically, without thinking. One thing which people do when they are
playing with a baby, for instance, is that they make faces. Carefully
analysed videotape of these games shows that the babies make faces too.
Parent and infant imitate one another, and these exchanges can go on for
some time. It is games like these which set the foundation for later
social experience. Infants learn how to take turns and how to wait for
the other person to respond before doing their action -- which is like
the turn-taking that occurs in conversation, and which even involves the
same kind of timing. Moreover, they learn it very quickly: we are
strongly predisposed to learn that kind of thing. Infants are also
strongly predisposed to learn to communicate. They want to do it, and
try to do it very hard. Again, we help them automatically. Psychological
studies of baby-talk have shown that the special way that human beings
talk to babies, which is so often ridiculed by comedians, actually helps
the baby to notice speech. The softened tones and higher notes that we
use are particularly

16

easy for the baby to hear, and the repetition of vowel sounds ('baabaa')
draws attention to the part of the language which the child learns to
produce ﬁrst. What all this adds up to is that other people are the most
important thing in a child's world. A human baby may be physically
helpless, but it is not at all helpless in terms of its social
abilities. It is already equipped with some social skills, and learns
new ones even faster than it learns physical co-ordination. People are
the most important thing in an adult's world too -- at least for all of
us except a few very exceptional individuals. And what infant
sociability does is to form the foundation for the personal attachments
and relationships which we all need in later life. DEVELOPING
ATTACHMENTS It used to be believed that infants developed attachments
with the people who looked after them purely because of the association
with physical care and satisfying hunger. This led to a number of
debates, such as whether mothers should go out to work, and similar
issues. However, as a result of these debates, psychologists began to
study relationship development very carefully and found that things
weren't nearly as simple as that. For one thing, many babies develop
special attachments to more than one person, and sometimes they will
develop a special relationship with someone that they only see for a
relatively short period each day. In the pioneering study by Shaffer and
Emerson, conducted in 1964, the psychologists found that many of the
infants in the families that they were studying had special attachments
with their fathers, who were out at work all day, as well as with their
mothers, who in this particular study were at home. Other babies though,
didn't form attachments with their fathers. And some formed attachments
with the fathers, but not with their mothers, even though it was the
mother who was with them most of the time. What made the difference?
Shaffer and Emerson found, as have many psychologists since, that it was
the quality of social interaction between parent and child which
affected the infant's response. Babies become especially fond of parents
2. Self and others

17

(and other people) who are sensitive to the signals they are giving out
-- smiling and other facial expressions, movements, and so on -- and who
are prepared to interact with them in their playing. They don't develop
such strong attachments to people who just care for them physically but
don't play or talk with them.

Insight Bonding to the person who interacts most sensitively with an
infant gives that baby the greatest chance of survival, because that
person is most likely to be able to read its needs accurately. Even
though parents become attached to their infants very quickly, it takes
longer for the infant to develop its own attachment. Although infants
often prefer to be with one person rather than someone else, in the ﬁrst
few months they are rarely distressed if their special person is not
present. Psychologists found that the full attachment would appear at
about seven months. Then, the baby would cry if the person had to leave
-- although of course babies can usually be distracted quite quickly.
This attachment forms the basis of the loving relationship between
parent and child which persists throughout life (if it is not actively
disrupted). And that attachment, in its turn, has been based on the
quality of the interactions between the parent and the baby. Of course,
that doesn't mean that an attachment has to be based on that -- as
adopted children know, a relationship which begins later in life can be
just as special. But a predisposition to interact with people, and to
form relationships with the people who respond to you sensitively is one
which is common to human infants all over the world. It is, quite
literally, part of our heritage as human beings.

The self-concept In later life, too, other people are more important to
us than we sometimes realize. Each of us has our own, personal idea of

18

ourselves -- something which is known as the self-concept. It's our
ideas about what we are like, what we are good or bad at doing, and how
we think. On the surface, it seems as if we should develop that
knowledge of ourselves just from our own personal experiences of what we
can do, and what we like. But when psychologists have studied the
self-concept, they have found that actually, one of the most important
factors in how we see ourselves is how other people see us. SOCIAL
RELATIONSHIPS As early as 1902, Cooley described the self-concept as the
'looking-glass self'. What Cooley meant was that we see ourselves as if
we were reﬂected in the eyes of other people. We don't just think of
ourselves in terms of our own personal knowledge: we judge what we are
like by the way that other people respond to us, and what we think they
may think. Another early psychologist, Guthrie, related a story about a
group of students who decided to play a joke on a class member -- a girl
who was very plain and unattractive. The male students in the class took
it in turns to ask her out and treated her as if she were attractive and
interesting. Guthrie observed that the students who were ﬁfth and sixth
on the list were actually quite interested in taking the girl out,
because by that time, she had changed considerably. The extra interest
that she was receiving had raised her self-conﬁdence and now she was
interesting to talk to and took pains to make herself look attractive.

Insight The judgements we make about others can come true simply because
we have made them. If we decide that someone is unpleasant, we treat
them as such and they are almost bound to respond unpleasantly. Then we
feel that we were justiﬁed, because we knew they were unpleasant all the
time. Is that fair? The self-fulﬁlling prophecy What this shows is that
sometimes other people's ideas about us may become a self-fulﬁlling
prophecy. In other words, what we think

2.  Self and others

19

about someone may come true simply because we think it. One of the most
striking illustrations of this mechanism was reported by Rosenthal and
Jacobson, in 1968. They had gone into an ordinary high school in
America, ostensibly to test out a new kind of intelligence test. On the
basis of the test which they gave (which was really just a standard one)
and class marks, they chose a number of ordinary children whose
performance in class was only average. They didn't speak to the children
directly -- instead, they let the teachers 'overhear' a conversation in
which these children were named as being likely to show a sudden spurt
in their academic work over the next year. The teachers also believed
that the intelligence test they had used was a special one, designed to
pick out these late developers. When Rosenthal and Jacobson returned to
the school a year later, they found that the children they had chosen
were up at the top of their classes. Because the teachers believed that
they would do well, they had given them extra encouragement. The
children didn't know anything about the teachers' beliefs, but they had
felt the encouragement, and worked harder. They had also become more
conﬁdent about their ability to learn. So the prophecy which Rosenthal
and Jacobson had made -- that the children would improve during the
course of the next year -- had come true simply because they had said
it. Many other psychologists, too, have found that the self-concept
depends on the type of interaction that we have with other people and on
the expectations that they have of us. The self-concept is often thought
of as having two different parts. One of these is a descriptive part,
which is just about what we are like: tall, being good at languages,
liking sport, and so on. That part is known as the selfimage. The other
is an evaluative part, which makes judgements about whether we are good,
bad, worthwhile and so on. That part of the self-concept is known as our
self-esteem. And that is the part which can be most inﬂuential in
shaping our relationships with others. PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS Carl
Rogers, the famous psychologist who is known as the father of
counselling psychology, argued that our level of self-esteem

20

depends on the type of personal relationships that we have had. People,
Rogers argued, have two basic psychological needs, and will suffer
psychological damage if those needs are not met. One of those needs is
the need for positive regard from other people -- affection, love, trust
and so on. Everyone, Rogers argued, needs positive regard of some kind.
Even people who avoid close relationships ﬁnd it important that other
people should respect them. To have some kind of positive regard from
other people is a very fundamental need, which has to be satisﬁed.

Insight Unconditional positive regard doesn't only have to happen in
childhood. A warm and accepting relationship in adulthood can let people
recover from an awful lot of childhood trauma. The other fundamental
need which has to be satisﬁed is the need for self-actualization.
Self-actualization means making real ('actualizing') the different parts
of the self -- in other words, exploring and developing our ideas,
abilities, interests and talents. This is a fundamental need in people
too: without any way of developing our abilities or skills, we can
become psychologically damaged. People self-actualize in many different
ways. Many people have a hobby or an interest which takes up some of
their leisure time, and this usually involves some kind of skill, or
problem-solving. Fiddling with a car engine, playing video games or
darts, baking, sewing clothes, or conducting a successful children's
party are all highly skilled activities; we enjoy doing them, and doing
them well gives us a sense of achievement and satisfaction. It helps us
to feel good about ourselves. So far, so good. Most people have family,
friends and working colleagues who provide them with the positive regard
which they need; and hobbies, interests and, if they are lucky,
challenging jobs to satisfy their need for self-actualization. And for
that reason, Rogers argued, most people have a reasonably high level of
self-esteem. While they don't see themselves as being perfect, they are
reasonably content with being who they are.

2.  Self and others

21

However, Rogers was working as a clinical psychologist and came across a
lot of people who weren't in that position. In these patients, Rogers
found that the two needs contradicted one another. Their need for
positive regard, or approval from other people, was in direct conﬂict
with their need for self-actualization. These people had come to Rogers
because they were suffering with neurotic problems. From his clinical
observations and treatments, Rogers concluded that these problems
occurred because they were suppressing an important psychological need.
When Rogers explored the childhood which these people had experienced,
he found that they all had one thing in common. They had all grown up
with parents or others who had made their positive regard conditional on
good behaviour. In other words, when they were naughty or had misbehaved
-- as children often do -- they had received a very clear message that
they were unloved and unwanted. 'Normal' people, though, had parents
who, even if they were strict, always made it clear that they still
loved their child. Those children who had grown up with conditional
positive regard were actually being given a message that it wasn't
really them who was loved -- it was some ideal, perfect child who was
never naughty. So they grew up believing that they had to be ideal and
perfect, and that if they were not, nobody would like them. What this
meant was that they needed approval from other people so much that they
wouldn't risk exploring their own interests, in case other people didn't
like it or didn't approve. They stiﬂed their own personal ambitions,
interests or talents -- in other words, their need for
self-actualization -- in order to be sure of social approval. These
people, as we can see, had very low self-esteem. They had developed
unrealistic conditions of worth -- that is, unrealistic ideas about what
they needed to do to gain social approval or respect. And they applied
these unrealistic conditions of worth when they were judging their own
behaviour. Even if they were really quite

22

successful, they still thought of themselves as failures, or as inferior
to other people. Naturally, all this had made them very anxious, and
eventually neurotic. The solution which Rogers found was very simple. He
argued that everyone needs some kind of secure psychological base from
which they can develop. That base will be found in a relationship which
gives them unconditional positive regard -- positive regard which
doesn't depend on how the person acts. If you really love, trust or like
someone, then you accept the decisions which they make about how they
are living their life. That doesn't mean, of course, that we have to
condone things which are morally wrong. But we can dislike what someone
does, and make that clear, without disliking that particular person. As
parents do all the time. However, Rogers found that it isn't only
parents who can provide this kind of relationship. In fact, we can
experience this kind of relationship at any age, and it can provide us
with the security that we need to begin to self-actualize. Many people
in adult life ﬁnd relationships which give them that security, and begin
to explore aspects of themselves which they have ignored before -- like
people who go to college for the ﬁrst time in their 30s or 40s. The
important thing is to have a relationship of that kind at all -- it
doesn't have to be in childhood. Rogers developed an approach to
psychotherapy based on this principle. The role of the therapist, he
argued, should be to provide an accepting and warm relationship for the
client (he didn't approve of the word 'patient') -- in other words, a
relationship based on unconditional positive regard. This would give the
client the psychological freedom to make their own life decisions and to
develop solutions to their own problems, because they wouldn't be
risking disapproval. Rogers called this client-centred therapy, because
it is entirely based on what the client wants and does, and not on what
the therapist thinks they should do. Many counselling psychologists
still use this approach today.

2.  Self and others

23

Cultural and social inﬂuences We can see, then, that both our social
interaction and our personal relationships can have a considerable
effect on how we see ourselves -- on the self-concept. But our ideas
about ourselves and how we are linked with other people are also shaped
by the social groups and cultures that we belong to. And different
cultures can make very different assumptions about individuals and what
it is to be an individual human being. THE INDIVIDUAL SELF In the
Western world, it is quite common to see each person as a separate
individual, who may choose to link him/herself with some kind of social
group if they want to. This model of the individual person has a long
history: ultimately, it goes back to the philosophical systems of the
ancient Greeks, and was reinforced by later philosophers such as
Descartes, in the seventeenth century. The idea is also apparent in
European history. The Protestant reformation, for example, emphasized
the individual's own direct responsibility and conscience in religion,
rather than the responsibility of the priesthood to interpret religion
for the community. It is open to question, though, whether any human
being really can be such an entirely separate individual as all that. In
fact, the idea of the individual as totally independent of others around
them is almost unique to the USA. Just about every other culture, even
Britain, recognizes the importance of social factors and group
memberships to the self-concept. Most of us exist within a network of
communities and social expectations: family, friendship groups and
occupational groups. Many people seek out communities to belong to:
religious groups, communes, volunteer groups. In other words, we don't
really exist as independent individuals: we live within social networks
and groups. As we will see later in this chapter, belonging to these
social groups can form a very important part of our sense of identity.

24

Insight Individuality doesn't contradict the notion of social
embeddedness. For instance, it is quite easy to be a unique person and
still a member of your family. We do, though, tend to believe that it is
important to be an individual, in the sense that being an individual
involves making one's own decisions about one's life, partners, friends
and career. And it is this belief in an individuality which is separate
from the other people around us which makes the Western approach rather
different from most of the other cultures in the world. Self in
community For example, in most of the traditional African cultures, and
in Native Australian cultures as well, the person is seen as being
primarily a member of the community. That doesn't mean that they are not
seen as being an individual person, but it does mean that how they live
their life concerns the rest of the community as well, and isn't just
their own responsibility. Individualism which doesn't concern itself
with the community as a whole is seen as being irresponsible, and pretty
well uncivilized. When the Native Australian rock group Yothu Yindi
began to have commercial success with their records, for instance, the
decisions about how the group's career should go were all taken by the
group's tribal community. As spokespeople for their culture, the members
of the band had no wish to do anything else. The prominence of the band
had brought increased acknowledgement and recognition of Native
Australian culture to white Australian audiences (and later to worldwide
ones). To the members of the group, it was important that they remain a
part of their culture, rather than abandoning it and chasing success as
individual musicians. In other words, they regarded being part of their
community an important part of being themselves -- not just an optional
extra. To people from such cultures, the idea of acting as an
individual,

2.  Self and others

25

separate from family, community and social group is simply unrealistic
-- and selﬁsh, too. According to Mbiti (1970), the individual self is
ﬁrmly located within the collective self of the tribe or people, and to
try to separate them is to imply that the person operates only with half
an identity. Layers of self A different concept of the self is apparent
in Hindu belief systems. Bharati (1986) described how Hindu belief is
centred around the idea of the self -- but not the individual
self-concept as it is in Western cultures. Instead, according to Hindu
thinking, the innermost self, or atman, is at one with God: it is a
central, spiritual self which everyone possesses, but which can be
reached only through meditation and other techniques. Other, more
superﬁcial parts of the self also contain more superﬁcial qualities like
personality, and negative emotions such as jealousy or greed. For the
most part, therefore, what someone sees as their self-concept is really
these outer layers of personality, and not their true, inner self. Only
those who have disciplined themselves, through yoga or meditation, have
access to the atman and can experience the true unity of the self and
God. So this idea of the self, too, is very different from the idea of
the individual which is maintained by Western cultures. Although this
view is not based on the importance of the culture and community, it
still maintains the idea that there are other dimensions to the self:
that there is more to being human than simply our own individual wishes
and emotions. The private self Even within highly industrialized
societies, there are different ideas of the self. Japanese people, for
example, see the self as operating within a social context -- but not a
context of traditional family or tribe. Like city-dwelling Westerners,
Japanese people may be meeting strangers all the time, but Japanese
society places a great deal of emphasis on social consideration and
social harmony. In order to maintain this, people are expected to keep
inner emotions

26

private, and to act in a socially acceptable manner at all times. Azuma,
Hess and Kashiwagi (1981) described how this idea is apparent even in
the experiences of a very young child in Japan. At the age of two or
thereabouts, as many parents know to their cost, children often become
very willful, insisting on getting their own way at every opportunity --
or trying to. It is at this time that they have to learn social
responsibility -- or at least, that they cannot always have their own
way in everything. Different cultures go about teaching this in
different ways. Among traditional families of the Shona people of
Africa, for instance, children of this age go to live with their
grandmother, and stay with her until they are about ﬁve. So the more
experienced family member is the one who tackles this difﬁcult part of
child-rearing. Western parents tend to confront their children, refusing
to co-operate until the child eventually learns that it must moderate
its behaviour. A Japanese mother, though, doesn't tend to confront an
egocentric two-year-old directly. Instead, she 'suffers' her child,
making it very clear that its behaviour is causing her pain and
distress. In this way, the child is brought to realize that its actions
have social and emotional consequences for other people, even from a
very early age. It is encouraged to feel responsible for the suffering
that it has caused, and also guilty, so it learns self-control as a way
of not causing the suffering and not having to feel the guilt. These
messages are consistent throughout childhood and leave powerful
inﬂuences on the adult's behaviour. A Japanese person, then, is still
regarded as an individual, but in a different way from Westerners. The
self is essentially private, and the person has extremely important
social responsibilities which cannot be avoided. This means that, for
the most part, personal wishes, emotions, and impulses need to be kept
in check. The self is not independent of other people because it is
easily able to cause grief or pain to them, through inconsiderate
behaviour. Social interaction has to be managed in such a way as to
minimize that grief or pain, and so minimize the guilt which the
individual would feel for having caused it. The self is seen as existing
in a social

2.  Self and others

27

context, with social requirements, meaning that it often has to be kept
private, or even secret.

Insight Many people maintain public and private selves. For example,
using make-up on a daily basis is an example of a 'public' self, which
hides the private self underneath. We can see, then, that people in
different parts of the world -- and also in different subcultures within
Western countries -- have very different ideas of what it is to be an
individual person. The idea of the individual as entirely separate from
others is really quite an uncommon one. And even in Western cultures, we
are not quite as immune to the inﬂuence of other people as all that.
SOCIAL IDENTIFICATION There is another way, too, in which other people
affect how we see ourselves. We are all part of society, and each of us
belongs to some social groups of some kind. Social groups can be
large-scale, like gender or ethnic background groups; they can be
medium-scale, like being an accountant or a machinery tuner in a mill;
or they can be small-scale, like being a member of a local astronomy
club. But whatever the size, belonging to different social groups has an
inﬂuence on our sense of identity. Social identity theory began in
psychology with the work of Henri Tajfel, and has become a very useful
way of understanding many important things about how human beings act.
Tajfel pointed out how the social groups which we belong to exist in the
real world, and vary in terms of things like how powerful they are, how
widely known they are, and how much prestige there is in belonging to
them. Because we all live in the real world too, we are aware of these
differences. So, for example, if we belong to a local astronomy society
and are aware that the astronomy society is quite respected in our local
town, then we would feel proud of belonging to it.

28

Insight We belong to more social groups and categories than we realize.
Age-groups, gender, family, interests and hobbies, social class are only
a few of the possibilities. See if you can count all yours. After a
while, belonging to that particular social group becomes part of our own
identity -- part of who we are. At times we will interact with other
people as if we were a representative of that group, for example,
speaking up for the group, or giving the members' point of view when we
are talking with someone who didn't belong to it. We don't always
realize when we're doing it, because it's just part of how we identify
with the group. At other times, we will interact with other people just
as ourselves, or from some other social identiﬁcation. We can slip into
any particular social identity when it seems to be relevant. We can even
slip from one to another without even realizing. For example, an
argument about who should do the washing up might begin as just a
discussion between two partners. However, if one of them makes a remark
about gender, it can rapidly change from being a personal argument, to a
confrontation between 'men' and 'women', with each person arguing as a
representative of their gender group, rather than as their individual
self. Categorization and self-esteem We all have a number of different
social identities. According to Tajfel, social identities come from our
basic human tendency to sort things into different categories. We
categorize other people as well as other things: this person is a
typical Volvo driver, that person is a rock fan, and so on. And we
include our own groups -- the ones that we belong to -- in the
classiﬁcation. However, there is more to it than that, because it is
also a basic human tendency to look for sources of positive self-esteem.
In other words, it is important for us to feel good about our own groups
-- we need to be able to feel proud of belonging to them. If our social
group doesn't have much status, then we may try to

2.  Self and others

29

redeﬁne it so that we can see it as more important. But if we can't do
that, then we may try to leave the group, or at the very least, pretend
that we are not like the other members of it. For example, imagine that
you are a teenager and have a particular hobby, say, trampolining, which
you really enjoy. Moreover, you are really getting quite good and have
passed various certiﬁcates. But then you join a new school and it
becomes apparent that your new friends there see it as an inferior kind
of sport. What would you do? Actually, there are several possibilities
which are open to you -- and all of them amount to ways of keeping
positive self-esteem. You might leave the trampolining group altogether
and look for some other hobby which will be a bit more respected. You
might claim that you only go because of parental pressure, or because
your younger brother likes to go and you have to take him, or something
like that. That would be distancing yourself from the group -- implying
that you aren't really like the others. Changing the status of the group
Alternatively, you might try to get your friends to change their view of
it, for example by pointing out that it actually involves a very high
level of skill. Or you might argue that it is a great deal better than
other kinds of recreational activity that some people do. Both of these
are attempts to change the perceived status of the trampolining group,
so that it becomes more respected. Or you could change your friends and
associate only with other people who also do trampolining and know how
skilled it is. This is a fairly small-scale example, but exactly the
same processes take place in larger social groups too. It is now much
easier for a black child, for example, to grow up being proud of being
black than it was 50 years ago. There are far more black people doing
responsible, professional jobs, or holding highly respected positions in
society than there used to be, which helps. There are also many people
in the public eye who are proud of being black, and ready to say so.

30

This is because over the past 50 years a great many black people have
been deliberately changing the perceived status of their group, by
challenging stereotypes and discrimination whenever they encounter it.
This has had its effect. There is still racism, of course, and still a
lot to do, but the general view in Western society is very different
from the view which was commonly held -- even by black people -- 50
years ago. We can see, then, that who we are and how we see ourselves,
is very closely linked with the ways in which we interact with other
people. We all have our own personal likes, dislikes, talents and
personalities. But we also exist in a network of social interaction, and
have done so since we were very small babies. Other people's reactions
and ideas matter to us, and they inﬂuence how we go about acting in
life. Our cultural background also shapes how we see ourselves, and so
do our social identities. None of us is totally patterned by these
social inﬂuences -- after all, everyone is different -- but we are not
totally independent of them either.

2.  Self and others

31

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Human beings are social animals from birth, and
they learn best from other people. 2 Smiling, crying and responding to
others are all ways that infants interact with other people. 3 Adults
respond more strongly to infant crying and smiling than to other
stimuli. 4 Infants develop their strongest attachments with people who
interact sensitively with them. 5 The self-concept is how we see
ourselves, and is strongly inﬂuenced by feedback from others. 6 Children
who grow up with unconditional positive regard from their carers have
more positive self-esteem than those who grow up with conditional
positive regard. 7 Ideas of the self vary greatly from one culture to
the next. 8 Most human cultures see the self as deeply embedded in the
community. 9 Our social identiﬁcations from group membership are
important in deﬁning who we are. 10 If we ﬁnd ourselves in a low-status
group, we are highly motivated to separate ourselves from it or to
change its status.

32

3 Understanding other people In this chapter you will learn: • how
people co-operate rather than disagree with one another • how people
develop social understanding • to identify at least two ways of
analysing communication between people. In the last chapter, we looked
at how belonging to social groups can inﬂuence our sense of identity,
and our dealings with other people. In this chapter, we will look more
closely at the branch of psychology known as social psychology -- the
study of how we interact with other people. We will look at when we are
likely to co-operate or obey, how we communicate with other people and
why we sometimes help others and sometimes don't. There are other
aspects of social psychology in other chapters, as well -- for example,
in Chapter 4 we will be looking at some of the social inﬂuences involved
in our experience of emotion, and in Chapter 6 we will be looking at
social motivation. Human beings are social animals and so social
inﬂuences affect just about everything we do, in one way or another.

Co-operation, compliance and obedience In some ways, we have a very good
social understanding. But when it comes to modern living, the
predictions we make aren't always

3.  Understanding other people

33

accurate. For example, people often avoid disagreeing openly with
someone else because they imagine that doing so will have more dramatic
consequences than it really would. They think the other person might
become upset or angry. In fact, we seem to spend a lot of time avoiding
other people's imaginary anger, although if we do actually confront
someone and disagree with them, it usually isn't nearly as difﬁcult as
all that.

Insight You'll often hear that humans are naturally aggressive.
Actually, we're quite the opposite, which is why even disagreeing with
other people face to face is so stressful. Part of our heritage as
social animals is that we place a high value on consensus and agreement
within the group. CONFORMING TO THE MAJORITY Asch (1952) showed just how
hard we try to avoid disagreeing openly with other people. He set up a
situation in which several people were asked to sit in the same room and
to compare various lines with a test line, saying whether they were
shorter or longer. The task was very easy, but most of the people in the
room were actors who had been told to give obviously wrong answers. Only
one unsuspecting person was the real research participant on each
occasion. That person could see what the right answer was, but also
heard all the other people in the room giving the wrong answer -- and
the same wrong answer at that! So the participants were forced into a
situation where they either had to disagree with the others or lie. Asch
found that about a third of the time the research participants would
give the same wrong answer as the others. And even when they gave the
right answer, they became extremely nervous and tense just before it was
their turn to speak. Later, they said that they had given the correct
answer only because they knew it was an experiment and they felt it was
their duty to report it accurately. Clearly, disagreeing openly with
other people is something they found very difﬁcult. A later study of the
'Asch effect', conducted by Perrin and Spencer (1980) found that fewer
people actually lied, but that they all

34

became just as anxious. Perrin and Spencer suggested that perhaps modern
people are more independent and less worried about confronting other
people. But other researchers challenged this idea on the grounds that
when they, too, had repeated the study, they had found the 'Asch effect'
to be as strong as ever. The debates about how much people actually
conform and how much they don't, continue. But all of the researchers,
no matter when they did the study, found that openly disagreeing with
other people is deeply stressful. Their research participants said that
they only did it because they believed it was important to tell the
truth for the experiment. It isn't at all easy for us to challenge the
majority.

Insight Disagreeing with other people calmly and reasonably is a learned
skill. Like other skills, it is easy once we have learned to do it, but
quite challenging to acquire. As we can see, co-operating with other
people is something which we tend to do almost automatically -- at least
when those other people are present. When we're away from other people,
or after we've had time to think about it, whether we co-operate or not
may be quite another matter. But the tendency to avoid disagreement and
confrontation is strong, and some studies show that even if other people
aren't present, we may still be likely to go along with what we think
other people might say. In 1954, Crutchﬁeld reported a study that was
conducted during a management training session, with a number of
military ofﬁcers. It was a replication of the study by Asch, which we
looked at earlier, in that people were asked to give answers to a set of
very easy problems, while believing that other people also taking part
were all giving the same wrong answer. In Crutchﬁeld's study, though,
the other people were not physically present. The research participants
worked in booths, with a display of lights in front of them which
supposedly told them what the other 3. Understanding other people

35

people had chosen. (The lights were rigged, of course, so that they
implied that the others had got the answer wrong.) But even though the
other people doing the study weren't actually there, so there was no
need to confront them face to face, the research participants still
conformed to the majority view half of the time. Of course, it is always
possible that this is a higher ﬁgure than we might normally get in those
circumstances, because of the research participants all being military
personnel. It's possible that, because of their training, they valued
conformity more than other people would. But at the same time, they also
valued accurate perception and knew that the answers they were giving
were wrong. So it does seem as though our tendency to conform to other
people is more than simply avoiding face-to-face interpersonal conﬂict.
OBEYING AUTHORITY But what happens when that type of situation could
mean that we end up doing something which is morally wrong? We usually
obey authority ﬁgures, sometimes even if we disagree personally with
what they are asking us to do. But would we obey them if they were
asking us to, say, give someone a lethal electric shock? The social
psychologist Milgram asked that question to a sample of psychologists,
psychiatrists and other people in the early 1960s. All of them were
positive that only a very small minority of people -- fewer than three
per cent -- would be prepared to kill or seriously harm another person
in obedience to the demands of a psychological experiment. So Milgram
decided to set up the situation. Not to kill people, but to set it up so
that people would believe their actions were being seriously harmful,
even though nobody would actually be hurt. He advertised for volunteers
and, when they arrived, they were told that it was an experiment about
punishment and learning. The volunteers were to act as 'experimenters',
and to give increasing electric shocks to a 'subject' in the next room
by pressing switches each time the 'subject' got an answer wrong.

36

The switches were clearly labelled as being of increasing severity, and
went up to 450 volts; and the 'subject' (who was really an actor) said
at the beginning of the study that he had a weak heart. Both the labels
on the switches and the sounds which came from the other room implied
that the person was in serious pain as the voltage increased, before the
victim fell ominously silent. Even then, the 'experimenter' was told to
keep giving the shocks by a grey-coated supervisor who oversaw the whole
operation and insisted that they should continue. Milgram found that
nearly two-thirds of the people he tested would carry on obeying the
supervisor even to the very highest shock level. That didn't mean that
they liked doing it: they would argue and point out that the 'subject'
needed help, and try to refuse to do any more. They became very
distressed indeed. But the supervisor would insist that they continue,
and in the end they would obey. There were a lot of things about the
situation which encouraged obedience, such as the way that each electric
shock was only a little bit stronger than the one before. That made it
very hard for someone to draw a line and say, 'I won't go any further',
because what they were being asked to do next wasn't very different from
what they had already done. The people who were aware of the dangers of
unquestioning obedience, though, stopped anyway when they felt they had
gone far enough. They knew, in their own minds, that to go further would
be wrong and that was enough. They didn't feel any need to justify or
rationalize what they were doing. Unthinking obedience happens in real
life, too. Hoﬂing and others set up a study in a hospital, in which
nurses working on the night shift were telephoned by a doctor whom they
didn't know and asked to administer medication to a patient. They were
told to go to the drugs cabinet and ﬁnd a medication, which was labelled
'Astroten'. On the label it said very clearly that the maximum daily
dose was 10 mg but the doctor asked the nurse to administer 20 mg. Even
though it violated several hospital rules -- doctors were not supposed
to give orders by telephone, for instance -- 95 per cent of

3.  Understanding other people

37

the nurses in the study were prepared to administer the medication. They
were stopped at the last minute by a staff psychiatrist who had been
observing what was going on in secret. The problem was, that in real
life, the hospital doctors were accustomed to breaking this type of
rule, and because of the hierarchy of power and their training, it was
very difﬁcult for a nurse to disobey a doctor. ASSERTION AND REBELLION
So why is it, then, that people will sometimes stand up for their own
beliefs and at other times simply go along with what they are told? One
of the answers is to do with social expectations. In Chapter 2, we
looked at how powerful expectations can be, and how simply expecting
something to happen can sometimes become a self-fulﬁlling prophecy. A
self-fulﬁlling prophecy, as we saw, comes true simply because we expect
it to, and act as if it already is. So that is one factor which is at
work here. Our previous training is another factor. We learn to obey
people who are in charge and to do what we are told. This is a powerful
form of social conditioning: many people become very distressed at the
thought of disobeying someone who is in authority, even when they know
it is the right thing to do. Our early learning has taught us that, and
it remains a powerful inﬂuence throughout our adult life. It is
reinforced, too, by the way people communicate. How people use words,
and the actual words that they use, encourages us to see possibilities
in certain ways. Non-verbal dimensions of communication also reinforce
those messages. It was no accident that the supervisor in Milgram's
study wore a grey lab coat and acted in a distant, ofﬁcial manner. It
made his authority seem even stronger. Milgram showed us how easy
unthinking obedience is for many people. But a third of the people in
his study refused to obey once things reached the point where they felt
that the 'subject' was in danger. Before they made the decision to
refuse, these people showed just as much stress and discomfort as the

38

other participants. But once they had reached a critical point, and made
their decision, they became very calm, and just simply refused to
continue. When they were interviewed afterwards, these people generally
turned out to have had some previous experience with unthinking
obedience and what it could do. One of them had been brought up in Nazi
Germany, for instance. These people made disobeying, and acting in
accordance with their own conscience, seem a very ordinary thing to do.
They simply made up their minds that to go any further would be wrong
and ignored all of the pressure which was put on them to continue. When
will people assert themselves? Gamson, Fireman and Rytina set up a study
which more or less encouraged people to rebel. Their research
participants were asked to take part in a marketing research exercise.
This involved ﬁlming a group discussion about a case of a manager of a
petrol station who was in dispute with the franchise company. The
research participants were told that the company said they wanted to
revoke his franchise because he was living with someone and was not
married to them; but the manager said it was because he had publicly
criticized their pricing policies. As the people in the study discussed
the case, they were frequently asked to argue a particular case in front
of the video camera. For instance, at one point, three members of the
group were asked to argue as if they were personally insulted by the
manager's behaviour. It soon became apparent that the group was actually
being asked to provide videotaped evidence which could be used by the
company to discredit the manager. At the end, they were all asked to
sign an afﬁdavit giving the company the right to use the videotapes as
evidence, in any way it wanted to. It was obvious to the groups that
they were being manipulated and most people, at that point, refused to
co-operate and sign the afﬁdavit. In 16 of the 33 groups, all of the
group members refused to sign, and in eight more groups the majority of
members refused. Even in the groups where most people signed, there was
a strong

3.  Understanding other people

39

minority who refused to co-operate any further. So it's apparent that we
will refuse to obey other people if we are clear enough about what is
going on and how we are being manipulated.

Insight We are all trained to obey authority, but unthinking obedience
can lead to terrible injustices. So, sometimes disobedience is the only
right thing to do. That's why we need to understand the psychology of
rebellion as well as obedience. Sometimes, as we've seen, it's important
to disagree. All the great social reforms which took place in the
eighteenth century, for instance, began as the dedicated campaigns of a
handful of people who saw something wrong, and did not let it rest.
Slavery was widely accepted in Europe in the eighteenth century, but as
a result of consistent campaigning the slave trade was made illegal near
the beginning of the nineteenth century, and the owning of slaves became
illegal a few years later. Moscovici and Nemeth (1974) showed that if
just a few people stick to a particular view, which they are convinced
is right, then over time they can have a great deal of inﬂuence on a
larger group. The important thing, though, is that those people who are
in the minority and trying to inﬂuence the majority should be seen to be
genuine, consistent and resisting social pressure. If we see people
acting like that, over time we become curious about why they are doing
it and so are likely to think more seriously about what they are saying.
It's evident, then, that we have choices. We can do as we are told, or
we can act as independent people in accord with our own conscience. But
in many ways, people in modern society are not trained to act
independently. Throughout school we are expected to do as we are told,
and trained to obey. In later life, too, there are people whom we are
expected to obey without question, such as police ofﬁcers. When this
goes together with our natural tendency to conform to other people, we
can see why most people obey in a situation like that, even if they
didn't want to. Experiences

40

like Nazi Germany show us just how dangerous that kind of acquiescence
can be. People who stand up to authority and do what they believe is
right have a difﬁcult task, which we should respect. But we live in a
world which isn't always consistent in what it expects. Whistleblowers,
for example -- people who 'leak' important documents or inform
authorities of breaches of the law -- are people who are acting
according to their consciences, and trying to do what they believe is
right. What they do is often difﬁcult, because of the social pressures
for conformity and obedience. Yet they are often penalized for their
actions, or blamed for causing trouble, which makes it even more
difﬁcult. A better understanding of the social processes underlying
these actions might help society to behave more reasonably towards such
people, and to make sure that they get the support that they deserve.

Understanding other people We actually spend quite a lot of time
thinking about what other people think. In other words, we are aware
that other people have minds of their own, and we use our social
experience to guess how they will use those minds. From a very young
age, we develop what is known as a theory of mind -- an awareness of
other people as thinking, feeling individuals -- which we use to
interact effectively with other people. But how does that theory of mind
develop? As most mothers know, a two-year-old isn't really aware that
other people have minds or needs of their own. Bringing up children at
that age can often become a battle of wills, as the infant insists that
the world must conform to its own demands, while the parent insists that
the child must learn to act in socially acceptable ways. It can be an
exhausting time, particularly because the child doesn't seem to have any
idea about how the other person might be feeling.

3.  Understanding other people

41

Insight Parents have known for years how toddlers can deliberately wind
up their older siblings. Their social understanding is often much more
subtle than we realize. But although they know that what they are doing
works, they don't fully understand what it means to the other person.
Yet by the age of ﬁve, children are very well acquainted with the idea
that other people may think differently from them, that they have good
and bad moods, and can be upset or made happy by the child's actions.
It's obvious that something happens during this time which allows the
child to become much more socially sensitive. Psychologists have found
that most children develop a theory of mind sometime between the age of
three and four. The child becomes aware that other people think and see
the world differently and that its own experience isn't necessarily
shared by everyone else. In one study, Perner, Leekam and Wimmer (1987)
had a child in a room, aware that a friend was waiting outside. The
child in the room was shown a Smarties tube and asked what was in it.
The child, naturally, would answer 'Smarties'. The tube was opened and
the child saw that it actually contained a pencil. Then it was closed
again and each child was asked what their friend would think was in the
box, if they came into the room now. There was a difference in
children's answers, depending on how old they were. Those who were just
three gave one type of answer, whereas those who were nearly four gave a
different one. The older children could predict what their friend would
think and said that the friend would believe that the box contained
Smarties. The younger children, however, said that the friend would
think that the box contained a pencil. Because they hadn't yet developed
a theory of mind, they couldn't imagine that the friend would think
differently. Having a theory of mind -- being able to imagine ourselves
in someone else's place -- is the basis for most of our social
interaction.

42

Harris (1989) suggested that this might be the problem with autistic
children. They can often talk and do everything that is needed for
social interaction, and yet they don't interact socially. They also fail
on tests like the Smarties experiment. Harris believed that autistic
children simply don't have a theory of mind, which is why they often
don't communicate well with other people. NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION The
experience of autistic children shows us how important communication
between people is. Deliberate communication depends on being able to
guess what the other person will think, so that we can make our messages
clear. If we don't know that the other person is thinking independently,
we can't engage in the give-and-take which conversation needs.
Communication isn't always deliberate, though. We pass information to
one another in all sorts of ways, and sometimes we may not even realize
that we have done it. We inﬂuence other people by what we say, of
course, but also by how we say it, and the context in which we say it.
This type of communication is known as non-verbal communication --
communication without words.

Insight We all understand non-verbal messages without really trying.
It's something we share with many other mammals, especially primates and
dogs, and goes back a long way into our primeval past. As a general
rule, we use non-verbal communication automatically, without thinking
about it. For example, imagine that one day you came into work and were
told to go to the general manager's ofﬁce. From the moment you received
the message, you'd be curious, especially if it was an unusual thing to
happen. The ﬁrst thing you'd want to know, of course, is whether there
was trouble coming. So you'd be noticing all the non-verbal cues to get
a hint as to what it might be about. But the actual words that the
manager used would be only a small part of what was being communicated.

3.  Understanding other people

43

You would listen to them, of course, but you would also be taking notice
of all of the other messages which were being transmitted as well. We
are all experts at non-verbal communication, even if we don't always
realize it. You would, for instance, be getting messages -- consciously
or unconsciously -- from the manager's body language. You'd notice
whether she seemed angry, or tense, or worried, and you'd pick up on
that without any words being said. If she smiled at you as soon as you
came through the door, you would be reassured because that would be a
non-verbal message to tell you that you, personally, weren't in trouble.
If she looked serious, you'd be wondering what was up. You'd also be
taking notice of the particular tone of voice which she used because
that's another important signal, and whether you were asked to sit down
or not. Facial expressions, posture, gestures and tones of voice are all
important indicators of our feelings and attitudes. In any interpersonal
situation it is important for us to pick up on feelings and attitudes,
if only so that we can get some idea as to how we should be responding
to them. Signs and symbols Human life is full of signs and symbols which
convey meanings to us. For example, the fact of being summoned to the
general manager's ofﬁce is in itself a message. Who says and does what
and to whom is often a communication about power. If the manager had
come to see you at your workplace, that would have given an entirely
different message, and would be a signal that, on this occasion, the
manager wanted issues of power left out of the discussion, or at least
minimized. In the normal run of things it would signify that she wanted
to consult with you, or gain your opinion. But being summoned to the
ofﬁce is quite different. It is a message about who is in control of the
interaction: who has the power. Similar messages are also communicated
by the layout of the ofﬁce and where people sit. Typically, a general
manager sits behind a large desk -- a symbolic barrier, as well as a
symbol of power -- and has access to all sorts of devices which can be
used to control the situation: telephones, computers, intercoms and the
like.

44

The person who has been summoned, however, has nothing like that to
hand. This example is only the tip of the iceberg. Non-verbal
communication has been studied extensively by psychologists because
there are so many different ways in which we communicate messages to one
another, and so many messages contained within any episode of human
interaction. One of the most interesting ﬁndings has been that people
tend to believe non-verbal communication far more than they believe the
words that we actually say. In one study, Argyle, Alkema and Gilmour
asked actors to communicate different messages to people. Following
that, the people (not the actors) were asked to report what they had
been told. The actual words of the messages were either friendly,
hostile or neutral. The non-verbal manner in which the actors delivered
the messages could also be friendly, hostile or neutral, but the two
didn't always match up. When the actor's manner and words carried the
same implications, there was very little misunderstanding of the
message, which wasn't surprising. But it was different when the actor's
non-verbal communication contradicted the words that they actually said.
When that happened, the researchers found that people were four times
more likely to take notice of the non-verbal communication, than the
actual words which were used.

Insight We believe people's non-verbal signals much more than we believe
their words. That's how con artists, who have excellent control of their
non-verbal signals, can be so successful; and why young people who adopt
casual postures and attitudes are so often misunderstood. VERBAL
COMMUNICATION AND DISCOURSE It's apparent, then, that we are very
prepared to take in non-verbal information, and that we consider it
important. But we do listen to

3.  Understanding other people

45

what people say as well, and again we may take in more than we realize.
People often convey quite a lot of extra information in the actual words
that they choose, as well as the way in which they say them. Looking at
how people express themselves has become a major source of interest in
modern psychology. It's known as discourse analysis, because the
researchers who are doing it are analysing the patterns of discourse or
conversation. For example, Beattie and Speakman (1983) showed how, when
people are discussing complex topics like politics or the state of
society, they often try out different images, and then, as the
conversation progresses, settle on a single metaphor. Using the same
type of image helps the people in the conversation to frame the problems
that they are discussing and identify possible solutions. One common
metaphor which people use in that context, for example, involves
describing the country's economy as if it were a sick person, by using
phrases like 'an ailing economy' or the need for an 'injection' of
capital, as if capital is a kind of medicine which will help to 'cure'
the problem. The sickness metaphor isn't the only one people use. A
different group of people might refer to the economy as if it were, say,
a garden, and talk about 'cultivating growth', or 'pruning surplus
expenditure'. That particular metaphorical frame would lead to different
conclusions than a metaphorical frame based on illness, because a garden
is something which has to be consistently cared for and looked after,
while an illness has to be cured. The metaphors which people use
actually contain different theories about what a 'normal' economy is
like. So by listening to the pattern of words which people use, we can
get an insight into how they understand or make sense of the problem
that they are discussing.

Insight Politicians are particularly good at using words or metaphors to
mislead others without actually lying. Try looking very carefully at the
actual words that they use. What they say often contains hidden meanings
which don't show up in the general impression that they give.

46

Attributions and explanations Another part of discourse analysis
involves looking directly at the explanations which people give for why
things happen. We all have to make sense out of our social experience,
and explanations are an important part of that. We don't just accept
what happens to us passively -- we try to work out why it has happened,
and whether we could have done anything about it. Finding a reason why
something has happened often involves making decisions about
intentionality: did so-and-so do that deliberately, or was it just an
accident? We also draw on our knowledge of other people and on more
general social explanations and assumptions in forming these
explanations. The process of ascribing reasons for why things happened
and why people acted in certain ways is known as attribution. In Chapter
4 we will look at how the different kinds of attributions people make
can inﬂuence our behaviour. As we will see, people who are chronically
depressed often have a depressive attributional style, which means that
the explanations they give for why things happen are always the kind of
explanations which will make them feel helpless and out of control.
Other people tend to use different kinds of explanations, which allow
them to see themselves as able to act positively and to be in control of
things. One of the interesting things about how we use attributions is
that we almost always judge other people's actions differently from the
way we judge our own. When we are giving reasons for what we do, we make
what are known as situational attributions -- in other words, we give
reasons which are to do with the situation. For example, Nisbett et
al. (1973) asked college students to write a paragraph explaining why
they had chosen to study their particular course at college. The
students all gave situational reasons, such as saying that doing the
course would help them to get a better job. But when we are judging
someone else's actions, we generally use dispositional attributions --
we conclude that the reason why they are doing something is because of
their personality or character. When the same students were asked to
explain why

3.  Understanding other people

47

their best friend had chosen to study that particular course, they gave
dispositional reasons, such as 'he's good at maths', or 'he likes
studying rocks'. Our tendency to make dispositional attributions about
other people is very strong. It's known as the fundamental attribution
error, and we do it even when we know that the situation is really the
most important thing. Ross, Amabile and Steinmetz (1977) asked people to
observe a quiz game. They saw how the people playing the game were
chosen: it was entirely random whether someone acted as a contestant or
as the quizmaster. The quizmasters had free choice of subject, so they
could choose topics that they knew about. But even though the observers
knew that, they always judged the person asking the questions as being
generally better informed than the contestant. They knew about the
situational factors, but still believed that the person's disposition
was more important.

Insight We almost always underestimate how much people's behaviour is
driven by situations. If we judged their behaviour the way we judge our
own, we wouldn't make that mistake.

Social representations Other people are important to us in all sorts of
ways, even when they aren't actually present. For example, we often
regulate what we do by imagining what other people would think if they
knew about it. That type of social inﬂuence is very strong, even when we
are alone and nobody else would know. Our social beliefs have become
internalized, as part of the way that our minds work. We don't actually
have to see someone react to what we are doing: we use what we know
about people to predict or imagine how they will respond. We all develop
our own ideas about why things happen, and we will be looking at
personal constructs in Chapter 6. But a lot of

48

our thinking is shaped by the shared explanations held by our own social
groups, or by society in general. These shared explanations are known as
social representations and they can be a very powerful inﬂuence in
society. A social representation is a kind of theory about why things
happen, but it is shared by a lot of people, rather than just one
individual. Social representations have a strong inﬂuence on how we act.
For example, in a study of medical social representations, Herzlich
showed how some doctors tend to see all problems which are brought to
them as having physical causes, while other doctors see many problems as
having psychological causes. They recommended entirely different forms
of treatment for the same kinds of problem, depending on which social
representations they held.

Insight Social representations are powerful shared beliefs which can
direct the actions of whole societies. You can see this working very
clearly in the various explanations which different groups of people use
for Middle Eastern conﬂicts. CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN SOCIAL
REPRESENTATIONS Social representations are also inﬂuential in
determining social policy. For example, in Britain, the prevailing
social representation is that people become criminals because of
something inside themselves -- because they are inherently bad in some
way. This means that we tend to ignore, or discount, serious attempts to
rehabilitate criminals, because we don't believe it will work. And even
when we try a rehabilitation scheme, we don't usually give it enough
time or resources for a long-term effect. However, other societies have
different social representations. Unlike Britain, for instance, American
society has a general social representation that people can change --
that they don't stay the same all their lives. (That doesn't mean that
everyone in America believes that, of course, but it means that most
people do, or at least that many social policies have been based on that
idea.) So in America, rehabilitation units attempt to develop
re-education programmes which will help criminals to change their ways.

3.  Understanding other people

49

I remember once being at a conference on child abuse and watching an
argument between an English and an American professional working in this
area. The American woman ran a rehabilitation centre for young men who
were sexual abusers of children. The centre had a very intensive
treatment programme which took a couple of years to complete. It was
carefully worked out and was very arduous to go through, but it also had
a very high success rate. The argument between the English woman and the
American, though, wasn't concerned with exchanging information about the
programme. Essentially, it was a clash of social representations. The
English woman simply did not believe that child sexual abusers could
change their ways, and the American woman knew, from her own experience,
that they could. So she became very frustrated with the discussion and
ended up almost jumping up and down (though not quite -- it was a
professional conference, after all!) because she couldn't understand why
she was unable to get her point across. People with different social
representations often end up talking past one another, like those two
women. Di Giacomo (1980) looked at the social representations held by
student political leaders in a Belgian university in the 1970s, and
compared them with the social representations shared by most of the
ordinary students. Di Giacomo found that the two groups had very
different social representations, and so they entirely failed to
understand one another. In some ways, Di Giacomo reported, it was almost
as if the student leaders were talking a different language from the
ordinary students. They would use phrases like 'student--worker
solidarity', but the majority of the ordinary students couldn't see what
students and workers had in common at all. So to them, the idea of
solidarity between students and workers didn't make much sense. As a
result, when the student leaders tried to mobilize the students in a
protest movement they failed to get enough support for the movement to
be successful. Social representations, then, are all about how we
explain what is going on to ourselves. Wagner and Hayes (2005) showed
how we draw from social inﬂuences and factors to make sense of our

50

lives -- to tell ourselves the 'stories' which shape and direct our
actions. Those stories are closely inﬂuenced by the social groups we
belong to, and the cultures that we come from, and understanding them is
important in understanding why human beings -- and societies -- behave
as they do. HELPING OTHER PEOPLE How we explain things to ourselves also
has quite an inﬂuence on how we interact with other people. For example,
if we come across someone who is asking for help, whether we actually
step in and help them or not depends on how we deﬁne the situation --
and that in turn will depend on the social representations we are using.
If we conclude that the situation isn't really serious, or that it is
the person's own fault that they are in that situation, then we are much
less likely to help out than if we deﬁne it differently. Darley and
Latané (1970) conducted a study in which an actor went up to people
passing by on the street and asked them to give him ten cents. People
responded differently, depending on what the actor said about why it was
necessary. As you can see from Table 3.1, the more 'worthy' the person's
cause seemed to be, the more likely people were to give him the money.
Table 3.1 Reasons for helping. Reason

Percentage of people asked who gave money

No reason given Money needed for a phone call Wallet stolen

34% 64% 70%

(adapted from Darley and Latané, 1970) The way other people act -- other
bystanders, that is -- also inﬂuences whether we are likely to offer
help to strangers. The same psychologists set up a situation in which
people who

3.  Understanding other people

51

were sitting in a waiting room heard a crash from the next room, and a
woman's voice crying out for help. When someone was waiting alone, they
were very likely to go into the next room to see if they could help --
in fact, 70 per cent of the people in that situation did so. But if
there were three other people in the waiting room as well, then they
were much less likely to go and help. Only 40 per cent of the research
participants offered help under those conditions. When they were
interviewed afterwards, the people participating in the study said that
they had taken their cues from the other people around. Because they
seemed to be reasonably calm, the person had come to the conclusion that
the situation wasn't really serious and so hadn't bothered to do
anything. They had redeﬁned the situation to themselves, so that it
seemed as though help wasn't really needed after all. Also, they felt
that the responsibility was somehow shared with the other people around,
so it was less important that they offered their personal help than it
was when they were alone. We can see, then, that whether we actually
exert ourselves to go and help someone depends on our social
representations -- how we explain to ourselves what is going on. Having
an unclear situation, or having other people around, can make a
difference. Nonetheless, if we are sure that someone really does need
help, we do tend to help them. In a study on the New York subway,
Piliavin et al. found that commuters would usually help someone who
collapsed on the train. If the person seemed to be ill, he was helped 95
per cent of the time, and even if he seemed to be drunk, people helped
out on half of the occasions that he 'collapsed'.

Insight Our natural tendency is to help other people who seem to need
it. But social representations can interfere with this, so that we end
up ignoring people because we think they don't deserve our help.

52

Social scripts Then there are the social scripts which are present in
most situations. As we grow up, much of what we learn is about acting in
the ways that society expects. We learn about social roles and how to
behave in a way that ﬁts in with the part we are playing, and this is
where we learn about social scripts -- what would be expected in a given
situation. If we go to a restaurant, for instance, there is a deﬁnite
script which tells us when we should do certain things and when we can
expect things to happen. We'd be deeply disconcerted if the waiter
brought coffee before the main course, for instance, and we would wonder
what was going on. Other social situations, too, have their own scripts,
and sometimes these can cause us to act in unusual ways. In one study,
Orne showed how powerful scripts can be. Normally, if you ask people to
add up a set of numbers on a piece of paper and then tear the paper up
and throw it in the bin, they will refuse. They might do it once or
twice, but no more. But if you tell them that it is part of a psychology
experiment, they will do it over and over again. In Orne's study, one
research participant even had to be stopped after several hours because
the experimenter wanted to go home! So we weigh up the situation that we
are in and match what we do to what we think that situation requires.
The attributions and explanations that we make inﬂuence how we
understand what is required, and our social representations guide our
choice of actions. We interpret and analyse the situation that we are
in, and that, too, inﬂuences how we behave. Social scripts are closely
linked with social representations, but they operate at a more speciﬁc
level. Where social representations tell us the overall 'story' of why
things are happening, social scripts tell us what behaviour seems to be
appropriate in a given situation. It is for this reason that so many
psychologists are concerned about the large amount of negative drama on
TV and in ﬁlm. It isn't about people copying behaviour directly,
although that can happen

3.  Understanding other people

53

occasionally. It is more because these dramas provide people with social
scripts which suggest that this is an appropriate or normal way to
behave. In doing so, they place an unrealistic emphasis on the less
pleasant options for human interaction, and encourage people to think it
is normal to deal with other people aggressively or vindictively. Our
social behaviour is complex, and draws from many levels of explanation
and different kinds of experience. We are inﬂuenced by our early
conditioning, by non-verbal and verbal communication, by our social
roles and social scripts, by our personal attributions and by social
representations. And we are also inﬂuenced by the emotions that we
experience. We will look more closely at these in the next chapter.

54

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 People ﬁnd it difﬁcult to challenge consensus in
a face-to-face situation. 2 Social pressures can produce unthinking
obedience to authority which can even result in ordinary people
committing murder or torture. 3 People who disobey social pressures and
act according to their consciences have often learned by past experience
how important it is. 4 Minorities who are consistent over time can have
a strong inﬂuence in the end. 5 Children start to become aware of other
people's minds round about the age of four. 6 Communication can be
either deliberate or accidental; and much of it is non-verbal -- not
involving words. 7 Non-verbal communication, both in human actions and
in symbols, is generally more powerful than verbal communication. 8
Attributions are personal explanations we use for why things are like
they are. 9 Social representations are shared beliefs held by groups of
people, which provide social explanations and direct social ideas. 10
Social scripts act in partnership with social representations to
establish expectations which guide our everyday behaviour.

3.  Understanding other people

55

4 Emotional living In this chapter you will learn: • eight different
types of positive emotion • outlines of four techniques for coping with
stress • the principles of positive psychology. If you were to survey a
large number of people about what makes a human being different from a
computer, the chances are that one reply would overshadow all the rest.
Human beings are very different from machines, because we can feel
emotion. We become happy, upset, thrilled or furious -- and we're not
always particularly rational about how we do it. In this chapter, we
will look at the psychology of emotions and at how psychological
knowledge has been used to help people to cope with anxiety and stress.

Emotions When we think of emotions, it is generally the unpleasant ones
which come to mind: fear, anger, anxiety, and so on. Partly, that's
because we live in a society which tends to emphasize those much more
than the positive ones. Films, news and TV dramas all emphasize negative
emotions and ignore positive ones. So we tend not to notice the positive
emotions that we feel, or to dismiss them as not really important.

56

People who give up smoking, for instance, often notice that they become
more easily irritated. But they overlook the fact that they also become
more able to smile, and that they laugh more easily. Both of these have
the same physical origin -- they are to do with getting the nicotine out
of the body (we will look at this more closely in Chapter 5) -- but we
notice only the unpleasant side, because that's how our perceptions have
been shaped by modern society. POSITIVE EMOTIONS Table 4.1 Situations
producing positive emotions. Spending a good social evening with
friends. Receiving an unexpected compliment which means a lot to you.
Getting involved in a thriller on TV. Feeling overwhelmed by the beauty
of nature. Getting on well with your loved ones. Solving an important
personal problem. Listening to a beautiful piece of music. Engaging in a
favourite hobby (not sports). Having a rewarding conversation. Doing
some sort of commitment activity (e.g. charitable work, etc.). Feeling
popular at a social gathering. Being a success at something important to
you. Being absorbed by your work. Meeting an interesting new person or
people. Engaging in a favourite sporting activity. Being successful at
work. Reading a good book. Doing some enjoyable physical work. Buying
yourself something you have wanted for ages. Spending some time thinking
about the good things in life. Being given a valuable present by someone
dear to you. Having a long hot bath, or pampering yourself some other
way. Spending a memorable evening at a cinema/theatre/concert. Having a
quiet drink with friends (non-alcoholic or alcoholic). (adapted from
Argyle and Crossland, 1987)

4.  Emotional living

57

In the later part of the twentieth century some researchers began
systematic investigation of our positive emotions. For example, Argyle
and Crossland (1987) asked people to imagine how they would feel in each
of 24 different situations (Table 4.1). They also asked them to compare
those feeling with the feelings produced by any of the other situations
on the list. By combining the different descriptions and analysing what
they had in common, Argyle and Crossland found that there seemed to be
roughly eight kinds of positive emotion which are listed in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2 Types of positive emotion. Potency Spirituality

Contentment Relaxation Self-Indulgence Altruism Absorption Exhilaration

Feeling capable and able to do whatever is needed. Feelings of wonder or
awe, such as when listening to a particularly beautiful piece of music,
or enjoying nature. Feeling pleasantly satisﬁed with circumstance.
Feeling unstressed and mentally calm. e.g. pampering yourself. Not
selﬁsh, but a pleasure which is personal rather than shared. Sharing or
caring for other people. Feeling interested in a topic or a hobby. Being
excited about something, or thrilled by an unexpected pleasant
experience.

Using these eight emotions as the basis for further research, Argyle and
Crossland concluded that they could be distilled into four basic
dimensions. The ﬁrst of these dimensions is involvement -- how involved
we are in what we are doing. When we are having a quiet drink with
friends, we tend to be less absorbed than if we were reading a good book
or solving an important personal problem. We take things more lightly,
and don't plunge into them as deeply. The second dimension is potency --
how effective we feel ourselves to be. Some experiences require us to
use our abilities fully, in

58

order to achieve success, and those can be very satisfying. But other
equally pleasant experiences, like socializing with friends or going to
the cinema or a music concert, don't require the same kind of personal
effectiveness. That type of experience simply isn't relevant when we are
socializing with friends or going to the cinema or a music concert. So
positive emotions can vary depending on how much they involve a feeling
of potency on our part. The third dimension is social -- whether our
attention is focused on social events, as it might be when we are in
conversation with friends or meeting new people, or whether our current
experience is simply personal and/or self-indulgent. Some positive
experiences seem to direct our attention outwards, to other people,
while others direct it inwards, towards our own selves. The fourth
dimension is intensity. Some experiences are really quite lightweight:
having a hot bath or watching a TV thriller are pleasant, but they are
not desperately serious activities. Some positive emotions, though,
produce much deeper emotions, such as solving an important personal
problem, getting on with loved ones, or feeling overwhelmed by the
beauty of nature. We can see, then, that there is a much larger range of
positive emotions than we sometimes realize. There are others, too,
which aren't on this list. However, modern society's tendency to notice
only the unpleasant emotions like anger or fear, or to regard them as
somehow more important than the positive ones, means that these aspects
of human experience are often ignored or neglected.

Insight Modern society tends to exaggerate unpleasant emotions, through
the media and everyday discussion. But we have a rich and varied array
of positive emotions, too; and these are just as important. It's time we
got to understand them better, so we can notice them properly.

4.  Emotional living

59

LOVING One emotion which isn't neglected in modern society is love. We
hear about love all the time, through the mass of romantic images in the
media. But how far does the public image of 'love' actually reﬂect the
reality? What is really involved in the experience of love, and what is
the difference in the love between a couple who have been married for 30
years, and that between two starry-eyed teenagers. Are there different
kinds of loving? It seems that there are. A number of psychologists have
investigated different kinds of love and have concluded that we often
use the same word to describe some very different emotions. One of the
most useful distinctions was made by Tennov (1979), who argued that
love, as a long-term emotion, was actually very different from the
short-term, intensive infatuation which we also call love, or being 'in
love'. She suggested that it would be more appropriate if we used the
term limerence to describe the intensive experiences, and kept the term
love to refer to the attachment involved in longer-term affections and
partnerships. Limerence, according to Tennov (and a vast number of
writers, playwrights and musicians), is an intensive, all-consuming
passion, which has a very strong element of fantasy in it. The person
becomes totally obsessed with their idea of their loved one and spends a
great deal of time thinking about them and daydreaming. Often, these
thoughts are focused around tokens of some kind, such as a letter, a
lock of hair, or a photograph. Perhaps the most distinctive feature of
this emotion is that it involves a state of intensive longing for the
person. Because of this, Tennov argued, it is quite important that the
person should be unreachable in some way -- otherwise the emotion isn't
likely to last very long. When two people experiencing limerence are
together all of the time, the emotion tends to die away because it is
not being fed by their longing for one another. That isn't necessarily a
bad thing, of course. In many cases, the period of limerence represents
an initial blissful period,

60

which is then gradually replaced by a deeper kind of loving, which
becomes a basis for a long-term partnership. But some couples ﬁnd that
they have relatively little in common once the period of intensive
limerence is over. The problem, of course, is that those experiencing
limerence can't imagine it ever being over, so it is quite possible for
them to make serious commitments, like marriage, while they are in this
state, and then to regret it later. The fact that limerence can be
perpetuated as long as the couple are prevented from being together as
much as they would like, explains why parental opposition to love
affairs so often has the opposite outcome to the one which they
intended. Forbidding the relationship has the effect of increasing the
longing which the two people feel for one another, and so can make their
attachment stronger. A more sensible course would probably be to make
sure that the two people spent as much time together as possible, to see
if they would still be likely to form a lasting attachment once the
period of limerence is over.

Insight Distinguishing between love and limerence is quite important,
because in everyday life we use the word 'love' to mean so many
different things. Try counting all the times you hear the word during
the course of a day, and see how many times the word is used with the
same meaning. Dimensions of love Sternberg (1988) accepted Tennov's idea
of love and limerence and went on to look at what seems to be involved
in the longer-term emotion which we also call 'love'. He surveyed 80
people between the ages of 17 and 69, asking them about the
relationships which they were experiencing at the time, and ones which
they had experienced in the past. From this and other data, Sternberg
concluded that love seems to consist of three underlying dimensions,
with different proportions of these dimensions producing different kinds
of love. These dimensions are intimacy, passion, and commitment (see
Table 4.3). 4. Emotional living

61

Table 4.3 Dimensions of love. Intimacy

Passion

Commitment

How closely the two partners share in one another's lives, including
communication, understanding and emotional support. Emotions, desires
and needs as well as physical passion, e.g. satisfying nurturing, caring
and personal fulﬁlment needs. A long-term commitment to building a
lifelong partnership which helps to keep the couple together during
difﬁcult times.

Different combinations of these dimensions produce different kinds of
love. For example, the kind of long-term companionate love which
develops between two people who have been together for many years is
often one which is high in intimacy and commitment, but perhaps less so
on the passion dimension. Romantic love, on the other hand, tends to be
high on intimacy and passion, but doesn't involve as much commitment.
Sternberg referred to the kind of love which involves all three
dimensions fully as consummate love. Using his sample of 80 people of
different ages, Sternberg also investigated how loving relationships
changed over time and, in particular, what kinds of things became more
or less important as the relationship developed. People in long-term
relationships identiﬁed ﬁve things as important -- that is, they
believed that ﬁve things mattered more in the long term than in the
short term. These are listed in Table 4.4. Table 4.4 Important factors
in long-term relationships. Having similar values. Being willing to
change in response to the other person. Being prepared to put up with
the other person's ﬂaws. Having matching religious beliefs. Having an
equal intellectual level. (Sternberg, 1988)

62

Interestingly, the last one in the list -- having a similar intellectual
level -- seemed totally unimportant to those whose relationships had
been going only for a few years, but was seen by people in long-lasting
relationships as absolutely essential. Some things, though, became less
important with time, including how interesting the other person seemed
to be, and how attentively each person listened to one another. Some
became more important during the ﬁrst few years of the relationship but
then declined or mattered less as time wore on. These included physical
attractiveness, the ability to make love, the ability to empathize with
the partner, and expressing affection towards one another. It isn't
really possible to tell, though, whether these things really became less
important, or whether the couples in the long-term relationships took
them so much for granted that they stopped noticing them at all.

Negative emotions Some of our emotions, like anger or extreme fear, can
be extremely destructive. Since the earliest days of psychology,
psychologists have been interested in these negative emotions -- partly
because of their social impact, and partly, as Seligman (2003) pointed
out, because of a widespread social belief that underneath, people are
nasty, selﬁsh and aggressive, and that this accounts for most of
society's problems. Seligman traces this idea back to the doctrine of
original sin, but points out that actually, there is very little
evidence for it. Most people would far rather be positive in their
dealings with others, and the way that we become distressed when we come
into conﬂict with other people indicates how important positive
interactions are to us.

Insight It has been said that people who are habitually angry or worried
take years from their lives, because the physical reactions accompanying
negative emotions are so draining for the body.

4.  Emotional living

63

PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF FEAR AND ANGER We do, nevertheless, experience
strong emotions, and these were the dominant focus of research into
emotion throughout the twentieth century. Early psychologists were
particularly interested in how the emotion that we feel connects with
the physical sensations that we experience when we are frightened or
angry. Both anger and fear are very active emotions. If you are angry
with someone, your muscles tense up and you become restless: some people
will even stand up and pace around the room as a way of helping to
control the tension. Similarly, if you are frightened your muscles
become tense and you may make small involuntary movements which express
that tension. The two types of tension aren't the same, of course, but
they do have quite a lot in common. They are quite different from the
quiescent emotions, such as depression, which involve listlessness and
apathy rather than tension and activity. In part, the tension that you
feel when you are afraid is a survival response, and one shared by all
mammals. In the natural world, if an animal is threatened by something
so that it becomes frightened, then there are only two options. It can
stay and ﬁght, in which case it will need all the strength it can
muster, to win; or it can run away, in which case it will need all the
strength it can muster, to escape. In either case, therefore, the animal
will need all its strength because holding anything back isn't much use
if you end up dead. So the animal's body goes into overdrive, to give it
as much energy as possible; and this is known as the 'ﬁght or ﬂight'
response. Humans have it too. Most of the time, we use only a small
proportion of our potential strength and energy. However during the ﬁght
or ﬂight response, the body changes the way in which it operates
physically in several different ways, all of which help to release more
energy to the muscles. Physical energy comes from a chemical reaction
between oxygen and forms of glucose, or blood sugars. Both of these are
carried in the bloodstream to the muscles where, effectively, the sugar
is 'burnt' to produce energy. This process takes oxygen, so

64

muscles that are in action need to have a continuous supply of fresh
oxygenated blood if they are to work properly. Many of these physical
changes, then, are concerned with getting oxygen into the bloodstream.
We breathe more deeply and more rapidly, increasing the oxygen supply
entering the lungs. Blood pressure increases, carrying blood around the
body more quickly, and extra red blood cells (which carry oxygen) are
released into the bloodstream. Some other changes are concerned with
getting more 'fuel' to the muscles. Stored fats are converted into blood
sugars and released into the blood. The digestive system begins to work
differently, ignoring long-term digestion and increasing the digestive
processes for rapidly acting foods such as sugars. Saliva in the mouth
changes in the same way, so that we can metabolize rapid-energy foods
quickly. Another set of changes is designed to protect us from injury as
much as possible. The amount of vitamin K in the blood increases, making
the blood more able to clot quickly if there is an injury. Also, if we
are frightened, blood vessels close to the surface of the skin shrink,
making us paler and minimizing the amount of blood we are likely to lose
if we are injured. Blood supply to the internal vital organs of the
body, on the other hand, increases. We also have some leftover responses
designed to protect us by making us look more fearsome. In many animals,
their fur stands on end as part of the ﬁght or ﬂight response, making
them look bigger and potentially more dangerous. Humans have lost their
fur, but the hairs that we have left still try to stand on end.
Unfortunately, instead of making us look more frightening, all this
actually does is give us goosepimples! We can see, then, that the ﬁght
or ﬂight response is a very powerful reaction, which serves an important
survival function -- at least, when we are faced with threats that
require physical action. It isn't quite as helpful when we are faced
with non-physical threats, such as anxiety about the mortgage, or a fear
of failing exams. Because these threats don't require physical action,
we don't have a way of using up that energy, and can

4.  Emotional living

65

quickly become stressed. We will be looking at this problem later in
this chapter. There are lesser degrees of the ﬁght or ﬂight response,
too. When our attention is caught by something, or when we feel anxious
about something, we experience the same kinds of physical changes but to
a much lesser degree. The changes are strong enough to be measured,
though, using sensitive detectors that will identify changes in pulse
rate, heart rate, sweating, blood pressure and the like. A machine which
measures several of these changes is known as a polygraph. Some people,
such as police conducting interrogations, use polygraphs as lie
detectors because they can detect the slight anxiety which people feel
when they tell a lie. Other machines can analyse slight changes in the
voice caused by anxiety, which can sometimes be useful for detectives
monitoring anonymous telephone calls.

Insight If lie detectors can catch the reactions produced by even a
single anxious thought, how much more does being continually worried
produce? It's no wonder that long-term stress is so damaging. The
general name which we give to this kind of physical state is known as
arousal, because it seems as though several physiological systems have
been aroused at the same time. The type of arousal which we experience
in fear is slightly different from the type we experience when we are
angry, but the two conditions have a great deal in common. Back in the
1950s, a psychologist named Ax conducted a study to investigate the
difference between fear and anger. Ax connected people up to an
impressive-looking machine, so that they had wires and connectors all
over the body. Then, when they were fully connected up, a technician
came rushing into the room saying 'Hold it! There's a short circuit in
the apparatus'. That was the fear condition. In the anger condition, the
person was wired up and then left alone with a technician who grumbled
about the study and insulted them.

66

Incidentally, it wouldn't be possible for a psychologist to conduct this
sort of study nowadays. There are very strict rules about ethical
principles which have to be observed while conducting psychological
experiments. It is not permitted to cause people who are participating
in the research any pain or distress (mental or physical) at all. It
also isn't permitted to deceive people, except under very special
circumstances and with special permission from an ethical committee, and
then only as long as they are told the full truth at the earliest
possible moment. However, when Ax was doing this research, these
conditions didn't exist. Ax found that there were distinct physiological
differences between the kind of arousal produced by fear, and that
produced by anger. These differences seemed to be the result of
different hormones and brain chemicals which were involved in the two
emotions. Both fear and anger involved a chemical named adrenaline (or
epinephrine in America), but anger also involved another one, known as
noradrenaline (or norepinephrine). Adrenaline and noradrenaline are both
chemicals which are used by the body to stimulate a special part of the
nervous system, known as the autonomic nervous system. This is a network
of nerve ﬁbres, running to all the internal organs of the body. When
part of the autonomic nervous system is stimulated -- a part known as
the sympathetic division -- the body experiences arousal. However, when
the other part, known as the parasympathetic division, is stimulated,
the body becomes quieter and less active. The parasympathetic division
seems to be involved in quiet emotions such as depression or sadness. So
we have these physiological symptoms which accompany our emotions. The
next question is: which comes ﬁrst? If physical changes happen when we
feel emotions, does that mean that our emotions are caused by these
physical changes? One of the early psychologists, William James, thought
so. He described what happens when you trip going down the stairs and
catch hold of the bannister to save yourself. During that ﬁrst second,
James pointed out, you simply react and do what is needed to survive.
However,

4.  Emotional living

67

a couple of seconds later, your heart begins to beat faster, your hands
sweat, and your breathing changes -- in other words, the arousal
response starts, but only after the emergency is over. It is then, James
believed, that we feel the fear. James went on to suggest that all human
emotions actually come from our perceiving the physical condition that
we are in. A famous quote from him is: 'We do not weep because we feel
sorrow; we feel sorrow because we weep.' He believed that the brain
unconsciously monitors the body for changes, and then interprets those
changes according to what the situation seems to demand. Over 60 years
later, two psychologists named Schachter and Singer conducted an
experiment to investigate this idea. Although it wasn't a very good
experiment, because they didn't really control it very well, the
experiment did give us some useful clues about how physical sensations
and our own knowledge of the situation might be connected. Schachter and
Singer's study wanted to see what happened if people had the physical
symptoms of arousal, and how they would feel in different situations. So
some of their research participants were injected with adrenaline,
producing the physical symptoms of arousal, while others were injected
with just a neutral saline solution, which didn't have any effect. Also,
they were given different 'explanations' for how they were feeling. Some
of them were told accurately what was likely to happen -- trembling
hands, a pounding heart and feeling ﬂushed. Others were misinformed, by
being told that they might experience an itching sensation, a slight
headache, or numbness. And a third group were not given any information
at all, just told that the injection was mild and harmless and wouldn't
have any side effects. What happened next was that the research
participants were asked to sit in a waiting room for 20 minutes,
supposedly to let the injection have its full effect. Each time, there
was another person in the room with them who seemed to be another
participant in the

68

study. Really, though, the person was a stooge -- an actor who was
pretending to be a research participant but who was really doing what
the experimenters wanted. Sometimes, during the 20-minute period, the
stooge would act as if he was in a very happy mood: playing 'basketball'
with pieces of paper, making paper aeroplanes, and playing with a hula
hoop. Each time, he would invite the real research participant to join
in, which many of them did. This was known as the 'euphoria' condition,
designed to encourage the research participants to feel happy. Other
people experienced a different condition. They were introduced to the
stooge and given a long, personally intrusive questionnaire to ﬁll in
during the time. The stooge would begin to ﬁll it in but would then
become increasingly angry at how personal and insulting some of the
questions were. Eventually, he would stamp out of the room in disgust.
This was the 'anger' condition, designed to make people feel angry
themselves. Schachter and Singer found that, by and large, the stooge
had more inﬂuence than the injection. In other words, whether they had
an adrenaline injection or not, those who were in the 'euphoric'
condition tended to be in quite a good mood at the end of the time,
while those in the 'anger' condition tended to be irritable. The moods
that we experience, their ﬁndings implied, are mainly determined by
social factors -- the reactions of other people around us. But they also
found that how intensely people experienced the emotion depended on the
adrenaline -- as long as they didn't know what to expect. People who had
been kept ignorant or misinformed about the effects of the adrenaline
showed quite strong changes in moods. But people who had been told about
the real effects reacted in much the same way as people who hadn't had
the adrenaline at all. In other words, they changed their mood a little,
from the social inﬂuences, but not much. The conclusion Schachter and
Singer came to, therefore, was that our awareness of the situation
produces the emotion that we actually feel. But our physical condition
inﬂuences how strongly

4.  Emotional living

69

we feel that emotion. An aroused state contributes to the way we
interpret situations, so we feel more angry, or happier, than we might
otherwise. You may have found a similar effect yourself if you have
been, say, running for a bus but have just missed it. Running and
anxiety both raise the adrenaline levels in the bloodstream, so we can
become very angry at the moment of missing the bus, even if it isn't all
that important when we calm down. The arousal exaggerates the reactions
that we feel. As I said before, the study had ﬂaws in terms of the way
the conditions were controlled -- and of course it involved far too much
deception and manipulation for anything like that to be permitted today.
However, it has given us some useful insights into emotion and how it
works -- in particular, by showing how our physiology interacts with our
personal and social experiences. Describing anger If our understanding
of the situation affects our emotion, then how we describe emotions can
also be important. So it is useful to look at how an emotion is
understood in different cultures and in different languages. In the
English language, for example, we tend to use the word 'anger' as a
general term to describe a particular emotion. However, that can
sometimes lead to confusion because different kinds of anger may
actually be quite different, both in their social meanings and in
whether we judge the angry person as being fully responsible or not.
Lutz (1991) discussed how the Ifaluk people of Micronesia have ﬁve
different words for anger, and each of these describes a different kind
of emotion. For example, the anger which you might feel with relatives
or friends who have not fulﬁlled their obligations is known as nguch.
This is regarded as a different emotion from the irritability which
people feel when they have been ill, and are convalescing, which is
known as tipmochmoch. A third kind of emotion is the anger we experience
when we feel frustrated or helpless, or trapped into doing things that
we don't want to do. The Ifaluk know this emotion as tang. And this is

70

entirely different from the kind of anger which builds up gradually
through lots of irritating little things going wrong, which is known as
lingeringer. Finally, there is a sort of anger which society actually
encourages: the kind of righteous anger or indignation which is to do
with morality and justice, and making sure that things which happen are
fair and equitable. That kind of anger is known as song. When we look at
these different words and their meanings, we can see that each of them
reﬂects an emotion that Western people also feel sometimes. But the
Ifaluk use different words, seeing them as quite different emotions, and
so they ﬁnd it easier to respond to them differently. Words might not
seem to be so important, but words structure and shape our understanding
of the world. Advertisers and propagandists know this, and quite
deliberately select words which carry the kinds of implications they
want to convey, because they know that even one word can change the
whole way people see what is going on. Having a vocabulary for different
kinds of anger means that people will be much more likely to take
account of the causes of that anger, and will be more prepared to treat
people differently. An Ifaluk person, for example, would be much less
likely to be disturbed or upset when a convalescent person was being
snappy and unreasonable, for example, because they would be aware of
what was producing the emotion from the outset. We have to learn these
things the hard way, because our language doesn't sensitize us to them;
and we can easily become stressed or even lose friends as a result of
not realizing the source of their emotion. We can learn a lot about
being human from non-technological cultures like the Ifaluk, because
people in such societies often have a much more sophisticated awareness
of mental states than people in technological societies.

Insight Using a different explanation for an emotion can mean that we
actually experience the emotion quite differently. The same can apply
when we are trying to understand other people's reactions, too.

4.  Emotional living

71

Stress and coping If we have a fright, or if we become angry with
someone, the emotion often passes. We calm down and get over it and, as
we do, the physical symptoms of arousal disappear as well. But sometimes
we can experience emotional arousal which doesn't go away. Being anxious
about whether there will be enough money to pay the bills, for instance,
is a continuous worry, not a passing thing. This means that it is
constantly producing physiological arousal, which doesn't go away. Selye
(1956) showed that long-term arousal such as this can have many harmful
effects, including interfering with our physical health. We call it
stress, and it is one of the most studied areas of psychology -- mainly
because it is such a big problem in modern society. Long-term stress
suppresses the action of the body's immune system, making us much more
vulnerable to colds, infections and more serious illnesses. In the long
term it can make us more liable to contract heart disease. Long-term
stress also makes us very jumpy and alert to potential threats -- which
means that quite often we see something as a threat when it is really
quite harmless. Because we overreact to what people say or do, we become
more likely to quarrel with the people around us. And it interferes with
judgement, so that we are less likely to make sensible decisions or to
appraise what is going on realistically. Obviously, this is not a
psychologically healthy condition to be in, but there are ways of coping
with long-term stress so that we do not suffer these effects.
Psychologists have identiﬁed many ways of minimizing or cancelling out
the effects of long-term stress and making sure that we deal with it in
a positive kind of way. Not all stress is bad, and we need to understand
how it can be helpful as well as damaging if we are to use it
positively. In order to do this, we need to understand how different
levels of physiological arousal affect us.

72

AROUSAL AND THE YERKES-DOBSON LAW As I mentioned earlier, the 'ﬁght or
ﬂight' response is an extreme state of physiological arousal. But there
are less extreme forms of arousal, too. It is best to think of arousal
in terms of a continuous scale, which has extreme relaxation at one end,
and ﬁght or ﬂight at the other. In between are many different levels. A
disagreement, an unpleasant interview, or even just a worrying thought
are all things which can make us more aroused. Other inﬂuences, such as
caffeine, exercise (while we are doing it, though not afterwards), or
premenstrual tension also raise our level of arousal. This isn't
necessarily a bad thing, because a small amount of arousal is
stimulating. Many people have a cup of coffee in the morning because the
additional stimulation helps them to feel more alert. People do exercise
for the same reason. In fact, up to a point, increased arousal helps us
to do things better. But only up to a point. If we become too aroused --
say, by becoming very upset or very angry -- then it can actually stop
us doing things well. You might ﬁnd, for instance, that you do better in
an argument if you are annoyed by what the other person is saying. Your
irritation helps you to ﬁnd words and to argue more ﬂuently. But if you
become enraged by the other person's comments, so that your arousal
level becomes too high, then you might ﬁnd yourself speechless and
unable to put what you want to say into words. Up to a point, the
increased arousal brought on by irritation has improved your performance
in the argument; but when the level of arousal goes past that point, it
interferes with it.

Insight Arousal is cumulative, so each little stressor adds to the total
load of arousal that we are carrying. That's why taking care of details
and avoiding little stressors can actually help us cope better with the
big ones. This principle is known as the Yerkes-Dodson Law of Arousal
(see Figure 4.1), and it can be applied to almost every task. Being
angry

4.  Emotional living

73

How successful performance of the task is

Optimum level

Level of arousal Figure 4.1 The Yerkes-Dodson Law of Arousal.

or upset might mean that you do the washing up more quickly and
efﬁciently -- but if those feelings were too intense, you might break
things or drop them. With a relatively simple activity such as washing
up, you can be much more aroused before you actually get to the point of
breaking things, but in a complex situation, such as an argument or when
doing something that you need to concentrate on, the optimal level of
arousal for doing the job well is much lower. In other words, you can be
put off more easily. COPING STRATEGIES Athletes, and other people who
take part in highly stressful activities, need to be able to make sure
that their levels of arousal will be enough to produce the best possible
performance. So they often use coping strategies, which allow them to
control the amount of arousal that they experience. Some of these
strategies are physical ones which involve using the adrenaline
constructively, to give additional energy when exercising. People who do
a lot of sport often do better in exams than people of the same
intellectual level who don't take regular exercise, and one possible

74

reason for this is that they simply don't experience as much physical
stress. Many coping strategies though, are cognitive -- they involve the
person's thinking in some way. They include mental exercises, deliberate
thinking strategies, and ways of using the imagination positively. By
doing this, we can make sure that the thoughts we have are useful, and
won't simply add to the amount of stress which we feel. Attributional
styles In everyday life, people often add to the stress they feel by
thinking negatively: worrying about how dreadful things are, or might
become. Since even a single worrying thought adds to our level of
arousal, all thinking of this kind adds to the total arousal and stress
which the person experiences. Sometimes, people even develop ways of
thinking which are totally self-defeating. Abramson, Seligman and
Teasdale (1985) found that chronically depressed people often have what
they called a depressive attributional style, which makes their
depression much worse. Attributions are the reasons that we give for why
things happen, and a depressive attributional style means that we
habitually give the worst kind of reasons for events or circumstances.
Depressive attributional styles are global, stable and uncontrollable.
Global means that the reason is taken to apply to almost everything;
stable means that it isn't temporary but likely to continue for the
foreseeable future, and uncontrollable means that the person can't do
anything about it. So when something unpleasant happens to someone with
a depressive attributional style, they believe that it is just like
everything else and will only turn out for the worse, that it is always
going to be that way, and that it can't be changed. These thoughts keep
their depression going, partly by increasing the stress that they are
under, and partly by making them feel that there isn't any point in
trying to do anything anyway. In other words, they feel helpless, and
unable to control what happens in their lives.

4.  Emotional living

75

Insight Look out for depressive attributions in everyday conversation.
They are usually the ones which say 'there's no point because ...' or 'I
tried that and it didn't work ...'. Cognitive therapists challenge these
attributional styles by teaching people to see things more
realistically. Life is always a mixture of positive and negative events,
and by learning to notice positive things they can see how an unpleasant
event is speciﬁc rather than global. Therapists also encourage their
clients to see how things can change, and become temporary rather than
stable; and teach them how they can inﬂuence events and gain control
over them. In doing so, the person gains a more optimistic outlook which
in itself reduces the amount of stress they experience. Locus of control
People with positive attributional styles, who see themselves as able to
control events by hard work and effort, and who don't give up, tend to
experience stress very differently. They are much less likely to become
depressed, and much more likely to be able actually to do something
about their situation, because they keep looking for ways to change it.
These people have what is known as an internal locus of control. They
believe that what happens to them is largely controlled by their own
efforts. People with a depressive attributional style have an external
locus of control, believing that they cannot inﬂuence what happens to
them. There is a great deal of psychological research which shows that
having an internal locus of control is much healthier for a human being
-- both physically and mentally. Long-term stress can lower the body's
resistance to disease and make us vulnerable to illness. But people with
an internal locus of control experience less stress, even though their
physical situation may be just as bad. This is because they channel
their energies into looking for positive things to do, instead of just
worrying. And because they are likely to gain at least a small success
through trying so hard they experience positive emotions such as a sense
of achievement, which people who are more passive don't feel.

76

We acquire an internal locus of control from infancy -- indeed, we can
see much of infant development as acquiring control over the body and
the immediate environment. But we often lose it as a result of bad
experiences and traumas that we feel helpless to do anything about.
Childhood experiences can be an important part of that, but even as
adults, experiences can shift our thought habits and behaviour, so that
we move from an internal to an external locus of control. Cognitive
therapy is all about teaching people how to take control of their own
lives, and how to avoid the self-defeating beliefs and attributions
which have stopped them from doing so in the past. Almost anything which
increases someone's self-conﬁdence has the effect of giving them more of
an internal locus of control over their own life. Problems may be real,
and not likely to go away, but we can make their effects worse or
better, depending on how we go about dealing with them. Awfulization
Challenging 'awfulization' is another problem for cognitive therapists
teaching people how to deal with stress. Awfulization is a habit of
thinking in which the person refuses to look at unwanted consequences,
because they would be just too dreadful to contemplate. So every action
or activity related to the thing which is being awfulized becomes
doom-laden with a cloud of awful consequences. Exams are a good example:
some students, even when they are well prepared for their exams, feel
that failing them would be so awful that -- well, they don't know what,
because it is so terrible that they haven't even let themselves think
about it. People who are given to awfulizing tend to do it about even
quite small, not very important things, as well as really important
ones. It's part of having a negative cognitive style. But all it does is
add to the stress that they experience. It doesn't help them to deal
with things in the slightest: it just makes their anxiety even worse.
Many therapists ﬁnd it helpful to get their clients to face up to their
fears, and make them real. They look,

4.  Emotional living

77

together, at the worst thing that can happen, and plan how the person
might go about dealing with it. This exercise helps people to bring
their fears into perspective, and see that there would be ways of coping
after all. Just knowing that the world wouldn't come to an end if the
worst happened can help a lot of people.

Positive psychology Society has a direct impact on how we experience our
emotions. The enormous emphasis on negative emotions produced by modern
TV and ﬁlm means that people in Western cultures often under-emphasize
the positive emotions of their lives: they don't notice them, or don't
think they are important. Many psychologists believe that this has
produced an imbalance in modern experience, in which continually
focusing on bad things adds to the amount of everyday stress that people
feel. Yet those people in public life who talk about the need for more
good news, or more positive TV, are often ridiculed as 'soft' or
'touchy-feelies', when actually they are only talking good sense.

Insight Positive psychology is a much-needed attempt to bring the
balance back into psychology. Instead of concentrating on the negative
sides of life, it tries to understand and promote the positive side as
well. What's the point of understanding unhappiness if we can't also
understand what it is to be happy? HAPPINESS Positive psychology is
about helping people to obtain a more balanced perspective, by learning
to recognize and value the positive aspects of our everyday life.
Effectively, as its founder Martin Seligman (1998) says, it is about
happiness. As we have seen, being happier can help us in many ways --
even physically, as researchers have shown how positive and happy
thoughts can

78

stimulate the immune system and help us to recover from many of our
ailments and illnesses. A better awareness of positive psychology could
help us all to live life more easily. We all have the capacity to live a
positive life, but we don't all do it in the same way. Martin Seligman
(2003) identiﬁed three sorts of desirable life: the pleasant life, the
good life, and the meaningful life. Effectively, a pleasant life is one
in which the person is aware of, and enjoys, positive emotions about the
past, present and future. Table 4.5 describes some of these emotions. A
good life, in Seligman's terms, involves using your strengths and
virtues to obtain gratiﬁcation in the main areas of your life. Finally,
a meaningful life is the use of your strengths and virtues in the
service of something much larger than you are. Table 4.5 Time
perspectives in positive emotions. Emotions directed towards the past
Emotions directed towards the present

Emotions directed towards the future

e.g. contentment, serenity, satisfaction, pride. e.g. pleasures, both
bodily ones like enjoyable sights or feelings, and higher pleasures such
as mirth, fun, bliss and thrills; and gratiﬁcations, such as activities
which we like doing and ﬁnd absorbing. e.g. optimism, hope, conﬁdence,
trust and faith.

As with any psychological classiﬁcation, most people will have a
combination of these different types of lives, and everyone goes through
periods when they experience loss, grief, or other negative experiences.
What Seligman is talking about is the dominant emphasis of our lives,
not the details. If we generally hold on to an optimistic outlook, and
adopt positive coping strategies to deal with our stresses, we can all
learn to be happier and healthier as a result. As we will see in Chapter
15, there can even be positive aspects to recovering from serious
life-disasters, depending on how we go about dealing with them.

4.  Emotional living

79

Veenhoven (2003) argued that the promotion of happiness should be a
major part of public policy. He discusses the utilitarian view of the
philosopher Jeremy Bentham, who argued that society should work for the
'greater happiness of a greater number', and challenged many of the
arguments which critics had put forward. For example, critics have said
it was impossible to deﬁne happiness since it can't be deﬁned or
measured, but Veethoven argues that happiness is an outcome of life, and
can be deﬁned as 'the overall appreciation of one's life as a whole'.
Since it is a conscious state, it can also be measured, because people
can tell us about it, and studies have shown that standard measures of
happiness used by psychologists are quite reliable and valid. Another
common complaint is that happiness is just for the happy few, and
happiness for the greater number is impractical. Veenhoven argues that
this is not so. At what he calls the macro level of society, wealth,
justice and freedom are strong factors which inﬂuence happiness. At what
he calls the meso level, happiness depends on institutional qualities,
such as autonomy at work or in-care situations. And at the micro level,
he argues, happiness is dependent on personal capabilities like
independence, efﬁcacy and social skills. When these factors are
combined, happiness for the greater number of the population becomes
perfectly possible. Some critics have argued that happiness spoils
people, making them depraved or selﬁsh. Veenhoven points out that quite
the reverse is true: studies of the consequences of happiness show that
it fosters altruism and sociability, as well as activity, initiative,
and of course, health. There is no evidence in psychological research
for any negative effects of happiness. Learned optimism In his early
career, Martin Seligman investigated a phenomenon known as learned
helplessness. He showed that repeatedly experiencing unpleasant stimuli
or events, without being able to do anything about it, produced a state
of apathy and hopelessness which was so strong that people (or animals)
wouldn't do anything

80

to help themselves even when they could. It's a kind of 'victim
mentality', which prevents people from taking positive action, and traps
them in bad situations.

Insight Learned optimism is the opposite of learned helplessness.
Instead of feeling that things are bound to be unpleasant, we can learn
to hope for the best and see the good side. That would help all of us to
live longer. As Seligman continued his researches, he found that it was
possible for people to overcome these thought habits, and to learn more
positive, optimistic ways of thinking. One way, for example, was for
therapists to work with people to develop the kind of positive
attributional style which we looked at earlier in this chapter. Seeing
things as speciﬁc rather than global, unstable rather than stable, and
controllable rather than uncontrollable leads to a far more positive way
of appraising situations. It gives people a positive sense of agency --
that they are actively in control of their own lives, and able to make
their own choices. And this is a much more psychologically healthy way
of thinking. The important of positive thinking has been known for a
long time. One method used by therapists is called the Pollyanna
technique, after a children's book written in the nineteenth century. It
involves looking for something good -- no matter how small -- to come
out of every event or disaster. That doesn't mean we have to ignore or
belittle the problems, of course, but it means that we need to see
things more realistically -- that even apparently awful events can
sometimes have positive side effects. Most importantly, it trains people
in a constructive way of thinking, which doesn't just focus always on
the worst side of things. That sort of pessimism is very bad for people,
because it increases their overall stress levels. But Seligman showed
how optimism is a much more positive state of mind, and how we can learn
to become more optimistic with the right therapy or self-training.
Essentially, he showed people how to replace learned helplessness with
learned optimism, and have a more positive life as a result.

4.  Emotional living

81

Insight Research has shown that people who take a positive outlook
recover better from cancers and other illnesses than people who are
depressed or anxious. That says a lot about the power of positive
thinking, and why we should all try to do it. We can see, then, that the
psychological study of emotions can give us a great many insights into
this aspect of our lives. Studying fear and anger raises interesting
questions about how our experiences relate to the physical states that
we are feeling. The psychological study of anxiety and stress has
allowed us to identify a number of positive ways to cope with stress and
other problems. More importantly, we have many more positive emotions
than we sometimes realize, and these may be associated with quite small
events as well as quite large ones. We can see from the research into
positive psychology how happiness and other positive emotions represent
a very rich part of human experience, which we should recognize much
more clearly than we sometimes do.

82

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Social factors mean that we often fail to notice
positive emotions. 2 Long-term love is quite different from limerence --
the obsessive absorption of romantic love. 3 The three main dimensions
of long-term love are intimacy, passion and commitment. 4 The 'ﬁght or
ﬂight' response is extreme arousal producing a short-term increase in
energy through various bodily changes. 5 The words we use to describe or
deﬁne emotions may also help or hinder us in dealing with them. 6 The
Yerkes-Dodson Law suggests that arousal can improve performance up to a
point, but after that will hinder it. 7 Coping strategies are ways of
tackling long-term stress, often using cognitive methods. 8 It is
psychologically healthier to have an internal rather than external locus
of control, and a signiﬁcant way of reducing stress. 9 Positive
psychology is concerned with the pursuit of happiness and other positive
emotions. 10 Learned optimism is psychologically healthier than
pessimism or learned helplessness.

4.  Emotional living

83

5 Consciousness and the brain In this chapter you will learn: • to
identify biological rhythms that affect us psychologically • about the
different effects that psychoactive drugs can have on the mind • about
cycles of sleep, dreaming and wakefulness. In this chapter we will be
looking at how our brains inﬂuence our experiences -- and in particular,
at how we experience different states of consciousness. Our brains are
physical structures, consisting of a network of nerve ﬁbres and
connections. They work using a combination of electrical and chemical
messages: brain chemicals, known as neurotransmitters, stimulate brain
cells, known as neurones, to produce electrical impulses. Those impulses
travel along the neurones, causing more neurotransmitters to be released
and make contact with the next brain cells. This stimulates those brain
cells to ﬁre in their turn, and so messages are passed around. This is
all very well, but as millions of neurones make connections in our
brains, they produce consciousness. Consciousness is something that we
often take for granted: we are generally aware of being conscious, we
worry if someone becomes unconscious and many people believe that it is
consciousness that separates us from animals. But it is difﬁcult to
deﬁne. We know, for instance, that we have different states of
consciousness. Sometimes we feel wide-awake and alert; sometimes we feel
pensive and dreamy; sometimes we feel drowsy and tired. Those are
different states of consciousness, and

84

that is what we are looking at in this chapter. We will look ﬁrst at how
consciousness can be affected by the natural rhythms of days and
seasons, and then go on to explore how certain drugs inﬂuence the mind.
Then we will see how psychologists study the brain's functioning, before
looking at sleep and dreaming -- the biggest changes in consciousness
that we experience from day to day.

Biological rhythms Our state of consciousness changes all the time. We
may be in a good mood and then something happens which puts us in a bad
one. We may feel sleepy, but then an alarming experience brings us fully
alert. We may be relaxed, but the sight of someone we really want to
talk to can rouse us to an unexpected level of energy. All of these are
changes in consciousness. Sometimes, we change our state of
consciousness deliberately by using a drug, such as alcohol or caffeine.
We will be looking at how these work later in this chapter. But a lot of
the time our state of consciousness changes simply because of biological
rhythms. There are many biological rhythms in nature: daily rhythms,
lunar rhythms, seasonal rhythms. Plants and animals all respond to
these: birds begin courtship rituals when the lengthening days signal
that it is spring; some plants open up during the day and close at
night, and so on. And human beings, too, respond to natural rhythms.
Poets and dramatists have long commented on the way that spring often
results in young people thinking of love and romance. I am not aware of
any psychological evidence which would either prove or disprove that,
but psychologists have shown that we respond, physically, to increasing
day length. Many people experience a form of depression during the long
winter months, which clears up completely when spring and summer come.
Seasonal affective disorder, as this kind of depression is called, has a
great deal to do with a lack of natural daylight. After all, for many
people who work indoors, in factories or

5.  Consciousness and the brain

85

ofﬁces, it is possible to pass several months in the winter only seeing
natural daylight at weekends. It is dark when we go out to work or
college, and dark again when we return home. Special lamps which mimic
daylight have been very successful in treating seasonal affective
disorder. The person spends a period of each day exposing their face to
the light produced by these lamps, and that stimulates hormones and
neurotransmitters in the body and brain which help to reduce the
depression. But how can day length have such a strong effect? The answer
lies in a small gland in the brain, known as the pineal gland. This
gland is situated deep in the brain, in a place which is roughly behind
the centre of the forehead. The ancient Greeks regarded it as the
location of the soul and, in other religions, too, this place often has
a mystical signiﬁcance. As far as psychology is concerned, we have
recently become aware that the pineal gland changes its activity in
direct response to day length. When our skin is exposed to light of the
correct wavelengths, the pineal gland stimulates the body to produce
chemicals which lift our moods and make us feel more energetic.
CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS We have other rhythms which are connected with the
24-hour cycle of the day. These are known as circadian rhythms, and they
actually inﬂuence a great deal of our day-to-day experience. Through the
course of the 24-hour cycle, we experience a regular increase and
decrease of activity in several physiological systems, including body
temperature, blood pressure, pulse rate, blood sugar level and hormone
levels. Our moods, alertness, concentration, skills and abilities also
vary according to this cycle.

Insight We are more affected by biological rhythms than we realize.
That's why so many motorway accidents happen in the early hours of the
morning, even though there is very little trafﬁc.

86

For example, between the hours of two and six in the morning, our blood
sugar levels are low, body temperature is low, and so is blood pressure.
If we are awake, we generally experience quite a subdued mood; and if we
are trying to do a demanding task of some kind, we are much more likely
to make mistakes. But this isn't just from tiredness, because as soon as
morning comes, we begin to feel better, and more alert, and our
performance improves. On the other hand, the hours between eleven and
about three o'clock have been shown to be our best times for classroom
learning. Before and after those hours, school pupils work best with
individualized tasks, but classwork has been shown to be much better
during those hours. As long as those hours ﬁt with the prevailing
culture, of course. Siestas As we progress through an ordinary day (not
one where we have stayed up all night!) we ﬁnd that there are particular
'low' points, where it is easy to become sleepy and to take a nap. Our
biological rhythms are set to bring sleep twice a day: at night, but
also in the early afternoon. In hot climates, a siesta is usually an
accepted cultural practice: everyone dozes or sleeps for a couple of
hours in the middle of the day, and then wakes up to resume work once
the hottest time is over. Even in colder climates, where a siesta is not
the standard practice, many older people take a nap after lunch if they
have the opportunity, while others ﬁnd they are inclined to daydream at
that time.

Insight Even people who think they are 'night owls' still have their
most alert period during the day. But if you have been used to a siesta,
it can be very difﬁcult to stay alert in the afternoon. There are other
changes which occur during the course of the day. For example,
psychologists have shown that the time between about four and six in the
evening is by far the best time for exercise -- the body gains more
beneﬁt from exercise at that time than from the same amount of exercise
at other times of the day. Many people experience a slight 'dip' around
about 6 p.m., and then ﬁnd that their energy levels gradually rise for
the rest of the evening, until

5.  Consciousness and the brain

87

Temperature

6am

9am

12 noon 2pm

7pm

3am

Time of day or night Figure 5.1 Body temperature throughout the 24-hour
cycle.

they drop again when it is time to go to bed. Figure 5.1 shows the highs
and lows of body temperature rhythms during a 24-hour period.
Psychological alertness often follows a similar cycle. What keeps these
cycles going? They are partly habit, in the sense that our bodies do
adapt to our usual practices. But they actually go deeper than that. Our
bodies go through these rhythms even if we are in completely artiﬁcial
situations, because these cycles are part of us even from infancy. But
without external stimuli, they can drift, and there are certain physical
cues which help the body to keep them in time with the 24-hour clock.
These cues are known as zeitgebers -- external signals, like external
activity or noise levels, which stimulate these rhythms. And natural
daylight is the strongest zeitgeber of them all. Shift work and jet lag
Sometimes, our body rhythms are disrupted so that we have to be alert at
different times of the day or night. There are two common reasons for
this: shift work and international travel. When we are doing shift work,
we have to adjust our bodies to a different 24-hour rhythm, sleeping at
different times of the day, and being awake at times when we would
normally be asleep. When we are travelling across time zones, we also
have to adjust to a different rhythm of activity. Both cases produce the
same type of problem, which we call jet lag when it is brought about by
travel. Although people can adapt to working at odd times, in that they
are not aware of being particularly

88

stressed, human performance is always inﬂuenced by circadian rhythms.
Nobody works as efﬁciently as they would do at their optimal times of
day, and at its worst, it can produce irritability, poor performance at
work, and poor decision-making. There are some ways in which the
damaging effects of shift work can be minimized. For example, it seems
to be easier for people to move forwards in time, rather than backwards.
So a shift-work cycle which progresses through the 24-hour period, with
someone going from a night shift to an early one, then from an early
shift to a late one, and then on to nights again, is much easier for
people to adjust to than a shift cycle in which someone goes from an
afternoon shift to an early morning one. It's a simple thing, but it can
lead to a measurable decrease in industrial accidents or errors at work.
In international travel, too, shifting the 24-hour system forwards (for
example, by staying awake for a longer period than you might do
normally) can be helpful in minimizing jet lag, and help the person
become adapted. Without that, it can take anything up to ten days to get
fully adapted to the new cycles. As a result, some politicians or
business people who need to make ﬂying visits to countries on the other
side of the world decide to cope by sticking rigidly to their 'home'
timetables for meals and sleeping, and ﬁtting meetings in between;
rather than trying to make the transition to new times and then having
to re-adjust a day or so later.

Drugs and consciousness As human beings, we don't just experience those
different states of consciousness which are involved in passing through
a regular day and night. We also deliberately change our consciousness
by using drugs. Every human society uses some drugs to change people's
state of awareness in some way. In our society, the main drugs are
alcohol, nicotine and caffeine, while in Peru chewing coca leaves (which
are used to produce cocaine) is an everyday activity, and in some Middle
Eastern countries smoking hasheesh or opium is

5.  Consciousness and the brain

89

legal while alcohol is banned. Drugs which inﬂuence our state of
consciousness are known as psychoactive drugs. PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS AND
HOW THEY WORK Caffeine Caffeine is a very common drug in Western
society, but it is much more powerful than many people realize. All
psychoactive drugs affect the nervous system in some way, but they have
different effects by inﬂuencing different parts of it. For example, in
the last chapter we looked at the state of arousal, and the ways that
anger or similar emotions can affect how the body works. The drug
caffeine, which we take in coffee or cola drinks, acts on the autonomic
nervous system to produce a state of arousal in the body. It also acts
on the reticular formation of the brain, as a stimulant. So it isn't
surprising that it helps people to wake up in the morning! It also isn't
surprising that, while a little caffeine may pep you up, too much of it
can make you irritable and edgy. Caffeine is also physically addictive,
and many people who give it up ﬁnd that they can experience unpleasant
withdrawal symptoms, including blinding headaches, nausea and stomach
upsets. This addiction comes as a surprise to many people, because
caffeine is so readily accepted in society that people assume that it
must be innocuous. However, being addictive doesn't necessarily mean
that it is damaging -- most people live perfectly healthy lives with a
daily dose of caffeine, with no problem that we can detect arising from
that. The main problem with caffeine is that, when people take it in
large amounts, it can interfere with decision-making, because people are
edgy and overreact to information and events; and it can also add
seriously to day-to-day stress. So reducing your caffeine intake is
quite a constructive thing to do if you are feeling under pressure.
Alcohol Alcohol works in almost entirely the opposite way -- as a
sedative which calms down the autonomic nervous system and relaxes the
muscles. In small doses, the inﬂuence of alcohol can often seem quite
stimulating, because it relaxes the everyday tension that most of us
feel and allows us to feel more at ease with other people. So we ﬁnd it
easy

90

to talk and to join in with what is going on. It isn't really a
stimulant drug, in a physical sense, but in small doses it can be a
sociable drug. In large quantities, the soporiﬁc effects of alcohol
becomes much more apparent. People who are very drunk often slur their
words, or even fall asleep under the inﬂuence, and it is a common
observation that even though they are more likely to have accidents,
they are less likely to hurt themselves if they fall over because their
muscles are so much more relaxed. Heavy drinking is a serious social
problem, though, partly because of the way that alcohol use reduces
social inhibitions, with the result that people can become extremely
aggressive and even violent. Most cases of domestic abuse are
alcohol-related. Other problems with alcohol come from its amnesiac
effects. Alcohol can severely interfere with memory, which is why people
often drink too much when they have problems. Once in a while that
doesn't matter, but it is made worse by not eating, because the toxins
from the alcohol don't burn off in the same way. So people who drink
heavily over a period of years and don't eat properly can lose their
ability to store new memories altogether, which is much more serious.
This condition is known as Korsakoff's syndrome and it can be very
disturbing. Sacks (1985) described the case of a 60-year-old man with
Korsakoff's syndrome who could only remember his life up to his
mid-twenties. When he looked in a mirror he became extremely upset
because he didn't recognize the old man he had become. Since he couldn't
remember anything from day to day, the distress was just as strong every
time. The other psychological effect which alcohol has is to impair our
ability to make a balanced judgement. People who have been drinking --
even quite small amounts -- make far more mistakes on physical
co-ordination tasks than people who haven't. But perhaps because they
feel relaxed by the drug, they usually shrug off these mistakes, or
don't even notice them at all. This is why so many people believe that
they can drive well even if they have been drinking. It's not that they
really can. It's that they don't notice any of their mistakes, so they
think they are driving safely when really they are quite dangerous. 5.
Consciousness and the brain

91

Insight Legal drugs (caffeine, alcohol and nicotine) can be just as
damaging to people's lives as illegal ones. Some people argue that much
of the harm caused by illegal drugs comes just because they are illegal,
so their purity and dosage can't be properly controlled. Nicotine Many
people who smoke believe that nicotine helps them to relax. But what it
really does is to make their muscles more sluggish, so that they are
harder to move. It also damps down the activity of the autonomic nervous
system, so that they are less likely to become aroused. In the same way
that alcohol can give us the illusion of being a stimulant when it isn't
really, so nicotine gives us the illusion of being relaxed when really
we are just feeling more inert and inactive. To understand how this
happens, we need to take a look at how our nerve cells work. When we
want to move -- say, to lift an arm -- the brain sends a small
electrical message along our nerve cells (which are very long and
stretched out) to the muscles. When the message reaches the end of the
nerve cell, it stops, but it then causes a special chemical, called a
neurotransmitter, to spill out of the ends of the nerve cell. The
neurotransmitter spills out just next to a special place on the muscle,
known as a receptor site. The molecules of the neurotransmitter ﬁt into
the receptor site like a key ﬁtting into a lock. When that happens, the
muscle receives a message to contract. If it happens with enough
receptor sites, then the whole muscle will move, and the arm will be
lifted. What nicotine does is to nip into the receptor site and block
out the real neurotransmitter. Nicotine molecules have nearly the same
shape as those of the neurotransmitter, so they can be picked up at the
receptor site very easily. But they don't pass the message on, as the
real chemical would have done, so only about half of the message from
the brain actually gets through. The person can still lift their arm,
but not as easily -- it takes more effort.

92

This, of course, explains why people often feel ﬁdgety when they are
ﬁrst giving up cigarettes. The brain has become so used to the nicotine
that it is also used to sending very strong messages to generate each
movement. But if there is no nicotine in the system, then the whole
message gets through and the muscles respond easily, and that can
sometimes feel as if we have too much energy. Because a similar thing
happens in the autonomic nervous system, we also feel our emotions much
more freely. People often comment on how they become more irritable when
they have stopped smoking, and that is true. But what they often don't
notice is that they also become happier, or more easily pleased. In
fact, all of our emotions become more intense, not just the negative
ones. Morphine and heroin It is difﬁcult to be quite so precise about
the actions of some of the illegal drugs which people use to change
their state of consciousness, mainly because, for obvious reasons, there
has been less research into them. Nevertheless, we understand the
effects of some of them fairly well. For example, we know that the
highly addictive narcotic drugs such as heroin and morphine have their
effects because they have a chemical structure which is very similar to
naturally occurring painkillers which the body makes by itself. If you
are doing something very demanding, it is possible to ignore injury or
hurt while you are actually doing it -- indeed, sometimes you might not
even notice it at all. In both war and peacetime, there have been many
instances of people who have been completely unaware of serious wounds
or injuries while they struggled to save someone else's life. In a
situation like that, the brain suppresses our own pain until the
emergency is over. It does this by releasing special brain chemicals,
called endorphins and enkephalins, which act to deaden feeling and
sensation in the body. Morphine and heroin both have very similar
chemical structures. So they can slip into the receptor sites in the
brain which are normally reserved for endorphins and enkephalins,
producing similar results. People who take these drugs report that they
make

5.  Consciousness and the brain

93

them feel euphoric, not quite in touch with reality, and good because
there is no physical discomfort or fatigue. But the problem is, of
course, that when the drug wears off it feels very unpleasant, and that
means that it is extremely easy to become both physically and mentally
addicted to these drugs. When that happens, the person loses contact
with the other important values in their life, and concentrates only on
the experience of the drug. What began as a pleasant 'high' becomes a
psychological necessity. Moreover, because the person is now addicted to
the drug, they also become habituated and what used to be a 'high', is
reduced to being just a relief from stress, rather than a pleasant
sensation. Endorphins and enkephalins are also released through vigorous
exercise, so that is a much better way of getting the same sort of
'high' naturally, without the damaging effects. When people talk about
'feeling good' after a strenuous physical workout, they are talking
about much the same effect that taking these illegal drugs produces, but
they have managed to get it in a much safer and more natural way. And it
doesn't have the unpleasant after-effects when it wears off, either.

Insight People who take morphine or heroin are really just trying to get
the same high that they would get naturally from vigorous and sustained
exercise. So take exercise instead -- it's cheaper and won't turn you
into a thief or burglar as you try to get the money for your next high!
Both morphine and heroin are sometimes used medically because they are
such powerful painkillers, so medical researchers have been able to
investigate how they work in some detail. However, because of the
difﬁculty of conducting systematic research into illegal drugs, we are
much less certain about the effects of marijuana. Marijuana We do know
that marijuana, or cannabis, was widely used as a tranquillizer in the
nineteenth century, and for over 2,000 years in the Far East. We also
know that it acts as a mild depressant,

94

damping down the actions of the autonomic nervous system and producing
muscular relaxation. Perhaps because of this, some users report a sense
of time passing very slowly, and an increased sensitivity to sensory
stimulation such as music or art. Recently, a great deal of debate has
focused on the harmful effects of this drug. Many long-term users insist
that limited use of the drug is effectively harmless, and a number of
people have begun to use it as an effective form of chronic pain relief.
It also appears to help multiple sclerosis sufferers. However, there is
increasing evidence that some stronger strains of the drug, cultivated
over the decades while it has been illegal have produced a stronger form
of marijuana which can produce serious mental illness. This includes
severe depression and at times even psychotic problems such as
schizophrenia, outcomes which are extremely rare with the more
conventional forms of the drug. We are a long way yet from understanding
exactly how marijuana works, chemically, in the brain. But one important
clue occurred when researchers in Israel discovered a chemical,
anandamide, which seems to be a natural substance that has the same
effect in the brain as THC (tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient
of marijuana). Not long afterwards, American researchers discovered that
there might be speciﬁc receptors for anandamide in brain cells, which
implies that these would also respond to THC. But these ﬁndings are
relatively tentative (Mestel, 1993). It needs a great deal more research
before we can be sure of these processes, but for social and political
reasons, it is difﬁcult for scientists to get research funding to
investigate this particular drug. Ecstasy (MDMA) We understand the
actions of some other psychoactive drugs much better, though. We saw
earlier how the brain chemicals known as neurotransmitters are used to
pass information from one nerve cell to another or from one nerve cell
to a muscle ﬁbre. There are several different chemicals which act in
this way, and some researchers have been able to trace 'pathways' of
nerve cells in the brain which use a particular chemical. Some
psychoactive drugs

5.  Consciousness and the brain

95

have their effects by acting directly on these pathways, and one of
these is the drug MDMA, which is also known as ecstasy or just 'E'. MDMA
(which is short for 3,4 methlyenedioxymethamphetamine) is a prosocial
drug. In other words, it makes people feel social and pleasant towards
one another, as opposed to feeling aggressive and irritable. It also
enhances awareness of music and colour. MDMA was ﬁrst discovered in
1914, and was used in marriage guidance counselling, to ease the
tensions between people so that they could talk over their problems more
effectively. In the 1970s, however, it became popular as a recreational
drug, and has now been made illegal. MDMA appears to work by acting
directly on a particular neurotransmitter pathway in the brain. This
pathway involves nerve cells which use the chemical serotonin. Normally,
when a neurotransmitter chemical is spilled out by the nerve cell, it
only remains around for a few seconds, because it is then recycled by
the cell that it came from. But MDMA prevents this recycling, so the
spilled serotonin stays where it is, and continues to work on the next
nerve cell. It does this all through the serotonin pathways of the
brain, and this seems to be what produces such a strong effect on the
person's moods. There is little evidence that MDMA use in itself is
physically or mentally damaging, although as with all drugs, long-term
heavy use can produce some damage to the brain. As a prosocial drug it
doesn't produce the problems of aggression associated with alcohol or
amphetamine use; but using it unwisely can put people at risk from
physical harm. Dehydration, for example is a real problem, and is made
worse by combining the drug with alcohol -- partly because alcohol also
dehydrates the body, and partly because the use of MDMA can lower the
user's awareness of how much alcohol they have been drinking. The deaths
that have resulted from MDMA have originated from this problem.
Amphetamines The stimulant drugs known as amphetamines or 'speed' also
sometimes appear to have a prosocial effect, at least in small doses,
but they

96

are much more dangerous than MDMA. People taking light doses sometimes
ﬁnd that they can talk to others more easily, and seem to be in a better
mood -- although often they may feel slightly edgy or tense. It was
widely used during WWII as a way of maintaining concentration. But in
large or regular doses, amphetamines can lead to severe mental illness
-- a disorder which is known as amphetamine psychosis. This involves a
distortion of reality, with the person becoming extremely paranoid and
disturbed. Since amphetamines are also highly addictive drugs, it is all
too easy for people who enjoy the effects which they have in small doses
to slip into taking larger and larger amounts, often with tragic
results. Where MDMA increases the level of the neurotransmitter
serotonin in the brain, amphetamines work by increasing the level of two
other brain chemicals, known as dopamine and noradrenaline. We know that
the dopamine pathways in the brain are associated with willpower, or
motivation. The illness known as Parkinson's disease comes from a
shortage of dopamine in the brain, and it leaves people unable to make
deliberate actions. Noradrenaline is associated with active and aroused
states of the body, such as anger. Combining these two chemicals seems
to produce amphetamine's effects. In the short term, it increases
motivation and arousal, so people ﬁnd it easy to be sociable even if
they are tired. But in the long term, and in high doses, it makes people
more likely to become agitated and suspicious. This is made worse, too,
by the fact that amphetamines act as appetite suppressants, so people
who take them frequently usually suffer physical debilitation as a
result. LSD Another well-known psychoactive drug is known as LSD, or
sometimes just 'acid'. LSD, which is short for lysergic acid
diethylamide, is a hallucinogen, and taking it gives people some very
unusual psychological affects. It can produce distortions of reality, so
that sounds and colours become extremely exaggerated. People who take it
can also experience hallucinations, seeing things which are not actually
there.

5.  Consciousness and the brain

97

Sometimes, these experiences can become extremely disturbing, and
possibly cause long-term psychological distress. Leary (1965), in
research conducted while the drug was still legal, stressed that LSD
should not be taken casually, but only when what he called set and
setting were right. Set refers to the person's mental state, since fears
or anxieties can produce disturbing effects; while setting refers to the
physical situation, which needs to be relaxed and friendly, since being
in a strange or threatening place can bring about disturbing
experiences. Like MDMA, LSD involves the serotonin pathways of the
brain, but it doesn't work in the same way. The molecules of LSD are a
very similar shape to the molecules of serotonin, so they can ﬁt into
serotonin receptor sites. They produce their effects by mimicking the
effect of the drug, but the chemical isn't identical. So where the
normal effects of serotonin seem to be to produce a sociable, highly
aware mood, the effects of LSD in serotonin receptors seems to be to
produce a kind of hyper-awareness, which can easily turn into
hallucination. This discussion of how drugs work may have been a little
bit technical, but it shows us how closely consciousness and the
chemicals in the brain are linked. We can change the chemical balance in
the brain, and we do, each time we have an alcoholic drink or a cup of
coffee -- or even a glass of milk, which contains mild, naturally
occurring morphine-like substances (which is why it can help us to feel
calmer). Both natural and synthetic drugs can change our moods, our
state of awareness, and our perceptions of reality.

Insight The long-term heavy use of any psychoactive drug will inevitably
produce dependency, damage memory, and harm our general well-being. The
body's normal repair mechanisms can't work properly when they are
continually being interfered with. STUDYING THE BRAIN As we've seen,
brain cells -- in fact all nerve cells -- work by generating tiny
amounts of electricity and passing these on to one

98

another. So some psychologists study brain activity, and how the brain
works, by studying the electrical activity of the brain. One way of
doing this is by using electro-encephalographs, or EEGs for short. These
are charts of the brain's electrical activity, which has been detected
using small electrodes that are attached to the scalp. The changes are
recorded by a pen which rests on a moving sheet of paper and makes small
movements whenever the electrical activity varies. Figure 5.2 shows an
EEG chart. The diagram in the top left-hand corner shows where each
electrode was placed on the person's head, and the lines show the
electrical activity detected by the electrodes. There is a different
line for each electrode, showing the electrical activity which is going
on in different regions of the brain.

Insight Our brain and nervous system works by electrical activity, and
each of us generates a very weak electrical ﬁeld. This might be why some
people who live too near power lines become depressed or ill, but
recover when they move away from them. Of course, all of this is a bit
like standing outside a factory and trying to guess what they are making
by listening to the noises coming through the window. Studying the brain
in this way doesn't tell us everything, by any means. But it can show us
something about the overall patterns of activity, and one of the things
it can show us is the general patterning of brain activity when we are
in different states of consciousness. The type of EEG which is produced
when we are awake and concentrating on something, is very different from
the pattern which is produced when we are awake but just lazily relaxed.
When we are relaxed, an EEG trace shows quite large waves of electrical
activity (large for the brain that is). These are known as alpha
rhythms. We produce them just before we drift off to sleep, or when we
are daydreaming or just relaxed and happy. When we are concentrating
hard, though, the EEG trace shows a different kind of activity. There
are still detectable rhythms in its pattern, but they are smaller and
closer together. These are known as delta rhythms. And when we are just
generally awake, neither relaxing nor concentrating, the EEG trace
doesn't show 5. Consciousness and the brain

99

100

Female aged 15 yrs. Eyes closed -- resting record. Subcortical seizure
discharge

Figure 5.2 An EEG chart.

Eyes open

Eyes closed

Relaxed, eyes closed and open Alpha rhythm (e.g. when daydreaming) Beta
rhythm (normal wakefulness) Delta rhythm (concentration) Figure 5.3 EEG
traces of consciousness.

any regular rhythms at all. Instead, it shows continuous intensive
activity with no particular pattern (see Figure 5.3). There are
different EEG patterns produced when we are asleep, too, and we will be
looking at these later in this chapter. Another way of using EEGs, which
is quite useful for investigating brain damage, is to give a patient a
particular stimulus, such as a ﬂashing light or a particular sound, and
observe the difference in their EEG. These differences are known as
evoked potentials, and they can be useful because they will show if a
particular area of the brain doesn't seem to be responding correctly.

Insight In the past, people were scared of epilepsy, because they
thought it might be an infectious disease. But now we know that it is
simply irregular electrical activity in the brain, which is not
something which can be passed from one person to another. Scanning the
brain Recently, we have become able to get a more general picture of how
the brain works by using scanning techniques. One type of scan, known as
a PET scan (short for positron emission tomography) involves looking at
how much blood is being used

5.  Consciousness and the brain

101

by a particular part of the brain. Each time a nerve cell ﬁres, it uses
up some nutrients, and so it needs to replace them from the blood
supply. So parts of the brain which are being active need a larger blood
supply than those which aren't. The PET scan allows a psychologist or
doctor to see which parts of the brain are using most blood. It works by
'labelling' the blood using a special radioactive chemical which can be
detected by the scanner. Another type of brain scan is known as computed
axial tomography, or CAT scan. This involves building up a
three-dimensional X-ray picture of the brain, by using X-rays to
photograph a set of 'slices' through it. The different images from the
'slices' are then combined using a computer. This can highlight areas of
deformed or damaged tissue, such as blood clots or regions where the
blood supply has been interrupted. So CAT scans can help us to identify
exactly where a problem is located. A third technique is magnetic
resonance imaging, or MRI scanning. This involves passing a succession
of electromagnetic waves -- like radio waves -- through the brain. The
neurones of the brain respond to the electromagnetic stimulation by
producing electromagnetic waves themselves, which are detected and
recorded. As with CAT scanning, it is the computerized combination of
these measurements which produces an image of the brain, this time
showing the bundles of nerve ﬁbres. Scanning techniques have helped us
to learn a great deal more about the functioning of 'normal' brains, but
we are still a long way from getting a comprehensive understanding of
what is going on. Nonetheless, researchers are slowly building up a
picture of some of the principles of how the brain works, and which
parts do what.

Sleep and dreaming For many years, psychologists regarded sleeping as a
time when nothing much happened, except for the occasional dream. But in

102

the late 1930s, psychologists began to use EEGs to record brain
activity, and when EEGs were taken during the whole of a night's sleep,
researchers found that actually the brain is extremely active, even if
the body seems to be quiet. In fact, we seem to have at least four
different phases of brain activity which take place while we sleep.
These are shown in Figure 5.4. As we can see from the diagram, level 1
involves very rapid and irregular activity of the brain, with very low
voltages. Level 2 sleep still shows rapid and irregular activity, but
with greater changes in the voltage becoming apparent from the peaks and
troughs on the chart. Also during this level of sleep, patterns known as
spindles begin to appear, which are very rapid, changeable bursts of
activity. By level 3, the frequency of the electrical activity has
become a little slower, and the peaks and troughs (the amplitude) on the
graphs are higher, meaning that the changes in voltage have become
larger than they were in the ﬁrst and second levels. This trend
continues with level 4, which shows very large changes in voltage, and a
much slower rate of change. Sleep cycles These patterns of sleep, like
so many other aspects of consciousness, happen in regular cycles through
the night. We begin sleeping at

Level 1/ REM

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

Figure 5.4 EEG traces during sleep.

5.  Consciousness and the brain

103

level 1, and spend maybe ten minutes in it. Then our sleep pattern
changes to level 2, and stays there for ten or 15 minutes before
changing again to level 3. During the ﬁrst part of the night, it will
shift down to level 4 for about 20 minutes or so, and then come back up
to level 3, then to level 2, and then back to level 1 (see Figure 5.5).
A complete cycle, from level 1 to level 4 and back again, usually takes
about an hour and a half. Interestingly, the levels of sleep as shown on
an EEG chart also reﬂect how deeply asleep we feel. When researchers
wake people up from level 4 sleep, they are very hard to rouse, whereas
people in level 2 sleep wake up much more easily. At least, that's the
case for levels 2, 3 and 4. Level 1, though, is a bit special, because
that is the part of our sleep when we dream. When we are in level 1
sleep, our eyes are continually making very quick movements. For this
reason, level 1 sleep is often called REM sleep, with REM being short
for 'rapid eye movements'. If people are woken up from this sort of
sleep, they report dreaming. We all dream four or ﬁve times during the
course of an average night, although some people remember dreaming while
others don't. That seems to depend on whether you have woken up from REM
sleep (in which

EEG patterns

Waking

Level 1/ REM

REM

REM

REM

REM REM

Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 2

Figure 5.5 Cycles of sleep.

104

4 6 Hours of sleep

8

case you remember the dream you were just having) or whether you have
woken up from level 2 sleep, which feels dreamless.

Insight Everyone dreams, even people who insist that they don't. We only
remember our dreams if we wake up from them. If we wake up from another
point in the sleep cycle, it feels as though we haven't been dreaming at
all. DREAMING Although we seem to be 'switched off' while we are asleep
and dreaming, we aren't totally unaware of our surroundings. Dement and
Wolpert (1958) sprinkled people lightly with water while they were in
REM sleep. Then, a little later, they woke them up and asked what they
had been dreaming about. Some people had dreamed about being under
waterfalls, some about swimming, and some about being out in the rain.
Most of them dreamed about water in some way. In other words, they had
managed to incorporate the outside stimulation of the water into their
dreams. In fact, we may have far more control over our dreams than we
realize. Most of us have occasionally had dreams in which we knew we
were dreaming, but the dream carried on anyway. These are known as lucid
dreams. Recently, psychologists have discovered that it is possible to
learn how to make a dream into a lucid dream, and then for the person
having the dream to control what happens. For this to work, people need
to know when they have begun to dream. In psychological sleep-research
laboratories, this is done by giving dreamers a pre-arranged signal. The
signal won't be enough to wake them up, just enough for them to become
aware that it is happening, like a tiny electrical tickle to the wrist,
or a red light ﬂashing on the eyelids. When the person begins REM sleep,
they are given the signal, so they become aware that they are dreaming.
Once they know this, they can make things happen in the dream.

5.  Consciousness and the brain

105

According to Hearne (1981) the secret of controlling a lucid dream
successfully is to make sure that what happens is believable -- as far
as the dream is concerned. For example, if you wanted to dream about a
particular person, you couldn't just make them appear from nowhere. But
you could dream that there was a door nearby, and make the person come
in through it. Some people dream about ﬂying, and so they would be able
to make themselves ﬂy, in the dream. Other people don't, so it would be
impractical for them to try it in a lucid dream. Green and McCreery
(1994) discussed how training in lucid dreams can be used
therapeutically, for example, in counteracting nightmares.

Insight Many insomniacs actually do sleep for quite long periods during
the night, but during that time, they dream that they are lying awake.
So when the morning comes, they believe that they haven't slept at all.
Functions of dreaming But what is dreaming for? In the early days of
psychology, the psychoanalysts, led by Sigmund Freud, believed that
dreams come from the unconscious mind telling us about our innermost
secret wishes and desires. These are disguised by the brain, using
symbols to stand for the real meaning. The books about dream
interpretation that you sometimes see on railway and airport bookstalls
are following this idea, but most psychologists do not believe that
dream symbolism is quite as extreme as Freud maintained, even though
they may accept that it has some part to play. A few medical researchers
believe that dreams come from random brain activity, which happens as
nerve cells restore and reorganize themselves while we are asleep. The
experience of the dream is simply imposed by our mind, as it tries to
make sense of these haphazard bursts of nerve cell activity -- in the
same way that we can sometimes 'see' castles or animals in cloud shapes.
According to this view, then, dreaming is just an accidental by-product
of the physiological activity of the brain, and has no real signiﬁcance.

106

The psychological evidence, though suggests that there is a
psychological function to dreaming as well as a physiological one.
Dreaming plays an important part in how we organize our psychological
experience. Throughout each day, we are bombarded with a massive amount
of sensory information and experiences. At some time, the mind needs to
make sense of it all: to store information in its proper place so that
it connects with similar things that we know; to identify patterns in
our experiences, and to ﬁlter through things that have happened to us to
identify particularly meaningful events. It does this while we are
dreaming. This explains, too, why sleeping on a problem is so often
helpful. Before we go to bed, we may be perplexed, upset, or completely
at a loss as to how to deal with something. But when we wake up, it
often all seems clear. This is because we have been working on the
problem unconsciously while we sleep. The brain activity which takes
place while we dream has allowed us to knit loose ends together, and to
put things, mentally, into their proper place. So when we wake up it is
much easier to decide what to do. We have seen, then, how consciousness
is not always constant. It can be changed, inﬂuenced, or affected in
different ways, and it varies of itself during the course of the day or
while we are sleeping. Understanding how our human state of
consciousness is constantly changing and what sort of experiences affect
it can help us to use our awareness to help ourselves -- for example, by
arranging our days so that we are doing the most intensive work when we
are best suited for it; or by using legal drugs such as caffeine or
alcohol in ways that will help to optimize our lives rather than damage
them.

5.  Consciousness and the brain

107

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Human beings, like other animals, have been
shown to experience a range of biological rhythms. 2 Seasonal Affective
Disorder comes from lack of natural daylight in winter, and can be
treated with special lamps. 3 Circadian rhythms are 24-hour cycles which
affect energy and alertness in the body. 4 Disruptions to circadian
rhythms from shift work or long-haul travel produce jet lag and can
increase industrial errors or road accidents. 5 Drugs which alter
consciousness include the legal drugs of caffeine, alcohol and nicotine,
as well as illegal drugs. 6 Most psychoactive drugs work by changing the
normal balance of neurotransmitters in the brain. 7 The electrical
activity in the brain can be measured using EEGs, which give an overall
picture of cortical activity. 8 Modern brain scans can show us the
working brain in detail, indicating which areas of the brain are active
at the time. 9 EEGs show us how we cycle through different levels of
sleep during the course of the night. 10 Dreaming helps us to sort out
and organize the mass of stimuli we receive when awake, which is
important for memory storage and decision-making.

108

6 Motivation In this chapter you will learn: • to identify at least two
ways in which human beings can be motivated • three examples of 'defence
mechanisms' • how social motivation can help reduce racism.

In this chapter, we will be looking at motivation -- why we do what we
do, and why we bother to do anything at all. If we want to understand
human beings, we need to look at what makes people 'tick' -- what moves
us to act, or at least to action. And, as with every other aspect of
psychology, there isn't a single simple answer to this question. Human
motives are complex, ranging from simple physiological ones to complex
issues of social respect and identity. We always have more than one
reason for doing things, and bearing this in mind it is worth trying to
sort out the different kinds of motives which contribute to our actions.

Insight Motivation is so multi-faceted that it is almost impossible to
document all of the factors involved in why people do even quite simple
things. How many reasons can you think of for reading this book right
now?

6.  Motivation

109

Physical motives Sometimes what we do is motivated by very basic needs:
if you go to the kitchen and fetch a glass of water, it's a fair bet
that you do it because you are thirsty. The level of ﬂuid in your body
has dropped below its ideal level, and this sets off a complex range of
physiological mechanisms in the body. Messages about your ﬂuid level are
passed from your body to a particular part of the brain, known as the
hypothalamus. This sends messages to the cerebral cortex, which is the
part of the brain that you think with, so you realize that you feel
thirsty and go to get a drink of water. HOMEOSTASIS Psychologists
investigating such physiological motives have found that these
mechanisms are all concerned with getting the right balance in the body.
As long as everything is at the right kind of level, we don't feel the
motivation. But if something becomes imbalanced, for instance, if our
blood sugar level gets too low or if we don't have a high enough level
of ﬂuid in the body, then we take action to put it right. This is known
as maintaining homeostasis -- maintaining the appropriate balance in the
body so that we can function well, physically. Of course, maintaining
homeostasis also means that the brain has to have some idea of what the
appropriate balance is, so that it can be maintained. Psychologists
researching into hunger have found that the body has a kind of set
weight, which it seems to try to maintain. In studies with animals, they
would eat until they had consumed enough food to reach their set weight,
and then stop eating. Even if they went on a restricted diet for a
while, so they lost weight, as soon as the restrictions were off they
would eat enough to return to the set weight. It seems likely that human
beings, too, have this kind of body mechanism, which might explain why
so many people have

110

problems with dieting. They are trying to achieve a weight that is lower
than the physiological set weight which their body functioning is based
on. So even if they diet and get their weight down for a short while,
they will ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to maintain that weight. Physiological
motivation, though, doesn't really have all that much to do with how we
act in other ways. Even eating and drinking, in human beings, are
affected by other kinds of motives: dieting, for instance, has more to
do with social approval than it does with physiological needs, and
people often drink even non-alcoholic drinks to be sociable rather than
because they are actually thirsty. So we need to look at other levels of
explanation as well, if we are really to understand human motivation.

Behavioural motives Sometimes, what we do comes about as much because of
habit as anything else. Habits are behaviours or feelings that are
associated with particular settings or situations. We learn how to act
in certain places, or with certain people, and these come back to us if
we ﬁnd ourselves in that situation again. At such times, we can surprise
ourselves with how we react. It is interesting, for example, how
powerfully an examination room can affect us, even if we are not
actually taking the exam. Exam rooms are something we usually only
encounter at school, and under quite tense conditions. People are
usually worried and anxious when they go into an exam room to take an
exam. Because we don't usually have anything to do with them at other
times, those feelings of worry and anxiety often come ﬂooding back when
we go into an exam room -- even years later. So we act nervously, and
not like our usual selves at all. What has happened here is that the
behaviours and feelings associated with a particular situation have been
brought back,

6.  Motivation

111

simply by being in that situation again. You might habitually buy a
certain brand of tights, simply because that is the kind you have bought
in the past, in that particular shop. Sometimes we do this even though
we meant to try something else, purely because the association of that
particular action with that particular situation is so strong. The same
thing can happen, too, with interpersonal relationships. For example, if
you meet someone that you haven't seen for a while, you can ﬁnd yourself
slipping back into ways of behaving with them that aren't typical of the
way that you behave with other people. As a child, I used to argue
continually and very vehemently with my cousin and, even now, when I am
with my cousin we tend to do the same thing -- though I don't argue in
that way with anyone else. Being with that person brings back old
habits, and it is sometimes hard to break out of them. Habits can be
broken, though -- we're not stuck with them forever. For instance,
teachers who invigilate exams as part of their job don't feel anxious
when they go into these rooms -- at least not once they have had a
couple of years' experience. You can deliberately decide to try a new
brand of tights, and remember to choose them when you are in the shop.
And even my cousin and I are gradually learning to communicate more
reasonably with one another! Breaking a habit involves replacing the
actions or feelings which are triggered off by that situation, with some
other actions or feelings. It is hard at ﬁrst, but the more often you
succeed, the weaker the original habit becomes. We will be looking at
this more closely when we look at association learning, in Chapter 8.

Insight We don't ﬁnd it hard to change our habits when our situations
change. So a good start for getting rid of a bad habit is identifying
the particular situations which trigger it off, and changing them. If
there are lots of situations, change one at a time.

112

Cognitive motives The way that we think also sometimes motivates us into
action. Cognitive motives are motives which come from our thoughts,
beliefs and ideas. They are to do with how we understand what is
happening to us, and the way that we understand a situation can make all
the difference to what we decide to do about it. PERSONAL CONSTRUCTS
Each of us has had our own personal experiences, and we have learned
from them. In particular, we have learned about other people. We have
formed our own personal theories about what other people are like from
the way that people have interacted with us in the past. These theories
are called personal constructs and we use them when we meet new people.
Personal constructs take the form of a two-ended kind of classiﬁcation,
such as like 'kind -- cruel' or 'hot-tempered -- calm', or 'interesting
-- dull'. Table 6.1 gives an interesting exercise which you might like
to try out. If you do it, it will help you discover some of your own
main constructs. As a general rule, we tend to use about eight or ten
main personal constructs most often, but we have several less important
ones as well. Whenever we meet someone new, we weigh them up on the
basis of our own personal construct system. Then we use those judgements
to decide whether we like them or not. All this is a bit like saying
that our decisions about whether we like new people or not depend on
whether they remind us of someone else that we once knew. And that's
true, to some extent. But the new person doesn't have to be exactly like
the person that we knew before -- they just may have one or two
qualities in common, which we can recognize as being similar. Using
personal constructs, we can see how people vary, and compare their
similarities and differences.

6.  Motivation

113

Table 6.1 Exploring personal constructs. This is an exercise which you
can do to ﬁnd out the main personal constructs that you use. Begin by
naming eight people who are important in your life:
A........................... E...........................
B........................... F...........................
C........................... G...........................
D........................... H........................... Then think
about these people in groups of three at a time. You will be able to
think of a way that two of them are similar, and different from the
other one. Write these down in the form given below: (A, B, C)
..........and ....... are...................., but ....... is
..................... (D, E, F) .......... and ....... are
..................., but ....... is ..................... (A, F, G)
......... and ....... are ..................., but ....... is
..................... (B, D, H)......... and ....... are
..................., but ....... is ..................... (C, E, G)
..........and ....... are ..................., but ....... is
..................... (H, B, F) .......... and ....... are
..................., but ....... is ..................... (A, E,
H).......... and ....... are ..................., but ....... is
..................... (D, G, C).......... and ....... are
..................., but ....... is ..................... The words you
have used to describe the similarities and differences indicate the
personal constructs that you habitually use. Try comparing your results
to those of a friend. Individual explanations Since each of us has led a
different life, our experiences of other people have varied, and our
personal constructs are also unique. They represent our own distinctive
way of looking at the world, and that can be entirely different from
someone else's. Two people could meet a third person for the ﬁrst time,
and even though they were together and had the same objective
experience, they might come to very different conclusions. One, for
example, might see the new person as being friendly and outgoing,
whereas the other might see them as ingratiating and manipulative. Just
because we are in the same situation doesn't mean that we see things the
same way.

114

And that, of course, can motivate our behaviour. If we see someone as
manipulative and ingratiating, for example, we behave very differently
towards them than we would if we saw them as friendly and outgoing. If
we used the ﬁrst type of personal constructs, we would be likely to
avoid them, and be suspicious of any approach that they made towards us.
If we used the second, we would be likely to be welcoming and to treat
them as a friend. Social expectations This type of thing can become
circular, of course. As we saw in Chapter 2, the expectations other
people have of us can inﬂuence our behaviour quite a lot. They can even
become self-fulﬁlling prophecies, so that we live up to what people
expect of us. If you have a set of personal constructs which mean that
you treat anyone new as if they were not really friendly but had some
ulterior motive for pretending to be so, then they will react to how you
are behaving towards them, and avoid you. You would take that as 'proof'
that they weren't really being friendly, not realizing that it was your
own behaviour which had produced that effect. A self-fulﬁlling set of
personal constructs such as this can easily mean that someone becomes
very isolated from other people, and deeply unhappy. It is good to be
cautious, of course, but it is not good to suspect everyone you meet,
automatically. Many psychologists use personal construct theory to help
people whose belief systems have become stuck like this. They use
techniques that will help people to develop a new set of personal
constructs, which will be more helpful to them in the long run.

Insight Believing in your own capabilities is an important part of
positive thinking. It's actually better to overestimate your abilities
than to underestimate them, because that means you will try harder, and
so will be more likely to succeed.

6.  Motivation

115

DEFENCE MECHANISMS There are other ways, too, that our minds can
motivate us. Many psychologists are deeply sceptical about the ideas of
Sigmund Freud, the psychoanalyst, who developed a theory about the
unconscious mind during the last century. But Freud did identify some
important mental processes which the mind uses to protect itself against
threats. These are called defence mechanisms. Other psychologists have
also found the idea of defence mechanisms to be a useful one, although
they don't necessarily share Freud's views about other aspects of the
working of the human mind. Denial Defence mechanisms are unconscious,
but they can be very powerful. They are all to do with how we protect
our own self-image. For example, if we are faced with an awkward or
uncomfortable fact about ourselves, our ﬁrst impulse may be simply to
deny that it is true. Sometimes, we will be able to get beyond that ﬁrst
impulse and see that the idea does, perhaps, have some justiﬁcation. At
other times, though, the implications of the idea may be too much for us
to cope with. So we stick to our denial, even though it may be quite
irrational, simply because we are protecting ourselves from having to
rethink all our beliefs and ideas. In this situation, denial is acting
as a defence mechanism, protecting us from a threat to how we see
ourselves. Repression There are other kinds of defence mechanisms, too.
One of them is repression. We often repress memories which are
personally distressing, or which would seriously challenge our beliefs
about ourselves. When a memory is repressed, we forget it -- but it is
different from normal forgetting because we become very agitated or
upset if something comes close to reminding us of it again. The mind has
repressed that particular memory or knowledge because it is too
emotionally demanding to cope with. Reaction-formation Sometimes,
something can be repressed so hard that it turns into its opposite. For
example, if someone has a very strong desire or need

116

which they feel is wrong and needs to be suppressed, they may try very
hard never to let it come to their awareness (remember that a defence
mechanism is unconscious -- we don't know we are doing it unless someone
else intervenes and shows us what is happening). Because their
unconscious mind is trying so hard, they become very hostile to any hint
of that particular desire or need in other people, and react
aggressively to it. This is known as a reaction-formation. The classic
example of a reaction-formation, of course, is homophobia. Most people,
whether they are homosexual or heterosexual, are unaffected by other
people's sexual choices. But some people become very upset and agitated
when they encounter any mention of homosexuality. These people can end
up reacting quite irrationally -- and sometimes very aggressively --
towards homosexuals. We refer to these people as homophobic. Their
homophobia often comes from their own unconscious homosexual desires,
which have been repressed so hard that they have become a
reaction-formation. SELF-EFFICACY AND LEARNED HELPLESSNESS Another way
that our cognitions can motivate us to action is to do with our
self-efﬁcacy beliefs. These are our beliefs about how effective we are
at doing things -- how capable, or how skilled, we are. And these are
very important, because they affect how hard we try. Bandura (1989)
showed how it is generally a good thing if people have high self-efﬁcacy
beliefs because it makes them more self-conﬁdent, and more likely to
succeed. It's even a good thing to have higher self-efﬁcacy beliefs than
the evidence would really warrant -- in other words, to believe that you
are better at things than you actually are -- because that way, you will
take on more challenges and improve your abilities as you deal with
them! In one study which Bandura described, a psychologist looked at how
having high or low self-efﬁcacy beliefs affected children's work in
school. The children in the study had different abilities: some were
good at maths, while others weren't very good at all, but they also had
different self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Some of the children

6.  Motivation

117

believed that they would be able to do it if they made an effort, while
others believed that they wouldn't be successful no matter how much they
tried. The psychologist found that the children with high self-efﬁcacy
beliefs did much better than the other children, regardless of their
level of ability. In other words, even if they really weren't very good
at maths, children with high self-efﬁcacy beliefs did better. They
solved more maths problems in the time that they were given, they
spotted where they had gone wrong more quickly, and they were more
prepared to go over problems which they had got wrong. The children with
low self-efﬁcacy beliefs, on the other hand, would make a single try at
the maths problems, and then give up. It's not hard to see why having
high self-efﬁcacy beliefs helps you to do well. Obviously, if you are
prepared to put effort into learning, and to keep trying and learning
from your mistakes, then you will eventually get somewhere -- even if
you are working at something that doesn't come easily to you. Many
psychologists nowadays believe that bringing up children and training
adults to believe in their own ability to take effective action is one
of the most important things of all. Learned helplessness There's
another side to this, as well. Some people go through a series of
demoralizing or unpleasant experiences, which they can't do anything
about, and then they just give up trying altogether. So when they are in
a situation which they could actually change if they made an effort,
they don't bother. This is known as learned helplessness -- they have
learned to be passive and helpless, rather than trying to inﬂuence what
happens to them. As we saw in Chapter 4, learned helplessness has a lot
to do with why people suffer from depression. When people are living for
a long time in demoralizing situations which they can't do much about,
they often slip into a 'victim mentality' which encourages them to feel
helpless and passive. They develop an attributional style, or a way of
thinking, which suggests that things happen

118

because of global, large-scale reasons which are always likely to be
there, and can't be controlled. So whenever they encounter a new
problem, they see it in this way and don't realize when it is actually
something they could do something about.

Insight The problem with learned helplessness is that it stops us from
recognizing when we really can make a difference. We become discouraged,
and think it's not worth trying any more. But circumstances are always
changing, and taking action may make a lot of difference at a different
time. It is important for us to feel that we have some control over what
happens to us. To feel that you are helpless is very stressful, which
just makes things worse. So one way that psychologists try to help these
people is to set up situations which will help them to raise their
self-efﬁcacy beliefs, such as encouraging them to tackle an entirely new
activity, or to trying a different approach in dealing with a problem.
By doing this competently, the person comes to realize that they can be
effective -- that they can actually do something about their situation.
We can see, then, that self-efﬁcacy beliefs are closely linked to the
idea of locus of control, which we looked at in Chapter 4. They are all
about seeing yourself as an active agent in your own life: someone who
can be at least partly in control of what happens, and who can take
effective action when it is necessary. If we are to understand human
motivation, we need to understand about these beliefs, because they can
make all the difference to whether someone tries to inﬂuence what is
happening to them, or not.

Social motivation What we do is motivated by social inﬂuences as well as
cognitive ones. We are surrounded by other people, and how they see us
can be a powerful inﬂuence on whether we do something or not. We are
also inﬂuenced by shared social understandings and, as we have

6.  Motivation

119

already seen, by the expectations which people have of us. So a great
deal of our motivation is social in its origins. SOCIAL RESPECT One of
the most important social motives of all is for respect from other
people. We all feel a deep need to avoid looking foolish, and sometimes,
if we feel that we have made ourselves look stupid in front of the wrong
people, even the memory of it can continue to embarrass us for a long
time. Harré identiﬁed the need for social respect as a very fundamental
social motive. A great deal of what we do, Harré argued, is aimed to
ensure that people will take us seriously, or will at least notice us,
and acknowledge us as worthwhile people. We hate it if other people just
dismiss us or, worse still, ignore our existence. We can see how deeply
rooted this need is by looking at children in a playground, when there
is an adult present. Most of the children will be clamouring for
attention in some way, looking to 'show off' something that they can do.
Although this is often dismissed as attention seeking, it is really a
way of looking for social respect. A child who has learned to stand on
her hands, or to do a long jump, wants an adult to acknowledge that
skill and to say 'well done'. Quite rightly, children want to be noticed
for their achievements.

Insight The way that we hate to look stupid in front of other people --
and the lengths we will go to avoid it -- shows just how important
social respect is as a motivator for human beings.

Adults need that kind of acknowledgement, too. Most of us work better if
our efforts are recognized by other people -- especially on those
occasions when we have made a special effort. We like to know that we
have been noticed. In fact, being ignored is one of the worst things
that can happen to us -- we feel it as a deep social insult -- and we
can go to great lengths to get over it by proving that those people are
less important than we are, or by making sure

120

that they are forced to acknowledge us on a future occasion. This need
for social respect is quite often the motivation underpinning human
ambition and achievement -- although not always. Sometimes, the need for
social respect can work in our own minds, too. Because we are always
aware of how our behaviour is likely to come across to other people, we
need to make sure that our own behaviour appears reasonable, even to
ourselves. One consequence of this is that we don't like to appear
inconsistent. Yet each of us acts differently when we are with different
people, so sometimes we can get into difﬁculties when we are trying to
balance the two. The musical Grease, for instance, was based entirely
around this problem. A young couple meet during the holidays, as
individuals, and fall in love; but when they meet again at school, the
boy is with his friends and feels he has to appear casual and uncaring,
which hurts her. Even though he is still in love with the girl, to show
it would be inconsistent with his public image, and might lose him
social respect. It is the way the two of them resolve this dilemma which
forms the plot of the musical. COGNITIVE DISSONANCE Sometimes we resolve
dilemmas like this by changing our attitudes or beliefs. In a very
famous study conducted in 1956, Festinger, Riecken and Schachter joined
in with a religious cult, who believed that their city -- and the rest
of the world -- was about to be destroyed by a great ﬂood. On a special
day, the cult members sold all their possessions and spent the night
praying, on a hill outside of the city. Festinger, Riecken and Schachter
were there too. They interviewed the cult members and found that they
believed that the ﬂood would happen, and only they would be saved. The
psychologists wanted to know what the cult members would say when the
world didn't come to an end at the appointed time. So the next day, when
no ﬂood had materialized, they interviewed as many cult members as they
could. Interestingly, they found that the cult members had adapted their
beliefs, so that they didn't have

6.  Motivation

121

to face up to the fact that their actions had been a waste of time. They
now believed that it was the fact that they had spent the night praying
which had actually saved the world. The ﬂood would have come as
scheduled, but God had repented at the last minute and so everything --
thanks to them -- was all right. Festinger, Riecken and Schachter
interpreted this in terms of what they called cognitive dissonance. We
all like to believe that we are consistent, and not irrational. So if
things happen which could make us appear irrational, we change our
beliefs to make them seem consistent again. Festinger believed that
cognitive dissonance is one of the main reasons why people change their
beliefs: we don't like to seem foolish to anyone, not even ourselves.

Insight We often mislead ourselves, in everyday things as well as usual
ones, because we don't want to experience the cognitive dissonance that
will come from acknowledging that we have been wrong. Festinger gave
some less dramatic examples of cognitive dissonance, as well. In one
study, people were asked to do an extremely boring task for a long time.
Then they were asked to go out and tell someone who was waiting outside
that the task was interesting. They were paid either \$1 or \$20 for
doing this. Then the psychologists asked the research participants to
describe how interesting the task had really been. They found that the
people who had been paid \$20 to do the experiment said what they
expected -- that the task was really boring. However, the people who had
been paid only \$1 said that, actually, they had found it moderately
interesting. Nobody in their right mind could really have found the task
interesting. Part of it involved giving each of 48 pegs in a pegboard a
quarter-turn, one after the other, for half an hour! But what seemed to
have happened was that the research participants needed to justify why
they had lied to the person in the waiting

122

room. It was OK for those who had been paid \$20, because they could say
they did it for the money. But being paid only \$1 wasn't enough, so
they needed a better reason for their lying. As a result, they convinced
themselves that the task hadn't really been all that bad. Cognitive
dissonance is a much more powerful motivator of human behaviour than we
realize. In some ways, it is another aspect of our need for respect, in
that we need to avoid looking silly, even to ourselves. So avoiding
cognitive dissonance, and seeming to be consistent in our beliefs and
actions is an important motivator which can lead people to cling on to
unrealistic beliefs or behaviours even when they are actually quite
damaging. AGGRESSION AND SCAPEGOATING Sometimes, one of the ways that we
avoid cognitive dissonance is by blaming other people for what happens
to us. This is known as scapegoating, and is a signiﬁcant mechanism
which underlies social aggression such as racism. Scapegoating seems to
be a mechanism which can bring out the very worst in human nature. As
things get difﬁcult people become frustrated and angry, and take that
anger out on the nearest clearly identiﬁable target. Racism and economic
recession It is noticeable, for example, that violent racist incidents
increase when the economy is in recession. Recent events in Europe are
an example of this, as is the massive increase of racism in Germany and
elsewhere during the 1930s' depression -- an increase which made the
concentration camps possible. In the United States, too, Hovland and
Sears (1940) showed that the number of lynchings of black people in the
Southern States was closely linked to the price of cotton. The lower the
price, the more lynchings. The key to understanding this side of human
nature lies in looking at where all that aggression comes from. For the
most part, people tend to live co-operatively with one another. As we
saw in

6.  Motivation

123

Chapter 3, our ﬁrst social impulse is to go along with other people, not
to confront them aggressively. But sometimes, human beings show that
they are capable of brutal inhumanity towards one another. How does that
happen? Frustration and aggression There have been a number of studies
that have shown how aggressive behaviour in human beings is particularly
likely when we feel frustrated or helpless. This idea was ﬁrst put
forward by Dollard and others in 1939, although at the time they phrased
it in a rather limited way. They suggested that people would always
react aggressively if they were frustrated in achieving their personal
goals. Nowadays, we recognize that people react differently -- not
everyone becomes aggressive in such situations. However, for the most
part, being prevented from doing something that we feel we should be
able to do (even if it is only getting on with our own lives in peace)
is something which makes us very tense. And some people express that
tension in aggression and violent action. But why should that tension
become displaced onto ethnic minority groups? The reason for this lies
in two other important motivators for human behaviour. As we saw
earlier, and in Chapter 3, it is stressful for a human being to feel
that they are helpless. Yet economic recessions are something that few
of us can do anything about: we all feel helpless as we hear about jobs
disappearing and companies collapsing. Even when we are personally
threatened by these situations, there is little that we can do. So a
social belief that a particular group is causing the problems means that
the frustration and anger people feel in those situations becomes,
wrongly and unfairly, channelled towards that group. Social
representations One very striking characteristic of human beings is that
we look for -- and sometimes even make up -- explanations for what is
happening to us. Some people seek those explanations in ideas such as
luck, or mystical concepts like astrology; some look for them, as we are
doing here, by looking to the human sciences; while others

124

look for them in the social beliefs and explanations which are shared by
the people around them. These explanations are known as social
representations, and they are an important key to understanding how
economic frustration becomes displaced onto the people who are usually
suffering the most from it. Social representations, as we saw in Chapter
2, are shared beliefs which are held by groups of people in society.
Each of us adopts our own set of social representations, by talking with
other people, picking ideas up from the mass media, and ﬁtting these
into our own personal construct system. They give us ways of explaining
what is happening in our everyday experience. In some ways, they are a
bit like the personal constructs which we looked at earlier in this
chapter, but they are shared by other people too.

Insight When people encounter difﬁculties, they look for explanations
for them, and this is where social representations can become very
powerful. Even if they don't really make sense, people tend to accept
the explanations that 'everyone' believes. Among racists, a common
social representation is the idea that they are somehow in competition
with members of ethnic minorities for the beneﬁts of society. So when
those beneﬁts become fewer, they blame the members of the ethnic groups
because they think they are taking an unfair share of what is available.
(In fact, it is generally the members of ethnic minority groups who
suffer most economic deprivation in these situations, but racists are
not noted for logical thinking.) While most people will put the blame
where it belongs -- with the government or economic forces -- racists
blame ethnic minority groups, and express their own personal frustration
through violent action towards them. SOCIAL IDENTIFICATION Why should
these people seize on members of a particular group, rather than on
particular individuals? The answer to this question

6.  Motivation

125

lies in the mechanism of social identiﬁcation, which we looked at in
Chapter 2. As we saw there, it is a very basic tendency for human beings
to see the world in terms of 'them' and 'us' groups. We are aware of the
social groups and categories that we belong to, and we are also aware of
other groups in society.

Insight Everyone has a gang, social group or social category of some
kind (people like us) which is important to them. Most people have many
more than one. This is because belonging to social groups has been a
really important part of human evolution, so it's deeply embedded in our
psychology. Stereotyping Because we tend to know the people in our own
groups best, and we only see members of other groups from the outside,
we become much more aware of the differences between people in our own
group than we are of differences among others. So it is very easy for us
to slip into the idea that 'we' are all different, whereas 'they' are
all the same. One of the ﬁrst steps in breaking down any sort of social
prejudice is to recognize that any group of people is made up of
individuals, with their own different ideas and opinions -- that 'they'
are not, in fact, all the same. These are psychological tendencies that
all people have to some extent. We all tend to stereotype groups of
people if we don't know them that well. The stereotyping isn't
necessarily about ethnic groups: we also stereotype businessmen,
doctors, schoolteachers, Americans and other groups of people. It is
partly a way of making sense of the mass of information that we have to
deal with; but it can also be dangerous, when it leads us to ignore
individual differences. Social comparison Another aspect of social
identity theory is that we tend to make comparisons with people in
groups which are close to us, socially and economically, because that
way it helps us to feel good about belonging to our own group. Those
racists who engage in violent action tend to be relatively less educated
and to undertake unskilled

126

work when they are employed. So, rather than place the blame for their
unemployment on those in charge of the economy, who are socially very
distant from them, they prefer to blame people who are in a similar
economic position, but belong to a different social group. We can see,
then, how looking at why violent racism often rises at times of economic
recession reveals a number of motivating mechanisms in human behaviour.
One of these is that frustration and discomfort often produce aggressive
reactions in people, partly as a way of getting rid of the tension
produced by feeling helpless. Another is the tendency to use shared
beliefs, or social representations, as a way of explaining what is
happening. And a third is to seize on a visible group who represent a
clearly identiﬁable target, who are close by, and who are in a weaker
position, both economically and socially.

Insight Racism and scapegoating tend to increase at times of economic
depression, as people blame minority groups for high levels of
unemployment. At its extreme, this can even lead to genocide, as it did
during Hitler's period of power in Germany. Counteracting racism One
thing which has become apparent, though, is that this kind of
consequence to economic recession doesn't seem to be inevitable. In a
population which is highly sensitized to issues of racism and
multiculturalism, the efforts of racists to stir people up into violent
action are much less effective. As people become more aware of
individual differences within different ethnic groups, and of how
political and economic factors inﬂuence recessions, they become less
likely to produce such simplistic, and tragic, responses. We may have a
long way to go, but understanding the psychological mechanisms which
underlie the phenomenon can give us some useful hints as to which
direction we should take. We know that human beings can act in some
astoundingly vicious ways. But it is important to keep this in
perspective. Most of our

6.  Motivation

127

everyday interactions are actually positive, but we ﬁnd the negative
ones so disturbing that they can overshadow all the others. Even one
unpleasant encounter can spoil the whole day -- and this, actually,
shows us how far it is from what we expect. We notice the unpleasant
things a lot more than the pleasant ones, because they are not usual,
and stand out in our experiences. But if we go through a day consciously
noticing pleasant interactions with other people as well, it is
remarkable how many of them there are, even on what seems to be a very
bad day. For the most part, people tend to co-operate with one another,
rather than compete -- in fact, some psychologists believe that this is
the baseline for human interaction, and that it takes some kind of
disruption, like frustration or illness, before people begin to interact
in more unpleasant ways. There are individual differences, of course,
and there are also questions of social learning, as we model our
behaviour on other people around us, including characters on TV and in
ﬁlms. But still, in their everyday lives, most people are not aggressive
most of the time. MOTIVATIONAL LEVELS One of the most famous
psychological theories of human motivation was put forward by Maslow, in
1954. Maslow was trying to understand why it is that people never seem
to be satisﬁed with what they've got. We often ﬁnd that we are
dissatisﬁed with our situation, and want something more; but if we get
what we want, then it doesn't take long before we want something else.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs Maslow suggested that it is useful to think
of human motivation in terms of a hierarchy of needs (Figure 6.1). We
have some needs which are absolutely basic -- our physiological survival
needs -- and if these are not satisﬁed, they will motivate our behaviour
almost completely. Our actions will be aimed towards getting food,
drink, shelter from the elements, and so on, and we will have little
time for anything else. But once those needs are satisﬁed, a different
layer in the hierarchy begins to become important. It becomes important
to us that we should feel safe and secure. Once that has been achieved,

128

according to Maslow, social needs become paramount, and what we do will
be geared towards fulﬁlling our need to belong with other people and to
be accepted. Each time one level of needs is satisﬁed, the next level
becomes important as a motivator. At the top of the hierarchy, Maslow
argued, is self-actualization -- realizing our talents and abilities to
the full. We have met this idea before, when we looked at Rogers's work,
in Chapter 2. But Rogers saw self-actualization as a fundamental human
need, whereas Maslow saw it as an ultimate achievement, managed by only
a relatively few remarkable people. Effectively, Rogers saw it as an
ongoing process in our personal development, whereas Maslow saw it as a
goal to be reached.

Selfactualization (develop and express oneself to the full) Aesthetic
needs (beauty, symmetry, elegance) Cognitive needs (to know, understand,
explore) Esteem needs (achievement, competence, respect from others)
Belongingness and love needs (to be accepted, to belong) Safety needs
(to be secure, safe, out of danger) Physiological needs (food, warmth,
shelter)

Figure 6.1 Maslow's hierarchy of needs.

6.  Motivation

129

The difference between how the two psychologists saw selfactualization
also points up one of the weaknesses in Maslow's theory. It may be OK as
a general tendency, but there are numerous examples of people acting in
ways which are quite different from that which would be predicted by
Maslow. What Maslow described as 'higher' needs are often extremely
important to people -- so much so that whether their basic needs have
been satisﬁed sometimes doesn't come into it The classic example, of
course, is the dedicated poet or artist, who denies security and
sometimes even goes hungry in the quest to fulﬁl needs for beauty or
symmetry. Another example is the person who gives up the safety and
security of a salaried job in order to do voluntary work overseas, or to
take on something which is less regularly paid, but much more
challenging. It may not be what most people do, but such people are less
rare than Maslow's theory might predict. Another great weakness in
Maslow's way of looking at motivation is that it is very speciﬁc to
Western cultures. It assumes that people are motivated by a need for
individual achievement, and that things like social needs are somehow
optional, at least by comparison with the satisfaction of physical ones.
While this may, at least partly, represent how things are in America and
other parts of the Western world, it isn't by any means a good
description of what human beings are like elsewhere. For example, in
many parts of the world, the kind of upward ambition and striving
represented by Maslow's approach simply doesn't apply. To take one
example: in Balinese culture people see their identity as ﬁrmly located
within their village's community, and the idea of accumulating personal
wealth is an alien one. If it does happen, the money is usually spent on
a particularly elaborate funeral celebration, or something equally
transient. While Balinese people would like to be less poor than they
are, naturally, the idea of achieving this through personal ambition and
saving up personal wealth is not one which comes naturally to members of
that particular culture.

130

There are other ways in which Balinese culture is different from many
others. For example, the idea of 'art' as a separate entity doesn't
exist, either. Although Balinese culture is full of what we would call
art, in dance, carving, weaving and many other ways, there is no
separate word for 'art' in the Balinese language. It is simply a part of
day-to-day living. So seeing it as a separate set of motives, which we
adopt once other needs are satisﬁed simply can't explain what is going
on.

Insight The idea that basic needs have to be satisﬁed before 'higher'
needs doesn't really hold water. Quite apart from dramatic examples like
starving poets, there are many times when even ordinary people put
supposedly 'higher' needs before 'basic' ones. Levels of explanation
This is only one example, but there are many others. It is perhaps more
useful, if we are trying to understand human motivation, to take an
approach which looks at it in terms of levels of explanation, than to
try to explain it as a hierarchy of needs. We all operate on different
levels at the same time. We may do something because it is approved of
by our social group, but also because we want to do it personally and
because we believe it will be good for us. Some of our motives are
conscious and deliberate, while others are unconscious and we aren't
even aware of them at the time. And most of the things that we do are
stimulated by several motives, rather than just one at a time. By
looking at the many different kinds of motives which people have for
their behaviour, we can identify some of the inﬂuences which might be
producing that behaviour at a given time. It isn't a particularly simple
way of explaining things, but then human beings aren't all that simple,
either. But it allows us to recognize the complexity of human life, and
in that way, seems to be more useful in explaining why human beings act
as they do rather than going for simplistic explanations which only look
at one level of experience at a time.

6.  Motivation

131

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 The study of motivation is about ﬁnding out why
people do things. 2 Physiological motives such as hunger and thirst
serve to maintain homeostasis in the body. 3 Habits are strongly learned
behaviours which can act as motives, but can be changed by deliberate
action or relearning. 4 Cognitive motives come from our personal
understandings and intentions, and sometimes from unconscious
self-protective mechanisms. 5 Motivation is increased when people
believe their actions can be effective. These are known as self-efﬁcacy
beliefs. 6 Social respect is an important motivator, which can even end
up changing our personal cognitions. 7 Aggression and scapegoating are
often rationalized using cognitive or social explanations, but usually
come from displaced stress. 8 Group identiﬁcation is an extremely
powerful motivator for human beings. At its extreme it can lead to
amazingly vicious behaviour, but it can also produce peaceful
co-operation. 9 Maslow suggested that motivation can be explained as a
hierarchy of needs, with basic ones needing to be satisﬁed before higher
ones become important. 10 Different levels of motives act
simultaneously, so levels of analysis are a useful tool for explaining
them.

132

7 Cognition In this chapter you will learn: • some principles of
problem-solving • about the Gestalt principles of perception • why
information that you are interested in is easier to remember than
information which does not interest you.

This chapter is all about cognition -- about how we think, how we take
in new information, and how we remember. In other words, it is about how
the mind works. Psychology began as the study of the mind, so the study
of cognition goes back to its very earliest history. But psychology's
emphasis changed during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century as a
result of the inﬂuence of behaviourism. The behaviourists thought that
studying the mind was impossible, since we can't see it, or analyse it
directly. So although some psychologists did continue to study the mind,
they had only a limited inﬂuence on psychology until the last few
decades of the twentieth century. From the 1950s onwards though,
psychologists began to develop ways of studying the mind in a more
objective manner. They found that it was possible to do controlled
experiments which would show how the mind was working. Doing this, they
identiﬁed some surprising things about how we think and remember. Most
of all, they discovered that the human mind is not just a passive
recording and analysing machine. It has its own inﬂuence on what we
perceive and remember, and on how we think.

7.  Cognition

133

Thinking The ﬁrst thing that comes to mind about cognitive activity is
thinking. We all know what thinking is, but when we try to deﬁne it, it
is not that easy. Thinking can include anything from daydreaming or
imagining, to trying to make sensible decisions. So psychologists
studying thinking have looked at different aspects of it, and in this
chapter we will look at the study of problem-solving and
decision-making.

Insight Thinking is something that we all take for granted, but actually
it's an amazingly complicated thing -- particularly the way that one
thought leads to another. We haven't even begun to explore the
subtleties of that yet. PROBLEM-SOLVING In the 1960s and 1970s, a number
of psychologists investigated how human beings go about solving
problems, and found that, often, we don't seem to do it particularly
logically. There are a number of mental 'traps' that we fall into very
easily. One of the most important of these is when we have expectations
about what we are likely to ﬁnd, and these expectations affect what we
do. Expectations can mean that we develop what is known as a mental set,
which is a state of being especially ready to think in certain ways.
Mental set There are lots of examples of mental set because it is such a
powerful cognitive mechanism. One of the ﬁrst demonstrations was by
Luchins, in 1932, who asked people to solve problems which involved
water jars which would hold different amounts of water. People were
asked to work out how they would get an exact amount of water by pouring
water from one jar into another. The ﬁrst few problems could be solved
by pouring water from large to small jars in a particular order and, as
people worked through the problems, they got used to this way of doing
things. Then Luchins

134

gave them problems with a much simpler solution. But because they had
become used to the other way of doing it, they didn't see the easy
answer at all. Instead, they solved the problem using the method they
had been using before, which was much more complicated than it need have
been. What had happened was that they had developed a mental set -- a
readiness to see one particular way of solving the problem -- and that
meant that they simply didn't see the other possibilities. The mental
set in Luchins's study was developed by their experience with other
examples of the problem; but sometimes, we draw on our existing mental
sets rather than creating one specially. The nine-dot problem shown in
Figure 7.1 is only hard because of the assumptions and expectations we
have of such problems.

Figure 7.1 The nine-dot problem. Join the dots without taking your pen
off the paper or going over the same line twice.

Lateral thinking Sometimes, we can train our thinking so that it
deliberately avoids being inﬂuenced by previous expectations and
assumptions. In the 1960s, Edward de Bono developed a technique known as
lateral thinking, in which people consciously learned to try to solve
problems by thinking 'outside the box' -- in other words, by ignoring
the usual approaches and going at the problem from an entirely different
angle. Someone faced with the problem of being unable to get into their
car, for example, because the key had snapped or the lock was frozen,
would normally try to solve it by sorting out the immediate problem. But
a lateral thinker might ask whether it was actually necessary to get
into the car at all right now? Could the journey be avoided, or its
purpose solved in some other way?

7.  Cognition

135

Lateral solutions aren't always the right ones, of course; but being
able to think laterally helps to increase the range of options that we
see as available to us, and can often help to overcome tricky problems.
A group-based form of lateral thinking has become very popular when
people are looking for new ideas. It is known as brainstorming, and when
it is done properly its ﬁrst stage is for people to produce as many
ideas as they possibly can, with nobody dismissing anything as
impractical or unrealistic. After that, there is a second, separate
stage where the ideas are evaluated. Having an open ideas session ﬁrst
can sometimes produce ideas which seem completely unrealistic at ﬁrst
sight, but actually prove to be workable and positive when they have
been looked at thoroughly.

Insight Brainstorming has become a common term for any type of ideas
session, but true brainstorming has to contain the idea that anything at
all is acceptable, at least in the ﬁrst stage. Censoring ideas as
impractical is not real brainstorming. Groupthink Groupthink is another
major discovery from psychologists exploring different aspects of
thinking -- although unfortunately, our understanding of what it is and
how it happens doesn't seem to stop politicians and others from doing
it. Essentially, groupthink happens when a group of people have become
so comfortable and certain that their own way of seeing the world is
right, that they ignore or dismiss any information which contradicts
their ideas. This can lead, and has led, to absolutely disastrous
decisions at times. The launch of space shuttle Challenger against
technical advice resulted in it blowing up in mid-air, killing not only
its crew but also America's ﬁrst space-travelling civilian. The invasion
of the Bay of Pigs, in Cuba, was a disaster for the US military. And the
economic decisions made by the UK government during the 2008/9 credit
crunch were disastrous for the UK economy. These are just a few of many
examples of groupthink in the real world.

136

The symptoms of groupthink were documented by Janis in the 1970s. They
include a sense of invulnerability, in that the group feels secure and
unlikely to be seriously threatened; self-censorship as people who
disagree or have doubts keep them to themselves rather than risk the
scorn of others; rejecting undesirable information by stereotyping those
who provide it or treating it as unacceptable; and most importantly,
maintaining an illusion of unanimity, because everyone is conforming to
the majority view. Many psychologists see this as one of the best ways
to diagnose groupthink. If everyone appears to agree with everyone else,
then that's a sure sign that either someone is hiding something, or that
the group needs some fresh viewpoints.

Insight Groupthink is one of the most dangerous traps in our
decision-making. It's particularly likely because it taps into our deep
social identiﬁcation mechanisms -- everyone likes to feel part of a
group -- and on our avoidance of social challenges. But consensus
without conﬂict almost always means that other viewpoints are being
ignored, and the consequences of groupthink can be disastrous.
DECISION-MAKING When we make decisions, we don't always go about it in
the most logical possible way. Human beings aren't computers, and we use
shortcuts in our thinking which a computer wouldn't use. For example, if
I were to tell a computer 'If it is raining on Sunday I shall go to the
cinema', then the computer would take that as a logical statement.
However, if I said that to a human being, they would listen to the
meaning of what I had said, which wouldn't necessarily be the same
thing. The computer and the human being would draw different conclusions
if they found me at the cinema on Sunday. The human being would conclude
that I was there because it was raining outside. But the computer
wouldn't. As far as the computer was concerned, it could just as well be
sunshine outside because all I actually said was that I would go if it
was

7.  Cognition

137

raining. I didn't actually say anything at all about what I would do if
it wasn't raining. Heuristics The computer works from strict logic, and
what I said, logically, meant that it was possible to draw that
conclusion. But a human being uses human logic, and they would know what
I really meant -- that I would go to the pictures only if it was
raining. We apply a lot of this type of social knowledge in
understanding each other, and it is why human thinking doesn't ﬁt very
easily into computer models. But sometimes, the cognitive shortcuts or
heuristics that we use can actually distort our decisions, so that we
don't make the most sensible ones. One of those heuristics is known as
availability. What this one means is that we are most likely to choose
from options which come immediately to mind, or which we have recently
been exposed to, rather than actually thinking through what our options
are. We have seen how strongly we are inﬂuenced by expectations, and our
most recent experiences go a long way to shaping what those expectations
actually are. Vivid examples come readily to mind, as advertisers know
very well, and so do the social scripts that we have recently
encountered. As a result, we can often end up ignoring important
information, and only bringing it to mind too late, once the decision
has already been made. Entrapment is another heuristic which can
inﬂuence our decision-making. This happens when we have already invested
quite a lot in one course of action, so that we ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
change direction because it will mean that what we have already done is
worthless. One common example of this is when you have an old car which
keeps developing different problems. The more money you put in, the more
difﬁcult it is to decide to scrap it, because it means that all that
money has been wasted. As a result, some people put off making the
decision and end up spending far more than they would have done if
they'd made the decision earlier. Another thing we are very inﬂuenced by
is how decisions are framed. For example, in one study research
participants were asked

138

to choose between two options for tackling a serious disease. The
participants made different decisions depending on whether one of the
options was presented as meaning almost a third of the sufferers would
probably be saved, or whether it was presented as meaning that
two-thirds of the sufferers would probably die. Although the information
was the same in both cases, 72 per cent of the participants chose that
option in the 'save' condition, but only 22 per cent chose that one in
the 'die' condition. That's quite a big difference, and it shows us just
how much the way that a problem has been framed can inﬂuence the choices
that we make.

Insight Studies of human thinking often imply that humans are illogical.
And we are, as far as computer logic is concerned. But when we look more
closely, we ﬁnd that human thinking is almost always rational, in terms
of social awareness and probabilities. These are only two aspects of
thinking, of course. In a book this size we can only look at a few of
the insights which have been made by psychologists, but they do give us
some of an idea of what sort of things the psychology of thinking
includes.

Perception Perception is all about interpreting the information that the
mind receives from the outside world, and working out what it means. So
the psychological study of perception involves looking at how the mind
acts on the information it receives through the senses, to give us our
perceptual experience. Most psychological research into perception has
concentrated on visual perception because vision is the most important
sense for human beings. But there are other kinds of perception too. We
make sense out of what we hear, what we touch, what we smell and what we
taste. Party games which involve touching different

7.  Cognition

139

objects while blindfolded show us how strongly we interpret what we
receive through our sense of touch. Sometimes, a particular smell can
bring back a whole ﬂood of memories. And we saw in Chapter 4 how the way
we interpret our physical state can inﬂuence the emotions that we feel.
So perception really involves all of our senses, even though it is
vision that we know most about. ORGANIZING PERCEPTION Our perception,
like other aspects of our cognition, is strongly inﬂuenced by our
evolutionary history, and is structured in a way that helps us to
survive. This is particularly true of the way that we organize our
visual perception: it is all based on the needs of the active human
being in dealing with the world. Seeing objects, animals and other
things in the world is important, and so is being able to detect
movement. So one of the ﬁrst things we need to explain when we are
looking at visual perception is how we can distinguish things, rather
than simply seeing a whole mass of disconnected colours and patches of
light and dark. The retina of our eyes, which receives the information
from the outside world, is simply composed of a whole array of
light-sensitive cells, so what we actually receive is a bit like the
dots which make up the TV screen. But automatically, it seems, we
organize our perception so that we perceive whole objects and shapes,
set against backgrounds. We do this by applying a set of perceptual
'rules' to what we are seeing. These rules tell us how to group
different bits of information together into whole units. They are known
as the Gestalt principles of perception, after the Gestalt psychologists
who discovered them during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century. There
are four of them altogether, and together they show how our perceptual
system automatically tries to make complete, meaningful units out of the
information which it receives. Principles of perception The ﬁrst Gestalt
principle is the principle of similarity. In the absence of any other
cues, we group together

140

items or stimuli which are like one another (as shown in Figure 7.2a).
The second principle, though, overrides the ﬁrst one. It is known as the
principle of proximity, and is the way that we tend to group things
together if they are close to one another, even if they aren't very
similar (see Figure 7.2b). The principle of closure, the third of the
Gestalt principles, overrides the other two (Figure 7.2c). If a group of
stimuli hint at a closed or complete ﬁgure, the mind automatically
groups them together and ﬁlls in the gaps. This tendency is so strong
that if people are asked to draw an incomplete ﬁgure that they have
seen, they will often ﬁll in the gaps automatically, because they didn't
notice that they were there. And the fourth principle is that we tend to
look for ﬁgures which have good Gestalt, or whole, complete shapes,
rather than ﬁgures which seem to be 'bitty' or disconnected. Together,
the Gestalt principles of perception mean that we can organize the
information we receive through our eyes into meaningful units -- objects
against backgrounds.

a Similarity

b Proximity

c Closure Figure 7.2 Three Gestalt principles of perception.

7.  Cognition

141

Insight Movies, cartoons and neon signs all apply the Gestalt principles
of perception to fool us into seeing movement instead of disconnected
dots or shapes. Brain cells and perception There is some suggestion,
too, that our tendency to see objects and shapes against backgrounds --
which is known as ﬁgure-ground perception -- may be hard-wired into our
nervous system. In the late 1970s, Hubel and Wiesel showed that there
are special cells in the visual cortex (the part of the brain which
interprets visual information) and in the thalamus (the part of the
brain which channels information from the eyes to the visual cortex)
which help us to identify patterns and shapes. One type of cell, known
as a simple cell, ﬁres when it detects a single type of stimulus, such
as a line at a particular angle in a particular part of our vision. A
second type of cell, known as a complex cell, receives information from
lots of simple cells, so that type of cell ﬁres when it detects a line
at that particular angle anywhere in our vision. And a third type of
cell, known as a hypercomplex cell, receives information from lots of
different complex cells. These cells ﬁre when they detect simple shapes,
such as a triangle or a square. Although we are only just beginning to
understand how visual cells in the brain combine information, what we do
know does suggests that seeing shapes and objects may be something that
our cells do automatically, from the way that they are connected up. The
psychologists Marr and Nisihara (1982) showed how connecting information
about edges and surfaces, detected by simple and complex cells, and then
applying computational rules like the Gestalt principles of perception,
allows us to identify whole, real objects like people, trees or animals.
The process is complicated, involving several stages, including one
where the image detected is almost like a stick ﬁgure. But by the time
the image is completed, we can make sense of it as a threedimensional
object.

142

Marr's computational approach tells us something about how we perceive
the physical world, as does work by other psychologists, notably Gibson,
who analysed how we interpret movement and textures. In many ways, our
visual world is made up of ﬁgures against backgrounds, and shaped by
movement and change -- so a system which computes edges and objects, and
looks at how our visual impressions change as we move around in our
worlds, is ideal for the basic survival needs of most animals. But in
the modern world, the things we are looking at are often more complex
than that, and have special meanings. When we are making sense of these,
we use our schemas and our existing knowledge, as well as processing the
physical images that we receive through our eyes. PERCEPTUAL SET Just as
our experience gives us mental sets which inﬂuence how we think when we
are solving problems, so expectation or mood, or other social inﬂuences,
can give us perceptual sets, which inﬂuence what we perceive. In one
famous study, Bruner and Minturn showed people sets of letters or
numbers. Each time they saw a letter or a number, they were asked to say
what it was out loud. Then they were shown an ambiguous ﬁgure, which
could be seen as either the ﬁgure 13 or the letter B. People who had
previously been looking at letters said that it was a 'B', while people
who had previously seen numbers said that it was a 13. Their prior
experience had given them a perceptual set, which had affected their
perception. First impressions Perceptual sets can be set up in other
ways, too. In one study, researchers asked people to watch as a student
tried to solve a set of difﬁcult multiple-choice problems. Each time,
the student got 15 out of the 30 problems right. However, when some
people watched, most of the correct answers came near the beginning, so
that their ﬁrst impression was that the student was very good at them.
Other people saw the student get more wrong answers at the beginning,
and more correct ones towards the end. When they were asked to estimate
how many questions the student had got right in the end, the two groups
of people made entirely different

7.  Cognition

143

estimates. Those who had seen more correct answers at the beginning
estimated that the student had got around 20 out of the 30 questions
right, compared to estimates of only 12 out of 30 by those who had seen
more wrong answers at the beginning. So our perception can be inﬂuenced
quite powerfully by ﬁrst impressions -- something you need to bear in
mind if you are going for an interview, or something else where ﬁrst
impressions might be inﬂuential. Motivation and perception Perception
can also be inﬂuenced by our physical or motivational state. Back in the
1950s, Gilchrist and Nesburg asked people to look at pictures and to
rate how brightly coloured they were. Some pictures were of neutral
stimuli, such as landscapes, while others were of food and drink. If the
research participants had gone without food or drink for four hours or
more, they saw pictures of food and drink as more brightly coloured than
the other pictures. Their motivational state -- hunger -- had affected
how they perceived the pictures. THE PERCEPTUAL CYCLE All this sounds as
though we only see what we want or expect to see. That's partly true,
but it isn't the whole story. We can also be surprised by what we see,
so it's obvious that our expectations don't entirely determine our
perception. Neisser (1976) described perception as taking place in a
continuously active cycle. We begin with schemas that we use to make
sense of the world. Those schemas help us to anticipate what we are
likely to encounter, so Neisser referred to them as anticipatory
schemas. Our schemas direct what sorts of things we notice as we explore
the perceptual world. We don't take in everything around us -- if we
did, we would soon become overloaded. We wouldn't know when to take
notice of the shadow of a leaf, or the texture of the tarmac on a road,
or anything else. So what we do is sample the relevant information. If
we want to cross the

144

mo d

W hic

ect d ir s

Which

s

h

e ifi

The anticipatory schema

Information from the real world

Our exploration of the perceptual world

Which samples Figure 7.3 Neisser's perceptual cycle.

road, we notice the speed of the car that is approaching, the width of
the road and other bits of information which might be relevant to what
we want to do, and we ignore the rest. We sample the perceptual world
through our perceptual exploration and that in turn has been shaped by
our anticipatory schemas (Figure 7.3). Once we have sampled that
information, it feeds back to the anticipatory schema, and modiﬁes it.
You may have been about to step into the road because your anticipatory
schema has to do with being on the other side, but your perceptual
exploration led you to focus on approaching cars, and the information
available told you that there was one coming up fast. So you modify your
anticipatory schema, waiting until the car has gone past. The modiﬁed
schema in turn directs a new set of perceptual exploration (looking
further down the road to see how many more cars are coming), and so on.
In Neisser's model, then, perception is a continuous, active cycle, not
just a passive snapshot of what is there. What we anticipate or expect
to happen affects what we perceive; but what is actually there affects
what we anticipate. So our expectations are continually changing and
adjusting themselves as we take in new information and revise our
schemas accordingly.

7.  Cognition

145

Insight The perceptual cycle shows us how active our everyday perception
is. It's unconscious, but we are continually registering information,
comparing it with what we expect, and adjusting what we expect
accordingly.

Memory Memory, too, is an active mental process rather than a simple
tape-recording of what has happened. In many ways, this is quite a hard
concept to grasp, because we always feel as though we are remembering
exactly what happened. But it's true, nonetheless. The trouble, though,
is that we don't often have a separate, objective record of what
actually did happen, so we can't compare our memories with the real
thing. ACTIVE REMEMBERING There are a few occasions when we do have some
objective evidence to compare it with, though. Have you ever been to see
a ﬁlm twice, with a gap of several years in between? If you have, you
will often ﬁnd that some of your favourite scenes in the ﬁlm don't
happen exactly the way that you remember them. Even though you felt you
remembered them word for word, they turn out to be different when you
actually see them again. It's the same with our other memories, too.
Very often, we think that we are remembering a conversation word for
word, but really we are remembering a slightly different version of it.
The great psychologist Ulrich Neisser showed how this can happen in an
analysis of some of the evidence given during the Watergate trials in
America, which eventually resulted in the impeachment of President
Nixon. John Deane's memory One of the important witnesses in these
trials was John Deane, a man who was considered by many to have an
astoundingly accurate memory. During the trials, he related a number of
very speciﬁc

146

conversations which had taken place between the President and other
people in the White House. Deane was convinced -- as were the other
people involved -- that he had recounted them accurately. However, later
on in the trials, a number of tape-recordings of the same conversations
were discovered. So in this case, it was possible for Neisser to compare
the testimony given by John Deane, including word-for-word descriptions
of conversations, with an objective record of what had actually been
said. The results were fascinating. In almost every conversation, John
Deane's recollection of what had actually been said was wrong. Different
words were used, topics were mentioned in a different order, and
sometimes particularly memorable phrases hadn't actually been said at
all. And yet, even though the details were all wrong, the actual meaning
of what had gone on was perfectly correct. Deane didn't remember the
details as accurately as he thought he did, but he did remember
accurately what had actually happened. It was the social meaning of the
events which he actually remembered, and his knowledge of what it all
meant inﬂuenced his recall of the details. Stories and schemas This
actually reﬂects a very powerful feature of our memory, which has been
known to psychologists for a very long time. Bartlett, in 1932, showed
how when people are asked to remember a story, they make sense of the
story in their own way. We ﬁt new information into our existing thought
structures -- into the schemas that we use for understanding the world.
This often means that we unconsciously adjust the information so that it
will ﬁt. Bartlett found this out by telling people a story which wasn't
the sort of story that they were used to hearing. He used an American
Indian legend, called 'War of the Ghosts'. This story tends to be
confusing to European and white American listeners, because it includes
the involvement of the spirit world, in ways that seem illogical to
Westerners. When people wrote down what they remembered of the story,
Bartlett found that they made systematic changes as they tried to make
sense out of it. The more often the story was reproduced, the more it
changed until eventually it was nothing like its original. 7. Cognition

147

Table 7.1 How memories change. Changes in importance People tend to
focus on one part of the story and see that as most important, even if
it isn't really. Changes to the People adjust the story so that it ﬁts
with emotional impact their own reactions and emotions. Drifting The
more often the story is told, the more its meaning gradually changes.
Shortening The story becomes shorter and less detailed, as things which
the person doesn't understand are left out. Coherence Bits are added to
the story, or its sequence is changed around, so that it seems to make
better sense. Conventionality Well-known ideas and themes are
introduced, so that the story becomes more like other stories which are
known in that culture. Losing names and These get lost as the story is
repeated, or numbers sometimes change into more familiar forms. Bartlett
identiﬁed seven types of changes, which are listed in Table 7.1. These
changes can be detected when we are remembering other types of
information, too, and that can sometimes be very important. A lot of
courtroom evidence, for example, is based on the idea that people can
remember things accurately. So we need to be aware that someone's memory
for what happened is likely to have been inﬂuenced by their own
expectations and social assumptions, no matter how accurate they try to
be, or believe they are being.

Insight Our memory is much more active than we realize. We change and
adjust our memories all the time, so they ﬁt in with our expectations
and our understanding of the world. But we don't have any idea that we
are doing this, so it always feels completely factual.

148

Words and memory Memories can be inﬂuenced by all sorts of subtle
factors. In a study described by Loftus and Loftus in 1975, people were
shown a ﬁlm of a trafﬁc accident. They were then asked questions about
it. Among the questions there was one about the speed of the cars, and
this was phrased very carefully. Half of the people were asked 'How fast
were the cars going when they hit one another?' while the other half
were asked 'How fast were the cars going when they smashed into one
another?' All the other questions were the same. A week later, the same
people were asked to remember the ﬁlm they had seen. Among other things,
they were asked whether there had been any broken glass in the ﬁlm.
There hadn't been any, and those who had been asked about the cars
hitting one another remembered that. But those who had been asked about
the cars smashing into one another distinctly remembered broken glass
strewn around the road, and were surprised to ﬁnd that it wasn't there
when they saw the ﬁlm again. The words which were used when they were
asked about the accident had directly inﬂuenced what they remembered --
to the point of introducing details which hadn't been there originally.
This is an important ﬁnding, particularly for people who have to ask
questions to witnesses for court. People can pick up subtle hints and
suggestions from the words that are used, and are often entirely unaware
that they are doing it. In some American states, the police experimented
with helping witnesses to remember what happened by using hypnosis,
because they believed it would help people to recall events. But when
people are hypnotized, they are even more easily inﬂuenced, and they are
also trying very hard to be co-operative. Because of this, they often
adjust their memories without knowing it, to ﬁt what they think the
questioner wants to know. As a result of this, Gibson (1982) argued that
the use of hypnotism on witnesses in police investigations should be
regarded as being equivalent to tampering with evidence. Memory doesn't
work

7.  Cognition

149

like a tape-recording. It can be changed and adjusted even some time
after the event, without the person even knowing. And once that has
happened, there is no way at all of telling the difference between a
constructed memory and a 'real' one. CODING MEMORIES Memories may be
affected by social inﬂuences, but this doesn't mean that everything we
remember is wrong. And we do store a tremendous amount of information,
which means that we have to have a way of retaining information in the
mind, and bringing it back to awareness again when we need it. So a part
of the research into the psychology of memory has been concerned with
studying representation -- how information is represented in the brain,
as it is stored. Modes of representation The kinds of memories that we
are most aware of using in everyday life generally involve one of four
different modes of representation. One of these is when information is
stored in complete meaningful units, such as concepts and schemas, and
we have learned something about these throughout this chapter. The other
three are also interesting, partly because we can see how they develop
as we grow older, and partly because of the implications that they have
for studying and using our memory for tests or exams. When an infant is
ﬁrst born it has a lot to learn, and a great deal of that learning is to
do with the body. A baby needs to learn how to move its arms, legs, eyes
and head when it wants to, and it needs to make sense of the different
sensations and feelings it experiences. Since actions and feelings are
the central part of the child's interaction with its world, its memories
tend to be stored as impressions of actions -- as 'muscle memories'.
This is known as enactive representation. It is possible to see babies
using this enactive representation as they repeat actions that have
produced an effect -- such as moving a hand as if they were hitting a
rattle, even though the rattle isn't

150

there. You, too, are likely to have some memories stored using enactive
representation. Imagine the feel of a wonder waltzer, or a
rollercoaster, and the chances are you will get an impression of how it
felt on the muscles of your body. That's enactive representation. Adults
can use it too, but they have other ways of storing information as well.
One of the other ways is known as iconic representation. This involves
storing information as images, like pictures, or images of sounds.
Iconic representation ﬁrst develops as the young child's world begins to
expand, and they encounter some kinds of information which can't really
be stored using muscle memories. When you are reading a book, for
instance, or watching TV, the muscle actions which you use are much the
same. But the information you are receiving can be quite different. So
the brain needs to develop additional ways of storing information.
Children tend to use iconic imagery a great deal. They remember what
things looked like, very clearly and, sometimes, even photographically.
About one in ten children have eidetic imagery -- visual memories that
are so clear that they are almost photographic. But this usually
disappears with puberty, and the number of adults with eidetic memory is
estimated to be less than one in 10,000. One of the reasons why it seems
to disappear is because iconic memory is much less ﬂexible and adaptable
than other ways of remembering. Bruner and Kenney (1966) showed that
children who used iconic imagery could remember a particular pattern of
glasses, arranged on a grid in ascending size and order (Figure 7.4)
quite accurately. But if they were asked to describe what the grid would
look like if the order was reversed, they couldn't do it. Children who
used symbolic representation, though, could do it easily. Symbolic
representation involves remembering things by using symbols to represent
the information in the mind. We actually learn this from a very early
age -- numbers, for instance, are symbols, and we use those to remember
many different

7.  Cognition

151

Figure 7.4 Bruner and Kenney's experiment.

kinds of information. But as we approach adulthood, symbolic
representation becomes more important because it is so much more ﬂexible
and adaptable than iconic imagery. It also lets us remember abstract
information, which can't be visualized very easily. So by the time we
are approaching adulthood, we have a number of ways of remembering which
are available to us. We can use enactive representation, iconic
representation, symbolic representation, or schemas, as well as some
more speciﬁc modes which we don't have space to look at here. We draw on
each of these as we need to, because each of them works best when
remembering different types of information.

Insight All our memories are linked with other ones, in some way. So one
bit of information can be a cue which helps you to remember quite a lot
of others. WHAT MAKES A GOOD MEMORY? There are times when the type of
representation which we choose to use makes a great deal of difference
to whether we remember things or not. You may have wondered what makes a
good memory and why some people seem to have good memories while others
don't. A very large part of that answer is to do with how we go about
storing the information in the ﬁrst place. Whenever we store
information, we process it in some way. At the very least, we are
changing it from an external stimulus in the outside world to an
internal, mental form and, sometimes,

152

we change it a great deal more than that. We might, for instance, change
something from a verbal form (words) into a visual form, such as a
diagram or a picture. Or we might hear someone say something and store
it in terms of the meaning of what they have said -- linking it with
other things which have similar meanings, and so on. All this is mental
processing of the information. Levels of processing What is particularly
interesting is that the amount of processing we carry out affects how
well we remember things. People who have bad memories -- or who think
they have -- are people who tend to try to remember things passively,
accepting the information but not trying to process it mentally. People
who have good memories are people who process the information that they
receive. They think about it, work out what it means and examine how it
links with other things that they already know. By the time they've done
that, they know it, and can remember it. In fact, all of us have
extremely good memories -- for things that we are interested in! Even
someone who thinks they have a bad memory has no problem remembering
their social life, and what has been happening lately among their
friends -- because they are interested in it. But usually they ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to remember schoolwork and other information because they
aren't all that interested in it, and so they don't process it much. And
this, of course, becomes circular, because schoolwork can only become
interesting when you do think about it and link it with other things
that you have learned. People who are 'good at school' do this
automatically. People who aren't are generally people who haven't
learned the trick of making themselves interested. It can change, though
-- a lot of people learn how to make themselves interested by following
up details and thinking about implications. When they do this, they ﬁnd
that the subject is much more interesting than they thought it was.

7.  Cognition

153

Interest and motivation Being interested in something can make a
dramatic difference to how well you remember it. In one classic study,
Morris et al. (1981) asked people to remember a list of words and
numbers -- a single number attached to each word -- which was read out
to them. They had two groups of people participating in their study. One
group was not particularly interested in what they were doing, but tried
to remember the list anyway. The other group was really, deeply
interested in it. When they were tested to see how many items from the
list they could remember, the interested group remembered far more than
the disinterested group. The reason why they were so interested was
because they were very keen football supporters, and this was Saturday
afternoon. They had agreed to come along to the researcher's laboratory,
and were hearing the results of that day's matches read out on the
radio. So as they listened, they were thinking about each result, about
how it ﬁtted into the overall picture, and what difference it would make
to that team's league position. In other words, they were processing the
information. The others, who were not particularly keen on football,
just listened and tried to remember, but they didn't process the
information as much, which is why they didn't remember as well. The
researchers made sure that the two groups were just as good at
remembering things by giving them another set of scores to remember,
which had been made up. In this case, the football supporters were just
as bad at remembering as the others. It was because they knew that these
were real results that they put the effort into processing the
information. So, if you want to try to improve your memory, there's the
answer. Don't just try to remember things passively: process them.
Change the form of the information in some way: use iconic imagery to
change it into pictures, or change it into symbolic form. Fit it into
your schemas and concepts, by working out what it means and why it
matters. You'll be surprised how much you can remember when you do that.

154

Insight Everybody has a good memory -- for stuff that they are
interested in. Even people who say they have lousy memories have no
difﬁculty remembering what is happening in their social lives. So the
real trick in successful revision is to get the good side of your memory
to connect with the other stuff. In this chapter, we have taken a brief
look at some of cognitive psychology. There is much more which could be
said: psychologists have been studying memory for over 100 years now and
we know a great deal about it. But in a book like this, all we can
really do is look at some of the psychological ﬁndings which are most
helpful in understanding human beings in their everyday lives. Our
evolutionary history, too, has left inﬂuences on our cognitive
processes, and we will look at some of these in the next chapter.

7.  Cognition

155

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Cognition is mental activity, such as thinking,
perception or memory. 2 Human problem-solving is strongly inﬂuenced by
expectations and assumptions. 3 Mental set is a state of readiness or
preparedness for particular mental activities. 4 Groupthink can result
in disastrous decisions as the decision-makers fail to take other
information or opinions into account. 5 Perception is how we organize
and interpret sensory information. 6 Perceptual set happens when we
expect certain kinds of stimuli and so are particularly ready to receive
it. 7 The perceptual cycle shows how we can still notice new things even
though our anticipations direct most of what we will notice. 8 Memory is
an active process -- we adjust our memories to ﬁt with our existing
awareness and expectations. 9 Memories can be coded and stored as
images, actions, words or symbols. 10 Memory can be improved by
processing information more intensively.

156

8 Evolution, genetics and learning In this chapter you will learn: •
about the evolutionary process of natural selection • the difference
between 'phenotype' and 'genotype' • how evolution can encourage
learning. As we've seen, there are many different approaches to
understanding people. So far we have looked at how social, cultural,
developmental, physiological and cognitive inﬂuences contribute to what
it means to be human. Each of these levels of analysis helps us to
understand a bit more about human beings. But there is another level of
explanation which is also important in psychology, and that is the
biological level: the level of explanation which says that since human
beings are animals, evolutionarily and physically speaking, then
understanding what we have in common with other animals will also help
us to understand ourselves. STUDYING ANIMALS By understanding evolution,
we can understand how the human brain has come to be organized in the
way that it is, how human genetics have evolved over time to develop us
into the human animals that we are, and how our physiological make-up
allows us to adapt to so many different environments. Human beings have
learned to live in almost all parts of the world, under wildly different
physical conditions. That learning is only possible because we have
evolved such a large amount of ﬂexibility and adaptability

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

157

in both our brains and our immune systems. Looking at how brains and
learning capacities have developed in other animals can help us to
understand more about how we have come to be like we are. But we also
need to be cautious when we are trying to generalize from other animals
to human beings, because of the very diverse ways that other animals
have evolved. Animal learning and animal biology are closely tied in
with the type of animal concerned, and the types of environments in
which each animal has evolved. Behaviour, habits, learning, and even
physiology all vary, and many of them are completely different for other
animals than they are for human beings. Nature may use the same
materials but in very different ways. Some studies of animal physiology,
for example, have shown that the same brain chemical, in apparently the
same part of the brain, can produce completely different behaviours in
rats and cats -- behaviours as different as sleeping and aggression.
Animal social organization varies widely, sometimes even in the same
species -- for example, plains baboons have a much more rigid social
hierarchy than forest baboons, which are more relaxed and 'egalitarian'
in their relationships with one another. So we should be very careful in
making our comparisons.

Insight Studying animals in their natural contexts can give us insights
into our own behaviour as well as theirs. But we have to remember that
the natural context for humans is other humans, which is why they can
survive in so many different physical environments. Learning in context
Also, we need to look at learning in the natural context. In the ﬁrst
half of the twentieth century psychologists mainly studied association
learning in the laboratory, investigating how animals can learn new
behaviours and complex tasks by using different kinds of reinforcements
or rewards. This is the kind of training we use to teach tricks to pets,
or to train performing animals -- although there

158

has always been a certain amount of debate as to whether the animals are
really responding as mechanically as all that, or whether they are
simply going along with their trainer because they enjoy it! In the
second half of the twentieth century, though, comparative psychologists
became more interested in investigating animal behaviour in the natural
environment. This approach is known as ethology, and many psychologists
consider that this approach is much more useful -- not to mention kinder
to the animals concerned. Animal learning is closely tied up with the
animal's evolutionary history, and what the demands on that particular
species have been. We will begin this chapter by looking at how
evolution happens, since that gives us the basis for understanding why
animals are different from one another, and also why human beings are
different from other animals. As part of that, we will be looking brieﬂy
at genetics, and how we inherit characteristics from our ancestors --
even if we have not been brought up by our biological parents. Then we
will go on to look at human and animal learning a little more closely.

Evolution Comparative psychology is ﬁrmly based on the idea that all
animals, including human beings, have evolved from primitive common
ancestors. The theory of evolution, as put forward by Charles Darwin in
1859, proposes that different animal species have changed and developed
continuously over time, as they become better suited to their
environments. Evolution happens through small genetic changes as the
species gradually adapts to the demands and rigours of the environment
that it lives in. Evolutionary change is slow, because it happens
through tiny changes in genetics, which are passed on from parent to
offspring. We will be looking in more detail at the genetic basis of
evolution later in this chapter. For now, though, we will look at
evolutionary processes in general.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

159

NATURAL SELECTION Individuals result from a combination of biological
inheritance and environmental experiences. It isn't an 'either-or'
process -- either genetics or environment -- as some early psychologists
used to believe. Both genetics and the environment work together, each
making it possible for the other to have its inﬂuence. Humans, for
example, learn from their environments all the time. But without the
human brain, which has developed as a result of genetic factors, that
learning would be totally impossible. And without its earlier
environment and pressures, the human brain would not have taken that
particular form in the ﬁrst place. Natural selection -- the basis of
evolution -- works by 'shaping' the set of genes that are inherited from
the parents. Each of us is unique, and the same applies in other species
as well as humans. Our genes tell our bodies what characteristics to
develop. They contain strands of DNA which add up to a 'pattern' for
development. But how well that development happens depends on the
environment that the individual grows up in. We all have cells for
storing fat, for example, but we can only become fat in an environment
where food is plentiful. Sometimes the combination of genes that an
individual inherits is particularly beneﬁcial. As a result, and given
the right environment, the individual may be stronger, or healthier,
than others of its kind. Sometimes, though, there are small errors in
copying the DNA when the special reproductive cells are made, and these
result in the new individual becoming different in some way. These
differences are known as genetic mutations. Large-scale genetic
mutations are quite rare, although they do happen occasionally; but they
are not normally passed on to the next generation because such
individuals are often sterile. Most of the time, though, mutations are
just tiny changes in the DNA, which may only make a tiny difference to
the individual's development. It is these small mutations which result
in the process of evolution.

160

Insight There will always be small genetic variations, but most of them
just remain as individual differences. They only produce species change
if they give some kind of advantage. But if the environment changes,
previously unimportant variations can sometimes become helpful and
that's when species change is likely to happen. Any organism, whether it
is a plant or an animal, exists in the world and needs to survive in it.
That means that it needs to obtain enough nutrients and living space or
other conditions it needs to keep it alive. It also needs to have some
way of combining reproductive cells with another member of the same
species, if it is to reproduce by sexual means. And in doing all this,
it will often be in competition with other animals or plants, which are
also trying to survive. Survival of the ﬁttest So anything which helps
an organism to get an advantage over the competition will be useful.
Slight physical changes produced by genetic mutations, can sometimes
give an organism just the edge it needs. If a mutation helps the animal
to become better adapted to its environment, it will be more likely to
survive than other members of its species. And, because it is a little
bit healthier, it will also be more likely to reproduce successfully, so
its beneﬁcial mutation can be passed on to future generations. One of
the 'classic' examples of evolution is that of the ﬁnches on the
Galapagos Islands. When Darwin reached these islands, on the voyage made
by the famous ship HMS Beagle, each island had a slightly different kind
of ﬁnch living on it. However, when he examined the different ﬁnches, it
was apparent that, at some time in the past, they had all developed from
just one species of ﬁnch. That species had originally colonized all the
islands. But because each island presented a slightly different
environment, natural selection meant that the birds had gradually
adapted to their particular island. In the process, they had become
different from the ﬁnches on the other islands.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

161

Imagine, for example, an island in which the main source of food was
seeds, with thick, strong shells. If a ﬁnch inherited the genes for a
slightly thicker, stronger beak -- perhaps as the result of a genetic
mutation -- then it would have an edge over the competition. It would be
able to get to its food more easily, using less energy than the other
birds. So it would be likely to grow to be strong and healthy. When it
mated, some of its offspring would also inherit the gene for a thick
strong beak and they, too, would become stronger and healthier than the
others. So if something happened which made the food supply scarce --
perhaps a drought, or some other natural change -- these would be the
birds which survived. They would be less likely to die of starvation
because they were healthier and better fed in the ﬁrst place. And they
would be more likely to be able to get at particularly tough seeds which
the other birds couldn't manage, so they could make the most of whatever
was available. As a result, more of them would be likely to survive the
drought or famine than the ones with smaller beaks. In the end, over
thousands of years, it would be their descendants which occupied the
island. On an island where the main food supply was insects which hid
under stones or tree bark, a thick strong beak wouldn't be much help.
Adaptation to that particular environment would beneﬁt birds with
thinner, longer beaks which could poke into crevices. They would be the
ones who would become better fed and stronger, and so they would be more
likely to survive the hard seasons. Natural selection is all about the
survival of the ﬁttest -- and 'ﬁttest' means best adapted to its
environment. HUMAN EVOLUTION This continuous process of adaptation and
development has produced a vast diversity of living organisms, ranging
from plants and yeasts to mammals and birds. Each species has evolved
its different characteristics through natural selection, and when we
look at different species, we can sometimes use those comparisons to
detect part of their evolution, or of the evolution of some

162

Cerebrum

Cerebrum

Frog

Cerebrum

Pigeon Cat Cerebrum

Cerebrum

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

Monkey Human

Figure 8.1 Evolutionary development of the cerebrum.

163

particular structure or ability. For example, Figure 8.1 tells us
something about the evolution of the largest part of our brain, the
cerebrum, and how it has developed in different animals. Human beings
are primates, which is a group of animals that includes monkeys, lemurs
and apes, as well as human beings. Primates have a number of distinctive
characteristics, but the one which is being illustrated in Figure 8.1 is
the large cerebrum. Having a large brain helps an animal to learn and
therefore to adapt to new environments quickly. As we can see, the human
cerebrum is particularly large, which may give us the key to the way
that human beings seem to be able to adapt to so many different
environments. Although it's quite common, it's a mistake to think of
evolution as a straight-line development leading up to the human being.
Human evolution is only one out of many different branches of evolution.
There are lots of different groups of animals, each of which has adapted
to its environment in different ways. We often think of a shark's brain
as being primitive, for instance: it isn't really up to much in the way
of learning or intelligence. But a shark is superbly adapted to its
environment and in many ways represents a triumph of evolution. It would
be hard to design a more efﬁcient and better-adapted animal to ﬁll the
ecological role which the shark plays. In a sense, every animal which is
alive today is the outcome of a battle for survival which has been going
on for millions of years, so none of them can really be regarded as
either inferior or 'better' than others. The most important part of the
whole evolutionary process is the fact that the animal is able to pass
its genes on to its offspring. For the most part, natural selection
favours an animal that can make sure that its offspring will survive. A
species might do this, as frogs do, by having hundreds of offspring, so
that at least a few will avoid being eaten by predators and grow up to
become mature frogs. Alternatively, members of a species might have just
one or two young, but nurture them carefully in family groups until they
are old enough to look after themselves.

164

When we actually look at what plants and animals do, we ﬁnd a tremendous
range of different behaviours and options. The principle of biodiversity
means that there are examples of almost every different kind of activity
that we could think of, somewhere in the animal kingdom. In many
species, for instance, it is the fathers which rear the young rather
than the mothers -- after all, they too have invested their genes in
their offspring. In some species, males hold territories; in others,
females do. The more we look, the less there seems to be general rules
about what is an optimal strategy for survival. Sociobiology Sometimes,
even, we ﬁnd that an animal helps its genes to survive by laying down
its own life. The sociobiologist E. O. Wilson (1975), from his studies
of ants, showed how it was often an evolutionary advantage for a single
animal to die to protect its relatives, since they too shared the same
genes. Moreover, it was also sometimes an advantage for an individual
animal not to have offspring directly, but instead to devote its life to
taking care of siblings or cousins, which again shared the same genes.
In this way, ultimately, that animal's own genes would survive and be
perpetuated. Wilson used this argument to explain how ant societies, and
similar insect communities in which very few individuals reproduce
directly, could have evolved. In these societies, altruism, or
self-sacriﬁcing behaviour could sometimes become an evolutionary
advantage. Survival of the ﬁttest didn't necessarily mean the biggest
and strongest, but the one which was best able to make sure that its
genes were perpetuated.

Insight We need to be very careful about making wild comparisons between
insects and human beings. Every animal species is different, and it
really only makes sense to compare humans with their closer relatives --
mammals, and speciﬁcally social primates. Our evolution has taken very
different directions from ants.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

165

Evolutionary psychology Wilson, and also Dawkins (1976), then went on to
draw a number of parallels between the sociobiological processes which
he had observed in ant societies, and things which happened in human
societies. This way of thinking eventually became the basis for a school
of thought known as evolutionary psychology, which is extremely
controversial. Although almost all psychologists accept the idea of
human evolution, the argument that what human beings do -- in terms of
things like aggression, prejudice, mate attraction and other such
phenomena -- is a direct outcome of our evolutionary history is nowhere
near as widely accepted. This is partly because the theory was based on
creatures which are very different from human beings. Ant societies are
highly structured, but not in the same way as human societies and the
species as a whole invests much less in a single individual than do
mammals. Human beings use a rather more direct method of controlling
their behaviour: by caring for their children, teaching them, and
helping them to survive to maturity. So simplistic parallels between
what human beings do and what animal societies do are very misleading.
They may appear attractive on the surface, but don't really stand up to
scientiﬁc scrutiny because they don't take into account the amount of
individual learning which happens as each person develops. Nor do they
take into account other types of animal behaviour -- the massive
behavioural diversity which we see when we look at different species,
which produces a huge range of behaviours and possibilities. The main
objection to the sociobiological version of evolution as applied to
human beings isn't really the ideas themselves, but the evolutionary
psychologists' claim that human behaviour is essentially determined by
the same biological mechanisms. As we've seen throughout this book,
human beings are supremely adaptable. We have a generalized body-form
which can do a wide range of things; we have a large brain capable of
storing lots of information and learning lots of skills; and we are even
born at an earlier stage in our development than other animals, to allow
for this large brain which continues growing after birth. Given such

166

a capacity for adaptation and learning, it isn't very likely that we
would inherit ﬁxed behaviour patterns, determined by biological
mechanisms. Also, human behaviours appropriate for survival vary too
much from one period of history to another and from one environment to
another, to make biological determination practical. What human beings
do, needs to be understood on a number of different levels, including
cultural, social and interpersonal ones. We may be inﬂuenced by our
evolution -- indeed, our evolution as social animals has shaped us far
more than we realize, in that it has made us so particularly ready to
learn from one another and to organize and identify with social groups.
But that's not the same thing because what we learn is different in each
generation and each culture. We human beings are as much determined by
our cultural as our evolutionary history. But our evolutionary history
is what has made us so adaptable in the ﬁrst place.

Insight Scientists who talk about modern trends in human evolution often
underestimate how many generations of consistent environmental pressure
it would take to change humans physically. Humans are a long-lived
species, and even the Roman invasion of Britain was only about 40
grandfathers ago; which isn't enough time for evolutionary change. As
society changes, so do its demands, and the physical characteristics
aiding survival in mediaeval times were very different from the physical
characteristics aiding survival now. Coevolution Evolution isn't just a
one-way process. Animals don't just adapt to their environments, they
also change those environments, just by living in them. Even an amoeba,
which has only one body cell, secretes chemicals into the water that it
swims in, and so changes that water. And more complex animals often
exert quite a strong inﬂuence over their environments, so that the
environments also evolve with the animals.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

167

This process is known as coevolution and it is something which is often
overlooked when people talk about evolutionary processes. The usual
assumption is that the relationship between animals and their
environment is just a one-way thing; that animals use their environment
to live in, but don't really affect it, except to use up its resources.
But that isn't really the case, and a number of large-scale ecological
problems have arisen from this rather simplistic view of the world. When
the ﬁrst white settlers arrived on the American prairies, for instance,
they found it teeming with buffalo, as well as the small animals known
as prairie dogs. When they exterminated the buffalo and introduced
cattle, they also systematically wiped out the prairie dogs. Since these
ate grass, they reasoned, they would be in competition with the cattle.
More recently -- and almost too late because the prairie dog was nearly
extinct -- biologists have found that the prairie dogs' activities
didn't use up the grass at all. Rather, they enriched it, so that it
grew more lushly and provided more foodstuffs for the buffalo and
everything else. Similarly, Trevor (1992) reported on a 30-year-old
experiment in Tsavo National Park, in Kenya. In other national parks,
the elephant population was culled when it seemed to be growing too
large for the park's resources; but in Tsavo they decided to let nature
take its course and to see what would happen if the elephants were
allowed to multiply unrestrictedly. Although this led to some
heartbreaking scenes in the short-term, by producing a country virtually
stripped of vegetation and the deaths of a large number of elephants
through starvation, in the longer term the country became richer and
more lushly vegetated than before. The elephants' activities had spread
the vegetation more widely, they had scraped out new waterholes during
the drought, and all the other species had beneﬁted too, over the
30-year period. These examples of coevolution show how animals and their
environments interact -- and there are some similar examples with human
societies, too. The Native Australians, for instance, managed the
Australian bush by using ﬁre, systematically, for many thousands of
years. They lived from the land, but also managed it,

168

and the plants and animals also adapted to this management. And this
process meant that the environment changed, as well. Australian plants
burn easily, but their seeds and roots are well protected, and they
regenerate from ﬁre very quickly indeed. In some sanctuaries in
Australia which have been set up by white people, and protected from ﬁre
for many decades, the native plants often develop serious diseases. They
haven't evolved natural resistance to plant disease, as European and
American plants have, because they didn't need it. Under the Native
Australians' management, regular ﬁres wiped out the diseased plants and
sterilized the soils so that the new plants grew up more healthily than
before. Through coevolution, both the animal and plant species become
adapted to deal with ﬁre and recover quickly from it. Coevolution, then,
is a signiﬁcant part of the evolutionary process, for people as well as
for animals and plants. We have all evolved in order to be well adapted
to our environments. But animals don't just adapt to their environments;
environments also adapt to their animals. And sometimes, animals shape
their environments so that they will ﬁt their needs better. It is this
two-way relationship which we need to bear in mind when we are looking
at what the study of animals can tell us about animal or human
psychological processes.

Genetic mechanisms We saw earlier that evolution is determined by the
genes that we inherit from our parents. In recent years we have come to
understand a great deal more about how this works, and that has helped
us to understand quite a lot about individual differences. Inside the
nucleus of each of our body's cells, there is a complex substance known
as DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, to give it its full name). Nuclear DNA
(the DNA found in the cell's nucleus, as opposed to mitochondrial DNA
which we will look at later) is made up of long strands of molecules.
These have two strands

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

169

running side by side, arranged so that the molecules are linked together
in pairs, a bit like a zip fastener. The strands are twisted so that
they form a spiral-like shape known as a helix. Because there are two
strands, the end result is a double helix -- like a very twisted ladder
(Figure 8.2). GENES AND CHROMOSOMES There are four kinds of DNA
molecules, and they make different combinations all the way along each
double helix. Together, they spell out what is known as the genetic code
-- a tremendously complicated set of information, which gives
instructions to the cells in the body so that they develop in certain
ways. As a result of these complex instructions, we grow specialized
liver cells, heart cells, hair cells, skin cells, and all the other
different types of cells which make up a body. Sections of DNA -- known
as genes -- also give instructions about when different types of cells
should develop, and whereabouts in the body they should be. As a result
of that, we also develop differently from one another -- colour of hair,
face shape and all the little physical things which make us individual.

Figure 8.2 A double helix.

170

DNA, then, codes for similarity -- what makes us all human, or makes a
dog a dog; but it also codes for individuality. The strands of DNA in
our cell nuclei are grouped together into larger units, known as
chromosomes. These are arranged in pairs as well, and for the most part,
each pair of chromosomes is very similar. The genes on each chromosome
each have a matching gene, known as an allele, on the other one, except
for one special pair of chromosomes known as the X and Y chromosomes,
where the Y chromosome is much shorter and so doesn't have a full
matching set. These particular chromosomes are the ones which determine
which gender we will have -- that is, whether we will end up male or
female. Females have two X chromosomes, while males have one X and one Y
chromosome. When we, or any other living things, reproduce ourselves
sexually -- that is, by combining sperm from one parent with ova from
another -- we do it by producing special cells which only have half of
the chromosomes: one from each pair. These combine with the new cells
from the other parent to form a complete set, which can then develop
into a new individual. In this way, the new individual inherits some
characteristics from each of its parents, and that mixture is slightly
different every time. MITOCHONDRIAL DNA It used to be thought that the
genes and chromosomes in the cell nucleus were the only sources of DNA
-- and therefore the only set of instructions which the body uses to
develop. But we now know that there is also DNA in other parts of the
cell -- in the mitochondria, which are small structures in the cell body
which have a number of different functions. It seems that one of these
functions is to give instructions about the body's development, starting
as a foetus develops in the womb and continuing throughout our growth
and development. So it isn't just the DNA which we inherit through
sexual reproduction which matters in our development. The DNA which we
acquire from our biological mothers during the gestation period also has
quite a strong inﬂuence in how we become like we are.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

171

This is a relatively new idea, and geneticists are not entirely sure how
it works yet. But it challenges quite a lot of assumptions. It used to
be thought, for example, that it would be possible to grow an identical
copy of an animal simply by using the DNA from the cell nucleus -- a
process known as cloning. But experiments with cloning, such as the
famous one that produced Dolly the sheep, have shown that the new animal
also absorbs mitochondrial DNA from the host mother -- that is, from the
animal which provides the womb for the cloned embryo to develop in.
Although the clone is almost identical to its genetic parent, it isn't
completely so because of the difference in mitochondrial DNA.

Insight The old science-ﬁction idea of growing hundreds of identical
clones has been seriously challenged as we realize how important
mitochondrial DNA is to development. Both the clone's 'parent' and the
host contribute DNA, so two clones could only be identical if they grew
in the same womb at the same time, like identical twins. GENOTYPE AND
PHENOTYPE The genetic code, as we've seen, provides instructions for how
the body should develop. But that doesn't mean that the body
automatically develops that way. From the moment that the embryo begins
to develop -- in other words, from the moment of conception -- there is
a continual interaction between the two types of DNA and the environment
in which the individual is developing. Factors such as the amount of
oxygen or nutrients available, the presence of stress hormones or drugs,
and the amount of activity of the mother all have an inﬂuence on the
embryo's development in the womb or the egg; and these environmental
factors continue and become even more signiﬁcant throughout the whole of
an individual's development. What this tells us is that inheriting
characteristics from our ancestors is only part of the story. How we
develop them depends on our experiences, and how they affect us. Someone
who only has a restricted diet when they are young, for example, may not

172

develop the full height and bone size that they might have had with a
richer diet. The total set of genetic characteristics that we inherit is
known as the genotype -- but nobody ever sees a genotype in real life.
What we actually see, in any animal, plant or human being, is the
phenotype -- what has actually developed as a result of the interaction
between the genes and the environment. That's an important thing to
know, because it tells us that genetic inﬂuences are not ﬁxed and
inevitable. Genetic inﬂuences work alongside environmental inﬂuences,
and they predispose us towards certain types of development. But the
environment can make a tremendous difference. Take heart disease, for
instance. Some people have inherited a genetic tendency towards heart
disease, which means that with certain kinds of environmental stressors,
they are likely to develop it. But if they know that they carry the
gene, then they can develop a lifestyle which will help them to avoid
the illness -- by keeping to a healthy diet, taking regular exercise,
and so on. Having a genetic tendency to something doesn't make it
inevitable. It just means we are more vulnerable and so we need to take
precautions. GENE THERAPY As a result of the human genome project -- a
massive scientiﬁc research initiative designed to map the whole human
genome -- scientists have developed a much better understanding of what
is involved in human genetics. This has helped us to understand how many
genetic disorders work, and as we have seen, that understanding can make
all the difference to someone with a genetic 'vulnerability' to a
disorder. It has also helped scientists to develop better treatments for
a number of problems. Knowing that a particular genetic disorder comes
from the body failing to produce enough of a particular chemical, for
example, means that we can often correct the problem by making sure that
the person gets that chemical in other ways -- through injections or
other medical treatments. Research into stem cells -- cells located in
the bone marrow and other areas of the body -- shows that even when we
are adults,

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

173

we still have some of the 'all-purpose' cells which we had when we were
younger. These cells contain the full genetic code, but haven't yet
become specialized, so they can develop in different ways in different
parts of the body. Some very successful therapies have been developed
which allow people to regrow parts of their own organs which have become
damaged, as a result of stimulation with stem cells.

Insight If we can really get stem cell therapy together, we could do
away with the need for organ donors. It will become possible to regrow
replacement organs from the person's own stem cells instead. Other
aspects of genetic research are more controversial. Some researchers
manipulate animal genes so that those animals will grow 'spare parts'
for human bodies, or produce important biochemicals for drugs to treat
human disorders. Those concerned about animal rights in medical research
have some doubts about whether this type of activity might produce more
problems in the long run, as well as being concerned with what is
happening to the experimental animals themselves. The artiﬁcial genetic
modiﬁcation of crops, too, is controversial, and many ecologists are
concerned that introducing plant crops with, for example, genes from
ﬁsh, will distort the natural environment and produce long-term problems
in plant life. Foods developed in this way have been called
'Frankenstein foods', and many consumers don't want them included in
their diets. But the scientiﬁc discussion is not as clear as it might
be, because the debates are also affected by the unethical behaviour of
the big corporations which are behind much of this research. Who we are,
then, is partly inﬂuenced by our genes and our evolutionary history. But
that is far from being the whole story. Our genetic make-up is largely
established at conception. But the environment that we live in continues
to affect and shape us throughout our lives -- both physically, and
through learning.

174

Levels of learning Learning can happen on all sorts of levels. In the
next chapter, we will be looking at some of the distinctly human aspects
of learning -- how we learn from symbols, language and imagination, for
example. But in the rest of this chapter, we will look brieﬂy at some of
the different levels of animal learning, which range from learning which
is very speciﬁcally controlled by genetic inﬂuences, to learning which
is much more ﬂexible. Just about all types of animal are capable of some
kind of learning -- even those with very primitive nervous systems. But
each species is predisposed towards the types of learning which are most
appropriate for the environment in which they live. In this way, the
genes can facilitate learning by making some kinds of learning easier
than others, for that particular species. ASSOCIATION LEARNING Perhaps
the most basic type of learning is pain avoidance. Even a ﬂatworm, which
has a very primitive, ladder-like nervous system, can learn to turn in a
particular direction if turning the other way brings it into contact
with a painful stimulus. That kind of learning happens at a very simple
level, in the connections made directly by the nerve cells; and as you
can imagine it is an important mechanism to help the animal survive.
Pain avoidance is a kind of association learning -- a simple connection
between a stimulus (e.g. pain) and a response (e.g. movement). But
association learning doesn't have to be based on pain. At the beginning
of the twentieth century, Ivan Pavlov showed how the salivary reﬂex in
dogs, which normally happens when they see food, could be trained so
that dogs would salivate at different times. By ringing a bell every
time dogs were fed, the sound came to be associated with the food and
the dogs would salivate when they heard the bell. Psychologists explored
association learning in considerable depth during the past century, and
there is a great deal of detailed

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

175

research into different types of stimulus, different responses, and the
ways that the two can be connected with one another. Association
learning is a powerful factor in human behaviour, too -- for example,
many of the problems that people have in giving up smoking come because
they have formed associations between the act of smoking and particular
situations or experiences. To give up, they need to learn new habits --
that is, form new associations. Effectively, there are two main forms of
association learning, or conditioning: classical conditioning, and
operant conditioning. We will look at how these types of conditioning
relate to human learning a little more closely in the next chapter.
LEARNING FOR SURVIVAL Some kinds of learning are closely directed by
genetic mechanisms. One of the best examples is the way that we avoid
foods which have made us sick. This is a useful mechanism to evolve,
since in the natural world, something which makes you sick is likely to
be poisonous, so learning to avoid that food helps an individual to
survive. It is an example of what is known as one-trial learning -- a
form of learning which is so powerful that we only need one connection
between the stimulus and response to make it stick. Avoiding foods that
have made you sick in the past isn't conﬁned to humans -- it's something
that most animals will do. Both human beings and animals can have an
inherited predisposition to learn some things very quickly indeed.
Another very rapid form of learning is shown by some precocial animals
soon after they are born. Precocial animals are ones which can move
around very soon after birth, such as foals or lambs, ducklings and
goslings. If they didn't learn quickly how to recognize their mothers
and stick with them, they'd be at risk of wandering off and getting
eaten by predators. So they have a very rapid form of learning, known as
imprinting, whereby they develop an attachment in the ﬁrst few hours
after birth. With young goslings and ducklings, it seems to be mostly
visual, in that they will imprint on the ﬁrst large, moving object that
they see, but with lambs the sense of smell and hearing also seems to be
important

176

rather than vision. But whatever the mechanism, it is a fast, almost
irreversible form of learning which has tremendous survival value.
Preparedness in learning Both one-trial learning and imprinting are
important for survival, and the more comparative psychologists have
looked at animal learning, the more they have found that learning is
often shaped so that an animal is most ready to learn what it will need
to survive. For example, in one study in 1966, Garcia and Koelling
looked at how rats respond to different unpleasant experiences. They
began by showing how the animals quickly learned to avoid salty water,
if they had been given an injection to make them sick soon after
drinking it. But rats who drank salty water and were then given an
electric shock didn't learn to avoid the water. They didn't learn to
connect the two stimuli at all. But they did learn to connect the
electric shock with a light or a clicking sound. In other words, the
rats had been ready to learn some connections, but not others. They
could associate shocks with lights or sounds, but not with tastes. They
could associate sickness with tastes, but not other unpleasant
happenings. It's easy to see, I think, how this type of learning ﬁts
with the idea of evolutionary adaptation. In real life, you would be
likely to be able to hear or see something which was about to cause you
pain; but you would taste something which was about to poison you. So it
makes sense for any animal to be ready to learn those kinds of
associations. Learning by instinct Pretty well all animals, it seems,
are more ready to learn some things than others. Honeybees, for
instance, ﬁnd it very easy to learn to recognize particular smells. If a
bee is fed with food that has been scented with a distinctive smell,
such as lavender, then it begins to select lavender scents, and to go to
those for food even if other food is available. They make the
association between smell and food very readily.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

177

But they don't associate other stimuli with food as easily. Menzel and
Erber (1978) showed that a honeybee can learn to link smell and food 90
per cent of the time, after just one learning session, as long as it is
a ﬂower scent that is being used. They take longer to learn smells which
are not from ﬂowers, and they take even longer to learn stimuli which
aren't smells at all. For instance, although they will learn to go to a
particular colour for food, it takes them three or four learning
sessions, not just one. And it takes them ﬁve or six learning sessions
to go to a particular shape. They can learn it in the end, but they are
not nearly as quick to learn as they are with smells. There are some
stimuli, too, which bees simply will not learn at all. For instance,
they don't learn to associate light with food, no matter how many
learning sessions they are given. It simply doesn't form an association.
Yet bees are very sensitive to light: they detect polarized light and
use it in navigation. Evidently, as far as bees are concerned, foraging
for food and ﬁnding your way home are two entirely unconnected skills!
What we ﬁnd, then, when we look at this kind of animal learning is that
it isn't simply a matter of random associations between stimuli.
Evolutionary pressures have 'shaped' both animals and humans to be
particularly ready to learn certain things rather than others. We've
seen a human application of this principle already, when we looked at
how strongly the human infant is pre-programmed for social interaction
with other people, and how readily human children will learn by
imitating others. Gould and Marler (1987) discussed how this
evolutionary 'shaping' of the capacity to learn applies across many
different species, and seems to be a fundamental feature of learning.

Insight Each species is really good at learning things which are
directly relevant to their traditional survival. That's why human beings
in general are more fascinated by social information than by abstract
knowledge like maths or philosophy. Our survival depends on it.

178

GENERAL LEARNING Learning, though, isn't only about linking one stimulus
with a response. Some animals have inherited a predisposition for a more
general kind of learning. They will explore places, or be curious about
new objects. And sometimes, too, they seem to be ready to learn entirely
new forms of behaviour. Rats and monkeys, for example, will generally
explore new situations and investigate strange objects that they come
across -- unless there is some good reason to avoid them. And this
exploration, too, can be an evolutionary advantage. In one study,
Blanchard, Fukanaga and Blanchard put experimental rats in a box with a
cat -- separating them by a clear screen. If the rats had been in the
box before, and so had explored it, they crouched down and remained
immobile to avoid attracting the cat's attention. But if they hadn't had
a chance to explore the box, they ran around looking for a way to
escape. In other words, rats use the knowledge that they obtain from
their natural tendency to explore new places, to tell them what to do in
the case of a potential threat. If you know that you are in a place with
no escape, then the best thing to do is to try not to attract a
predator's attention. If you don't know, then the best thing to do is to
try to ﬁnd a way out. But it is better to know, so exploring new places
is a good way of surviving. LEARNING AND BRAIN DEVELOPMENT As we saw in
Figure 8.1, the cerebrum of the brain is much larger and more highly
developed in some species than it is in others. This is the part of the
brain which we use for learning and thinking, and those animals which
have the largest and most highly developed cerebrum also seem to be
those animals which are most able to take advantage of opportunities for
learning. As far as land animals are concerned, human beings have the
most highly developed cerebrum of all. And we are also capable of
learning more than any other land animals.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

179

Insight The reason why the human brain is so folded and grooved is
because it is the surface -- the top few layers of cells -- which does
the actual thinking and processing. The layers underneath are
connections between different parts of the brain. Crumpling the surface
up means you can get more of it into a small space. A dolphin's cerebrum
is even larger and more convoluted than a human being's, but we don't
really know what that implies, since a dolphin's experience is so very
different from ours. Almost from the ﬁrst time that human beings can
co-ordinate their muscles, we are manipulating objects, changing them
and shaping our environments. Although dolphins play with objects, too,
their experience is much more to do with living in and experiencing
their environment: they don't manipulate it as much. That's very
different and it's not at all clear whether we actually have any common
ground for understanding dolphin intelligence. It is apparent to anyone
who works with dolphins that they are intelligent, but it is unlikely
that 'intelligence' means the same thing in a dolphin as it does in
human being. What we do know, though, is that dolphins are very ready to
learn all sorts of things, including entirely novel kinds of behaviour.
Moreover, they give every sign of enjoying doing so. Pryor, Haag and
O'Reilly trained a dolphin to perform a new type of action each day, by
giving her a reward when she did something she hadn't done before. By
the end of the study, the dolphin was producing many entirely new
actions, including tail-walking and back ﬂips, and some actions which
were so elaborate that the researchers found it hard to describe them!
Human learning We can see, then, that when we are talking about animal
learning being shaped by the demands of adaptation to the environment,
we are not just talking about learning simple responses. If an
environment is constantly changing, it makes evolutionary sense to be
prepared for novel kinds of learning. A species which can live in
different environments may need to be able to learn very different

180

behaviours to survive. Human beings live in all kinds of conditions,
from arctic wastes to tropical forests, so it would be inappropriate for
us to be genetically prepared to deal with a particular physical
environment. Instead, we are genetically prepared to interact with and
learn from other human beings, and that's what allows us to survive.
Human learning, then, includes association learning and the basic
survival mechanisms. But it encompasses much more than that. Our
heritage as adaptable social animals means that, as we saw in Chapter 2,
we are engaging in social learning almost from birth: belonging to
social groups is a signiﬁcant motivator for human beings, and 'how to
belong' is one of the most important forms of learning that we do. Our
intrinsic ability to use and develop language means that we are able to
pass on learning culturally, from one generation to another. And we also
have a capacity for abstract thought and reasoning, which results in the
more formal kinds of learning which we will be looking at in the next
chapter. We cannot deny our evolutionary heritage, because it has shaped
our preparedness and our capacity for learning. But it has not shaped
what we actually learn, nor what we do with that learning. In the next
chapter, we will be looking speciﬁcally at human forms of learning, and
at the human capacity we know as intelligence.

8.  Evolution, genetics and learning

181

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 It is useful to study animals in their natural
contexts, because that can help us to understand more about human traits
or abilities. 2 Natural selection happens when environmental
circumstances favour a trait or traits, with the result that those who
possess them are more likely to rear young successfully. 3 Human beings
have evolved as social primates, characterized by an ability to adapt to
widely differing environments through learning. 4 The principle of
biodiversity means that there is no single line of 'progress' in
evolution; just variations which help adaptation. 5 Scientists who see
people as 'determined' by their evolutionary past are ignoring the
adaptive capacity of the human brain. 6 Coevolution is all about how
animals shape environments as well as being shaped by them. 7 Cell
growth is channelled into specialist functioning through information
carried in the DNA of the body's cells. 8 Research into stem cell
therapy shows how the individual's own genetic material can be used to
repair and rebuild damaged organs. 9 The cerebral cortex is the part of
the brain directing most of our learning. It is larger and more folded
in the more 'intelligent' animals, such as dolphins and humans. 10 Human
learning includes the primitive forms of learning, as well as more
complicated and abstract ones.

182

9 Learning and intelligence In this chapter you will learn: • to
identify at least ﬁve different ways in which we can learn • about the
possible uses of intelligence testing • why it is misleading to take
about 'intelligence' as an ability. Human beings learn all the time.
Indeed, the amount that we can learn seems to be one of the main things
which distinguishes us from other animals. Not the fact that we can
learn at all -- as we've seen, other animals can also learn, and those
which are closest to us in evolutionary terms can learn a tremendous
amount. But human beings seem to have a greater, and slightly different,
capacity for learning than any of these other animals.

Forms of learning So how, exactly, do we go about doing that learning?
As we've seen, human beings are complex and operate on a number of
different levels. Learning, too, can take place on several different
levels. As human beings, we have several different kinds of learning
available to us, and each kind is appropriate for different aspects of
our experience. In this chapter, we will look at several different
aspects of how people learn, before going on to look at how modern
psychologists see the general abilities and knowledge which we think of
as intelligence.

9.  Learning and intelligence

183

Insight Humans, as highly adaptable animals, have lots of different ways
of learning. We've inherited the primitive mechanisms of early animals,
the more sophisticated ones of higher animals, and also our own social
and cultural ones. It's having all these different learning abilities
together that makes us so special. As we saw in the last chapter, one of
the most basic forms of learning, and one which is shared by other
animals too, is known as association learning. Association learning is
sometimes called conditioning, on the grounds that it is all about
producing a particular response under particular conditions. It isn't
really a 'thinking' type of learning at all. Instead, it is where we
have learned to make an automatic response to some outside event or
stimulus. This response is controlled by the lower parts of the brain,
and sometimes directly by the spinal cord, rather than by the cerebral
cortex, which is the part of the brain concerned with thinking and
decisions. CLASSICAL CONDITIONING There are two main types of
conditioning, known as classical conditioning and operant conditioning.
Classical conditioning, as studied by Ivan Pavlov, is the purest form of
association learning and also seems to be the most primitive kind of
learning of all. Pavlov studied dogs, and showed that their salivary
reﬂex, which they produced automatically when they received food, could
be conditioned to take place when they heard a bell or a buzzer. But
classical conditioning works in human beings, too. One of the best
examples of this was a study conducted by Menzies, in 1937, concerning
the reﬂex which we call vasoconstriction. This is something which the
body does automatically when it is cold. In order to retain heat, the
blood vessels near the surface of the skin shrink, while those in the
middle of the body enlarge. This is why your skin will go paler when you
are cold. It is an automatic reﬂex and one which we can't control
deliberately.

184

Menzies asked research participants to plunge their arms into a bucket
of ice-cold water, and each time they did so, a buzzer sounded. As you
might expect, the cold water produced vasoconstriction. What was even
more interesting, though, was that after a few trials, the
vasoconstriction was also produced when the people heard the buzzer. It
had become conditioned to the sound of the buzzer. We can see, then,
that classical conditioning can work even on responses which we don't
consciously control. Vasoconstriction is an autonomic response -- in
other words, it is controlled by the autonomic nervous system. As we saw
in Chapter 4, many of our emotional reactions are also controlled by the
autonomic nervous system, and this may be why we sometimes ﬁnd that
emotional reactions can be triggered off suddenly by an unexpected event
or situation.

Insight Classical conditioning is the most basic form of learning, and
can be done by almost all animals. It doesn't need a complex brain, just
a primitive nervous system; but it helps any animal to avoid pain or
immediate danger. Treating phobias Certain phobias -- extreme fears
which interfere with a person going about their ordinary life -- seem to
have a lot to do with classical conditioning. They are often formed by a
learned connection between the object and a fear response in the past.
Many people become frightened of spiders or wasps, for instance, because
as small children they see adults responding in a frightened kind of
way, which also frightens the child. One difference, though, between
animal and human learning is the way that human beings use imagination.
Phobias are often kept alive and strengthened by the person imagining
the feared object, and frightening themselves at the thought. Each time
someone does this, they are strengthening the association between fear
and the object, not physically, but in the mind. So conditioning in
people isn't always exactly the same thing as conditioning in animals.

9.  Learning and intelligence

185

Conditioning can also be used to break a phobia, if it is deliberately
used to make new associations with the object. One method for doing this
is called systematic desensitization. In this method, the person
gradually learns to relax in the presence of the object. They begin with
something very indirect and non-threatening, like, say, a picture of the
object, and learn to relax while looking at it. Once they can do this,
they move to a slightly closer stimulus, like a realistic photograph of
the object, and learn to relax again. Since you can't relax and feel
frightened at the same time, what this method does is to replace the
conditioned fear response with a learned relaxation response and, by
doing this, the phobia disappears. Another approach is much more direct.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the fear response is all about getting as much
energy available as possible. So it is very demanding of the body's
resources, and hard for us to keep it up for long. After a while, the
physiological fear reaction dies away and we calm down, even if we are
still in the presence of the thing that we are frightened of. So another
approach to treating phobias, known as implosion therapy, is simply for
the person to be placed in a room with the thing that they are
frightened of until the fear subsides. It may sound unpleasant, but it
works -- and it is much quicker than desensitization methods! OPERANT
CONDITIONING The other main type of association learning is known as
operant conditioning. In this type of conditioning, we learn something
because it is immediately followed by a pleasant effect. That pleasant
effect is sometimes a direct reward. For example, a squirrel will learn
to climb a washing pole to reach a bird-feeding tray and gain the food.
Sometimes, though, the pleasant effect comes from the removal of
something unpleasant. An animal might learn to press a lever in order to
avoid receiving an electric shock; or a schoolgirl might do her homework
purely in order to avoid getting into trouble the next day.

186

Reinforcement These two types of pleasant effect are both known as
reinforcement -- because they reinforce, or strengthen, the behaviour
that we have learned. The kind where we receive a reward is called
positive reinforcement, whereas the kind where we escape from, or avoid,
something unpleasant is known as negative reinforcement. Both positive
and negative reinforcement have to happen immediately after the
particular action which is being learned. Conditioning doesn't work if
they happen later -- if we do learn from delayed rewards, it is a
different type of learning. Sometimes people confuse negative
reinforcement and punishment, but the two are really quite different.
Both positive and negative reinforcement are about training a person or
animal to do something -- they encourage a particular kind of behaviour.
But punishment is about stopping the person or animal from doing
something, not about encouraging them to do something else. It's a bit
confusing, because the threat of punishment can sometimes act as
negative reinforcement, but the punishment itself never does. The
psychologist who became known as the 'father' of operant conditioning,
B. F. Skinner, insisted that punishment was a very bad way of training
children -- or animals, for that matter -- because all it did was to try
to stop them from doing something, but it didn't give them any idea of
what they ought to be doing instead. Skinner believed it was better to
train children using operant conditioning, because that way they were
rewarded for doing the right thing, and so encouraged to act correctly.

Insight Operant conditioning, in its essence, is learning by the effects
of actions: whether their effects are pleasant or not. Most animals can
do this, but some are better at it than others. Training autistic
children Operant conditioning has been used in a number of different
ways, including training severely autistic children to talk by rewarding
them for making noises, and then words, using rewards of pieces of
fruit.

9.  Learning and intelligence

187

Many of these methods used the principle of behaviour shaping, which
allows us to use operant conditioning to produce entirely new types of
actions. In behaviour shaping, a new action is trained by gradually
changing what needs to be done to earn the reward. For example, at the
beginning of training, if an autistic child who is normally silent makes
a noise, that would be enough to earn a reward. After a while, the child
makes noises more often. Once the child is making noises, the
psychologist or parent rewards them only when they make noises which
sound a little like words. Once they have learned that, then they are
rewarded only for making proper words. Eventually, the rewards 'shape'
the child's behaviour until it is saying proper words, even though at
ﬁrst it was unable to speak. Of course, we don't have to produce a
reward every time. In fact, learning is generally stronger if the reward
comes only now and again. This is known as partial reinforcement. People
who play fruit machines are a classic example of how human behaviour can
be manipulated by partial reinforcement: they will often play for hours
(if they can afford it), only receiving a reward now and again. Computer
games don't give money rewards, but they do give a strong sense of
achievement when we get a bit further each time. Their programmes are
carefully calculated to make sure that we get enough rewards to continue
playing with the machine. Conditioning and society In 1972, Skinner went
on to argue that society as a whole should develop systematic ways of
conditioning people into behaving appropriately. People are always
conditioned by the reinforcements around them, he argued, but these
reinforcements act in a random, haphazard manner. If society were to
take control of these reinforcements, it would be better than the
random, unplanned approach, because then people would be trained to meet
society's needs, and wouldn't act in antisocial ways. As you might
imagine, this caused a considerable amount of debate. The real core of
the argument was that Skinner, along with many of the other
behaviourists, believed that all human learning and

188

personality came from conditioning. His book was called Beyond Freedom
and Dignity, because he was arguing there was no such thing as 'freedom'
or 'dignity' -- they were just an illusion, and all human behaviour was
really shaped by conditioning. Even language, Skinner argued, was only
'verbal behaviour', and had developed simply through conditioning and
association. Other psychologists and people from other professions too,
disagreed. They argued that people do have free will and are able to
make real choices. Skinner's reductionist argument was claiming that
everything could be reduced to stimulus-response learning. But there are
other ways that human beings learn and interact as well: being human
includes responding to conditioning, but it is much more than that.
There are other levels of learning, and as adaptable social animals, we
do a great deal of learning directly from other people.

Social learning From its very earliest days, a young infant is learning
to handle its world. At ﬁrst, that consists mainly of learning to
control its body movements, and to make sense of the information which
it is receiving through its senses. But as we saw in Chapter 2, human
infants are predisposed to react most strongly to other people, and
learning from others is an important part of how the infant continues to
develop. Its knowledge of its world, and its competence in handling it
become more sophisticated and continue to develop throughout childhood.
This applies to the infant's social world just as much as it does to the
physical world. The young child's sociability means that human beings
are a major factor in the child's early learning.

Insight Early learning for all young animals, including humans, is all
about becoming competent in dealing with the demands of their particular
world. So the learning that they can do in infancy is carefully tailored
to what they need to survive.

9.  Learning and intelligence

189

This links with another very fundamental ability which the human infant
has -- that of adaptation. A human infant is able to adapt to a
tremendous range of physical environments, child-rearing practices and
diet. As long as it has a good quality of social interaction, and
adequate physical care, an infant is able to adapt and develop. And as a
result of this, human beings are found living successfully in nearly
every part of the world. Transactions and contingencies What enables the
infant to adapt so well is its ability to learn. Infants are strongly
predisposed to learn -- indeed, that is what the large human brain is
all about. Some scientists argue that the reason our babies are so
helpless by comparison with other animals is because they are born
prematurely, to allow the brain to continue growing outside the womb. It
wouldn't be possible for the brain to reach a comparable level of
maturity to other animals before birth, because that would make the
brain much too large for the birth process. Whatever the reason, part of
the infant's predisposition to learn involves responding very strongly
to certain types of events, such as transactions. Transactions are
social exchanges between people, and babies are particularly fascinated
by activities which allow them to create exchanges with people, such as
turn-taking games or being talked to and responding in some way.
Transactions are a very important way that the young infant learns about
its social world, and acquires the basis for social interaction in later
life. Another very special mechanism of learning for the infant consists
of learning about contingencies. Contingencies are events which happen
as a result of a particular action or activity. For example, making a
car move along a road is contingent on starting the engine; winning the
jackpot on a fruit machine is contingent on putting in money and pulling
the handle. Just as infants are particularly interested in other people,
so they are also particularly responsive to contingencies. If they can
make something happen by, say, hitting it, they will do so over and over
again.

190

This is the reason why babies like rattles and other things they can do
to produce a noise. When the baby discovers that waving its hand around
causes a rattle to make a sound, it explores that effect and continues
to practise it over and over again. In this way, it gradually gains
control over the situation. Infants become fascinated when they ﬁnd that
they can do something which makes something else happen, and this is the
basis for many infant toys -- and also games that they play with adults.
Their interest also means that they will continue to try to master the
skill. So human beings are strongly predisposed to learn from
contingencies: it is an important basis for skill learning. Discrepancy
Infants also become very interested when things are different from what
they expect. Not if everything is totally new, of course -- then they
are simply bewildered. But moderate amounts of discrepancy between what
they expect and what actually happens is something that fascinates
infants, and this, too, is the foundation for further learning. Learning
about the world also involves learning what to expect under different
circumstances. As the infant continues to develop, its environment will
broaden and so will its range of experience. We all learn most when the
results of something are not quite the same as they have been in the
past. Of course, it is only moderate discrepancies which are helpful to
the child's learning. If everything suddenly changes, then all the
child's carefully acquired competence in dealing with its environment
has been lost, which doesn't help it much. But some discrepancy is very
good, even for relatively young children. For example, if an infant is
staying with a grandparent or other relative, many aspects of its daily
routine will be the same, but some will be different. Those differences
allow the child to explore new contingencies and transactions and so
help it to broaden its understanding of the world. Schemas One of the
reasons discrepancies are important is because they help the child to
build up its store of knowledge. The child

9.  Learning and intelligence

191

psychologist Jean Piaget argued that knowledge development in children
happens through the formation of schemas -- cognitive structures which
store information. This isn't just information about the outside world.
It also includes information about plans, intentions, and what is the
right thing to do in certain situations. Adults use schemas too, and we
will look at how they develop them later in this chapter. The very ﬁrst
schema that an infant develops, Piaget believed, is the body schema --
the idea that some parts of the world are 'me' while others are
'not-me'. This distinction, he believed, is originally enough to
encompass everything that is important about the young infant's
experience. But gradually, as the infant becomes more aware of its
world, its experience becomes more differentiated, and its 'not-me'
schema begins to expand and divide into different areas. One of the ﬁrst
of these is the differentiation between the physical environment and
other people -- we have already seen how the young infant responds
differently to other people than it does to the things around it, and
this suggests that it may be using different schemas. Developing
competence All of these mechanisms work together to help the young
infant, and later the child, to develop competence in its dealings with
the world. Perhaps the most important principle of child-rearing, in
psychological terms, is that child development should be a continuous
process of developing competence and effectiveness, in dealing with
whatever happens. We have already seen how feeling helpless is stressful
to human beings. Feeling competent is the opposite: when we feel that we
can deal with our world adequately, we thrive, both mentally and
physically. As we saw in Chapter 6, when we feel competent we are more
likely to cope with problems, to make efforts to overcome difﬁculties,
and to be successful in the end. So a child who has been brought up to
interact competently in its world -- who has experienced appropriate
transactions and contingencies, and enough discrepancy to keep
stimulating its interest in learning

192

more -- is a child who is better equipped to deal with the problems and
disappointments which it may encounter in later life than one who has
not had those experiences. Many of the damaging effects of the
experience of refugee children, those who have suffered abuse from
adults whom they trusted, and others with different traumatic
experiences, originate with the sense of helplessness and total lack of
control as the child's safe, secure world is torn apart. There are other
sources of psychological damage in those situations as well, of course.
But it takes a great deal of love, safety and help before a child -- or
an adult for that matter -- is likely to feel secure and competent
enough to begin a personal and emotional recovery. CHILDHOOD LEARNING In
Chapter 3, we looked at how people use social scripts to help clarify
and direct social interaction. Much of what children learn as they grow
up involves developing those scripts, and broadening their understanding
of what counts as appropriate behaviour in different situations.
Children pick up social scripts from their families, their school
experiences, and through books and TV -- which is one reason for concern
about the content of the TV that a child watches. We will be looking at
this more closely in Chapter 13. But children also learn from imitating
other people, and this too is an area which has been studied by
psychologists. Imitation and modelling The most important of those
psychologists was Albert Bandura. Bandura was particularly interested in
how we learn by imitating others. Imitation is an important form of
learning because it is a kind of shortcut. If we learned everything
through operant and classical conditioning, we would have to do
everything by trial and error -- doing it, and seeing what the
consequences are. But life is too short for that. Using imitation we can
learn much more quickly.

9.  Learning and intelligence

193

Bandura performed a number of studies showing how people learn through
imitation, and whom they are most likely to imitate. In one well-known
study by Bandura and Walters, young children saw someone in a playroom
with a lot of toys. The person was acting aggressively towards a bobo
doll -- a kind of doll which rocks backwards and forwards when it is
hit. Some of the children saw the scene in real life, some saw it on
ﬁlm, and some saw a cartoon version. After they had seen this, they were
then let into the same playroom and left to play with the toys. After a
while, the experimenters came in and removed the toys that the children
were playing with. This was to make the children feel aggrieved and
frustrated, so that they would be more likely to act aggressively. Then
they observed how the children acted. Table 9.1 shows the average number
of aggressive actions towards the bobo doll which children made during
the next 20 minutes. As you can see, those children who hadn't seen
anyone acting aggressively didn't make as many aggressive acts as those
who had seen aggression being modelled. Table 9.1 Aggressive acts
performed towards a bobo doll. Situation Real-life model Filmed model
Cartoon model Model playing unaggressively with toys

Average number of aggressive acts 83 92 99 54 (adapted from Bandura and
Walters, 1963)

When the children's actions were analysed more carefully, so that the
researchers could tell which actions were speciﬁc copies of what the
model had done, Bandura and Walters found that it was the real-life
model which was copied most closely. In other studies, Bandura found
that children were most likely to imitate models like themselves --
other children in preference to adults, people of the same gender, and
so on. They also were more likely to imitate people that they admired.

194

Insight Imitation learning is more sophisticated than conditioning,
because it involves whole sequences of behaviour and a certain amount of
memory as well. But imitation allows us to learn what to do much more
efﬁciently than by the trial and error involved in conditioning. Latent
learning The most important ﬁnding of all, at least as far as psychology
was concerned, was that what the children had learned from the model
didn't necessarily show up straight away. It remained latent, until it
was needed. A child could see someone acting aggressively, and not seem
to copy it at all. But later, if the child was in a situation where
acting aggressively looked as though it would be useful, the child would
act out the behaviour it had learned. Children store what they have
learned, and only use it when the time seems right. This is an important
ﬁnding for two reasons. The ﬁrst, of course, is what it suggests to us
about the inﬂuence of violence on TV, and we will be looking at that a
bit more closely in Chapter 13. But it is also important in terms of our
general understanding of how learning happens. Skinner and the other
behaviourists saw learning as an immediate change in behaviour. But
Bandura showed that we can learn things even if we don't change our
behaviour straight away. We can store our experience and use it later.
COGNITIVE LEARNING In fact, Bandura wasn't the only person to have shown
how we store our experience for later use. As early as 1932, Tolman had
shown how experimental animals can develop cognitive maps, so that they
have a mental image of what a maze looks like. Tolman gave a set of rats
the opportunity to explore a complicated maze. If they were just put in
the maze, they would just wander around. But then, if they were put in
the maze and given a reward for getting out of it quickly, they would
make their way straight to the exit point. This showed that they could
use what they had learned from their explorations.

9.  Learning and intelligence

195

Human beings use cognitive maps too. Learning our way around somewhere
new is often a matter of joining up apparently disconnected places,
until we have a mental map which makes sense to us. We organize our
cognitive maps in terms of landmarks, such as special buildings that we
have particularly noticed. Often, too, we have only a vague idea of the
distances between these landmarks. Briggs (1971) found that we
underestimate familiar distances, so they seem shorter. But we
overestimate distances that we don't know very well. This is why, when
you go somewhere new, distances often seem very large; but they shrink
as you get to know the place. Imitation and cognitive maps are both
cognitive forms of learning, in that they involve remembering and
thinking rather than just linking a stimulus with a response. There are
other types of cognitive learning too. One of these is known as insight
learning. In this, we learn something new by suddenly understanding its
underlying principles. We might solve a maths problem, for instance, by
getting a sudden insight into how we should reach the solution -- why
the problem is like it is. Animals can show insight learning too. In
1925, Köhler reported a study with a number of different chimpanzees.
One of them, Sultan, was particularly good at insight learning. He would
be given problems to solve, such as reaching a piece of fruit hanging
high above his head out of reach. A number of boxes would be scattered
about in his cage. In one typical trial, Sultan dragged a box under the
fruit and tried to reach it but it was still out of reach. After a few
unsuccessful jumps, he would seem to give up. But then, suddenly, he
would go to the other boxes and begin to pile them up until they were
high enough for him to reach the fruit. He had solved the problem by
getting an insight into what he needed to do. Learning sets Some
researchers argued that the chimpanzees in Köhler's study weren't
actually thinking at all. Rather, they had simply learned

196

from a lot of experience with trial and error learning. Harlow (1949)
showed that monkeys could develop what he called learning sets -- a
readiness to solve a particular type of problem, rather than just learn
a single answer. By rewarding a monkey with a raisin or a peanut each
time it solved an odd-one-out problem, Harlow showed that the monkey
could learn to look for the odd one, instead of just choosing the object
which had hidden the reward on the last occasion. Harlow took this as
evidence that simple trial-and-error learning was all that an animal
really needed to produce what seemed to be insight. But it can just as
well be taken as evidence that animals, too, can develop concepts. It
would be very difﬁcult to draw a clear line between a learning set and
the type of stored experience which we call a schema. Schemas A schema
is a whole set of knowledge or experience which we use in particular
situations. Schemas are an important way that human beings learn. We ﬁt
new experiences into what we already know and try to make sense of them
that way. Sometimes, we are successful, and the new experience ﬁts into
our existing schemas, without anything needing to change much. That
learning process is known as assimilation -- where an existing schema is
applied to a new situation. Sometimes, though, our new experience
doesn't ﬁt into our previous schemas very well. When this happens, the
schema has to change, as it adjusts itself to the new information. This
is known as accommodation. Some psychologists and educationalists see
accommodation as being the basis of all cognitive learning: we develop
our understanding by extending and adjusting our existing ideas. SKILL
LEARNING Not all types of learning are to do with absorbing new
information though. A great deal of the learning that we do is concerned
with

9.  Learning and intelligence

197

learning skills -- both physical skills and mental ones. And one of the
main features of skill learning is that if we are skilled at doing
something, we don't think about it. It just comes easily to us.

Insight A lot of childhood is about learning the basic physical skills
so well that we don't have to think about them. It begins with essential
actions like reaching out and taking hold of things, and gets
progressively more sophisticated as we get older and our lives become
more complicated. Whether we think about what we are doing or not is
what distinguishes experts from learners. A skilled skater doesn't think
about balancing his body, but someone new to skating thinks about it all
the time. A ﬂuent reader doesn't have to look at each word in a
sentence: instead, she usually looks directly only at one or two words
in the middle of the sentence, and recognizes the others instantly by
their shape. Someone who isn't very good at reading, though, has to read
every single word. A skilled driver doesn't have to think what to do
when changing gears to turn a corner, but a learner tries to remember
everything at once and often gets very ﬂustered as a result.
Automatizing actions All of these skills are different, but they all
have one thing in common. That is, that the individual units of the
skill have become automatized. The person does them automatically,
without thinking about it. Because they don't have to think about
speciﬁc actions, this leaves the person free to concentrate on other
aspects of what they are doing -- such as thinking about their complete
performance in a skating exhibition, or the meaning of the story they
are reading, or the best route to take. An action which has been
automatized is actually controlled by a different part of the brain than
an action which we have to think about. The cerebrum is the part of the
brain which we think with. It also has areas which receive information
from our senses, including the body; and it has an area which is used
for deliberate

198

movement -- when we consciously decide to move a particular part of the
body. This area is known as the motor area and, as you can see from
Figure 9.1, it is on the top of the brain, next to the sensory area
which receives bodily feelings. But the area of the brain which
co-ordinates skilled movements isn't in the cerebrum at all. Instead, it
is an entirely separate part of the brain, known as the cerebellum. The
cerebellum is still concerned with deliberate movements, but it
co-ordinates all the little actions which are involved so that they
happen smoothly. If you decide to take a drink from a cup, for example,
you don't think about reaching out, closing your ﬁngers around the cup,
and so on. All you think, if you think about it at all, is that you'd
like a drink. The cerebellum co-ordinates all the actions needed to make
that happen. When a set of actions becomes automatized, control moves
from the cerebrum to the cerebellum. A learner driver coming up to a
corner has to think about the actions needed for signalling, Motor area
Sensory area

Cerebrum

Auditory area

Olfactory area

Visual area Brain stem Cerebellum Spinal cord

Figure 9.1 Areas of the brain.

9.  Learning and intelligence

199

braking, changing gear, turning the wheel and looking out for other
trafﬁc all at the same time, because these actions are all single,
conscious ones being controlled by the cerebrum. We become ﬂustered
because it's a lot to think about all at once. But as we get more
practised, the physical actions gradually weld themselves into a ﬂuent
unit, which is controlled by the cerebellum. This leaves the cerebrum
free, so it can concentrate on looking out for other trafﬁc, and can be
alert for anything unexpected that might happen. Skills become
automatized through practice. The more we do a set of actions, the more
likely we are to link those actions into a complete, ﬂuent movement that
we don't have to think about. We can automatize mental abilities as well
as physical actions: not only reading, but other mental abilities, too,
such as the ability to do arithmetical calculations or to recognize
patterns. With enough practice, people can become ﬂuent in many
different mental skills. And it is generalized mental skills which we
are talking of when we talk about the human quality known as
intelligence.

Insight All skill learning is really about practice and feedback. That
applies just as much to cognitive skills, like writing essays, as it
does to physical skills like playing musical instruments.

Intelligence Intelligence is a difﬁcult thing to deﬁne. Everyone knows
what they mean when they say the word, but it is hard to pin down that
meaning exactly. Perhaps the best deﬁnition anyone has been able to come
up with was from the psychologist, Alice Heim, who said: 'Intelligence
consists of grasping the essentials in a situation and responding
appropriately to them.' It may not be a very speciﬁc deﬁnition, but it
does seem to carry the general meaning which we think of when we think
of intelligence.

200

Psychologists were studying intelligence throughout the twentieth
century, although for the ﬁrst 50 years that research was seriously
distorted by political and social inﬂuences. These distortions occurred
mainly because of some inﬂuential psychologists who believed in
eugenics: the idea that people who were genetically inferior should not
be allowed to reproduce, because they would weaken the species. And they
measured 'inferiority' using intelligence tests, which were often very
culturally biased. It was an old-fashioned idea, stemming partly from a
limited view of evolutionary theory, but mainly from the
nineteenth-century belief that people inherited their abilities and
characters -- and also their position in society -- and that these could
not, and should not, be changed. But it was a vicious idea too. It
formed the ideological basis of several political atrocities, including
the Nazi concentration camps, restricted immigration for certain groups
of people, and compulsory sterilization laws in some American states for
those who did not achieve a certain IQ level. Temperament and potential
Nowadays, most psychologists take a much more positive view of the human
being. We are aware that inheritance provides us with potential -- for
example, that each infant has a different temperament -- but we are also
aware that the potential is shaped and guided by our subsequent
experience. A child who is born with a physically active, ﬁdgety
temperament can develop in many different ways, depending on social
factors. A lot will depend, for example, on whether the family sees that
temperament as a positive thing, so that the child is encouraged to
develop physically active skills and competences. If they see it as a
nuisance, on the other hand, they may try to make the child learn to be
quiet and restrained, which might cause some difﬁculties for the child
and with its relationships with other people. In other words, the same
temperament can develop into very different personality traits depending
on how people respond to it. Also, as we have seen, people continue to
grow and develop

9.  Learning and intelligence

201

psychologically throughout life. So to speak of genetic inﬂuence as if
it were a ﬁxed thing, setting some kind of top limit to our potential,
is an idea which has become increasingly implausible as we have
discovered more about the mechanisms by which people adapt and develop,
throughout adulthood as well as in childhood.

Insight Intelligence is all to do with our ability to appraise
situations and respond appropriately to them. So what we mean by
intelligence varies from one situation to another. Intelligence tests
Psychologists do, however, use intelligence tests sometimes. Not because
they measure the limit of our intelligence (you can get better at
intelligence tests if you practise them) but because they can help us to
know a bit more about that person. Intelligence tests may not tell us
exactly how intelligent someone is, but they do tell us how well
developed certain of their skills are. Some skills -- such as the
ability to comprehend words quickly and accurately -- are skills which
we often need to do a particular type of job. There are two kinds of
intelligence tests: group tests and individual tests. Group tests are
usually pencil and paper tests, which consist of several different
problems that the person has to solve as quickly as possible. Because
they are carried out in conditions a bit like an exam, it is possible
for several people to be tested at once, and they are often used for
selection to courses or career opportunities, such as the civil service.
Individual tests, though, involve a psychologist seeing just one person
and presenting each part of the test to them separately. They consist of
lots of varied tasks, each of which assesses different mental skills,
and so they are often useful for helping to understand people who are
having speciﬁc difﬁculties, perhaps with learning, or sometimes in
coping with their day-to-day lives. But no psychologist nowadays would
see an intelligence test, on its own, as giving enough information to
make a decision about whether somebody was suitable for a job or a
course. Intelligence

202

tests, like other psychometric tests, have to be used along with
interviews and records of achievement: they are not accurate enough to
be the basis for decision-making on their own. THEORIES OF INTELLIGENCE
We actually use the word 'intelligent' to mean a lot of different
things. Sometimes, we are talking about someone who is very quick to
grasp things and make decisions. Sometimes, though, we are talking about
someone who is a 'deep thinker', and can see into problems more deeply
than the rest of us. And sometimes, we are talking about someone who can
be quick-witted and humorous in conversation. Each of these are examples
of what we would think of as intelligence, but they are actually very
different. Intelligence as multiple abilities There are two signiﬁcant
ways of looking at intelligence in modern psychology. One of them is to
look at intelligence as consisting of a number of different abilities.
Gardner (1986) proposed that there isn't a single thing called
intelligence, but that what we are actually referring to is a set of
seven entirely different intelligences. The seven types of intelligence
are listed in Table 9.2. Table 9.2 Gardner's seven intelligences.
Linguistic intelligence

-- to do with language and how we use it.

Musical intelligence

-- to do with musical appreciation as well as performing and composing
music. -- to do with calculation and logical reasoning. -- to do with
art and design, as well as ﬁnding your way around. -- to do with
physical skills, like sport, dancing and other aspects of movement. --
to do with interacting with people socially and sensitively. -- to do
with understanding your own personal self and abilities.

Mathematical-logical intelligence Spatial intelligence Bodily
kinaesthetic intelligence Interpersonal intelligence Intrapersonal
intelligence

9.  Learning and intelligence

203

Each of these types, according to Gardner, is completely separate. Most
people that we would call 'intelligent' have a combination of these
different abilities, but some are particularly good at only one or two,
and not at the others. A musical genius, for instance, will have one
type of intelligence very highly developed, but might be quite ordinary
in other respects. What we call an 'idiot savant' is someone who is well
below average intelligence in most respects, but has one outstanding
ability -- to remember, or to calculate. Gardner's idea of separate
intelligences shows how this may be possible. One problem with Gardner's
approach, though, is that it tends to treat these separate intelligences
as if they just developed within the person, and have nothing to do with
social inﬂuences. Although he drew much of his evidence from the
biographies of high-achieving people, Gardner ignored the social
inﬂuences on them. But people who achieve outstanding ability in any
area have usually had at least one person who believed in them and
encouraged them. Some psychologists believe that this inﬂuence may be
more important than we realize.

Insight Modern psychologists are agreed that intelligence isn't a single
thing, but a combination of lots of different abilities. But different
psychologists have different ideas about which particular abilities are
important. The triarchic theory of intelligence The other way of looking
at intelligence is to see it as nested very ﬁrmly within its social and
cultural context. Sternberg (1986) developed what became known as the
triarchic theory of intelligence. He identiﬁed three different aspects
of intelligence, each of which contributes to how intelligently we
interact with other people. The ﬁrst facet of intelligence is contextual
intelligence. Any intelligent act or ability, Sternberg said, takes
place within a context. It happens in a society and a culture, and that
makes all the difference to how the act or ability is regarded. For
instance,

204

imagine someone who is particularly quick at responding to something
that has been said to them. In one culture, this might be regarded as a
sign of intelligence; but in another culture, it might be seen as a sign
of impulsiveness and lack of thought. A slower, more thoughtful way of
responding would be seen as being more intelligent. So one part of
intelligence is to do with how the person responds to the demands and
expectations of their culture. The second facet of intelligence which
Sternberg identiﬁed is experiential intelligence. In the last chapter,
we saw how experiences and expectations affect the way that we think,
perceive and remember. We also learn from our experiences, and all this
forms a signiﬁcant part of our intelligence. Experience can inﬂuence
intelligence in two ways: ﬁrstly, because of the automatized skills
which we have developed and, secondly, because of the way that it helps
us to recognize the demands of a situation, and what would be the best
thing to do. The third facet of intelligence is the one which is usually
assessed by intelligence tests -- or at least, by modern intelligence
tests. Some of the early ones were very culturally biased, assuming that
anyone who was not familiar with the practices of white American or
English culture was automatically mentally inferior. But modern tests
are much better at assessing what Sternberg called componential
intelligence. Componential intelligence consists of three parts: ﬁrstly,
our ability to learn and acquire knowledge; secondly, how well we
actually carry out a task, such as problem-solving or calculation; and
thirdly, higher mental abilities such as our ability to plan and make
decisions. So each part of componential intelligence contributes to how
well we think and process information. But how we do it is also
inﬂuenced strongly by our own personal experience, and by the cultural
and social setting in which we ﬁnd ourselves. Intelligence isn't
something which just happens in a social vacuum: it is part of social
living. And different societies value different intellectual skills,
which means that what we consider to be 'intelligent' behaviour also
varies.

9.  Learning and intelligence

205

Emotional intelligence Another form of intelligence was described by
Goleman, in 1995. Goleman argued that there was another form of
intelligence which had been completely neglected by other researchers,
and that was all to do with maintaining positive interactions and
relationships with other people. Some people are noticeably better at
this than others. They show more social understanding, are more likely
to spot when someone is distressed or upset, are more diplomatic in how
they say things, and generally more sensitive to social demands. Goleman
argued that these people have higher levels of emotional intelligence,
and that this is another quality which makes a considerable difference
in everyday life. Since Goleman's ﬁrst book, other psychologists too
have been looking at the idea of emotional intelligence. It seems to
consist of a number of different facets: a list produced by Petrides,
Furnham and Frederickson (2004) is summarized in Table 9.3. Researchers
have also shown that people can improve their emotional intelligence
through sensitivity training and other activities, and a number of
training courses have been based on these ideas. As we can see from the
table, the idea of emotional intelligence also links quite closely with
the positive psychology movement which we looked at in Chapter 4. An
adjective, not a noun Inevitably, though, researchers have argued about
how to measure emotional intelligence, and how it should be deﬁned -- as
they do with all other aspects of intelligence. Rose, Kamin and Lewontin
argue that part of the reason why people ﬁnd it so difﬁcult to deﬁne
what intelligence actually is, is because it is an adjective, not a
noun. It isn't a 'thing' which people have, it's more a question of how
we approach things. When we talk of someone being intelligent, what we
really mean is that they are able to do something intelligently. They
have done an intelligent act, or had intelligent thoughts -- in other
words, they have gone about things in a certain way, which is
distinctive. Rose, Kamin and Lewontin question whether intelligence as a
separate 'thing' actually exists at all, in the sense that it is elusive
to deﬁne,

206

Table 9.3 Facets of emotional intelligence. Adaptability Assertiveness
Emotional expression Emotional management Emotional perception Emotion
regulation Low impulsiveness Relationship skills Self-esteem
Self-motivation Social competence Stress management Empathy Happiness
Optimism

ﬂexible and willing to adapt forthright and frank with people able to
communicate feelings to others able to inﬂuence other people's feelings
clear about our own and others' feelings capable of controlling our own
emotions reﬂective, not giving in to immediate urges having fulﬁlling
personal relationships self-conﬁdent and successful persistent in
achieving goals, not giving up easily having good social and networking
skills able to withstand pressure and regulate stress seeing things from
someone else's point of view cheerful and satisﬁed with everyday living
conﬁdent and looking on the bright side of life (adapted from Petrides,
Furnham and Frederickson, 2004)

means different things in different social contexts, and doesn't really
help us to understand what people do or why they are like they are.
Taking all the evidence into account, it is probably more useful if we
think of intelligence in this way, because this means that we are much
more likely to see intelligent actions in their context. We have seen,
then, that human beings can learn in some very different ways. As with
all of the other aspects of psychology in this book, we have only been
able to skim over some of the main areas -- there are other forms of
learning, too, and much more psychological research into these areas
than we have been able to look at here. What is important, though, is to
remember that as human beings, we don't just use one way of learning. We
can learn in a number of different ways, and sometimes even on several
levels at once. 9. Learning and intelligence

207

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Learning is not a single skill, but takes many
different forms. 2 Conditioning is the most basic type of learning,
which is linking a stimulus with a response. 3 Both classical and
operant conditioning can help change some very speciﬁc types of human
behaviour. 4 Infants show the fundamentals of social learning almost
from birth. 5 The infant's readiness to engage in transactions and to
learn from contingencies and discrepancies shows that even from the
earliest days, our capacity to learn from other people is quite
sophisticated. 6 What we learn becomes organized into mental structures
such as schemas, which help us to deal competently with the world. 7
Much of our social learning happens at a cognitive level and doesn't
immediately show in our behaviour. 8 Most of our childhood learning has
to do with developing cognitive and physical skills, through practice
and automatization. 9 Intelligence is difﬁcult to deﬁne, and probably
doesn't exist as a single 'thing'. 10 Modern ideas about intelligence
see it as composed of many different skills.

208

10 Childhood and adolescence In this chapter you will learn: • why
'playing' is so important for human infant development • how children
develop social competence • the four approaches to understanding
adolescence. In the next two chapters, we will be looking at how we
develop throughout our life span. In this chapter, we will look at
childhood and adolescence, and in the next chapter we will look at
adulthood and ageing. Until about the 1980s, developmental psychology
was more or less seen as child psychology, because the entire focus of
interest was on how children develop, and it was assumed that by the
time people were 20 or so, their development was largely over. We know
now, though, that this is completely wrong. People continue to develop
throughout their lives. As ten-year-olds, we are obviously very
different than we are as 20-year-olds; but we are also different at age
20 than we are at age 30; and different again at 40, and so on. So
modern developmental psychology covers the whole life span and not just
the early years of life. But for various reasons, there has been more
psychological research into childhood than any other period of life, so
we will begin by looking at some of the major ﬁndings.

Childhood During the course of this book we have already covered many
different aspects of child development. In Chapter 2, we saw how 10.
Childhood and adolescence

209

Table 10.1 Types of play. Physical play Pretend play Play with words
Play with objects Social play

e.g. running, jumping about, spinning, climbing e.g. imagining
situations, characters, scenes e.g. puns, rhymes, riddles e.g. playing
with toy cars, dolls, household objects e.g. ring o' roses, competitive
games, role-play

the young infant is primed to be sociable, almost from the ﬁrst moment
that it is born. In Chapter 6, we explored the importance of
self-efﬁcacy beliefs for children's learning; and in the last chapter we
saw how children learn through building up their schemas about the world
around them. There are several other examples throughout this book. So,
in this chapter, we will try to bring together some of the main aspects
of childhood, looking in turn at the child's social development,
motivational development, and skill development. But we will begin by
looking at research into children's play. PLAY Playing is one of the
main ways that children learn. Through play, they practise important
skills, broaden their knowledge of the world around them, and, of
course, develop physically. There are several different kinds of play,
and the main ones are listed in Table 10.1. We will look at each of
these in turn.

Insight The different types of children's play reﬂect the very complex
lives we live as adult humans. All of them give children practice in
necessary skills and understanding. Physical play Each of these types of
play serves its own function. Physical play, of course, helps the child
to develop a strong body through exercise, and improves the child's
general physical health. It also encourages the child to develop a clear
body schema, so that it becomes aware of physical capabilities and
develops better co-ordination.

210

Physical conﬁdence isn't everything, of course, but it can be quite an
important source of self-efﬁcacy beliefs, and we have seen how important
those are. Although it's often overlooked in modern Western societies,
or relegated to the limited arena of school sports, physical play sets
an important psychological as well as physical foundation for later
adulthood. Physical play is sometimes a purely individual activity. Most
children will simply enjoy developing the physical skills involved in
swinging on a bar, or clambering around a climbing frame. Indeed, the
urge to climb on things is very powerful in small children, and may
easily represent a strong internal drive to develop our physical skills
to the full. Some physical play, though, is more social. Roughand-tumble
play between children, or between adults and children, is also something
which children evidently enjoy a great deal; and it serves a social as
well as a physical function. Pretend play Pretend play, on the other
hand, is about a different sort of learning. It allows the child to
explore its world and the possibilities which it offers. It is no
accident that children's pretend play usually begins by acting out
simple domestic situations, because the social world is so very
important to children. Pretend play allows the child to practise
different social roles, and to develop an awareness of the wider social
world. Pretend play also encourages the child to develop its
imagination, and many children do this to quite a high degree. It isn't
uncommon, for example, for a child to develop an imaginary playmate who
accompanies the child and becomes the focus for its exploration of the
world. These imaginary playmates may be human, or they may be humanized
animals, such as a lion or a horse. Although parents sometimes worry
when their child begins to talk to someone who isn't there, there is no
evidence at all that it is harmful. Some psychologists have even studied
the number of high-achieving scientists and public ﬁgures who had
imaginary playmates when younger, and have suggested that exercising the
imagination in this way is actually a very positive thing for a child

10. Childhood and adolescence

211

to do. But it is hard to obtain evidence for this idea one way or the
other. Play with words Children also enjoy playing with words. Indeed,
as anyone who has heard a toddler babbling knows, they seem to enjoy
playing with speech sounds before they even have words; and this urge to
experiment continues throughout early childhood. Many children talk
constantly to themselves as they play. This type of talking, known as
egocentric speech, doesn't have much to do with communication. Its main
function is to help the child to think. Vygotsky (1962) argued that when
a child is using egocentric speech it is actually thinking aloud -- the
language is a kind of running commentary on what the child is thinking
about. As the child grows older, this way of using language becomes
internalized -- we think it to ourselves, but don't say it out loud
(unless we have become too used to being on our own). Children also
engage in sociable playing with words. In the late 1960s, Lorna and
Peter Opie went around children's playgrounds collecting the word games
which children used. They collected an enormous set of rhymes, riddles
and puns, and argued that these form a verbal culture, passed on from
child to child. Many of these rhymes are still current nowadays, and the
popularity of these word games implies that they are an important part
of how children learn to interact with one another. They also help
children to develop an understanding of how subtly words can be used. It
doesn't stop with young children, either -- the fascination with
'double-meanings' shown by adolescents who are just learning about sex
is another example of the many different ways that people play with
words.

Insight Playing with words, like other forms of play, doesn't stop at
childhood. Most teenagers go through an age of seeing double meanings in
just about any innocent remark, and adults enjoy puns, crosswords and
many other kinds of word play.

212

Play with objects A great deal of children's play doesn't actually
involve toys at all. But some does, and even from quite a young age, an
infant will play with an object, holding it, sucking it and being
interested in it. Lowe (1975) discussed how play with objects becomes
more sophisticated as the child grows older and its social awareness
develops. Lowe's stages are presented in Table 10.2. Toys which attract
curiosity and interest in children seem to be preferred to toys that are
simple representations of objects. Corinne Hutt suggested that
exploratory play is linked strongly with both mental and emotional
development in children, which suggests that it is a good idea for a
child to have toys which encourage it to explore and to be curious. In
one set of studies, Hutt used a 'supertoy', which was a wooden box with
wheels, buzzers, bells, counters, pedals and levers. Playing with
different combinations of levers and pedals would produce several
different outcomes -- noises would sound and counters would be covered
up or revealed. Children enjoyed playing with the supertoy, and would
play with it for longest if it was set to maximum complexity.

Table 10.2 Stages in playing with objects. Age of child

Activity

9 months 12 months

The child will hold, wave, bang and suck objects. The child looks at
things before sucking, waving, banging them about. Familiar objects are
used as if in everyday life, e.g. 'pretend' drinking from a cup. The
child uses more than one thing together, e.g. 'feeding' a doll from a
toy bowl. The child's play with objects is becoming increasingly
realistic, mirroring everyday life, e.g. driving toy cars along
marked-out 'roads'. The child begins to get toys to 'act' for
themselves, e.g. a doll may put the other toys to bed.

15 months 21 months 24 months

30--36 months

10. Childhood and adolescence

213

Hutt also observed two- to three-year-old children playing with the
supertoy, and then saw the same children four years later. Those
children who had been most interested in exploring the supertoy were
more conﬁdent and more social, and also had higher IQ levels than those
who didn't explore it much. Nobody is suggesting from this that playing
with the supertoy produced these differences, of course. But it does
suggest a strong link between an inclination to explore, and later
development. And this in turn suggests that toys which encourage
exploration and curiosity in children are likely to be of positive
beneﬁt.

Insight Some of the most popular toys for young children are those which
mimic those used by the adults around them. Sometimes, these can shape a
child's preferences to such an extent that the ﬁnal career the child
chooses is directly related to those early favourite toys. Social play
Social play is another category of playing which has been studied by
psychologists, although as we have seen, several of the other kinds of
play are also social at times. Essentially, there are three main kinds
of social play: free play, which is worked out by the children
themselves as they go along; formal play, which has clearly deﬁned rules
and procedures, such as skipping games or card games; and creative play
in which children develop a new game together, perhaps involving
imaginary characters or entirely new rules. Early research into
children's play tended to focus on children in playgroups, and so was
all to do with how children of the same ages played together. But of
course most social play actually takes place between members of the same
family -- brothers, sisters, parents and other relatives -- that is,
between people of different ages. Cohen (1987) used diary methods to
record the play of his two young sons within the family, and found that
even from a very early age, children would initiate different favourite
games with different members of the family.

214

Garvey (1977) showed that when pre-school children are left to play with
someone of the same age, they often begin a kind of dramatic play,
involving familiar scenes and stories. Younger children, for example,
often play games about mothers taking care of babies; while older
children are more likely to play games which reﬂect their growing
awareness of a wider context, like doctor--nurse games or acting out
fairy stories. We can see, then, that children's play is quite varied,
and can take many different forms. Through playing, children develop
skills and engage in exercising both their mental and physical muscles
in preparation for adult life. What is very striking, though, is how
much of children's play is social in character. Even if a child is not
actually interacting with other people directly, it is often rehearsing
social roles or expressing its social awareness as it interacts with
toys. The psychological study of play, like so many other aspects of
psychology, shows us just how powerfully we are inﬂuenced by other
people and our social worlds. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT Children develop
socially in other ways too. Young children do a great deal of watching
and learning from the adults around them, and from the scenes they see
portrayed on TV or in other contexts. We saw in the last chapter how
important imitation and modelling are in the child's learning, and much
of that focuses on the scripts and social schemas which are acted out in
front of the child. Children learn about social ways of expressing
emotions, ways of dealing with situations, and also different ways of
interacting with others. In the middle of the twentieth century,
psychologists tended to believe that a child's developing understanding
of its world occurred simply as a result of interacting with things --
people or objects, it didn't matter which. The child would build up its
schemas through assimilation and accommodation (see Chapter 9), and
gradually become capable of formal abstract thinking as it matured.
These ideas were based on the thinking of the famous Swiss psychologist,

10. Childhood and adolescence

215

Jean Piaget. But in the last 20 years of the twentieth century,
psychologists came to realize that Piaget had underestimated the power
of social inﬂuences on children and, as a result, had failed to realize
how sophisticated even a young child's thinking can become. Developing
social competence In the 1980s, a group of researchers based at
Cambridge University carried out a large-scale ethological study of
young children in their families. They explored how small children
interact at home, and found that in this context, children are far more
socially competent than they had thought. Dunn (1988) argued that the
play, humour, emotions and conﬂicts of family life are part of the way a
child learns. The child doesn't just pick up what it is supposed to do
from praise or punishment -- it takes part, actively, in a series of
dynamic and emotional exchanges. Some of those exchanges consisted of
teasing older brothers or sisters. Dunn found that children often
deliberately provoke their siblings, sometimes to the point of tears.
Every family is different, and some families quarrel more than others;
but teasing is a very common activity among pre-school children, and one
which they become more sophisticated at as they grow older. Up until the
age of about two, the child tends only to tease its older or younger
siblings; but from age two onwards, it is just as likely to tease its
mother -- often by deliberately beginning to do something forbidden
while she is watching, and seeing how she reacts. Children don't just
tease though, they also comfort their siblings, and even their parents,
when they are upset. Even children as young as two years old will
respond to a brother or sister's distress, and try to comfort him or her
by offering toys or stroking. Comforting was particularly evident among
the older pre-school children in Dunn's study. By 14 months or so,
younger children will also comfort their older brothers and sisters when
they are upset, or their parents when they have accidents or minor
upsets.

216

Insight Dealing with teasing and frustration when interacting with other
children gives us the social learning that we need to deal
constructively with irritating people or difﬁcult social situations in
adult life. By and large, a child becomes fully aware of other people as
independent individuals, with minds and feelings of their own, round
about the age of three and a half. This awareness is the basis for
empathy, social responsibility and all sorts of other qualities which
are such an important part of belonging to society -- and we acquire it
far earlier in life than researchers used to think. Dunn identiﬁed four
features of social competence which young children evidently possess and
which imply that they are far more competent than people often assume.
These four features are listed in Table 10.3. There is, of course, much
more to the child's social cognitive development than this, but the
information that researchers have gained from studying children's social
competence has told us a great deal about what we can normally expect
from a child, at what age.

Table 10.3 Developing social competence. Understanding others' feelings
Understanding others' goals Understanding social rules Developing a
theory of mind

'Tuning in' to the moods of others, and responding to distress,
amusement and other emotions. Developing an awareness of other people's
intentions and personal plans. What is and is not permitted, when rules
will or won't apply, the idea of responsibility, and the use of excusing
and justiﬁcations. Understanding that other people have minds of their
own and may know or not know things that the child knows. (adapted from
Dunn, 1988)

10. Childhood and adolescence

217

Social inﬂuence Children continue to develop throughout their childhood,
and later childhood is an important period for the formation of
friendships, physical and linguistic competences, and all sorts of other
abilities. But that learning doesn't happen in a vacuum. It is
structured by school, by parenting, and by other social interactions
that the child experiences. The Russian child psychologist, Vygotsky,
emphasized the importance of other people in the child's cognitive
development, and argued that their inﬂuence is essential if a child is
to realize its full cognitive potential. The zone of proximal
development, according to Vygotsky, is that part of the child's
potential which the child is able to achieve with structure and guidance
from others. This is far greater than a child can manage on its own, as
parents and teachers know intuitively. It includes abstract thinking,
reasoning, problem-solving, complex language use and the development of
sophisticated memorizing. All of these are cognitive abilities which are
brought on and developed by the child's school and family experiences --
the informal teaching which happens in families, schools and
neighbourhoods is just as important for the child's cognitive
development as formal teaching in school. Both of them contribute to the
child's increasing ability to handle sophisticated ideas and abstract
thinking as it becomes older; and they are both important in the child's
socialization -- that is, in the way that the child becomes able to take
full part in its culture and society.

Insight Vygotsky showed how children need adults to bring on and shape
their learning. But the most important inﬂuences don't always come from
the parents: many successful adults were strongly inﬂuenced as children
by a teacher or family friend who encouraged their interests.
MOTIVATIONAL DEVELOPMENT How far the child does participate, and how far
it takes advantage of the educational and social learning opportunities
which others

218

can provide, depends very much on how the child is motivated. In Chapter
2, we saw how important the expectations of other people can be for
children. Rosenthal and Jacobsen showed how simply expecting a child to
do well made an enormous difference to how well they actually did. The
adults unconsciously transmitted their expectations to the children, and
the children lived up to what was expected of them. There are many other
aspects of teaching and learning in which interpersonal relationships
and social interactions are extremely important. Achievement motivation
For example, as any teacher will tell you, some children seem to have a
much stronger need for achievement than others. These children often
learn well, because success is important to them and so they put a great
deal of effort into studying. They aren't the only children who learn
well, of course, some others do it purely because they are interested in
what they are learning. But it is helpful for children to have a
reasonably high level of achievement motivation, because this will see
them through temporary difﬁculties and setbacks as they come to terms
with new things. In one early study, Rosen and D'Andrade showed that
achievement motivation seems to have a great deal to do with the way
that parents interact with their children. In one of their studies, they
gave a child a difﬁcult task to do, while its parents were watching. The
child was blindfolded and asked to build a tower, as high as possible,
out of building bricks. The researchers took note of how hard the child
tried to do this -- how much effort was put in to getting the tower as
high as possible -- on the grounds that this would give them some idea
of the child's general level of achievement motivation. Rosen and
D'Andrade also observed the parents closely, while the child was trying
to complete the task. They found that those children with the highest
level of achievement motivation had parents who consistently gave them
praise and encouragement. Their parents also had quite high expectations
-- they anticipated that their child would do quite well in the task,
and the children often lived up to those expectations. Parents of
children who had

10. Childhood and adolescence

219

low achievement motivation, though, didn't expect their children to
achieve very much, and didn't particularly encourage them either.

Insight Encouragement and merited praise are much more effective than
material rewards in motivating children to do well. It's another example
of how important social inﬂuences are in human development. Self-efﬁcacy
Psychologists of that time tended to think of achievement motivation as
a general trait, which would be roughly the same for anything the child
encountered. Nowadays, many psychologists see achievement motivation as
being linked with self-efﬁcacy beliefs -- our personal beliefs about how
effective we can be (see Chapter 6). Since our self-efﬁcacy beliefs
vary, depending on which type of activity they are concerned with, this
means that achievement motivation, too, can be variable. For example,
someone might have very high self-efﬁcacy beliefs when it comes to maths
-- they know they can do it, and so they try hard in maths lessons and
are successful in exams. The same person, however, might have much lower
self-efﬁcacy beliefs when it comes to learning history. If they have low
self-efﬁcacy beliefs for history, then they are less likely to put in
the effort that is needed to master the subject and pass the exams. But
self-efﬁcacy beliefs are not ﬁxed. They can be changed by experience. As
we saw in Chapter 2, experiencing repeated failure often leads to
learned helplessness, and giving up. But if we have the experience of
learning effectively, and realize that we are able to do so competently,
our self-efﬁcacy beliefs rise, and we are more likely to work harder. So
a successful teacher, in this respect, is one who makes sure that
students experience success from time to time, and also see that success
is a result of their own efforts. This raises their self-efﬁcacy
beliefs, and provides them with the motivation to work at the subject,
achieving things competently.

220

In the ﬁrst part of the twentieth century, the assumption was that
children would learn simply as a result of their exposure to the world
-- and this is true. But the extent and nature of that learning depends
on the social experiences of the child as well, which is why good
schools encourage the child through personal contact and structured
experiences (while also having high expectations that the child can live
up to). Even children who may have little encouragement at home can use
such a school's opportunities to develop, if the school experience is a
positive one. But boring or negative experiences in school can do a
great deal of damage, because the child comes to believe that it is not
really capable of learning much, so there is no point trying. For many
psychologists, and good teachers too, self-efﬁcacy beliefs are at the
core of the child's educational development.

Insight Children need to be able to have conﬁdence in their abilities to
tackle even unknown challenges. Developing positive self-efﬁcacy beliefs
as we grow up is an important part of becoming a psychologically
healthy, balanced adult. SKILL DEVELOPMENT We have seen already how
children's play helps them to develop skills which they will use in
later life. Skills can take many different forms, but whether they are
physical, mental or social, the actual way they develop is very similar
-- through practice and feedback. In Chapter 13, we will be looking in
more detail at this, in terms of how sports psychologists use their
knowledge of skill development to enhance sporting performance among
athletes. But all human beings develop skills, whether they be in
cooking, driving, arithmetic or animal care. And it is practice, as they
say, that makes perfect. We saw earlier how different types of play
encourage the child to develop physical skills. For most children, their
experiences are carefully graduated so that new skills build on their
existing competences, and also provide the foundation for later ones.
So, for example, the early years of primary school tend to have many

10. Childhood and adolescence

221

activities emphasizing hand-eye co-ordination. As the child grows older,
what is required of the child in this respect becomes more subtle, as
the child becomes more capable -- learning to write develops an emphasis
on good handwriting; artwork trains the child in representational
drawing and management of colour; physical activities become structured
physical sports, and so on -- all part of Vygotsky's zone of proximal
development, in which the child's abilities are reﬁned and brought on by
adult contact.

Insight Skills with words and logical thinking are just as important in
childhood development as learning physical skills. Like all other
skills, they develop with practice and feedback, which is something that
comes from families as well as schools. Schema development The great
child psychologist Jean Piaget developed a theory of the child's
cognitive development, which detailed the mental skills which children
acquire at different stages in their development. Piaget believed that
young children are fundamentally egocentric -- that is, they are
entirely driven by their own experiences, and are unable to
conceptualize abstract concepts, or ideas outside of their own
experience. This egocentricity reduces gradually through childhood, as
the child develops cognitive schemas which it uses to make sense of the
world. Schemas are mental structures which organize the child's
knowledge, and they grow and develop from each other. As we've already
seen, the very ﬁrst experiences of the world become gradually organized
by the young infant into 'me' and 'not-me' -- the beginnings of the
body-schema. As the child grows, these schemas develop and become more
sophisticated through the two processes of assimilation, in which new
experiences are absorbed into the schema so that it can be used more
widely; and accommodation, in which the schema itself is stretched, or
even divided, to ﬁt the new experiences. In this way, schemas grow and
multiply, eventually giving the child a ﬁrm cognitive base to use when
making sense of things, and also to use when performing what Piaget
called operations on

222

the environment. An operation may be a thought, a remark, or an
activity, but its important characteristic is that the child is using
its knowledge to do something -- to answer a question, or perform a
task. Piaget also believed that children only became capable of certain
kinds of operations when they reached certain cognitive stages, which
are listed in Table 10.4. Table 10.4 Piagetian stages. Stage

Age (approx)

Description

The sensorimotor stage

0--2 years

The preoperational stage

2--7 years

The concrete operational stage The formal operational stage

7--11 years

Learning to organize and interpret sensory information and to
co-ordinate motor activity. Beginning to reduce egocentricity, but can
only take account of one feature at a time in conservation problems, and
is unable to decentre. Able to undertake adult-style cognitive
operations; but only with real-world targets. The child is now fully
decentred, and can undertake abstract reasoning and perform logical
operations.

11+

There has been a great deal of controversy about Piaget's stages -- many
psychologists nowadays feel that they over-simpliﬁed what the child was
capable of, and also ignored the child's social competences. As we have
already seen, in the last chapter and in this one, children are a lot
more sophisticated socially than people used to think. Piaget's theory
also didn't really take account of how systematic training by adults
could inﬂuence how the child's mind developed. In recent years there
have been many examples of how an enriched environment can help a child
to develop its schemas more effectively, and how early learning
programmes can bring on a child's mental development. 10. Childhood and
adolescence

223

One of the main problems was Piaget's insistence that children were
simply not capable of certain kinds of operations until certain ages.
Many researchers since have shown that the tasks which Piaget used were
only difﬁcult for children because they were taken out of context and
presented in an abstract way. If they are presented differently -- for
example, by putting them in a familiar context and making the task into
a game -- children can deal with even quite complex matters. The
important thing is to start with what the child already knows, and make
sure that any new learning serves to extend and develop the schemas that
the child already has. When we do this, we ﬁnd that children's mental
development isn't nearly as limited as the Piagetian stages would imply.
The idea of the schema, though, is very useful. It helps us to see how
the child builds up its knowledge, and also becomes more skilled at
applying it in different contexts. In Chapter 3 we saw how important
social scripts are for our understanding of our social worlds. These,
too, are types of schema which help us to understand the world.
Throughout childhood -- and adulthood too for that matter -- we pick up
social scripts and apply them to make sense of what is around us. And we
use them to work out how we 'ought' to behave in different situations.
We will be coming back to this idea in Chapter 13, when we look at the
inﬂuence of TV. DEVELOPING PERSONAL CONSTRUCTS Other types of schema
concern the way that we understand other people. As we grow older, our
unique store of experience leads us to develop our own ideas about what
people are like. These ideas are known as personal constructs (see
Chapter 6) and are the individual theories and ideas about the world
that we develop from our personal experiences, and apply to new
situations. Driver (1983) showed how these can be extremely important
when people are trying to understand information at school. If our own
personal understanding of the world doesn't ﬁt in with what we are
supposed to learn, then we will absorb only part of what we are
learning. We will adjust the information so it ﬁts with our own personal
construct system.

224

This, Driver argued, is the source of most of the common factual errors
which schoolchildren -- and adults -- make. She looked at children's
everyday understanding of scientiﬁc ideas, such as heat or falling
(gravity), and showed that if we develop knowledge of these things
purely from our own experience, then the conclusions we come to are not
the same as those developed by physicists. By the time children learn
about these things in school, they have had plenty of time to develop
their own theories and ideas about how the world works. As the children
try to understand what they are learning, these theories get in the way.
Driver showed how understanding how students develop and apply their own
personal construct systems to what they are learning can help teachers
to teach more effectively. Mistakes don't come from stupidity, or an
unwillingness to learn, but from applying the wrong kind of ideas to
what they are supposed to be learning. Understanding this helps teachers
to know what kind of explanations will be needed and why some students
are having difﬁculty.

Insight Children, as well as adults, are always trying to make sense of
their experiences. Schemas and personal constructs are how we go about
this, and many of the amusing explanations given by children arise
because of the personal constructs which they have developed as part of
making sense of their worlds. Social skills The most fundamental of all
human skills are social skills. As we have already seen, even a very
young infant will smile, grimace and make eye contact with others. These
are very basic signals in human interaction -- so much so, that we often
regard people who don't use them in the usual way as being 'odd' or
'difﬁcult'. We can convey tremendous amounts of information through
facial expressions, and we automatically take that into account when we
are communicating with other people. On the phone, or in written
language where it isn't possible to see the person we are communicating
with, we have to substitute for them. We have to use tones of voice on
the phone, and punctuation in writing, to let the other person know what
we really mean. 10. Childhood and adolescence

225

It isn't just facial expressions either. They way we stand, sit or move
also conveys social meanings -- like being bored, or being interested,
or being in a hurry. All this body language is an important part of
social competence, and children acquire these skills more or less
automatically by interacting with others. Social play gives them an
opportunity to practise their social skills, but again, as with so many
other skills, they can be developed and enhanced by experience and
interacting with other people. The fact that so little teaching is
required for these skills indicates that they are hard-wired into our
mental frameworks -- that is, we develop them as a natural part of our
growth. All human societies recognize the basic expressions of emotion
and affection, because these skills have been fundamental to our
evolution as social animals. And many studies have shown that we attach
far more importance to body language and tones of voice than we do to
the actual words that people use when they are speaking to us. Not
everyone is equally good at these skills, of course. We all know people
who are 'good listeners', or other people who are difﬁcult to get on
with, and often this comes down to the way that they use body language
to communicate. One of the more reliable gender differences is the way
that female humans tend to be more sensitive to these skills than men,
as a general rule; but this is only a general rule, and doesn't apply to
everybody. Some men are very sensitive to social signals, and some women
are not. But generally, possibly because of the inﬂuences they
experience when they are younger or possibly because of inherited
potential, women and girls do tend to be more socially skilled. Some
evolutionary psychologists attribute this to the fact that women are
more involved in child-rearing and caring for others, while men have
traditionally adopted social roles which are more concerned with hunting
and defending. Whatever the reason, it is noticeable that in modern
societies there are more women in jobs which involve interacting with
and caring for other people. But there are also many men in such jobs,
too. Childhood, then, can be seen as a lengthy period of skill
development. Most responsibilities and pressures are taken off the
child, at least in

226

Western societies, and during this time, the child develops and reﬁnes
the social, mental and physical skills which will help it as it grows up
and begins to take more of a part in society. Through developing
competences, positive self-efﬁcacy beliefs, effective schemas and
personal constructs, children develop their understanding of their world
and their ability to operate effectively within it.

Adolescence As the child's body matures, the child begins to enter
adolescence. Adolescence is often thought of as a turbulent period -- a
period of upheaval and rebellion from parental authority. This image of
adolescence has been very popular with Hollywood since the 1950s, and it
has passed into our everyday consciousness. But it's questionable just
how realistic this impression of adolescence is. Although some people,
undoubtedly, do have a turbulent time in this period of their lives,
others pass through adolescence quite smoothly, and without major
upheavals. Every child is different and these differences have been
reﬂected in psychological theories, too. Cockram and Beloff (1978)
identiﬁed four different models of adolescence. Each of these applies
only to some people and not to everyone, but they are useful in helping
us to understand something of what is going on during these years.
ADOLESCENCE AS ' STORM AND STRESS ' This view sees the adolescent as
inherently rebellious, rejecting the authority of parents or other
representives of 'the establishment', and looking only to the peer group
for social inﬂuence. Adolescents in the ﬁlms of the 1950s and 1960s were
portrayed as moody and emotionally unstable, and as implicitly difﬁcult
for adults to interact with. Various explanations were put forward for
this phenomenon, including the ideas that it was a throwback to the
animal passions of an evolutionary past, that it resulted from the
hormone imbalances of puberty, and the psychoanalytic notion that it was
an emotional reworking of early childhood sexual conﬂicts.

10. Childhood and adolescence

227

Some anthropologists and psychologists, such as Margaret Mead and
Bronfenbrenner argued that it arose as a result of the alienation of
young people from adult culture in Western capitalist societies. In
non-technological societies, Mead argued, adolescents were fully
participating members of their communities, and so were not left to
their own devices and regarded as a separate culture. Even in Soviet
Russia, Bronfenbrenner argued, young people were more integrated into
their society than they were in America, and showed fewer signs of
alienation. All of these theorists, however, were working on the
assumption that a turbulent adolescence was the normal state of affairs
for young people in Western societies. But gradually this view was
challenged as psychologists such as Albert Bandura began to study
'normal' adolescents, rather than adolescents who were attending clinics
or courts because they were disturbed or troublesome. Bandura found that
most adolescents didn't particularly oppose their parents' values or
show hostility or rebellion. Rather, for many people, adolescence was a
period in which they developed a more trusting and positive relationship
with their parents, rather than the reverse. Research by other
psychologists conﬁrmed Bandura's arguments, and the 'storm and stress'
model of adolescence became increasingly regarded as one which had only
a limited usefulness -- appropriate for some adolescents, but not for
most. So, different models of adolescence began to emerge. ADOLESCENCE
AS ROLE TRANSITION One of the most popular of these alternative models
was the idea that adolescence can most usefully be seen as a period of
role transition -- a time when teenagers are changing how they interact
with society in general, and with the other people around them. Moving
from school to work, or from school to higher education, involves
adopting different social roles, and these in turn can produce changes
as different sides of the personality emerge. There are several
different aspects to the changing roles of adolescence. Sometimes, we
retain the same roles, but there are

228

changes in how we are expected to perform them. We would expect a
ten-year-old older sister to act differently from a sixteenyear-old
older sister, for example. But there are entirely new roles, too, which
appear during adolescence, and these have to be learned. A Saturday job
in a shop, for instance, involves learning a way of interacting with
people which is entirely different from the styles which we adopt with
family or friends. Part of being an adolescent, then, involves balancing
out the different demands of the social roles that we are called on to
play. Sometimes, these result in widely differing expectations: someone
might be regarded as a responsible adult in their Saturday job, as a
child by members of their family, and as an irresponsible teenager by
their schoolteacher. Each of these expectations will bring different
'selves', or aspects of the personality, to the fore, so balancing their
different demands is something which takes a bit of learning.
ADOLESCENCE AS A DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE A third way of looking at
adolescence identiﬁed by Cockram and Beloff, is to see it as a
developmental stage. This idea is based on Erikson's theory of life-long
development (Erikson, 1968), which identiﬁed a number of different
conﬂicts which each individual has to resolve as they pass through life.
These are listed in Table 10.5. The successful resolutions of early
conﬂicts, Erikson argued, set the foundation for the later ones, so all
the stages are important in the person's psychological development. The
particular conﬂict which needs to be resolved during adolescence,
Erikson argued, is that of identity versus role confusion. In a sense,
this relates to the perspective on adolescence that we were just looking
at -- the way the adolescent needs to come to terms with the many new
social roles that they are expected to play. In terms of the
individual's own psychological development, Erikson saw it as important
that the adolescent could accept the fact that they had a single,
integrated identity, despite the fact that they played so many different
social roles and acted differently in each one. 10. Childhood and
adolescence

229

Table 10.5 Erikson's stages of life span development. Early infancy

trust vs mistrust The infant has to strike a balance between trusting
people and risking disappointment, or being mistrustful and unable to
relate to other people fully. Later infancy autonomy vs shame and doubt
The toddler has to develop a sense of personal agency and control over
behaviour and actions, rather than mistrusting its ability to do things.
Early childhood initiative vs guilt The child has to develop an
increasing sense of personal responsibility and initiative, rather than
simply feeling guilty and uncertain. Middle childhood industry vs
inferiority The child has to learn that systematic effort will overcome
challenges, rather than just giving up and accepting failure. Puberty
and identity vs role confusion adolescence The adolescent needs to
develop a consistent sense of inner self, rather than being swamped by
the range of roles and choices available. Young adulthood intimacy vs
isolation The young adult needs to learn to develop intimate and
trusting relationships with others, rather than avoiding relationships
because they can become threatening and painful. Mature adulthood
generativity vs stagnation The adult needs to develop a productive life,
recognizing their personal achievements and abilities, instead of
stagnating psychologically. Late adulthood integrity vs despair The
older person needs to be able to look back on their life positively,
rather than to feel that it has been meaningless and futile.

230

Only by maintaining or developing a coherent sense of identity, Erikson
believed, would an adolescent form a ﬁrm foundation for a later
productive adulthood, and for mature and satisfying relationships. If
the different role demands which they experienced were too stressful,
the person would experience what Erikson called a state of identity
diffusion, in which they would have difﬁculty forming relationships with
other people and would also ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make coherent plans for
the future, and work towards achieving them. Without a clear sense of
who we are, such things are very difﬁcult, and yet adolescence is often
an important time of preparation for adult life, and can involve a
considerable investment in work, effort and planning. THE LIFE SPAN
APPROACH TO ADOLESCENCE The fourth type of theory of adolescence
described by Cockram and Beloff is the life span approach to
adolescence. This model presents the adolescent as an active agent in
their own lives -- unlike the other ones, which tended to see the person
as passive, merely suffering or experiencing all these different
demands. But adolescents are very active in interacting with their own
environment, and can shape what happens to them to quite a high degree.
Lerner (1985) argued that adolescents interact with their environment in
three ways. The ﬁrst of these is that they act as a stimulus to other
people, and people respond differently to them. Secondly, adolescents
process information mentally: they think about what they are
experiencing, interpret it, and respond accordingly. And thirdly,
adolescents act as active agents in their own lives, making their own
choices, and deliberately inﬂuencing what is likely to happen. All these
combine to mean that the adolescent is much less passive than the older
psychological models implied.

Insight Adolescence is a time of challenge, discovery and growth. A
healthy society provides plenty of legitimate opportunities for this,
but adolescents without such opportunities will still look for
challenges, and may end up ﬁnding them in less socially desirable areas,
such as in the gang or drug cultures.

10. Childhood and adolescence

231

CHANGES AND STAGES So what can we conclude from all this? Essentially,
it seems, there is no single way of looking at adolescence which will
explain what everyone experiences. There are a lot of role changes which
take place during adolescence, and a great many major life changes too.
But each person will cope with them in their own way, and according to
the awareness and understanding that they have developed as a person in
their own right. Throughout this book, we have been looking at
mechanisms which inﬂuence people, and which give us clues to understand
why people are like they are. They apply just as much to adolescents,
too! Adolescence has its own internal stages -- a young adolescent is
faced with different types of challenges and transitions than someone in
later adolescence. So it may not be very helpful to think of all
adolescents as going through the same kinds of experience. Some
psychologists, in fact, question whether it is actually useful to think
of development in terms of stages at all, since so much development
happens within stages, and each period of development tends to blend
with the one before and the one after. People develop in complex ways,
and rarely show an abrupt transition from one stage to another. So it's
important to remember that stages may not really exist! They are just a
shorthand way of describing that particular time in a person's life. In
the next chapter, we will look at other aspects of our development --
the development which happens as we become adults, have families, grow
older, and eventually retire.

232

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Children learn through play, which can take many
different forms. 2 The importance of play is that it allows us to
practise the different skills that we will need in later life. 3 A
child's social development also includes learning how to interact with
other people. Small children are particularly good at this, especially
with their siblings. 4 Vygotsky showed how children's learning is aided
and enhanced by adult inﬂuence. 5 Achievement motivation is strongly
inﬂuenced by parental encouragement and support. 6 Developing positive
self-efﬁcacy beliefs is one of the most important aspects of childhood
development. 7 Schemas and personal constructs help the child to
organize and use its learning in the real world. 8 It is possible to see
childhood as a lengthy period of skill development, in which the child
develops mental, physical and social skills for life as an adult in
society. 9 Adolescence is often seen as a stormy period, but this is not
inevitable. It depends on the child's home environment as well as the
ideas and personality of the child itself. 10 Adolescence is a time of
changing roles and responsibilities, which can often be difﬁcult as the
child makes the various transitions needed at this stage.

10. Childhood and adolescence

233

11 Adulthood, retirement and ageing In this chapter you will learn: •
why research into adulthood may be regarded as 'culturally speciﬁc' •
about changes in retirement theories • to differentiate between 'cross
sectional' and ' longitudinal' methods of studying ageing.

Contrary to popular belief, our development doesn't stop when we become
adult. We continue developing and changing throughout our lives both
mentally and physically. In recent years the study of life span
development has become much more popular, so in this chapter we will
look at development throughout the rest of the life span -- that is,
development in adulthood and during the ageing process.

Adulthood It is only relatively recently that psychologists have begun
to study adulthood in its own right. Of course, psychology is about
people, and so the various aspects of how human beings function which we
have looked at earlier in this book are all relevant to understanding
adulthood. In that sense, psychology has always studied both

234

adults and children. And work psychology, which we will be looking at in
the next chapter, has a long history too, which is entirely concerned
with adult life. But the idea that the period of life which we know as
adulthood might also be worth studying in its own right is a relatively
new one. To date, much of this research has been concerned with looking
at the various phases which people pass through in the course of their
adult life: charting what happens to us -- or at least to many people in
Western industrial societies -- as we grow older.

Insight Research projects follow the trends of their times, and life
span psychology has developed as the post-war baby boom generation has
matured. The current wave of research into ageing and care of the
elderly, for example, can be seen as directly resulting from that
generation reaching retirement age. LIFE-TRANSITIONS Gould (1978)
developed the idea that adult life consists of a series of transitions,
or life changes, which occur at different times in our lives. The ﬁrst
of these is that of adjusting to the responsibilities of being
independent and living away from parental care. Looking after ourselves
without someone in the background is quite different from the kind of
independence which occurs when living as part of a family group, where
there is always someone to fall back on, or to look after you if you
become ill. This transition, Gould argued, takes place usually between
the ages of 16 and 22. Then there is another transition, which takes
place during our twenties, in which we develop our own competences and
autonomy, and choose our own rules to live by, rather than simply
conforming to our parents' rules and principles. A third transition,
according to Gould, happens between 28 and 34, as we come to know
ourselves better, and learn to come to terms with aspects of our nature
which we weren't really aware of before. And the ﬁnal transition
involves accepting that life isn't going to last for

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

235

ever -- that is, developing a sense of our own mortality. This ﬁnal
transition, Gould argued, happens between the ages of 35 and 45. There
are some big problems with this type of approach to studying adulthood.
One of them is that it is very culturally speciﬁc -- it is probably ﬁne
for describing the lives of middle-class white North American men, but
things may be rather different for people of different backgrounds,
where the normal course of living takes different forms. Another is that
it doesn't account for individual differences. Some people don't leave
home until much later in life; some people don't experience a lengthy
period of independence but marry from their family home; and some come
across these transitions at very different ages. So it would be difﬁcult
to say how the model applied to them.

Insight We will all experience several life-transitions; but they will
be different for each of us. It is more useful to try to explore the
psychological processes involved as we tackle our life-transitions, than
to try to predict categorically what those life-transitions will be. If
there are so many problems with this type of model, why should we bother
with it at all? Well, mainly because it's a start. By identifying the
kinds of things that are missing from a model like this, we can move
towards developing better theories. Psychology doesn't have all the
answers: it is continually changing, and trying to improve its theories
and ideas. When a new area is ﬁrst opened up, the initial theories are
often quite limited; but they provide a useful basis for further
research which can help us to develop a deeper understanding. The family
life cycle Even if a theory is a little bit limited, it may still be
useful. For instance, Duvall (1971) developed a model of the different
stages of marriage which has been criticized in similar ways -- it is
culturally speciﬁc and it doesn't take account of the experiences of
single parents, or of divorce, for example. But even with its

236

shortcomings, the model can still help us to understand how a consistent
long-term marriage goes through different phases; and how these phases
actually involve different behaviour on the part of the couple, and
different assumptions about what they are actually doing. Duvall
identiﬁed eight different stages of marriage in all. The ﬁrst of these
is the honeymoon period, in which the married couple are learning to
live together, without children. At this time, they are getting to know
each other and setting the foundations for their later life together.
Statistically, a couple whose honeymoon period lasts for two years or
more before children come along are much more likely to stay together in
the long term than those who only have a brief interval before starting
a family. This may partly be because they have the time to get to know
one another as people much better. The second period in Duvall's model
is the nurturing period, when the oldest child is less than two years
old, and the couple are learning to cope with being new parents. It can
be a stressful time for both of them, and it isn't made easier by lack
of sleep, and anxiety about how the child or children are progressing.
So at this time, the couple are likely to need to give one another quite
a high level of both practical and emotional support; and knowing each
other well can make for fewer misunderstandings and quarrels. The third
stage is what Duvall referred to as the authority period, in which the
family are bringing up pre-school children, with the oldest between two
and ﬁve years old. Essentially, the parents have to train their
pre-schoolers to behave in a socially acceptable way, and not like
tyrannical little monsters! This, too, can be a deeply demanding phase
for the parents. Things often ease up a little when the family enters
the interpretive period, in which the oldest child is between ﬁve and 13
years old, and at school. (The reason why Duvall categorizes these
stages from the age of the oldest child is mainly because

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

237

this signals the need for the parents to learn new behaviours. They have
already learned most of the behaviours they will need for younger
children -- although each child is different, of course.) The ﬁfth
period in the family life cycle is the interdependent period, which
consists of families with teenagers. At this time it becomes possible
for the teenagers to take more of a share in the emotional and physical
aspects of the family, and the relationship between parents and child
can become a two-way, interdependent one rather than a simple, one-way,
dependent one. Then there is the sixth period, which Duvall refers to as
the launching period, as the young adults emerge to become independent
in society. Typically, this period involves some degree of support from
home -- perhaps providing a home for a child who is away at college
during term-time, or providing help with furnishings or a regular Sunday
lunch for a young adult who is independent and working. This period
lasts from the time when the ﬁrst child leaves, to when the last child
leaves home. The seventh of Duvall's stages is the empty-nest period,
when all the children have left and the parents are together at home.
This can be quite a difﬁcult adjustment for some couples, particularly
if the children have been the exclusive focus of attention for most of
their time together. Some couples, though, ﬁnd it a pleasant relief,
because it means they can simply enjoy one another's company again. They
often begin a number of co-operative activities that they weren't doing
before, such as redecorating, or travelling. The ﬁnal period in the
family life cycle, described by Duvall, is the retirement period, in
which the members of the partnership who were working are now retired.
This, too, can be a period of re-adjustment, particularly if one of the
couple has been accustomed to having the house to themselves for most of
the day. We can see, then, that each stage of the family life cycle
involves different adjustments and new forms of learning.

238

Although, inevitably, it doesn't ﬁt every single family, identifying the
different stages in this way has proved to be very useful for marriage
guidance counsellors and other people who are either trying to help
people to adjust to changes in their relationships, or who are trying to
do the adjusting themselves. Having said that, the number of modern
families which ﬁts this simple pattern is becoming increasingly few.
Families break up and re-form with new members, single-parent families
are increasingly common, and people with grown-up children often ﬁnd
themselves in new relationships which involve bringing up much younger
children. Models like Duvall's can be helpful, but they are not by any
means the whole pattern of our life span family development.

Insight The family life cycle model can help us understand the
adaptations that parents must make. But modern families are not always
so neat, with overlapping generations, stepchildren from previous
relationships and other complications. So, relatively few families
follow the pattern exactly the way that the theory proposes. The
mid-life crisis One of the more popular ideas in recent years is that of
the mid-life crisis. In many societies, adults simply work from the time
that they are grown (or in some cases before) until they become too old.
But in modern Western societies, it is no longer the case that we stay
doing the same job throughout our working lives. Temporary work,
redundancies, adult re-training schemes and a greater emphasis on job
satisfaction mean that many people hit a period in their 40s or 50s when
they begin to re-evaluate their lives, and decide that they want to do
something which is more personally meaningful for them. Sometimes, this
crisis simply takes the form of the person looking for a different job.
But in the modern world, such decisions usually mean re-training, and
some people go back into full-time education

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

239

to achieve this. Universities have growing numbers of adult students, as
do colleges and training schemes, and even people who left school
feeling that they were too 'thick' to gain qualiﬁcations ﬁnd that this
is not so, and that they can learn as effectively as anyone else. Other
people may make more dramatic changes in their lives -- perhaps moving
to start a new life in a different country, or a different town, and
taking up an entirely new occupation. Making such dramatic changes
sometimes doesn't work very well, but often people report increased
feelings of well-being and conﬁdence, and more positive life
experiences. As we have seen, we continue to grow and develop throughout
our lives, and the mid-life crisis can be seen as a way of taking
control of that growth and channelling it into new directions.

Insight Some researchers see the mid-life crisis as a myth, arguing that
people can engage in life changes at any time in their lives. That is
true, but if we look at people who have re-evaluated their lives and
make dramatic changes as a result, there is a majority in their 40s and
50s.

Retirement Another major transition, of course, is retirement. In
earlier times, the period of retirement used to be a brief interlude
before old age and death. But in modern living, it has become quite
different. Changes in diet, lifestyle and general health mean that most
people continue to live an active, productive life for a long period
after they ﬁnish formal working -- as long as 30 years, or if they have
taken early retirement, even 40. This period is very nearly as long as
many people's working life, so the idea of retirement as a 'restful
interlude' isn't really very practical. Instead, life span psychologists
nowadays see retirement as a way of developing in new and different
ways, that weren't possible under the constraints of working life.

240

Insight Retirement was originally introduced to give people a couple of
years' rest before death. But people died younger in those days:
nowadays, we can expect a healthy 20 or 30 years of life after
retirement. Using that time constructively is one of the personal
challenges of modern society. DISENGAGEMENT THEORY The ﬁrst
psychological theories about retirement tended to take a rather negative
position. Cummings and Henry (1961) saw retirement as a gradual process
of separating off from society. Old people might be numerous, but they
were less visible than younger people, and less involved in social
activities. Cummings and Henry saw this as part of a natural mechanism,
similar to a weakened animal withdrawing from its herd to die. Cummings
and Henry put forward a biological explanation for this. They proposed
that, as people grow older, there is a kind of inherited biological
mechanism which encourages them, gradually, to withdraw from society.
They have fulﬁlled their evolutionary function by bringing up families
and helping their offspring to survive and now, Cummings and Henry
argued, evolution has no place for them. As a consequence, they become
less and less involved in social affairs, leaving decision-making and
social organization to younger people and become increasingly withdrawn
into their own lives. This rather gloomy process is known as
disengagement, based on the idea that there is an innate, biological
tendency to disengage from society with age, rather like an animal
creeping off to die by itself. It reﬂects a tendency of psychologists at
that time to look for biological explanations for all human behaviour.
But there are many problems with this model. For one thing, the relative
lack of social involvement of older people isn't anything like an animal
creeping away to die, because the period of being 'an old person' or a
pensioner is so very long. Nowadays, it isn't uncommon for people to
live for 30 years or more after they have retired, and that's quite
different from a couple of days of being ill and weak before dying --
the normal state of affairs among wild animals. 11. Adulthood,
retirement and ageing

241

ACTIVITY THEORY That type of explanation also ignores the social factors
involved in retirement. An alternative explanation for why older people
don't seem to take as active a part in society as they might was put
forward by Havighurst, in 1964. Havighurst attributed it to the fact
that older people have relatively few opportunities to play meaningful
social roles in society. When someone is active and working, they play a
large number of different social roles. These include various roles at
work as well as roles to do with the family. In other words, as
Havighurst put it, their role-count is high. But when someone retires
from work, their role-count drops dramatically, because all the social
roles that they played that were relevant to work -- even ones as simple
as being a commuter -- vanish. All that is left are social roles to do
with family and home. In other words, Havighurst was arguing, people
become less visible when they retire simply because they don't have as
many opportunities to play a part in everyday social living. And this
has personal consequences, as well as social ones, because people can
easily come to feel apathetic and useless as a result. The way to
counteract this, Havighurst argued, is for people to replace their lost
social roles deliberately, by adding new ones such as joining clubs and
societies for older people, or working for organizations like Oxfam,
which employ people over conventional retirement age. Keeping up one's
role-count, according to Havighurst, is the way to ensure a positive
experience of old age. SOCIAL EXCHANGE THEORY In 1975, Dowd proposed a
different way of explaining this question. Dowd proposed that retirement
is actually a sort of social contract that the person makes with
society. They obtain increased leisure time, and an 'honourable
discharge' from the idea that all responsible members of society ought
to work as hard as possible -- the Protestant Work Ethic -- and in
return, they give up their involvement in how society's affairs are run.
This social exchange is seen, according to Dowd, as a fair trade, both
by society and by old people.

242

More recently, however, people are showing signs of being less prepared
to accept this type of social contract. After all, we live much longer
now than we did when retirement was ﬁrst introduced, and we keep our
health for longer, too; so it is much more practical for people to
continue to take an active part in society. Among business and
professional people, it is not at all uncommon for retirement to signal
the beginning of a second career, and a much more independent one that
allows them to use their experience, such as working as a consultant. In
other groups of society, too, people are beginning to see retirement as
an opportunity to do new things. Organizations like the University of
the Third Age encourage retired people to develop new hobbies and pursue
new interests, and are becoming more popular and successful all the
time. Many psychologists now take the view that successful retirement is
all about making sure that you acquire new social roles, to replace the
ones that you have lost through work, and activities of this sort are
exactly the way that people do that.

Insight Having responsibilities and being needed seem to be the core of
successful retirement. That can take many forms: some people feel needed
by their gardens, and devote much of their time to taking care of them;
while others take on more social responsibilities. SOCIAL LABELLING
Dyson (1980) interviewed a large number of people about their
experiences of retirement, and challenged the idea that people see it as
a fair exchange. Dyson's respondents saw it as fair for old people in
general, but not in their own personal cases. They felt that, for the
most part, society had thrown them on the junk heap too early, when they
were still perfectly capable of making an active and useful contribution
to society. But they did think it was probably fair for other old
people, and for old people in general.

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

243

Dyson's research gave some interesting hints about the emergence of a
new perspective on ageing, which developed during the 1980s. This view
sees the lower visibility of older people in society as a product of
social labelling. We live in an ageist society, in which stereotypes of
old people are very strong -- even though most of us are personally
acquainted with individuals who don't ﬁt those stereotypes at all. But
it is very difﬁcult for an individual to break through the social
stereotyping and be regarded as an intelligent person with something
useful to contribute, because too often they are seen as someone who is
old, and therefore useless. Or they think this is how they will be seen,
and so they don't bother trying. The stereotypes associated with old
people are particularly unpleasant. They are often regarded as sick,
stupid, or even dirty. Because a minority of old people become confused,
or suffer from mental disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, it is
assumed that any old person is likely to become mentally incapacitated
-- although, in fact, the evidence is very different. Because of this,
the positive contributions which older people can make to social events
and processes are often overlooked, or simply ignored. Recently, a
number of organizations and individuals have begun to challenge these
stereotypes about ageing, and there is some indication that attitudes
are beginning to change. But there is still a long way to go.

Insight The negative view that we have of old people is like other
stereotypes, having a small grain of truth in some cases but a lot of
exceptions. Interestingly, although old people also share this negative
stereotype, they almost always see themselves as one of the exceptions.
So who is left to ﬁt the stereotype? RETIREMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY Some
people who reach retiring age, though, still hold to the old negative
ideas about retirement. Sometimes they feel that society has simply
thrown them away, even though they are as ﬁt as ever.

244

But sometimes they interpret any aches and pains as being evidence that
they are becoming old and useless, so they stop doing activities which
would help them to keep ﬁt. Anyone will grow inﬁrm if they do nothing
all day but sit in the house and watch TV -- muscles need exercise to
keep toned, and a healthy retirement means an active one. Also, feeling
socially useless is a major source of stress and helplessness. Without
another source of self-esteem, such as a hobby or voluntary work, people
can become extremely depressed, and appear to give up on active living.
People who take this view have been shown to be much more likely to die
in the ﬁrst few years of retirement than those who take a more positive
view. It seems that they ﬁnd it much harder to ﬁnd anything worth living
for, because they feel so useless. This also helps to explain why women
live longer than men (although there are other factors to be considered
too). Women who are past retiring age now, grew up in a culture in which
the home was considered to be a woman's primary responsibility. Even
after they have retired, that responsibility still remains, so they
still have something in their lives to be involved with. But men of the
same age were usually brought up to believe that their primary
responsibility was to work and be the breadwinner for the family. That
responsibility vanishes with compulsory retirement and this can be
emotionally devastating. Even people who have looked forward to
retirement can ﬁnd that, after the ﬁrst few months, feeling socially
useless is more than they can cope with, and they can become very
depressed even, sometimes, to the point where they give up trying to
live. This is why it is so important for retired people to make sure
that they have some other interest in their life, and more than just one
if at all possible. Many retired people take up another responsibility
where they can still feel needed, such as voluntary work. Gardening is
particularly popular, because a garden needs to be looked after -- it
can't be neglected or it will quickly turn wild. So gardeners know that
their efforts are necessary and worthwhile. Some people develop hobbies
such as travelling, or learn a new sport, such as golf or bowls. All
these are ways for people to develop other sources of self-esteem, to
compensate for being without paid employment.

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

245

Ageing As we've seen, many people live healthy, happy and productive
lives for many years after the standard retirement age. But sooner or
later, barring accidents, we all become old. It used to be thought that
ageing was a steady decline in functioning, with people going inevitably
downhill from the age of 50 or so. But now we know that is not so. The
research evidence which suggested this pattern of ageing was seriously
ﬂawed in the way that it was done, and modern experiences show that
ageing occurs quite differently. The general pattern seems to be that we
have only a very gradual decline in our older years, and that decline
can be slowed down by exercise and activity, but that eventually we
reach a period of more rapid physical decline, which rarely lasts for
more than about ﬁve years. Usually, the person dies at some point during
the ﬁve-year period. In some old people, that decline is brought about
by an accident -- a fall or some similar event -- which damages them
physically but, more importantly, shakes their conﬁdence and makes them
feel unable to cope with life as they once did. How inevitable the
decline is, once it has begun, is something nobody knows. We do know,
though, that even old bodies can respond surprisingly well to exercise.
In one study, 90-year-olds who began a programme of physical exercises
were found to be putting on muscle mass as a result -- in other words,
their muscles were responding to the exercise and becoming stronger.
This ﬁnding has been repeated a number of times now, and it shows that
the saying 'it's never too late' may be even truer than we realize. The
real danger in ageing, more than any other, seems to be the person's own
beliefs about it. Someone who expects to decline and become incapable as
they grow older is not likely to face their body or mind with extra
challenges. Without exercise, our bodies have no incentive to grow
stronger or to maintain their normal levels of strength; so they become
weaker. This, to the person who expects to be weak as a result of age,
is 'proof' that

246

they were right, and their belief in inevitable decline is conﬁrmed. But
really, it began as a self-fulﬁlling prophecy. INTELLIGENCE AND AGEING
The same thing seems to happen with mental abilities too. For example,
intelligence is often inaccurately cited as one of the areas which
declines with age. For many years, people 'knew' that various abilities,
including intelligence and physical strength, reached their peak in the
early twenties, and then declined steadily from then on throughout a
person's life. This knowledge was based on a series of studies, reported
by Miles in 1931, which involved measuring various human characteristics
in people of different ages. When they plotted the results of these
measurements on a graph, Miles found a steady decline: the older the
person was, the less strong, or intelligent (as measured by IQ tests) or
able they were. Other researchers found similar results, so for a great
many years there was a strong belief in an inevitable decline with age.
Indeed this belief is still held by a great many people, including some
doctors and social workers, but when we look more carefully at the
evidence, what we ﬁnd is actually quite a different picture.
Cross-sectional methods The problem was that all of these studies were
done using cross-sectional methods. That is, the researcher tested
several different groups of people, of different ages. But someone who
was 60 in 1930 had experienced quite a different upbringing and
lifestyle from someone who was 20 at that time. Their schooling was
quite different, their life experiences were quite different, and their
standards of living were different too. The same thing applied to
cross-sectional studies that were conducted later on in the century:
they failed to take account of the very major changes in education and
health care which had taken place. It wasn't surprising, for example,
that older people did badly on intelligence tests in the 1960s, when
they had experienced an

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

247

education which consisted, in the main, of learning large chunks of
information off by heart. Younger people, by contrast, had experienced a
form of education which stressed reasoning and mental skills, and so
they naturally performed much better on IQ tests. Longitudinal methods
When psychologists actually began to look at how individual people
developed, following them up through their lives, a very different
picture emerged. Obviously, longitudinal research like this is quite
hard to do because researchers need to follow it up over many years. So
there are fewer longitudinal studies of life span development than there
are cross-sectional ones. But there are some. For example, in 1966,
Burns reported on a study of intelligence and ageing which had begun in
the 1920s with a group of teachers who were just emerging from their
training colleges. The researchers tested the teachers' intelligence
throughout their careers and found that, contrary to what the
cross-sectional research showed, their IQ scores had actually increased
as they had become older. The apparently inevitable decline with ageing
wasn't inevitable at all! What was even more interesting was the
particular scores which the teachers had obtained on their IQ tests. The
tests assessed intelligence in two parts: verbal intelligence, which was
to do with the use of words and knowledge of vocabulary, and numerical
intelligence, which included the use of symbols and logical reasoning as
well as arithmetical abilities. When the researchers looked at these
scores, they found that the 'arts' teachers, who taught subjects such as
English and history, showed an increase in their verbal intelligence
scores, but a slight (though not very great) decline in numerical
intelligence. The science teachers, though, showed an increase in their
numerical intelligence but a slight decline in their verbal intelligence
scores. What this clearly implied was that, more than anything else, it
is the amount of practice we have which is most important in whether we
are likely to improve our intelligence as we get older

248

or not. If we adopt a passive mental approach to living, just receiving
information passively and not bothering to learn new things unless we
absolutely have to, it's likely that our intelligence would decline. Our
muscles waste away if we don't use them and, in the same way, our
intelligence declines if we don't use it. But if we remain active in our
thinking, and ready to learn new things or to challenge our previous
assumptions, then we are likely to retain our intelligence, and even
increase it. The more we use a skill, the better we get at it. This is
only one example, but both psychologists and doctors are ﬁnding, more
and more, that getting old has almost as much to do with lifestyle and
practice as it has to do with the number of years that we actually
carry. Everybody gets older, of course, but ageing doesn't mean an
inevitable steady decline from age 20, as people used to think.

Insight Longitudinal studies of ageing are a lot more valid than
cross-sectional ones. But it is almost impossible to guarantee the
continuous funding and administration of a large research project for 50
years, so longitudinal studies of ageing have tended to be fairly
small-scale. MEMORY AND AGEING The problem, though, is that we all have
our own beliefs about ageing and sometimes, as we've seen, these can
become self-perpetuating. For example, most people believe that memory
inevitably declines as you get older. Because they believe this, they
notice each time they fail to remember something, and take it as 'proof'
that their memory is really getting worse. Their belief becomes a
self-fulﬁlling prophecy, because they become convinced that there is
less and less point in trying to remember things because they won't
manage it anyway. And then they don't remember things, because they
don't make any effort to store the information. Harris and Sunderland,
in 1981, decided to put this idea to the test. They obtained a group of
people aged between 20 and 36,

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

249

and compared them with a group of people aged between 69 and 80. When
they tested their memories for events in everyday life, they found that
the younger people in the study actually experienced more memory
failures than the older people! It was possible, of course, that the
younger people forgot more simply because they had more going on in
their lives. After all, the older group comprised all retired people. So
Harris and Sunderland repeated the study, this time with a group of
people who were still working, aged between 50 and 60. This time, they
found an even stronger difference between the two groups. Again, the
younger people were much more forgetful than those who were older, even
with information that they were trying to remember. So why is it that
older people are so convinced that their memories are poorer now than
they were when they were young? It's possible, of course, that they
really did have better memories when they were young, and that for some
reason the younger generation studied by Harris and Sunderland didn't
have very good memories at all -- after all, this was a cross-sectional
study. And the educational system which was current when the over-60s
were younger did involve quite a lot of memorizing. But what seems more
likely is that it is much more to do with motivation and attention.

Insight Human beings are so powerfully driven by their beliefs and
expectations that reality is sometimes irrelevant. People start worrying
about memory decline from their 30s or 40s -- even though real decline
doesn't actually begin until after 70. But each example of ordinary
absent-mindedness is seen as evidence of decline, so the belief become
self-fulﬁlling. Attention and motivation Young people, by and large,
don't worry too much about their mental abilities. Older people, though,
sensitized by society's belief in an inevitable decline in mental
ability with ageing, do worry

250

about it. So when a younger person forgets their key, or can't remember
someone's name, or forgets what they came into the room to do, they
hardly notice it because it simply doesn't matter to them. When an older
person does the same thing, though, it sticks in the mind because they
are always wondering if it is a sign of age. So where the younger person
simply shrugs off everyday forgetting, the older person worries about
it, and notices it much more. This means that when older people look
back on their own earlier lives, they don't remember being worried about
forgetting things at all when they were younger, and they come to the
conclusion that they simply had better memories. This reinforces the
belief that their own mental abilities are declining, and so becomes a
circular process. A psychological decline with ageing, then, isn't
nearly as inevitable as it once appeared to be. If we use our mental
abilities, we are more likely to improve them than to lose them, at
least until the very ﬁnal years of our life. For people who lead full
and active lives, and don't hesitate to make efforts or to stretch
themselves a little, it seems that they can retain their abilities
almost to the end of their lives, with only a relatively sudden decline
in the last ﬁve years, rather than a continuous steady one. Of course,
your system responds to the demands that you make on it -- which is why
sports doctors and physiotherapists know how important it is to exercise
injured muscles as soon as healing has begun. Resting simply means that
the muscles adapt to limited demands, and become weaker. It's the same
with ageing: people who believe in a continuous decline, and don't push
themselves to make an effort, naturally become more and more frail and
feeble, because they are never stimulating their bodies or minds to
become stronger. There are limits, of course, but we haven't yet begun
to discover what they are, and they certainly aren't encountered in most
people's lives.

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

251

Insight Motivation is the most important factor in cognitive ageing, as
it is in physical health. People who see age degeneration as inevitable
don't bother to practise or give themselves challenges -- either
mentally or physically -- so their decline is quicker and more
noticeable than those who keep active. PRINCIPLES OF LIFE SPAN
PSYCHOLOGY In the past two chapters, then, we have seen how life span
development covers far more than just childhood. Sugarman (1986)
identiﬁed four central ideas in life span developmental psychology. The
ﬁrst of these is the idea that development always needs to be seen in
its social context. How people develop is inﬂuenced by their society,
their family, their social class and their culture, and social inﬂuence
can come from many other sources as well. So we can't really study
development without taking these into account. The second idea which
Sugarman identiﬁed is to do with the fact that social inﬂuence isn't
just a one-way process. People inﬂuence one another, and are inﬂuenced
by others -- it's a two-way process, which we call reciprocal inﬂuence.
This inﬂuence isn't static either -- it changes all the time. We are
inﬂuenced by family members and by changes happening within the family,
as well as by changes among our friends and work colleagues. And we
exert our own inﬂuence on these changes as they develop. Reciprocal
inﬂuence is important, but it's far from being the whole story. We are
also active agents in our own lives, making our own choices and
decisions. In that sense, we are all active in shaping our own
development, and how we understand what is going on is an important
aspect of that. For example, as we saw earlier, we know that mental
abilities don't inevitably decline with age, but someone who believed
ﬁrmly that they did decline would tend to 'take it easy' and avoid
challenging situations as they grew older, because they wouldn't think
it was worth trying. And because of this, they

252

would decline faster than someone who understood life span development
in a more positive way. Another fundamental principle that Sugarman
identiﬁed in life span psychology is that of complexity. Essentially,
this is the same principle that we have encountered so often throughout
this book. People are not simple beings, and no single approach is going
to be enough to tell us about human beings. We have to take into account
different levels of explanation, and to explore connections and issues
which arise from them, if we are to get any useful awareness of what
human beings are really like. In the next chapter we will look at
another aspect of adult psychology -- the psychology of working life.

11. Adulthood, retirement and ageing

253

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 We continue developing and changing throughout
our adult lives, mentally as well as physically. 2 Some researchers
study adulthood by looking at life changes or major life transitions. 3
The family life cycle shows how a typical family changes over time. It
has been criticized for being too culturally speciﬁc. 4 Many people
experience a mid-life crisis in which they make a dramatic change to
their life. 5 Social labelling is a very important factor in retirement,
as is maintaining responsibilities and roles. 6 Most people remain
healthy and active throughout old age, and just decline in their ﬁnal
ﬁve years or so. 7 Studies show that intelligence can increase as we get
older rather than decline. 8 Older studies of ageing were more negative
then they needed to be because they used cross-sectional methods. 9
Memory does not necessarily decline with age, but older people notice
memory lapses and worry more about them than young people. 10 Life span
psychology emphasizes social context, reciprocal inﬂuence, complexity
and active agency.

254

12 Working life In this chapter you will learn: • why a manager's theory
of human nature can completely alter the way employees work • to
identify three styles of leadership • how to deﬁne the term
'organizational culture'. In this book, we have only been able to look
at a small sample of psychological knowledge. There's much more, but
what we have covered gives us a general idea of 'mainstream' psychology.
But since its very beginnings, psychology has been both a 'pure' and an
'applied' subject -- that is, some areas of psychology are concerned
with scientiﬁc investigation purely in order to understand what is going
on; while other areas are concerned with the various ways that
psychological knowledge can be put to use. Applied psychology takes many
different forms, and quite a lot of them are covered in Understand
Applied Psychology; so we won't be going into them in so much detail
here. But they are also part of psychology, and contribute to our
understanding of day-to-day living; so in the next few chapters we will
look at how psychology can help us to understand people in everyday
situations. We will begin, in this chapter, by looking at how psychology
can help us to understand people at work.

12. Working life

255

Why do people work? For a human being, work is a deeply important part
of life. Although we might daydream about a life of leisure, the reality
is that most of us are psychologically, and physically, healthier if we
are working. If we are prevented from working, by unemployment or
redundancy, we are very likely to become depressed. If that unemployment
continues for a long time, we are also liable to fall into a kind of
learned helplessness (see Chapter 6), which can sometimes make it very
difﬁcult for us to ﬁnd work again, or to make the sustained effort that
is necessary if an opportunity does come along. Unemployment has other
negative effects as well. Warr (1987) found that between 20 per cent and
30 per cent of unemployed people showed a deterioration in their
physical health. Binns and Mars (1984) found that unemployment often
leads to difﬁculties in personal relationships as well, often because of
the additional strain brought on by continuing ﬁnancial difﬁculties.
And, of course, the longer we are unemployed, the more these problems
are likely to become exaggerated. LATENT FUNCTIONS OF WORKING Jahoda
(1982) suggested that the reason why long-term unemployment is so
damaging is because working serves more functions for us than we
realize. It doesn't just serve the obvious functions such as earning
money to live on, although this is important, of course. But working has
other functions which are not so obvious. Jahoda identiﬁed ﬁve latent
functions of working, which are listed in Table 12.1. We don't really
notice these while we are working, but they are extremely important in
helping to keep our emotional and psychological life balanced. Thinking
of work in this way can be useful, because it gives us some hints as to
how unemployment can be survived. For example, people who are unemployed
but keep themselves busy by doing voluntary work don't usually suffer
from the depression and learned helplessness that so many other
unemployed people

256

Table 12.1 Latent functions of working. 1 2 3 4 5

Employment imposes a time structure on the waking day. Employment brings
about regularly shared experiences and contacts with people outside the
family. A job links the individual with goals and purposes beyond one's
own. A job deﬁnes aspects of personal status and identity. Paid
employment enforces its own activity.

experience. This seems to be partly because they gain the same latent
functions of working from their voluntary commitment. It can sometimes
be like this for people who are committed to a particular hobby too. '
SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT ' Looking at what happens when people don't work
can tell us a great deal about what working actually does for us. But
what about people who do work? What motivates them to continue working?
One of the ﬁrst psychological theories of working was the very
straightforward one which has probably occurred to you already, as you
read this chapter: people work for money. F. W. Taylor, in 1911,
believed ﬁrmly that money was the sole reason why people work. Given
this, he reasoned that a work and pay system which allowed people to
earn more by being more efﬁcient would be useful, both to employees and
to employers. Taylor developed an approach to work which became known as
'scientiﬁc management', and was based entirely on the idea of work being
as efﬁcient as possible. Time and motion Taylor began implementing his
new approach with a labourer loading pig iron onto railway trucks. From
observing the labourers' working, he became convinced that the work
could be done much more efﬁciently. He got one man to agree to do
exactly as he was told: lifting when he was told, resting when he was
told, and so on. 12. Working life

257

By the end of that working day, the labourer had loaded 47.5 tonnes of
pig iron, instead of his usual 12.5. Taylor went on from there to
develop the principle of time and motion studies, in which production
and labouring jobs were carefully observed and timed, in order to
identify the most efﬁcient ways of working. This 'scientiﬁc management'
approach became very popular in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century,
because it seemed to represent a new and better way of organizing work.
Like many ideas of that time, though, it was simply too mechanistic for
human beings to put up with for very long. The ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century was full of mechanistic ideas about progress, and the
idea that the world was really based on very straightforward engineering
principles -- known as modernism. As a result, it was common for people
to be seen as being like machines, and this affected psychology too. In
fact, we've already seen something of this, in the behaviourist approach
to learning which we looked at in Chapter 9. The problem, though, is
that if you treat people in this way, as human beings they are inclined
to rebel.

Insight One of the big problems with modernism was the belief that
people could be treated as machines, being paid purely to do exactly
what they were told. But any ﬁrm which does that quickly hits
difﬁculties, because human beings need more than money to stay motivated
to work well. Sometimes that rebellion is unconscious. The rates of
industrial accidents, for example, increased with the introduction of
scientiﬁc management. Although some early industrial researchers (e.g.
Greenwood and Woods, 1919) came to the conclusion that some people were
simply accident prone, later researchers saw it as a simple consequence
of expecting human beings to act in exactly the same way, day after day,
hour after hour. Sickness and absenteeism rates also increased, as did
rates of staff turnover -- the number of staff who simply left. Treating
people like machines just isn't a good idea.

258

Insight It is useful to look at staff turnover, sickness and absentee
rates in a company. These are all symptoms of the quality of management,
because people who are happy in their work take fewer days off and don't
want to leave. That also makes them more proﬁtable to employ. SOCIAL
ASPECTS OF WORKING In the 1930s, a group of psychologists challenged the
time and motion approach by showing that there are important social
dimensions to working too. In a series of studies at the Hawthorne
Electric Plant, in Chicago, Elton Mayo and his colleagues Roethlisberger
and Dickson began by trying to ﬁnd the best lighting levels in a
particular workshop. They began by raising the lighting levels, and
found that production increased. Then they lowered the lighting levels
and production increased again. Finally, they put the lighting levels
back to how they had been originally, and production was higher than it
had ever been. The Chicago researchers had hit on an important discovery
about working life. Almost regardless of what they did, the employees in
that area worked harder as a result. The one exception came when they
varied the tea breaks, and had a condition with about eight short breaks
throughout the day. The girls in that part of the factory complained
that they didn't get time to concentrate on what they were doing. But
apart from that single case, it wasn't their physical conditions of work
that mattered. The fact that the researchers were taking an interest in
what the employees were doing was enough to increase their motivation.
Group standards In another part of the company, the researchers
investigated a department called the bank-wiring room. This consisted of
a group of people who were usually left to work without much
supervision. Interestingly, the workers in that section of the factory
seemed to be unaffected by the changes introduced by the psychologists.
They had developed their own way of working, which produced

12. Working life

259

Table 12.2 An informal 'code of practice'. 1 2 3 4

You shouldn't work too hard --'rate-busting' is not acceptable
behaviour. You shouldn't slack over your work -- do your own fair share.
You shouldn't tell a supervisor anything which might get a fellow worker
into trouble. If you hold a position of authority, you shouldn't pull
rank or act ofﬁciously.

a regular, steady rate of production. They didn't increase it much, even
when paid extra, but then they didn't slow down either. When they looked
into it a bit more deeply, Mayo and the others found that this group had
developed a clear code of practice about how each person should do their
share, and not do anything which might get the rest of the group into
trouble. The principles by which they were working are listed in Table
12.2, and all the members of that department held to them. As a result,
it was one of the most reliable and dependable parts of the
organization. INFORMAL LEADERSHIP In some later studies, Mayo and his
colleagues explored the idea of group leadership. They were
investigating an aircraft factory in southern California which had
serious problems with staff turnover -- people were leaving, and new
people were being taken on, at a rate which made it very difﬁcult for
the factory to operate properly. But in one department, there was very
little staff turnover indeed, which attracted the attention of the
psychologists. When they investigated, they found that this department
had an informal leader who took charge and sorted out disagreements
between people when they arose. The leader also welcomed new people when
they joined the department; took care that they should meet everyone and
get to know what each person was doing.

260

Then they were taken on a tour of the whole factory, so that the person
could see how their own job contributed to the production of the whole
aircraft. The outcome of all of this was that these people felt that
they were part of the organization, and welcome, from the very
beginning. They knew that there was someone to whom they could turn for
help or guidance if they needed it. And they didn't ﬁnd their work on
the factory line alienating because they had a clear understanding of
how what they did ﬁtted in with producing the whole plane. The actions
taken by the informal leader of the group were exactly what was needed
in a big plant like this, and gave a number of useful pointers to the
psychologists as to what would be sensible practice. Each of these
different studies, and several others, pointed to different aspects of
work motivation, and showed that there was much more involved for people
than simply earning money. The ﬁrst study, on lighting, had shown that
people respond to management or others taking an interest in what they
do. The bank-wiring room showed that doing the right thing by one's
colleagues was more important than simply trying to get extra pay. And
the aircraft factory study showed the value of effective leadership, and
also the value of people being able to see their own job in an overall
context.

Insight The most important part of most people's working life is the
people they work with on a day-to-day basis. So good management comes
from ensuring that people can carry out high-quality work and have good
working relationships. This is not something that can be managed by
slogans or mission statements. EXPECTATIONS AND MANAGEMENT As a result
of the Hawthorne studies, work psychologists began to pay close
attention to the social dimensions of working.

12. Working life

261

What became apparent almost immediately was the way that people respond
to the expectations which other people have of them. If managers
distrust their staff, and show their distrust by close supervision and
not allowing them to make even minor decisions for themselves, the
result is that their staff will become unwilling to take responsibility,
and sometimes even become untrustworthy. But if managers trust their
staff, and show it by listening to their ideas and giving them enough
autonomy to get on with doing their work properly, people almost always
respond by acting responsibly. Theory X and Theory Y McGregor (1960)
drew these and many other observations showing the importance of
expectations in management together, and concluded that how people
behave at work has everything to do with how they are treated. McGregor
argued that people like to feel valued and appreciated at work and, that
if they are given the opportunity, they will generally work hard.
However, some managers, McGregor argued, actually create
irresponsibility among their employees by showing, through their
everyday practices, that they don't trust their staff, and that they
think they are naturally lazy. McGregor argued that managers tend to
have two different underlying theories about human nature which they
apply to their employees. The ﬁrst one, which he called Theory X, is the
old-fashioned idea that people are really shiftless and lazy, and won't
work unless they are made to. This type of theory, according to
McGregor, is the one which leads to these self-defeating approaches to
management and supervision. The second theory, which McGregor called
Theory Y, is the idea that people really like to work, and that the job
of the manager is to provide a working context which will allow them to
show what they can do. Managers who hold Theory Y, McGregor argued, set
up working conditions in which staff feel valued and trusted. As a
result, their staff really do work hard because they know that their
efforts are appreciated.

262

Human resource management The early theories of what motivates people at
work form an important background to the area of management known as
human resource management. This, as the name suggests, is the branch of
management which is particularly concerned with people. A great many
modern organizational psychologists are involved in human resource
management, and their concern is to ensure that the organization's
practices are all operating to make sure that people are working well
and positively together, and in a way which allows them to adapt to
change when it is needed. WORKING IN TEAMS One of the important areas in
human resource management has to do with helping people to work in ways
which realize their potential. Sometimes, this involves giving them more
challenging jobs to do; but, sometimes, also it involves organizing work
so that it can be done by teams. Hayes (2002) discussed how effective
work teams can be in helping an organization to cope with change and
develop responses to challenges.

Insight Working teams are a powerful way of harnessing people's social
motivation alongside their individual abilities. If they are given
sufﬁcient autonomy and responsibility to feel effective, teams can be
powerful contributors to the success of an organization. Team building A
team is different from a working group because it is task-focused and
much more clearly structured. Organizational psychologists have
developed various kinds of team-building exercises which can be used to
help to train people to work together. Some of these exercises focus on
helping people to get to know one another -- they adopt an interpersonal
approach, encouraging people to be honest with one another, and creating
an open and safe climate in

12. Working life

263

which people feel able to admit their weaknesses and identify their
training needs. In the 1960s and 1970s, many team-building exercises
adopted this approach, focusing on sensitivity training, in which people
learned to become more sensitive to one another. They would learn, for
example, about non-verbal communication and how people can signal
intentions or emotions by their body language or behaviour. They would
also learn how to listen carefully to what people are really saying
(something that most of us are quite bad at). And they would learn how
to offer support when people are doing something particularly
challenging and needing help. In other words, they learned to respond to
the interpersonal messages of other members of the group. More recently,
approaches to team building have tended to emphasize the roles and tasks
which people in the group are concerned with. Adair (1968) argued that
any given team has to take account of three sets of needs: task needs --
the practical things which have to be done in order to do the job at
hand; group needs -- to do with overcoming interpersonal quarrels or
disputes, and making sure that people can act together effectively; and
individual needs -- to do with what the individual members of the team
want to get out of it. The job of the team leader, in this model, is to
pay attention to all three types of need and to make sure that they are
all at least partly satisﬁed. It isn't enough just to concentrate on the
demands of the job at hand and to ignore the group's needs, because this
could mean that tensions between members of the group become so strong
that afterwards, those people couldn't work together again. And it isn't
really a good idea to concentrate only on the task and the group's needs
and to ignore individual ones. It might get the job done, but in the
long term people work much better when they beneﬁt personally from being
involved, too. The personal beneﬁts of belonging to a team, though,
don't need to be visible ones. In Chapter 2, we looked at the process of
social identiﬁcation, and how people like to be able to feel proud of

264

belonging to a particular group. Hayes (2002) argued that this is also a
fundamental aspect of team working. Belonging to a successful, achieving
group, and being recognized as contributing to it, is sometimes enough
on its own to satisfy individual needs. Alternatively, teamwork may be
seen as a way of accumulating experience which will help in later
promotion.

Insight Building up a team can take time and effort, especially if
people are unused to that way of working. But once it has been properly
developed, a working team can make a lot of difference to how a company
or organization works. The important thing, really, is the attitude that
management has towards teamwork. Imai (1988) showed how Japanese
management systems involve all of the workers, at any level in the
company, in a continuous drive for improvement. People are encouraged to
feel proud of, and committed to, their company, and are treated as
intelligent and responsible people, no matter what job they are doing.
So if they are asked to join a speciﬁc team to solve a problem, they are
often pleased to be involved, and to be recognized as someone who has
something worthwhile to contribute. In too many organizations in the
Western world, however, contributions like this are still ignored or
unrecognized by management, so they are seen as just an additional chore
for the individual. Although a skilled team leader will be able to get
around this, by ensuring that their team, at least, pays attention to
people's individual needs, their job can be made a great deal harder or
a great deal easier by the organization's general policies towards its
staff. LEADERSHIP Organizational psychologists have also been involved
in studying leadership. Much of the early research into leadership
tended to look for particular people who had leadership 'qualities' --
who automatically acted like leaders and took on leadership

12. Working life

265

responsibilities when that sort of situation arose. Later, though,
largely as a result of a particularly interesting study conducted in the
1930s, psychologists became more and more interested in the idea that
effective leadership was actually a style of interacting with people,
rather than a speciﬁc inherited personality trait. Leadership styles The
study was conducted by Lewin, Lippitt and White (1939), and was actually
done in a boys' after-school model-making club. The boys were divided
into three groups, and each group was given a leader who acted in a
different way. Later, the leaders were changed round, to make sure that
it was really their inﬂuence and not just differences between the groups
of boys. The different leadership styles and their results are described
in Table 12.3. As you can see, they support McGregor's idea that leaders
bring out particular behaviour in their subordinates and, in fact, this
study and the other research which it stimulated was an important part
of the evidence which McGregor used when he ﬁrst developed his 'Theory X
and Theory Y' model of management. Table 12.3 Leadership styles and
their effects. Style Authoritarian Leader makes arbitrary decisions,
doesn't consult group, gives orders, supervises closely. Democratic

Laissez-faire

266

Effect Group works hard when leader is present, stops work when absent.
Competitive and attention-seeking. Group works steadily Leader makes
decisions on the basis of group discussions, whether supervised or not,
is helpful with one another, delegates responsibility, and solves
problems jointly. gives requests rather than orders and expects
co-operation. Leader leaves group alone Group disorganized, does to get
on with work, does very little work, and is easily not intervene or
attempt to demoralized by small inﬂuence them. problems or failures.

Following this work, approaches to leadership became concerned with just
how organizational leaders or managers inﬂuence the people in their
working groups. Some theories have seen effective leaders as having
preferred styles, which concentrate either on the job at hand, or on the
people they are dealing with. Task-oriented leaders are people who focus
on the job which has to be done, whereas process-oriented leaders are
more concerned with making sure that everything in the group runs
smoothly, and that people get along well together. Interestingly, and
contrary to what we might expect, the evidence suggests that
process-oriented leaders actually get more done in the end. Although the
task-oriented leaders are concerned with what needs to be done, they are
less efﬁcient overall because they allow tensions and resentments to
build up in their teams and, in the end, this means that people work
less productively. Process-oriented leaders, on the other hand,
concentrate on making sure that people are reasonably happy with one
another, and with what is going on, so that they are free to give their
best efforts to the job. Transactional leadership This observation led
to a focus on leadership as being all about the transactions which take
place between manager and employee. Transactions are interpersonal
exchanges between two people. Often, these take the form of 'strokes' --
that is, ritual greetings or enquiries which signal that the two people
have recognized one another. A habitual 'good morning' exchanged between
two people at a bus stop or train station is a good example of a stroke.
The words of the exchange are relatively unimportant, but the greeting
signals that the two have acknowledged one another. As we've already
seen, being recognized by other people matters to us, so the everyday
strokes that we get from other people can be very important. We may not
notice them much when they happen, but we certainly miss them if they
don't. The idea of transactional leadership is that effective leadership
is essentially a joint thing, depending on both the manager and the
employee. How effective a leader is depends on how both the

12. Working life

267

leader and the employees interact. It doesn't just depend on the leader
alone. After all, people won't co-operate with someone who doesn't seem
to come up to scratch, so a leader who comes across as being ineffectual
or incompetent isn't going to be able to inﬂuence other people very
much. What this means is that a manager, consciously or unconsciously,
negotiates their position with the employees. It's an interpersonal
relationship, and their inﬂuence depends on being respected or valued.
This is where the transactions come in. Strokes, for instance, can be
either positive or negative: they can help us to feel good, or they can
make us feel unhappy. Positive leaders look for ways of encouraging
their staff to feel good, by recognizing their achievements and helping
them to work around difﬁculties. Negative leaders criticize their staff,
and only notice mistakes rather than positive achievements. But as
decades of organizational psychology have taught us, it's not a method
that gets the best out of people.

Insight Transactional leadership is about the quality of the
interactions which the leader has with the staff. Managers who engage in
negative and unpleasant interactions have been repeatedly shown to have
less efﬁcient and proﬁtable departments than friendly managers. So it is
odd that those management styles are still so common. Transformational
leadership An even more recent way of looking at leadership is to do
with the way in which large organizations can often become very
unwieldy. This can make them slow to respond to changes in society,
which means that they are not able to compete properly with other
companies in the same line of work. A great many organizational
psychologists are involved in organizational change, and one of the
outcomes of this has been to make it clearer what an inﬂuence some kinds
of leadership can have. Some leaders seem to be particularly good at
getting their staff to deal positively with change and to approach their
jobs in new

268

ways. They are known as transformational leaders, because they have the
knack of being able to encourage an organization to transform itself --
to adapt a different style of working. In recent years, with so many
organizations having to adjust to an entirely different economic
context, this has become an important feature of leadership. Getting
people to deal positively with change isn't as easy as it sounds. People
will often resist changes to the way that they work, but this isn't
because they are simply being obstructive. As we saw in Chapters 5 and
6, we actively make sense of our worlds, and we act in ways that ﬁt with
what we understand is going on. So, sometimes, people will object to
changes in how they work because they can't see how it will improve
things. A transformational leader is generally someone who realizes how
important it is that people should understand what is happening, and who
makes an effort to show them why, and how, it will be worthwhile to make
the efforts. Transformational leaders help people to come to terms with
organizational change by showing how the new approach can be linked with
what people are already doing. Smith and Peterson (1988) showed how
these leaders often use metaphors and stories to help make these links
clear. Another feature of transformational leadership is that such
leaders also encourage members of the organization to be involved in the
changes. They listen to what they have to say, and take their ideas into
account. In the end, of course, this means that the employees are much
more likely to work effectively and to make the changes successful,
because they, too, are aware that there are good reasons for them.

Insight Times of change are always uncomfortable for people, and
resistance to change at the workplace can drive an organization into the
ground. So transformational leaders who can encourage people to respond
well to change are particularly valuable in a changing economic climate.

12. Working life

269

This doesn't mean, though, that all organizational change is always a
good thing, or that it is always successful. Sometimes, attempts to
change how organizations work are resisted by the people working in them
because they really are impractical -- they have been badly thought out,
and nobody has consulted the people who are really doing the work.
Sometimes, too, people have simply had more change than they can cope
with, and need a period to consolidate the new ways and let new ideas
sink in.

Organizational culture Transformational leaders are people who try to
change the general culture of the organization in which they work.
Organizational culture is all about the general assumptions, beliefs and
practices in an organization -- its distinctive style of working.
Sometimes, you can ﬁnd two organizations, in exactly the same line of
work, but which go about doing that work in entirely different ways. The
people working in those organizations have quite different approaches to
what they are doing; they deal with problems differently, and they
expect different attitudes from management. Effectively, they are
participating in different types of organizational cultures.

Insight Full organizational cultures have their own symbols and legends.
But it is important to realize that these are only powerful because they
reﬂect deeper beliefs in the culture. Trying to change the culture
simply by changing the symbols can't work. Levels of culture Although
some organizational researchers have spent their time trying to classify
different types of organizational cultures, organizational psychologists
tend to be more interested in how cultures work, and why they inﬂuence
the people working in them the way that they do. Lundberg (1990)
observed that organizational cultures seem to have three different
levels, and these are listed in Table 12.4. Psychologists have studied
culture at

270

Table 12.4 Levels of organizational culture. The manifest level Symbols,
language, stories, rituals, etc. The strategic level Beliefs about the
company's direction, planning and expectations, internal management
strategies. The core level Ideologies, values and assumptions about
human nature and what people and the world are like. (Lundberg, 1990)

each of these levels, but we tend to be particularly interested in the
deepest level of shared assumptions and beliefs. Other researchers, such
as Van Maanen and Barley (1985) showed how organizational cultures
aren't really just single phenomena, with everyone in the organization
thinking the same way. Instead, different groups within the organization
have their own ways of thinking. In a strong organizational culture,
these different groups overlap, so they all have something in common.
But in other types of organization, different groups may have entirely
different assumptions and beliefs.

Insight A positive organizational culture makes people feel valued and
able to do good work, so they are proud of belonging to that
organization. A dictatorial culture, or one where cost-cutting means
that people have to do bad work they are not proud of, produces high
staff turnover and dissatisﬁed workers. Working groups Any organization
contains a whole host of in-groups and out-groups: there are friendship
groups, departmental groups, working teams and many others. People often
feel more loyalty to some of these groups than to others. Some
organizational change doesn't happen, for instance, because it is
resisted by 'canteen cultures' that keep certain beliefs and ideas going
among the workforce even when management are trying to change it.

12. Working life

271

The classic example of how a canteen culture can work against
organizational change is in equal opportunities. An organization may
adopt an ofﬁcial equal opportunities policy, but groups of employees may
still perpetuate racist beliefs. So anyone from an ethnic minority
background has a very hard time indeed. Ofﬁcially, for example, the
police service is trying to be non-racist. It has maintained an equal
opportunities policy for many years now and has attempted to develop
better community relations with ethnic minority groups. However, several
studies have shown how canteen cultures in the police service perpetuate
a high level of racism, which isn't really affected by ofﬁcial policy.
And it is the canteen culture, of course, which new recruits encounter
when they are learning practical policing. As we've seen, we develop our
schemas and our understanding of the world from our experience, and we
use them as a guide for action. So ﬁrst experiences like this are
important in shaping future working practices. Hayes (2002) discussed
how an understanding of the kind of social identity processes which we
looked at in Chapter 2 could help us to understand how canteen cultures
work, and why they are so inﬂuential. Knowing about social
representations, too (see Chapter 3) can help us to understand how these
shared beliefs develop. People tend to take more notice of people who
they think are like themselves, or who belong to the same in-group. So
it's particularly easy for a group in an organization to develop shared
beliefs about their work, and about life in general. Applying these two
social psychology theories, therefore, can help us to understand how to
tackle this sort of problem.

Insight The power of organizational culture is closely linked with
social identiﬁcation. People always form social groups at work, and a
positive organizational culture can include those groups as its
strengths, because everyone is pulling in the same direction. In more
negative organizations, the group's values and those of the management
don't connect.

272

What we have covered in this chapter has been only a brief glimpse of
psychology at work. There are many more areas of working life that work
psychologists have studied. For example, ergonomic psychologists study
the human--machine interface -- in other words, they design machines
which people can operate easily, and which will reduce the likelihood of
mistakes. Ergonomics is a branch of work psychology that has had a
powerful presence in industry for many decades, but there isn't really
enough room to write about it here. See Understand Applied Psychology if
you are interested. Occupational psychologists are also concerned with
psychology at work, and particularly with how people and jobs come
together. They are involved in selecting people for jobs, and developing
tests and other techniques for identifying which people appear to have
the personal qualities required by a particular job. They are involved
in vocational guidance, which is all about helping people to ﬁnd the
right type of occupation for their own particular personality. And they
are also involved with managerial strategies, such as job enrichment,
which help people to become more satisﬁed with their working experience,
and so become able to contribute more to their organization, and develop
more personal skills. You can ﬁnd out more about psychology at work in
Understand Applied Psychology. But in the next chapter, we will look at
some aspects of psychology and leisure -- what we do when we aren't
working.

12. Working life

273

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 We can tell how important work is by looking at
the negative effects of unemployment. 2 Early studies of 'scientiﬁc
management' emphasized efﬁciency but ignored human factors in working. 3
There are many different approaches to team-building, but one recurrent
factor is respect for each team member's knowledge and experience. 4
Task-focused leadership styles are not usually as effective as
people-oriented ones. 5 The transactions which occur between managers
and staff are important in enhancing or reducing morale, and hence
efﬁciency. 6 Transformational leaders are good at getting people to work
positively with change. 7 Organizations vary greatly in their ideas,
customs and general approaches. Often these variations are signiﬁcant
enough to become an organizational culture. 8 Organizational cultures
have deeper levels as well as the obvious, manifest level. 9
Organizations consist of many groups and networks, which can often be
much more inﬂuential than the directives coming from higher management.
10 Successful organizational cultures build positive social
identiﬁcations for their staff.

274

13 Leisure In this chapter you will learn: • to identify the positive
and negative effects of watching TV • why computer games are
psychologically appealing • how to differentiate between external and
internal motivation. In this chapter, we will look at some of the
psychology which underlies our leisure activities. The concept of
leisure has become increasingly important in modern society. By
comparison with pre-industrial society, or even with the industrial
society of 50 years ago, we spend far less of our day-to-day lives
working (even though it may not always seem like that!). And for
signiﬁcant chunks of the week, we have speciﬁc times when we are not
actually working at all. It is difﬁcult, really, to deﬁne leisure
activities, because many of the things that some people regard as
leisure are regarded as work, or at least chores, by others. Shopping is
one of those things. Some people enjoy it, and treat it as a leisure
pursuit, while others detest it and treat it as an unfortunate necessity
of life. It certainly happens during 'leisure' hours; but whether it is
truly leisure is open to question. So we will not look at consumer
psychology here. If you are interested, there is a chapter on it in
Understand Applied Psychology. What we will look at in this chapter are
activities which are more self-evidently the kinds of things that people
regard as leisure.

13. Leisure

275

People have varied interests and hobbies and, as we saw in Chapter 2,
it's possible to see them as an expression of our basic need for
selfactualization. We enjoy developing our skills and interests, but we
also sometimes spend our leisure time in less active pursuits, such as
watching TV -- which may sometimes involve learning things, as in the
large number of DIY and cookery programmes, but may equally well be
nothing more than passive entertainment. So we will begin this chapter
by looking at TV watching as a leisure pursuit. Then we will go on to
look at a slightly more active way of interacting with a video screen,
in the case of computer games, before concluding our sampling of
psychology and leisure by looking at sport psychology. Of course, for
some people sport is a profession rather than a leisure activity, and
many of the insights from sport psychology have been developed with
professional sports people in mind. But equally, many people play sport
as a hobby or pastime, and so it is appropriate to look at it brieﬂy
here. If you're particularly interested in this area, there is a more
detailed chapter on sport psychology in Understand Applied Psychology.

Watching TV In Western society, watching TV is a very large part of our
relaxation activities. Over 98 per cent of homes in Britain have TVs,
and over half have more than one TV set. People spend on average about
four or ﬁve hours a day watching TV, which makes it a signiﬁcant
cultural activity. But ever since TV became popular, people have been
concerned about it. Psychologists have been studying its effects for
some time. THE EFFECTS OF TV VIEWING One common debate, of course, is
whether TV increases antisocial behaviour, and particularly aggression,
or not. Most psychologists ﬁrmly believe that it can do so, although it
is hard to obtain deﬁnitive evidence, since there are so many other
things which also

276

inﬂuence people's lives and can lead to increased aggression -- notably
the frustration which arises from constant poverty. The earliest studies
of TV's inﬂuence on aggressive behaviour were laboratory experiments.
These were designed to assess an immediate change in behaviour as a
result of people being exposed to aggressive images on TV. Typically,
research participants would be shown a piece of ﬁlm which showed
distinctively violent behaviour, and then they would be observed to see
whether they mimicked that behaviour, or showed heightened aggression in
response to a stimulus or a questionnaire. These studies did show some
modelling effects, although not as strongly as some people expected them
to, but other studies failed to ﬁnd the same results.

Insight Media people often claim that people aren't inﬂuenced by what
they see on TV. But if this were the case, TV advertising would have
died out years ago. Companies which advertise on TV are well aware of
how even a brief exposure can have a powerful inﬂuence. Problems with
studying the effects of TV But these laboratory studies were really very
artiﬁcial. Even if people are inﬂuenced by violence on TV, it's unlikely
that it would show up straight away. Rather, as Bandura showed in his
studies of imitative learning, we wouldn't be likely to show the
aggressive behaviour until it was somehow worthwhile -- or at least
appropriate -- for us to do so. So one reason why laboratory studies of
TV violence often have contradictory results may be because of the
methods which they adopt. Another problem with these studies is that
they tend to look for group inﬂuences, rather than for speciﬁc effects
on individuals. They study a large number of people and see whether, on
the whole, their behaviour seems to be inﬂuenced by the type of
programmes that they watch. By studying people as a whole, they aim to
cancel out individual differences and just look at general

13. Leisure

277

trends. But when it comes to something as important as this, it is
individuals who matter. Even if only one extremely disturbed person out
of six million viewers imitates a TV murderer, that is one too many.
Social scripts and social understanding It is difﬁcult, therefore, to
obtain absolute proof that violence on TV directly affects people. But
this doesn't mean there is no evidence at all. As we saw in the early
part of this book, human beings are particularly ready to acquire social
scripts and different types of social understandings, and people learn
from any kind of social contact. TV has a capacity to deﬁne a form of
reality for people and this can make a great deal of difference to how
we live our lives. It acts as a window into the wider world, and tells
people what that world is like. So studies of the amount of TV that
people actually watch can tell us quite a lot. One thing they tell us,
is that watching a lot of TV can distort how we see the world. Gerbner
and Gross (1976) compared heavy TV watchers and people who don't watch
very much. They found that heavy viewers had a very unrealistic
perception of the outside world, seeing it as an extremely dangerous
place. Sometimes, these people believed that they were likely to get
mugged as soon as they stepped outside their own doors, even though the
towns that they lived in made such an event extremely unlikely indeed.
More recent replications of the studies have shown this effect to have
become even stronger. The way that TV tends to concentrate on violent
action, both in reporting news and in its drama, means that heavy TV
viewers see the world as a much more dangerous place than it really is.
People who watch less TV, on the other hand, generally have a much more
realistic perception of the risks of everyday living. They are aware
that dangers exist, of course, but they don't exaggerate them the way
that the heavy viewers do. They can weigh up, realistically, the odds
against something untoward happening, and so carry on with their lives
in a positive way.

278

The problem isn't really the fact that violence occurs on TV. It's more
to do with the proportion of violence that is shown on TV by comparison
with the amount of other types of human activity. Most people go their
whole lives without ever coming across a murder in real life; yet the
average TV-watching child has seen something over 600 TV murders by the
time it reaches ten years old. Such an unrealistic proportion can't help
but distort any child's picture of what the world is like.

Insight Moral panics are generally about people copying things they see
on TV. But the real danger isn't copying actions: it's in the social
scripts they use of how people deal with revenge, betrayal, anger and
frustration. By suggesting that this is a normal way of behaving, they
undermine more positive community values. POSITIVE TV Not all TV is bad,
of course. Nature and science documentaries or historical programmes,
for example, broaden our awareness of the world in which we live. Sports
coverage allows people to participate vicariously in competitive
activities, to express their loyalties and develop their understanding.
For many people living in modern industrial societies, TV has replaced
books as the main way that we come to know our world. It's become a
major agent of socialization, showing both children and adults how the
world works. TV also contains positive messages in terms of humour and
fun. Entertainment programmes like game shows may appear trivial to
those who look for high-culture entertainment, but they actually show a
friendly and positive approach in their dealings with people -- most of
the time, at any rate -- and this is more useful in modelling behaviour
than the more aggressive behaviour shown in soap operas and dramas.
Sports and music programmes, too, serve positive psychological
functions, stimulating people's interest and enthusiasm.

13. Leisure

279

Insight The popularity of prosocial TV programmes indicates that the
viewing public quite enjoy them. But market research is misleading and
directs programme-makers towards antisocial TV because of the way that
dramatic events stick in people's minds, and also because we are not
often able to articulate more positive values very clearly. Teaching
prosocial behaviour There have been a great many studies on the inﬂuence
of children's programmes in teaching children prosocial behaviour
(prosocial is the opposite of antisocial). For example, in 1976
Rubinstein and others found that ﬁve- and six-year-olds who saw an
episode of Lassie in which a boy helped a dog were more likely to help
puppies in distress than children who hadn't seen the programme. The
programme illustrated positive social scripts (see Chapter 3) which the
children had adopted for themselves. There is some evidence that the
early soap operas, or at least the British and Australian ones, had
prosocial effects on children -- and possibly adults too. The Australian
soap Neighbours, for instance, used to contain a number of clearly
positive messages in its content. It contained ideas such as: if you see
your friend is in trouble, try to help them out; or if someone has upset
you, try to work out the problem with them so that you can be friends
again. Soap operas of this type used to portray people as belonging to a
community in which people helped one another out -- a very different
message from the competitive aggression of so much TV drama.
Unfortunately, however, recent trends in TV drama have meant that the
positive messages of soap operas have become lost, and there is much
more of a focus on the negative aspect of human interaction than used to
be the case -- aggression, murder, jealousy, and so on. So what used to
be a positive viewing experience, both for children and adults, has now
become as negative as other forms of TV drama; with the result that many
parents are beginning to restrict their children's exposure to these
programmes too.

280

The real problem is that programming decisions are based heavily on
market research, and market research, because of the way that it asks
the questions, will always ﬁnd that people identify the most dramatic
episodes as the ones that had most impact on them. They are, after all,
the most memorable. But that doesn't mean that such drama should drive
the programme's basic content. As we've seen in other chapters, people
are often less able to talk about positive experience, but it still
makes an impression. And, of course, drama has more effect in a context
where it is unusual, rather than when it is what happens every week. The
success of programmes with more positive social scripts, such as Top
Gear, shows that the public does enjoy positive TV, as long as it is
exciting and interesting. TV and reading There is quite a lot of concern
regarding the inﬂuence TV has on children's reading. Gunter (1982)
showed how heavy TV viewing can seriously impair a child's learning to
read, particularly during the earliest years of the child's education.
The reasons for this are all tied up with the child's own perceptions --
of what reading is for, and why it should make the effort to learn to
read in the ﬁrst place. As we saw in Chapter 9, the experience of an
expert is quite different from the experience of a novice, and this
applies to reading too. Expert readers see reading as a doorway into
another world of information; but children who are only just learning to
read have quite a different experience. One reason why some children ﬁnd
it hard to learn to read is because they haven't actually realized that
it will be much easier once they are good at it. Novice readers are
often so concerned with the mechanics of reading that they hardly notice
the story. To them, reading is very hard, and they sometimes can't see
any point in doing it. This is made even more extreme by TV, because the
child sees TV as similar to reading, but much easier. Reading needs a
lot of practice: it takes time and effort before you recognize words at
a glance, and are free to concentrate on the meaning of what you are
reading. TV, on the other hand, gives you instant access to information.
Moreover, it tells you stories, and lets you know about the outside
world. So some children simply can't see the 13. Leisure

281

point in learning to read, and unless someone takes the time and trouble
to show them what the point is, they will never put in the effort needed
to become ﬂuent readers. This is one reason why reading stories to
children is so important -- it shows them the kind of experience which
they will be able to get in the long run, if they carry on making the
effort to read. And TV isn't really a substitute for reading. It's an
entirely different type of cognitive experience. For one thing, reading
trains children's imagination, because children need to create their own
mental pictures about what they are reading. Reading also introduces
children to abstract ideas, that can't really be portrayed in a concrete
form -- and that forms an important basis for later understanding and
analytical thinking. TV, as we have seen, can have some positive effects
on children's development -- it isn't all negative. But reading is an
entirely different skill, which trains different mental abilities. So it
is important that young children see it as such, and not as an
equivalent to TV.

Computer games Computer games are another aspect of modern leisure life
which have inﬂuenced a great many people -- not quite as many as TV, but
a sizeable proportion of the population. They have become a major sector
of the leisure market when it comes to children and teenagers; and many
adults also have computer games which they enjoy playing. Unlike most
other leisure activities, video games are relatively new -- the very
ﬁrst game, Pong, was invented only in the early 1970s. Since then, they
have continued to develop, and each year sees the launch of new games
and new ideas.

Insight Rogers showed that people have a strong drive to develop skills
and reﬁne their abilities, which he called self-actualization. Computer
games give people that opportunity, in many different ways, and this
accounts for a good part of their popularity.

282

TYPES OF COMPUTER GAME Computer games are tailored for several different
interfaces, ranging from ordinary domestic computers to specialized
games consoles. The accuracy of representation which they provide also
varies, from very simple games such as Tetris which can even be played
on a small-screen mobile phone, to highly complex ones with realistic,
ﬁlm-like backgrounds and characters, which require specialized consoles
to operate them. So there is quite a range of possibilities available to
those who enjoy playing computer games, and most people have their own
favourite types. Action/adventure games Action/adventure games are those
in which the main character (or characters) is involved in some kind of
quest or challenge. This might be seeking out something, such as hidden
treasure; or simply defeating 'baddies' of one sort or another.
Characters in these games often become well known as popular ﬁgures -- a
process which again has been going on for almost as long as computer
games have existed -- and their fame continues long after people have
stopped playing the game. Many people, for example, still remember Sonic
the Hedgehog, even though the game itself is completely outdated; and
the character of Lara Croft has become known by many who have never even
attempted the Tomb Raider games. Simulations Simulations are another
popular form of computer game which generally involve some quite
elaborate construction. One of the earliest of this type of game was
SimCity, in which the player had to construct a viable city -- putting
in place features such as sanitation, factories, schools, residences and
the like. Other games of this type may require the player to construct
their own robot, empire, spaceship, or give them similar types of
challenges. Effectively, they are problem-solving games, requiring the
player to put together various types of information; and quite a few of
them have a hidden educational content.

13. Leisure

283

Sports games Sports games mimic the kinds of pastimes which people might
engage in as part of their more active leisure pursuits. They require
the person to simulate the same kinds of skills as they would in
carrying out these skills in real life, and often to make the same kinds
of judgements, although with a very different set of controls. Everyday
sports such as golf or tennis are popular in this category but, overall,
the most popular are driving games. Driving and ﬂying simulations were
some of the earliest games to be marketed. Their development may have
owed something also to their potential for real training, in that those
training to master complex types of controls, such as in ﬂying an
aircraft, or the sophisticated aspects of car driving, can often learn
real skills from a well-designed simulation. So this area of computer
games has always been well researched and, as a result it developed more
quickly than many of the other areas. Strategy games Strategy games have
an even longer history, but used to be played with models and props
rather than computers. Many of the traditional war games were converted
into computer games, and have proved very popular. The ﬁrst, of course,
were familiar domestic strategy games -- computer chess games were
developed almost at the same time as home computers themselves; and
other popular board games such as Risk or backgammon have lent
themselves successfully to computerized versions. But the computer
strategy game goes much further than that. The additional effects which
they offer, such as 3D or explosions, have meant that many games in this
category have been developed explicitly for gaming platforms. Some
strategy games are speciﬁcally designed as team games -- they are played
over the internet, often between groups of players who have never
personally met, and they involve close co-operation in order for
difﬁculties to be overcome. They are often referred to as 'Dungeon'
games, because one of the earliest of these games was a fantasy-based
one called Dungeons and Dragons.

284

Arcade games Arcade games are played purely for fun, without any
particular goal apart from scoring as many points as possible. They
include the shoot-'em-up video games, which typically involve chasing,
ﬁring missiles and causing opposing screen artefacts to explode or
selfdestruct; and skill games which involve catching or hitting objects.
These games have a long history (in computer game terms), dating right
back to Pong and Space Invaders; although their modern-day equivalents
are, of course, far more sophisticated. What is interesting, though, is
how popular they continue to be; and that in itself can give us several
insights into the psychology of computer games. Self-improvement games
With the growing popularity of small personal game devices, there has
been an increase in the number of self-improvement games of one sort or
another on the market. Some of these have speciﬁc goals, such as
language training games, but others are designed to increase mental
stimulation -- on the grounds, as we saw in Chapter 11, that the more we
practice our mental abilities, the less they degenerate as we grow
older. Puzzles such as crosswords and Sudoku have been popular in paper
and pencil forms for many years, and have made the transition easily
into electronic format. But as electronic devices become more
sophisticated, voice response, reaction time, and even the monitoring of
physical movements have all become possible, and integrated into these
games, to make a more interactive experience for the player. THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF COMPUTER GAMES Whether someone enjoys a particular
computer game or not will depend on a number of factors: their own
personal interests, their personality, the structure of the game, the
equipment they have available, and the skills which they already have in
handling that equipment. Some games, for example, require more
sophisticated handling than others, or more experience. But game
designers are very careful to gauge the levels of difﬁculty within the
game itself, to ensure that players can develop their skills and advance
from one level to another as they get better at playing it.

13. Leisure

285

Rewards and incentives This carefully staged learning is important,
because it helps to keep up players' motivation. By providing manageable
goals for people to aim for and achieve, the game designers help to
build a player's sense of competence and excitement. Added to this, when
each new goal is reached, some kind of reward or recognition is offered.
Sometimes this is an extrinsic reward within the game, such as obtaining
a new type of weapon or a points bonus, but sometimes, it is an
intrinsic reward that comes about as the person recognizes what they
have managed to do. As we saw in Chapter 9, learning through rewards is
a fundamental form of learning which has been studied in detail by
psychologists, and is very effective. The popularity of video games
gives us yet another example of just how effective it can be.
Self-efﬁcacy beliefs The idea of staged learning and the acquisition of
more sophisticated skills taps into other aspects of human motivation as
well. In particular, it helps to build up the person's self-efﬁcacy
beliefs -- their sense of competence at being able to undertake
particular challenges or perform particular tasks. We looked at
selfefﬁcacy beliefs in Chapter 6 and saw that they can be important in
building up our personal self-conﬁdence, as well as affecting our
preparedness to learn. Computer games encourage success through
perseverance, and so encourage children (and adults) to recognize that
they can achieve things if they work hard at them -- a useful message in
any walk of life! Sensation-seeking Another aspect of human psychology
which is activated by many computer games is that of sensation-seeking.
Many people enjoy activities which are exciting, or which provoke a
certain level of anxiety. The popularity of fairground rides is an
example of this, and computer games tap into some similar types of
psychological mechanisms. They don't do it in the same way as fairground
rides do, of course; but the level of concentration which they require,
and the skilled control, means that they can become quite thrilling and
absorbing for the person playing them. The effect is increased,

286

of course, by the background music of the game, which has been designed
to heighten these emotional responses and to keep the player absorbed in
what is going on. More recent wireless-based physical activity games
also build on this psychological mechanism, as players gain the
kinaesthetic feedback from the movements of their own bodies. Social
interaction A fourth aspect of human psychology which is involved in
many computer games (although not all) concerns the way we respond to
other people. The team-based 'Dungeon'-type strategy games involve
co-operation between players, and those who play them ﬁnd this type of
interaction very rewarding -- perhaps because it avoids the challenges
and ambiguities of other types of human contact. Some people have
expressed concern that teenagers with social problems may use this type
of contact to avoid more direct face-to-face interactions; but the
evidence seems to suggest that such teenagers have always devoted
themselves to hobbies in any case, and at least these activities do
bring them into contact with like-minded others. So they may actually
result in such teenagers becoming more social than they would if they
had been engaging in a more isolated activity such as model-building.
More commonly, though, games tend to tap into the psychological
mechanisms activated by competition. Most games offer some opportunity
for comparison with other people, even if it is only on the high-score
board; and many games are designed explicitly so that two or more
players can compete directly with one another. Wii-based sport and music
games allow players to compete directly with one another, or to
co-operate, for example by taking part in a virtual band. By offering a
social dimension as well as a personal one, computer game designers
encourage the game to be an interactive event between people, as well as
between the person and the machine. ARE COMPUTER GAMES HARMFUL? Just
about any form of new technology raises social concerns about whether it
is beneﬁcial or harmful. When computer games became

13. Leisure

287

popular, many people worried about whether children would be damaged by
playing them. Effectively, these concerns took three forms. Firstly, the
fact that many games were based on violent concepts, such as beating up
'baddies' or shooting things, was thought to encourage a culture of
violence among young people, or to make them more aggressive. Secondly,
the fact that children spent so much time playing computer games raised
concerns about damage to their physical health. Thirdly, the obvious
enjoyment and preference which children showed for computer games was
considered to be potentially harmful in terms of their future learning.

Insight Research indicates that computer games are more likely to be
beneﬁcial than harmful, by encouraging values such as perseverance and
accuracy. But doing anything to excess isn't a good idea, and the
inactivity involved in many games can result in health problems.
Violence and aggression The psychologist Mark Grifﬁths reviewed the
evidence of various studies which have attempted to explore whether the
violence of computer games is harmful or not. The general idea is that
the violence in the games encourages children to model their everyday
behaviour on the type of behaviour demonstrated in the game; and also
that the gory nature of much computer violence will brutalize children
so that they come to regard it as normal. However, most of the studies
which have attempted to investigate this effect are inconclusive.
Certainly if children are put in situations where they can act out the
type of behaviour shown in a game, soon after playing it on the
computer, then they will do so. But that is short-term imitation in
rather artiﬁcial situations. Studies which attempt more realistic
evaluations are much less clear-cut. Grifﬁths pointed out that the
evidence is inconclusive, but that overall there does not seem to be as
much of a damaging effect as some people imagine. As a general rule,
children are well able

288

to distinguish between computer simulation and reality, in much the same
way as they distinguish between the violence in cartoons and reality.
Although they may sometimes act out the behaviour of some characters in
video games, this is imaginative play, which they are not likely to
confuse with real life. Time spent game playing Concerns about the
amount of time that children spend playing computer games are another
matter. Computer games, as we have seen, are designed to keep the person
playing; and children may not realize how long they have been spending
on that particular activity, without the intervention of an adult.
Physical exercise is important for healthy development -- and for
healthy adult life, for that matter -- so it is important for a child to
have a balance of activities, with some time being spent in physical
play or sport, and some time being spent on more passive activities.
This doesn't mean, though, that computer games are the worst offenders
in this respect. The interaction between the person and the computer is
a much more active and, in many ways more psychologically healthy form
of engagement than the passive receptivity required by TV watching.
Rather than simply watching, the child who is playing on the computer is
acting and thinking, which is preferable to being passive. If it comes
to a choice between watching TV and computer games, then computer games
have a deﬁnite advantage -- depending, of course, on the game and the TV
programme. Too long staring at any kind of screen, though, can be
damaging to the eyesight, because eye muscles need exercising in the
same way as any other type of muscle; and too long sitting down can
encourage obesity; so the ideal is always that children have a balance
of activities rather than doing just one type of leisure activity. Wii
games seem to have taken on that challenge by offering a physically
active though still virtual experience. It will be interesting to see
whether they will have long-term effects in challenging, say, childhood
obesity or other problems.

13. Leisure

289

Insight The personal satisfaction involved in learning physical skills
can be profound. Just the sensation of getting better through practice
can motivate people to quite extreme efforts. And that's just as valid
for beginners as it is for professionals, because it taps into our deep
personal need for self-efﬁcacy and self-actualization. Harm to learning
The third main objection to computer games is that they might be harmful
to children's learning, because they encourage children to fritter away
their time on the games instead of reading or doing things which are
more obviously educational. This objection is more complex, because
children learn in many different ways and, also, because there is
relatively little research evidence. Overall, what evidence there is
suggests that children who like to read still read for pleasure whether
they play computer games or not -- they appear to regard them as
separate activities, not as substitutes for one another. Also, as we
have seen, the perseverance which children devote to video games is
regarded by some psychologists as a valuable form of learning in itself.
Many educational programmes, too, use children's enjoyment of computer
games to convey educational messages. There is a range of educationally
based CD-ROMs available for children of all ages, which combine
educational information with engaging activities and challenges for the
child; and several other games, as we have seen, have an educational
undercurrent. So some video games and other computer activities can
actually enhance children's formal education rather than interfere with
it. Computer-based learning of this type may be regarded as different
from the classic computer game, but it can equally well be argued that
the popularity of video games helps to create the climate for the
children's enjoyment of educational activities, and their readiness to
learn. Again, it depends on the game, and this is deﬁnitely an area
which needs more psychological research. Computer games, then, are a
signiﬁcant part of the leisure activities available to most people.
There is an ever-increasing range of

290

games, and increasingly complex control systems, ranging from
sophisticated driving simulators to ﬁlm-quality displays. But some other
new developments, such as the early 3D-based virtual reality devices,
have been less obviously successful. Home-based virtual reality
equipment did not take off in the way that its designers originally
expected, partly because of the personal vulnerability experienced by
people cut off from their immediate surroundings. DVD-based realism, by
contrast, caught on very fast. This may have been the result of clever
marketing on the part of the DVD people; but few inventions which have
made people feel more vulnerable have been successful in the mass
market. More modern wireless-interface games have overcome these
problems, and are becoming popular. So it seems that computer games are
likely to be with us for a very long time; and understanding the
psychological mechanisms underlying them is interesting in its own
right.

Sport psychology Sport is another important way that people use their
leisure time. Many of us are involved in sport in one way or another,
whether we do it ourselves, or whether we just watch other people do it.
Sporting activities range from everyday exercises such as walking or
jogging, to team sports such as playing football, rugby or hockey, to
performance sports like skating, athletics or cycling. In many ways, it
is difﬁcult to draw a hard and fast line between exercise and sport, but
when the full range is taken into account most of us do something
vaguely sport-like, even if it's only to go swimming now and again. Some
people, though, engage in sport much more seriously. They decide, from a
relatively early age, that they are going to compete seriously in their
particular sporting activity, and from that point they devote tremendous
amounts of time to improving their skills, learning new techniques, and
ensuring that their physical and mental condition is as perfect as they
can get it. Some people do this as amateurs, aiming to participate in
sports as a serious hobby, but not intending to make a living from it.
Others aim to take sport 13. Leisure

291

up as a profession, by achieving international standards of performance
or, possibly, by training others. Whatever their ultimate aim, these
people devote a considerable amount of their lives to perfecting their
sporting performance. Music and dance Sport isn't the only area of human
activity which is like this, of course. Exactly the same thing applies
to both dance and music. To become a professional dancer or musician
doesn't just require a personal talent. It also requires devoting a
large part of one's daily life to learning and perfecting performance
techniques. This is particularly true if someone aims to take up music
or dance as a profession, but it is also true if they want to acquit
themselves competently as an amateur. Many of the ﬁndings of sports
psychologists also apply to the psychology of music and dance. Sport
psychology is all about using psychology to help people to learn skills,
keep motivated, and perform as well as possible. It draws from
psychological knowledge and experience of sporting practice to try to
understand how different factors can inﬂuence sportspeople in their
performance, and what the best methods of training might be. One of the
central aspects of sport psychology, therefore, is how we learn physical
skills. LEARNING PHYSICAL SKILLS Learning to perform a complex physical
action precisely is really quite a complicated thing. It involves
hundreds, or even thousands, of different muscle groups, each
contracting and relaxing at precisely the right moments. Each muscle
contracts in response to a message from the brain, so the different
messages which are sent from the brain to the muscles need to be highly
co-ordinated if the movement is to be exactly right. In Chapter 9, we
saw how this involves automatizing the actions, so that they can be
carried out without any conscious thinking, apart from the decision to
perform them. This happens as the sequence of actions becomes controlled
by the part of the brain that co-ordinates action, the cerebellum,
instead of being controlled by

292

the cerebrum, which is the part of the brain that we think with. And, as
we saw in Chapter 5, drugs such as nicotine interfere with the messages
from the brain to the muscles, which is one reason why high-performance
sportspeople don't smoke. The other reason, of course, is that it also
interferes with how efﬁciently we breathe, and with the amount of oxygen
that the blood can carry. The learning curve When we are learning
something new, we generally take quite a long time to do it successfully
at ﬁrst. But the more we do it, the easier it becomes. Someone learning
to perform a new tennis stroke may fail entirely the ﬁrst time they
attempt it. As they practise, though, they are likely to succeed more
and more often, until eventually they can do the stroke successfully all
the time -- at least, while they are practising!

Time taken to complete task

It's the same with any other physical skill. Someone who is learning to
type will be very slow at ﬁrst, but will become faster as they become
more familiar with the positions of the letters on the keyboard. If we
were to plot their speed of typing on a chart, measuring it against the
amount of practice, we would ﬁnd that it made a curve which picked up
very steeply at ﬁrst, and then rounded off more gently. And if we were
to do the same with the practising of the tennis stroke, we'd ﬁnd that
it, too, made the same curve (Figure 13.1). This is known as the
learning curve, and it shows how we go about learning any new skill.

Amount of practice Figure 13.1 A learning curve.

13. Leisure

293

Time taken to complete task

Amount of practice Figure 13.2 Plateau learning.

Actually, though, the basic learning curve is only the beginning. In a
complex sport or skill, we often experience several different curves,
with a levelling out between them (Figure 13.2). We improve with
practice a great deal at ﬁrst, but then we hit what is known as a
plateau, where we don't seem to get any better for a while. But if we
keep on working at it, then eventually we begin to improve again. Most
complex skills involve plateau learning, because they actually consist
of many skills combined together, and it takes time to master each one.
It's also possible that the time spent apparently not getting any better
is useful because we consolidate those skills we do have, and make sure
that they are fully under control. The use of feedback Another very
important part of skill learning is feedback. Feedback is all about
knowing what we have done -- knowledge of results. If we didn't get any
feedback about the outcomes of our actions, we wouldn't be able to learn
anything. You couldn't get better at darts if you were blindfolded, and
couldn't see where the darts had landed on the board! Instead, when
playing darts, we use the outcome of our ﬁrst action 'throwing the ﬁrst
dart' to help us to aim the second one more accurately. One of the most
important tasks of a sports coach is to provide feedback. But the kind
of feedback matters. Den Brinker et al., in

294

1986, investigated how important feedback is when learning to ski. They
used a ski simulator, and asked people to learn how to make slalom-type
movements while on the machine. The researchers varied the kind of
feedback, and found that the most useful type was when people were given
feedback about the amplitude of their body movements -- how much they
swayed with the actions. They learned much faster from this than they
did when they were given feedback about how often they moved, or how
smooth their movements were. Mental training Another aspect of complex
skill learning that sports psychologists have become very experienced in
is that of mental training. Mental training involves using the
imagination, in a carefully controlled way, to improve performance. For
example, Ainscoe and Hardy developed a training programme with gymnasts,
in which they were asked to practise their performance not just
physically, but also mentally -- visualizing themselves going through
each action successfully and smoothly. They found that using this method
produced a noticeable improvement in how well the gymnasts learned.
Ainscoe and Hardy weren't the only psychologists to have discovered
this. In 1983, Feltz and Landers reviewed 60 different studies of mental
training of physical skills. They came to the conclusion that this
method was a useful way of improving performance. Many athletes and
other sportspeople use visualization as a regular part of their
practice, and ﬁnd that it doesn't just help their physical learning, it
also helps their concentration.

Insight One of the major insights of sports psychology is the
recognition of how important mental training can be. In fact, it can be
so effective that techniques like visualization can sometimes make all
the difference between success or failure -- if they are also
accompanied by appropriate physical training, of course.

13. Leisure

295

Practice and automatization Any new skill requires practice -- it won't
become a skill until enough time and effort has been put into perfecting
it for it to have become virtually automatic. Some sports psychologists
have investigated whether it is better to have long, concentrated
sessions of practice, or whether it is better to break them up into
smaller chunks. The answer seems to be somewhere between the two.
Practice sessions need to be long enough for the person to get some
physical control of the skill that they are working on, but it is also
important to have breaks. These don't just give the person a chance to
rest: they also seem to help us to consolidate the learning, physically,
so that it comes more easily the next time we try it. Gruson (1988)
looked at how skilled pianists practised, and compared that with people
who were still working through the lower grades. She found that the
experts went about their practising in a different way from the novices.
The experts, for instance, would spend much more time practising whole
units. They wouldn't ever repeat single notes -- if they made a mistake,
they would repeat the whole section. Novices, on the other hand, would
repeat single notes if they made a mistake, and this didn't really help
them to learn the whole piece of music at all. The implication, then, is
that practising whole units is important for the development of ﬂuent
skills. If we wish to produce a performance which is polished and
continuous, then we need to practise what we are doing in a way that is
also continuous. It's obvious really, when you think about it, but it's
surprising how many people don't do it! KEEPING MOTIVATED Another
important aspect of sport psychology is studying how it is that
successful athletes manage to maintain their motivation. Success
requires continual training and striving to improve

296

performance. And becoming a competent sportsperson involves giving up a
great deal of free time, and putting oneself through a considerable
amount of physical effort. For many people, such efforts would be too
much. So what is it that distinguishes someone who is prepared to do
this, from the rest of us? Internal and external motivation One of the
most important distinctions which sports psychologists make is between
internal and external sources of motivation. An internal source of
motivation is one which comes from inside ourselves -- which derives
from our own intentions, ambitions and personal goals. An external
source of motivation, as its name suggests, comes from outside. External
motivators include rewards, avoiding punishment, and living up to other
people's expectations. Interestingly, there is quite a lot of evidence
which shows that giving people external rewards, such as money, for
achieving success in sport, music or exams, can actually be
counter-productive. It can reduce someone's motivation, not increase it.
For example, Orlick and Mosher (1978) asked children to carry out a
balancing task on a bar, for ten minutes. Before and after the test, the
children could spend as much time as they liked practising. The amount
of time that they practised was taken as showing their level of
intrinsic motivation. Orlick and Mosher found that all the children
spent much the same amount of time practising before the test. When they
did the test, they gave one group of children a special award, saying
that it was because they had done such a good job. Another group of
children didn't get any reward at all, even though they were just as
good. These children didn't know about the other group, so they didn't
feel disappointed. But after the test, the children who had received the
award actually spent much less time practising than the children who
hadn't been given anything. Receiving the award had actually decreased
their level of intrinsic motivation.

13. Leisure

297

Of course, this doesn't mean that all awards are a bad thing. Sometimes,
they can help motivation because they encourage people to feel
competent, and that they are getting somewhere. When Orlick and Mosher
told children beforehand that they could earn an award by doing the
balancing task, those children didn't lose motivation at all. So things
which tell us that our skills are improving as a result of our efforts
help us to feel competent, and don't reduce our motivation. But rewards
which aren't relevant to our efforts, such as money or unexpected
awards, can sometimes reduce intrinsic motivation. The reason for this
seems to be that we tend to focus on just one explanation for why we are
doing things. Even though, as we have seen, human beings often do things
for more than one reason, we still prefer to identify just one reason at
a time. So if someone receives an external reward for doing well, then
they are likely to see themselves as being motivated by the reward,
instead of by their own interest and commitment. If the rewards don't
continue, or don't seem to be as important, the person loses motivation.
Someone who knows that they are doing something for their own personal
pleasure and ambition, though, isn't likely to lose that motivation
unless their ambitions change.

Insight External rewards for success have been shown to be damaging to
motivation. But rewards which come through successful competition are
much more effective. This may be because they are also tied to
successful social recognition. Competence This doesn't mean, though,
that we could carry on putting lots of effort into mastering a sporting
or musical skill if we didn't feel that we were getting anywhere. It is
very important that we should be able to feel competent in our learning
-- that we should feel that our skills are improving, and that our own
personal abilities to do things are getting better. Having good feedback
is a part of that, because that shows us when we are improving. But
another

298

important part of this is the way that we set our personal goals. We
need to have something to aim at, and that something must be something
that we think we could manage. It needs to give us a challenge to rise
to, but should not be so far ahead that we feel we could never get
there. Setting manageable goals is an important part of retaining
motivation, because the feeling that we have achieved another target
helps us to keep going. ACHIEVING PEAK PERFORMANCE Sport psychology is
also concerned with making sure that people can perform to the absolute
limit of their ability, at the times when it matters. Training and
motivation are part of that, but there are other factors, too, which are
the concern of sport psychology. On the training ﬁeld, for instance,
many athletes reach top performance. But when it comes to actual
competitive events, some people consistently win, while others just
don't seem to be able to manage that last, ﬁnal edge which means
success. Positive thinking Positive thinking is a crucial factor in
distinguishing between people who are likely to be successful and those
who aren't. Highly successful sportspeople don't allow themselves to
think about failure. They don't just block it off -- instead, they think
positively about success. Not about winning the gold medal, but about
actually doing the activity successfully. When it is being used in this
way, the person imagines him/herself going through the whole activity
successfully -- running the race, or taking the exam, or whatever it is.
By concentrating only on positive thoughts, and systematically imagining
each successful stage of the activity, the person leaves no mental room
for the doubts and worries which would add to their level of stress.
This sort of approach requires a high level of mental discipline on the
part of the athlete or performer. There are various techniques for doing
this. One of them is learning how to concentrate your mental focus, so
that you are aware only of the part of your surroundings which matter.
The champion tennis player

13. Leisure

299

Billie Jean King described how her mental focus would change from a wide
range, encompassing the whole court, while the ball was over the other
side of the net, to a tight, narrow focus the minute the ball was hit by
her opponent. The gold medal-winning athlete Linford Christie used to
limit his mental focus to the track in front of him during the few
minutes before the race began, ignoring everything else except the
starting pistol. Another way that successful athletes use positive
thinking is in visualizing achievement. The hurdler, David Hemery,
described how one year he tried to prepare himself for disappointment,
by imagining realistically how he would deal with failure. He lost. The
next year, throughout his training, he allowed himself to think only
about success, and didn't entertain the thought that he might not win.
That was the year that he won his Olympic gold medal. Taking a more
optimistic approach by thinking positively gave him an overall edge
which the more pessimistic outcome didn't. As with using visualization
for training, Hemery's mental images weren't about standing on the
podium. What he would visualize was completing the track without a
single mistake, in the best possible time. By creating a positive mental
image of what he was capable of achieving, Hemery was able to build up
his feelings of competence and conﬁdence, and to make sure that his
performance on the day was the very best that he could do. Managing
performance anxiety Another aspect of making sure that you do the best
you can, whether in a sporting competition or in an exam, is making sure
that your anxiety levels don't get out of hand. We saw in Chapter 4 how
being anxious or upset can interfere with how well we do things, so it
is important for athletes not to allow themselves to get too worried.
Using positive thinking is also a good way of doing this. By ﬁlling the
mind up with positive mental images, there isn't much room for thoughts
about failure or mistakes.

300

Athletes also manage performance anxiety by making sure that their
bodies are not physically stressed in the wrong way. Anxiety can be
increased by eating the wrong things, or by eating at too infrequent
intervals. If we haven't eaten for several hours, for instance, we
automatically become more anxious and aroused, because this is an
ancient biological mechanism encouraging us to go out and look for food.
Many athletes drink milk, because it contains naturally calming
substances which work in the brain to reduce anxiety without interfering
with our physical abilities. And, of course, they regard it as very
important that they are properly rested and have a good night's sleep
before a key competition. Exactly the same principles apply to any sort
of demanding human experience. It's just as important when you're doing
an exam, for instance, to eat properly and to be rested, as it is when
you are entering a sporting competition or taking a graded sports test.
But it is astounding how many people ignore the physical demands of
their bodies, and make their anxiety much worse by not eating properly,
or by staying up the night before to 'study'. There is a physical aspect
to managing any kind of performance anxiety, even exam performance.

Insight Performance anxiety is a two-edged sword. It can help people to
perform better, or it can damage their performance to a disastrous
extent. So learning to manage performance anxiety is as vital to any
serious sports competitor as it is to a musician or actor. Using
setbacks constructively Another feature which seems to distinguish the
top performers from those who don't do as well, is how they handle
failure when it actually happens. Many people respond to failing a test,
or an exam, or losing a competition, by feeling upset and disappointed.
But the top sportspeople don't do this. Instead, they react by being
angry with themselves. They know that they can do better

13. Leisure

301

than that, and so they resolve to make sure that it won't happen again.
This has everything to do with the process of attribution, which we
looked at in Chapter 3. Attribution, you may remember, is about the
reasons that we give for why things happen. And this makes all the
difference to how we respond to failure. As we saw in Chapter 4,
negative attributions tend to be global, stable and uncontrollable --
that is, they are seen to apply generally to most things, to be unlikely
to change, and to be something that the person can't do anything about.
Making those sorts of attributions about setbacks or failures can
seriously damage our chances of improvement. If someone attributes their
failure at sport (or education or anything else, for that matter) to
lack of talent or ability, that is stable, global and uncontrollable, so
they are unlikely to try very hard to overcome it, because they won't
think there's any point. If they think it was because they hadn't
practised enough, that is something that they can do something about, so
it will spur them on to more effort. Alternatively, if it was just a
'bad day', that's unstable and not always going to apply in the future,
so again they will continue with their normal training, and not be too
bothered about it. If they think it is because they were doing something
badly, which they could do better, then they will work very hard to
learn better techniques to make sure that they don't make the same
mistake again. It is the attributions they make for setbacks or failure
which distinguish the champions and make them special.

Insight The thing that distinguishes ﬁrst-rate athletes from others is
how they deal with failure. By taking them as their own responsibility,
and as something they can overcome with enough effort and training, they
are taking control and using the failures to spur them on instead of
discouraging them. Sport psychology, then, like so many other aspects of
psychology, brings together many different levels of human functioning.

302

We have to perfect our physical skills, and ensure that they are fully
co-ordinated. We learn by practice, accustoming ourselves to repetition
and association. But we are also affected by our thoughts, beliefs and
imagination -- and these can make all the difference to ho w we learn,
and how we perform, skilled actions.

13. Leisure

303

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Research suggests quite strongly that violence
on TV encourages violence in society. 2 People who watch lots of TV see
the world as more violent than it really is. 3 TV with positive content
can enhance prosocial behaviour. 4 TV has been shown to interfere with
children's learning to read, partly because of its instant access. 5
Computer games use well-established psychological principles such as
self-efﬁcacy and incentives to maintain interest and promote skill
learning. 6 There is little evidence that computer games are more
harmful to children than any other sedentary activity, although games
with antisocial content may encourage antisocial behaviour. 7 Sports and
music are both leisure activities which involve skill learning,
motivation and performance. 8 Skill learning occurs through practice and
feedback, and involves a high level of automatization of actions. 9
Internal motivation is more effective than external motivators like
rewards. 10 Achieving peak performance involves positive thinking, using
setbacks constructively and managing performance anxiety.

304

14 Education and health In this chapter you will learn: • what is
involved in skilled teaching • about two controversial aspects of
dyslexia • about three types of therapy used by clinical psychologists.
Psychologists have been involved with both education and healthcare in
one way or another ever since psychology began. But over time,
psychological ideas have changed considerably, as our understanding of
the human being has developed. As psychological ideas have developed, so
too have many of the social practices which emerged from them. For
example, in the middle of the twentieth century, a number of politically
inﬂuential psychologists, particularly Sir Cyril Burt, believed that
intelligence was a ﬁxed, inherited quality. Since Burt was directly
involved in giving advice to the Ministry of Education, this ultimately
led to the introduction of a school system in which children were sent
to different schools, offering different types of education, depending
on their performance in an examination and intelligence test which they
took at the age of 11 years old. Nowadays, we don't see intelligence in
quite the same way. We see it as much more of an interaction between
someone's own personal temperament and their experiences and
environment. The experiences of mature students who are unsuccessful at
school but who take exams, degrees and even higher degrees later in
their

14. Education and health

305

adult lives, show that intelligence can change dramatically with
experience. And research evidence also suggests that as long as we use
it, our intelligence increases as we get older, not decreases. So the
old idea that a person has a ﬁxed intelligence, which doesn't change
through their life span, is pretty well discredited. In the health ﬁeld,
too, psychological ideas and knowledge have developed considerably.
During the ﬁrst part of the twentieth century, this area of psychology
was strongly inﬂuenced by the ideas of the psychoanalyst, Sigmund Freud,
who believed that people were largely acting out the demands of
unconscious parts of their personality. Freud believed that unconscious
infantile conﬂicts could lead to both mental and physical disturbance,
even in adults. More recently, psychoanalysis has become pretty well
separated from psychology. Although some of its ideas have been useful
to clinical psychologists -- in particular the idea of defence
mechanisms, which we looked at in Chapter 6 -- psychoanalysis as a way
of seeing the world adopts a different style of reasoning, and takes a
different view of scientiﬁc evidence, than modern psychology. For the
most part, modern clinical psychologists draw on a different set of
psychological insights and theories in their work. In this chapter, we
will look brieﬂy at some of the main ideas which psychologists working
in education and health tend to use. Some of them may seem familiar,
because quite often we will be looking at how the concepts which we
looked at in the early part of this book are being applied in real life.

The psychology of teaching and learning The idea of a rigidly ﬁxed
intelligence may have been discredited, but nonetheless, some of us are
still quicker at understanding some types of things than other people
are. People differ. We each have our own aptitudes, our own interests
and our own talents. But even if we have an aptitude for something, if
we are not interested in it, then we are unlikely to put any effort into
mastering it.

306

STUDENT MOTIVATION As we've already seen, being interested in something
can make all the difference to whether we remember it or not. And, as
we've also seen, becoming skilled at anything, whether it is an
intellectual skill like reading or a physical skill like skating, takes
practice. So a vital part of the psychology of teaching and learning
consists of understanding how students come to be interested in what
they are learning, so that they have the motivation to keep working.

Insight Motivating children to learn is at the heart of good teaching.
Some teachers use very strict and structured approaches, while others
use ﬂexible, consultative methods equally successfully. But all good
teachers give their pupils a sense of self-efﬁcacy and progress, which
is why the pupils enjoy learning and achieve success. In Chapter 10, we
looked at the importance of self-efﬁcacy and social expectations in how
children learn, and in Chapter 6, we saw how human motivation can
operate on several different levels. These are fundamental to the
educational process, because unless children are motivated to learn,
then simply exposing them to information will have very little effect.
The act of teaching isn't just about presenting information -- it's
about presenting it in such a way that children (or adults) are engaged
and can ﬁnd interest in what they are doing. The learning environment
Our behaviour is sometimes energized and directed by how we think about
things, sometimes by the situation itself, and sometimes by social and
cultural factors. All of these are relevant to education too. For
example, if we take one of the more basic levels of explanation, we are
all inﬂuenced by the environment around us. A formal classroom layout
produces different behaviour from the people in it than an informal
setting.

14. Education and health

307

Partly, this stems from our social understanding of what a formal layout
is intended to convey: it is a kind of non-verbal communication. But
partly, also, it is a learned association between stimulus and response.
Our past experiences have formed that link, and so we act in the same
way when we ﬁnd ourselves in the same situation. If we look at the way
that a 'classic' classroom is laid out, the teacher has about
one-quarter of the space at the front of the room, and the teacher's
desk, which is much larger than the students' desks, is sometimes on a
raised platform. The students are all seated facing the teacher, not
only so that the teacher can see what they are doing, but also so that
communication can ﬂow between teacher and students easily, but less
easily between students themselves. In other words, it is arranged to
give the teacher maximum control over the interaction. When teachers
undertake group work with their students, it is usual for them to
rearrange the seating, so that students are sitting in small groups
facing one another, and the teacher moves between groups. This
arrangement facilitates the students talking to one another, and reduces
the emphasis on information coming from the teacher's desk. In a
co-operative educational task, this type of arrangement is much more
efﬁcient, and it also conveys a different type of message to the
students. This might seem trivial, but it is one of the things that we
need to take into account when we are considering the psychology of
teaching and learning. For instance, many people who take qualiﬁcations
in further education colleges are returning to study as mature students.
Although they do want to study, often their ﬁrst experience of being in
a classroom again brings back unpleasant associations of school and
feelings of inadequacy and failure. A teacher who is aware of this
process is able to make sure that these feelings can be replaced quickly
by ones which will help the student to learn, by providing more positive
learning experiences in that setting. But someone who was unaware of
what was going on could easily dismiss these people as not having the
necessary motivation or ability to learn.

308

Insight There is an old proverb often quoted in teacher training, which
goes: 'I hear and I forget; I see and I remember; I do and I
understand.' It sums up a great deal of teaching psychology, both about
processing information and also developing a sense of self-efﬁcacy in
learning. Programmed learning In psychology's earlier years, the human
and social aspect of teaching was often unrecognized. Stimulus-response
psychologists focused almost entirely on the information that was being
conveyed, and developed systems which were intended to maximize the
learning through conditioning processes. The behaviourist, B. F.
Skinner, developed a system known as programmed learning, which used the
principle of learning through positive reinforcement. Skinner, as we saw
in Chapter 9, believed that it is better to reward appropriate behaviour
than to punish inappropriate acts. So the learning system which he
developed was based on the idea that the more people could get right,
the more they would learn. In a programmed learning system, information
which needs to be learned is divided into very small chunks, each of
which leads on to the next. By dividing it up like this, it is
relatively easy for a student to get each answer right. If they don't,
they go back and relearn the section until they do. Skinner believed
that maximizing the chances of gaining right answers would provide the
motivation for learning -- unlike the conventional educational
programmes of his time, which tended to emphasize failure and wrong
answers rather than rewarding right ones. A number of programmed
learning systems were developed following Skinner's ideas, and many of
the self-tests in modern textbooks use much the same principles. But
Skinner envisaged a system in which the teacher was largely replaced by
a computer, presenting the information in bite-sized chunks; this has
never really materialized. The social contact between teacher and
student is much more important than those early teachers

14. Education and health

309

recognized -- a good relationship with a teacher can make all the
difference in a child's learning, and a negative relationship can often
mean that the child (or adult) feels that they are completely incapable
of learning that subject. Processing information Sometimes, effective
teaching is all about ﬁnding ways of getting students to process the
information they are exploring. In Chapter 7, we saw how we remember
things far better if we have processed the information deeply. Being
interested in something means that we do process the information because
we think about what it means, and what effects it might have. So we
don't usually have any trouble remembering things that we are interested
in. But knowing about levels of processing in memory can also help us
with other aspects of educational experiences. For example, taking
examinations generally means learning a great deal of information, not
all of which is scintillatingly interesting. But it is possible to use
the idea of levels of processing to remember the information, even
though we may not be totally thrilled by it. By changing the form of the
information -- drawing up charts, or diagrams, or making summaries -- we
force our minds to process the information and think about what it
actually means. And once we are aware of what it means, it is much
harder to forget it. In fact, books about how to revise are full of
advice about working with the material. Drawing on their own good
experience with students, the authors recommend various different
methods for revising, all of which actually add up to processing the
information more deeply. The problem, though, is that they don't usually
explain why we should do it. Unless we can see a good reason for doing
something, we don't usually bother. So understanding the psychological
processes of memory, and why drawing up a table or a chart helps us to
learn, are important. Positive emotions Another aspect of psychological
knowledge which is important in understanding teaching and learning is
how emotional states

310

affect learning. In Chapter 2, we saw how people need a warm
interpersonal climate if they are to be open to learning new things and
developing their ideas. Nobody learns well in a climate of hostility or
sarcasm, but if they feel approved of and safe, people often surprise us
with what they can achieve. So, one of the things which a skilled
teacher learns is how to create an atmosphere of interpersonal warmth in
the classroom, which will encourage their students to become conﬁdent
and to learn positively. Although many non-psychologists, including,
unfortunately, some teachers, believe that we can learn when we are
tense or anxious, all the psychological evidence points the other way.
We are far less open to new ideas when we are tense and anxious. About
all we learn in those situations is how to avoid pain, which is a basic
and primitive form of learning. But there is plenty of psychological
evidence for the opposite: in education as well as in everyday hobbies
and interests, people learn best when they feel safe, conﬁdent and
approved of. And they can often surprise themselves, and others around
them, with unexpectedly high achievement in such circumstances.

Insight Some teachers are able to be successful even in the most
difﬁcult schools. They use supportive non-verbal cues and manage their
learning environments so that even the difﬁcult pupils don't feel
threatened or defensive, and can relax and enjoy learning during their
time in the classroom. SOCIAL DIMENSIONS TO TEACHING AND LEARNING There
are also social dimensions to the psychology of teaching and learning.
As we've already seen in this chapter, we can't really separate the
personal and social aspects of learning, because we are all personally
inﬂuenced by social factors. But there are other issues too. For
example, in Chapter 2 we saw how social identiﬁcation, or belonging to
groups, is an important part of how we see ourselves. The attitudes
which our friends and family take to education will affect us, as well
as whether the teacher encourages the class to feel special, and a
social group in their own right. 14. Education and health

311

Social identiﬁcation A knowledge of social identiﬁcation is useful for a
teacher because it shows us how inter-group conﬂicts can develop. If
students feel that their group identity is being disparaged or
threatened, they may respond by reacting against classwork, or even
against being in school at all. But people can have many different
social identiﬁcations, which don't have to be in conﬂict. A student may
be a member of a teenage gang, yet still work hard when he/she is in the
classroom -- as long as that working hard isn't seen as a threat to
his/her gang identity. Many extremely effective teachers have worked
successfully with students who, on the surface, appear to be directly
opposed to what they are trying to do. They have been able to do this
because they have made it clear that there is no conﬂict between them. A
vital part of this involves knowing how important social identity is to
our self-esteem. This helps a teacher to see why the student's social
group is so important, and why it matters that the student should see
how working for the future -- which is what school or college work
really is -- is not a threat to their social identity in the present.
Without such an understanding, many teachers are either dismissive of
their students' social groups, or see them as inevitably in conﬂict with
educational values. And the result is that these students, on their
part, often feel misjudged and unfairly stereotyped.

Insight Psychology shows how important social identiﬁcation is to all of
us. It can be a powerful tool for knitting together a good learning
group in the classroom. But dismissing or belittling a pupil's most
important identiﬁcations can make them resistant and hostile to the
education process. We can see, then, that the psychology of teaching and
learning spans a number of different levels of explanation. It ranges
from the personal and emotional aspects of human psychology, to the

312

cognitive, social, and even cultural levels of explanation. As with so
many other aspects of human behaviour, we can gain insights from each of
these levels of explanation; but if we are to get a more rounded picture
of how human beings are, we need to take them all into account.
EDUCATIONAL DISADVANTAGE Psychologists are also involved in helping
children and adults who are experiencing some kind of educational
disadvantage. Such psychologists are known as educational psychologists
in Britain, although they are called school psychologists in the United
States, where educational psychologists are more concerned with the
applied psychology of teaching and learning. In Britain, educational
psychologists are responsible for assessing children who are thought to
need a special type of education, and recommending what sort of
education that should be.

Insight There is a danger that social disadvantage can become such a
label that teachers don't even try very hard to teach pupils from
disadvantaged backgrounds. But a positive school experience can actually
help pupils to overcome their disadvantages, by providing an alternative
experience where they feel competent and valued. Speciﬁc learning
difﬁculties There are several different kinds of educational
disadvantage. Sometimes children have speciﬁc learning difﬁculties,
which means that they ﬁnd certain kinds of information very hard to
learn. If they experience a special school environment, in which the
teacher pays particular attention to training them to handle the things
which they ﬁnd difﬁcult, they can often learn a great deal more than
they would do in an ordinary school. Other children who also have
speciﬁc learning difﬁculties, though, might beneﬁt more from being in an
ordinary school and mixing with the children there. The educational
psychologist's judgement

14. Education and health

313

as to which type of schooling will be best for that particular child
will take into account as many different facets of the child's
experience as possible. For example, we have already seen how much
social expectations can inﬂuence us. They can affect our self-image, our
interactions with other people, and how well we learn. If a child
attends a special school, it is possible that people won't expect as
much from him/her as they would do if he/she went to an ordinary school.
So in some cases, if a child's problem isn't very extreme, then it may
be better for him/her to go to an ordinary school and perhaps have some
additional tuition which will help to overcome his/her difﬁculties than
to go to a special school. The decision about whether to send a child to
a special school depends very much on the child itself, and on how
severe his/her problems are. Educational psychologists undergo rigorous
training in diagnosing learning difﬁculties. Some problems have a
physical source: certain kinds of brain damage, for example, can produce
very speciﬁc effects on how a child learns. Sometimes, it is possible to
overcome these effects with the right kind of training. Most children
recover very well from accidental brain injury, for instance, and often
if they have the right kind of therapy, the effects disappear
completely. Sometimes, though, the problem isn't the kind you can get
over. In such a case, the psychologist might decide that amelioration is
the best approach, so the child will be taught how to cope with, and get
around, the problem. By developing training which is relevant to the
kinds of situations that the child is likely to meet, the child can
learn how to live a relatively normal life, even though they may have
some difﬁculties. Dyslexia One of the speciﬁc learning difﬁculties which
educational psychologists often need to diagnose is the problem known as
dyslexia. Dyslexia used to be known as 'word-blindness', and people who
experience dyslexia often have difﬁculty in

314

identifying letters, or recognizing how they should be written. For
example, a dyslexic person might write a letter like 'y' or 'r' back to
front, but not realize that they had done it. They seem to be 'blind' to
the image of the letter. Other dyslexics have difﬁculties recognizing
words. Sometimes dyslexia comes about as a result of some kind of
accident which causes an injury to the person's brain. This is known as
acquired dyslexia. Shallice and Warrington (1980) described two kinds of
acquired dyslexia. One of them, which is known as surface dyslexia, is
when someone has problems with the forms of words, such as difﬁculty
recognizing letters, as above, or problems with spelling -- like writing
'lurn' instead of 'learn'. The second kind of dyslexia isn't about the
forms of words, but about understanding them. People with this type of
dyslexia have difﬁculty with words that are hard to visualize: they can
understand words like 'tree' easily enough, but have problems with words
like 'and'. Shallice and Warrington called this deep dyslexia, because
it relates to a deeper understanding of words. Acquired dyslexia isn't
particularly controversial in psychology. It is a recognized outcome of
some forms of brain damage, and there is a great deal of evidence which
shows how people who previously had these abilities intact experience
problems after their accident. But there is a second type of dyslexia --
the kind that an educational psychologist would encounter -- which is
much more controversial. This is known as developmental dyslexia.
Developmental dyslexia is a problem which becomes apparent as a child
develops and goes through school. A few children seem to be virtually
unable to identify words and letters properly, and so have problems with
spelling. Some psychologists believe that this problem occurs because of
an inherent deﬁcit in the brain, and some have even gone as far as to
suggest that it is a genetic disorder, although as yet the evidence for
this is a little sketchy.

14. Education and health

315

Insight Some experts believe that dyslexia is accepted too passively in
schools, resulting in pupils under-achieving because they feel that
making an effort to overcome the problem is pointless. Diagnosis should
be a signal for special training and programmes to deal with the
problem, rather than just used as a label. Problems with dyslexia So
far, so good. There certainly do seem to be cases in which children have
difﬁculties of this kind, which really do seem to result from some kind
of inherent problem. The controversy comes, though, with the question of
whether all children who are considered dyslexic really have these
problems. Many psychologists (for example, Whittaker, 1982) see the word
'dyslexic' as a convenient label which is used in many entirely
inappropriate cases. Whittaker and others believe that children are
often labelled dyslexic when all they really have are problems with
spelling. The problem is compounded by the fact that the concept of
dyslexia became popular in Britain soon after a nationwide experiment on
reading, which tried to teach reading using a special phonetic alphabet,
known as i.t.a., or initial teaching alphabet. This was based on the
principle that children learned to read by 'hearing' the words -- a
principle which we now know to be untrue. But as a result of the use of
i.t.a., a great many children became confused about the need to spell
accurately, and many schools almost gave up on teaching spelling
formally. In view of this social context, and the fact that spelling is
something that doesn't come naturally to anyone -- it always has to be
learned by heart, and that takes effort -- there is a great deal of
anxiety that too many children have been labelled as dyslexic when
really they could overcome their problem with a different kind of
teaching. This is also exaggerated by a tendency to see a diagnosis of
'dyslexic' as a message that there is no point trying to teach this
child words or spelling. As with many other educational disorders,
special training programmes which recognize the difﬁculty, and address
it directly, can often overcome the problem, at least if it is in a mild
form.

316

So there are two aspects to the controversy about dyslexia. It isn't
really about whether dyslexia exists: it's clear that it does. The ﬁrst
aspect is about whether all the children who have been labelled dyslexic
really are, or whether the label has been given to them simply because
they are ﬁnding words or spelling hard. The second part is about whether
an accurate diagnosis of dyslexia means that the problem is permanent or
ﬁxed. Special training programmes suggest that it isn't, and that it can
be overcome, but many people seem to see such a diagnosis as if it were
a life sentence. Childhood autism Sometimes, the problems that
educational psychologists encounter are broader than straightforward
learning disorders. For example, the problem known as childhood autism
seems to be a broadly based emotional and personal disorder, which
results in such children being unable to relate effectively to the
people in their lives. Autism was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a general syndrome
by Kanner (1943), who pinpointed four characteristics which autistic
children possess. The ﬁrst, and probably the most important, is that
they are unable to form relationships with other people. Although they
may interact, they seem to be aware only of the way that another body
impinges on them, not of the person as a human being. The second
characteristic is that autistic children rarely play spontaneously and,
in particular, they don't engage in play which involves pretending.
Ordinary children, though, begin pretend play from quite an early age,
and don't need to be taught it at all. Autistic children also show
differences in how they learn to speak. Some of them never actually
learn to talk at all. Others will talk quite a lot, but when they do,
they don't speak in the same way as ordinary children. For instance,
they may not quite get the hang of reversing the pronouns which we do
automatically in conversation. Although ordinary children learn this
quite easily, autistic children say what they have heard other people
saying, so they tend to refer to themselves as 'you', and to the other
person as 'I'. 14. Education and health

317

The fourth distinctive characteristic of childhood autism is that these
children often have an almost obsessive insistence on certain routines
or repeated activities. They seem to enjoy repetition and routine, and
can become very upset if their routines are interrupted for some reason.
Harris (1988) discussed how a range of psychological evidence all points
to the idea that autistic children don't have a theory of mind. In other
words, they are not aware that other people have a mind of their own,
and may see things differently. Baron-Cohen (1992) described an autistic
girl, Jane, who had no problem remembering people or information, but
who had absolutely no awareness of the fact that other people were
independent, thinking and feeling human beings. Her inability to
empathize, or to understand someone else's point of view, resulted in a
great many of her autistic symptoms.

Counselling and therapy A different area of activity for psychologists
is in healthcare. Psychologists are involved both in mental and physical
healthcare, in one way or another. Clinical psychologists have been
concerned with helping people who suffer from emotional disorders or
mental illness since the early part of the twentieth century. More
recently, health psychologists have become increasingly concerned with
aspects of our physical healthcare, as it has become more apparent that
so many aspects of our physical health depend on psychological, rather
than medical, factors. CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY Clinical psychology, for the
most part, has been concerned with people who are suffering from some
kind of mental or behavioural abnormality -- people who we might call
mentally ill, although, thinking of them as 'ill' often isn't the best
way to understand what is going on. Clinical psychologists often work
alongside psychiatrists (doctors who specialize in mental illness) in
psychiatric hospitals or

318

clinics, but their approach to dealing with the patients is very
different. Where a psychiatrist draws on a knowledge of physiology,
which means adopting treatments such as chemotherapy (drugs) or physical
treatments such as electro-convulsive therapy, clinical psychologists
use their knowledge of human psychology to tackle the problem.

Insight Too many people feel that getting therapy is a sign that they
are sick or disturbed. In fact, therapists also help quite normal people
to deal with everyday problems, like overcoming emotionally difﬁcult
childhoods or learning to manage bad tempers. Behaviour therapy For
example, some of the types of problems which clinical psychologists
might deal with are what we know as neuroses -- fears or anxieties which
have become so extreme that the person has difﬁculty living a normal
life. In the 1950s, psychologists who were interested in conditioning
approaches to learning took the view that many of these problems could
be understood entirely as problems of behaviour. These people, they
argued, had learned inappropriate ways of dealing with their
environments, and this inappropriate learning was causing them problems.
So the way to tackle those problems was for them to learn appropriate
ways of dealing with their environments instead. This led to the
development of a number of different, behavioural, methods for dealing
with neurotic problems. As we saw in Chapter 9, psychologists began to
use conditioning techniques for dealing with the irrational fears known
as phobias. By treating the feared object as the stimulus, and
substituting new, learned associations such as relaxation for the fear
reaction, people could learn to deal with their phobias, and overcome
them. Other psychologists used approaches which derived from operant
conditioning, or from social learning. Bandura (1977) showed how
modelling could also be useful in teaching people to overcome everyday
fears. Seeing someone handling a snake harmlessly often

14. Education and health

319

gave those who were frightened of snakes a role model to imitate, and
they found that their own level of fear became much less as a result.
Behaviour shaping Many psychologists working with disturbed people
adopted the idea of behaviour shaping, which comes from operant
conditioning theory. Using this, a person becomes able to carry out an
entirely new type of behaviour by learning it a little at a time. This
principle was very successful, for instance, in helping people with
agoraphobia -- a fear of open spaces. Rather than forcing them into
dealing with the whole problem all at once, a psychologist would
gradually help the person to build up their abilities, a little at a
time. They might begin, for instance, by getting used to standing in the
open doorway of their own home. Once they could do this easily, then
they might venture out for just one or two steps; and each time a little
more would be added until eventually they could manage to deal with the
outside world easily. Another way in which behaviour shaping was used
was in token economy systems, introduced to help long-stay psychiatric
patients to take more responsibility for their own lives. In the 1960s
and 1970s, some patients had been in psychiatric hospitals for decades,
and they had become thoroughly institutionalized -- dependent and unable
to look after themselves. Psychologists developed training systems which
would allow them gradually to learn how to do basic things, like
sweeping a ﬂoor or taking care of their own clothes. Since it is
important for operant conditioning that the reward or reinforcement
should happen immediately after the person performs the behaviour which
is to be rewarded, the patient would be given a token when they did
something right. In very severe cases, this might at ﬁrst be for
something as simple as holding a broom and making vague sweeping
movements. Once they had learned this, behaviour-shaping techniques
would be used, so they would only be rewarded for sweeping a bit more
thoroughly. At the end of the day or week, they could exchange their
tokens for privileges of one kind or another. In this way,

320

long-stay patients were gradually taught the kinds of behaviour which
they would need if they were ever to leave the institution and live in a
hostel. Cognitive therapy In the late 1970s and early 1980s, as
psychology changed its emphasis, clinical psychologists began to develop
new approaches, which drew on other areas of psychological knowledge. A
new form of therapy, known as cognitive therapy, emerged. Psychologists
began to work on the self-defeating beliefs of many of their clients,
showing them how to recognize negative attributional styles and how to
develop realistic and positive self-efﬁcacy beliefs. Research into
stress management showed how important it is for people to have a sense
of control over their own lives, and many clinical psychologists adopted
these principles in their work. More recently, clinical psychologists
have integrated the best of the insights and techniques of the
behaviourist approach with the cognitive approach, to produce the
general approach known as cognitive behaviour therapy, or CBT.
Psychologists using this approach work with their clients to develop
more positive cognitive styles, but they also show them how to use
behavioural techniques to change ingrained self-destructive habits. By
combining the two, they can develop interventions which work at more
than one level of analysis, and so are more likely to be successful
overall.

Insight There is a constant debate about which types of therapy are
'better' than others. But everyone is different, and as long as a
therapy suits both the client and the therapist, then it will probably
work. Different methods suit different people's understanding.
COUNSELLING PSYCHOLOGY Another form of clinical psychology ﬁrst emerged
in the 1950s, with the work of the psychologist Carl Rogers. As we saw
in Chapter 2, Rogers believed that human beings had two basic needs: the
need for

14. Education and health

321

positive regard from others, and the need for self-actualization. From
his experience with his own patients, he came to the conclusion that
providing an environment in which people would experience unconditional
positive regard would allow them the security to be able to explore
their own potential and to make their own choices. Client-centred
therapy Rogers's work became the foundation of what was later to become
counselling psychology. He developed an approach which he called
client-centred therapy, to emphasize that it was the client who held the
responsibility and made the decisions, rather than the professional who
was supposed to be helping them. In client-centred therapy, the
therapist provides a supportive, warm environment in which the person
explores their own options and makes their own decisions. Following on
from this, Rogers concluded that it was equally possible for other
people to provide a supportive and warm environment. He developed the
idea of encounter groups -- groups in which people would share their
problems, and encounter one another openly, as individual human beings.
It was this which provided the basic principle of the self-help groups
which have become such an important part of Western societies. Rogers's
ideas became extremely inﬂuential in many areas, and were taken up by
many people, both psychologists and otherwise. Counselling as a
profession was developed on the basis of Rogerian principles, although
it has since developed other approaches as well. Although many
counsellors are not psychologists, the area of applied psychology known
as counselling psychology has been growing considerably in recent years,
and it consists of qualiﬁed psychologists who apply their professional
skills and training in counselling work.

Health psychology Psychologists are also involved in working to enhance
physical health. Health psychology is a very broad area because it is

322

concerned with the psychological aspects of our physical health, and
there are a great many of these. Maintaining physical health isn't just
about avoiding illness: it's also about making sure that we stay well,
so lifestyles and beliefs are very important in health psychology.
DOCTOR-- PATIENT COMMUNICATION Some health psychologists are interested
in doctor--patient communication. For example, people often don't give
their doctors all the information they need to make an accurate
diagnosis because they feel intimidated by the doctor's manner, and by
the formal setting of the surgery. Health psychologists use their
knowledge of non-verbal communication and social appraisal to help
doctors to communicate more effectively, so that they can overcome these
problems. Another aspect of doctor--patient communication concerns the
issue of following medical instructions. Surveys show that as many as 60
per cent of people don't actually use medical treatments in the ways
that they have been told -- and this is important, because this can make
all the difference to whether the treatment is effective or not. A drug
which has to be taken with food will not do its job properly if it is
taken on an empty stomach, because it needs to interact with the
chemicals involved in digestion to have its effect. So health
psychologists look at the various reasons why people do or don't follow
medical instructions. They explore issues such as lifestyle -- given the
person's everyday life, is it actually difﬁcult for them to do what they
have been told to do? They also look at people's beliefs about medicines
and how they work, and at how instructions can be misunderstood.
Research of this kind has produced a number of recommendations for
medical personnel which have improved how accurately people use their
treatments.

Insight Power and status imbalances mean that patients often feel unable
to speak freely to their doctor. So it is important that doctors are
aware of this, and can check whether the patient is actually in a
position to follow the treatment regime they are prescribing for them.
14. Education and health

323

BEHAVIOURAL TREATMENTS Another aspect of health psychology is concerned
with behaviourally based treatments. In some physical illnesses, such as
diabetes, there is no known cure. All that patients who have diabetes
can do is to manage their disorder by behavioural control of some kind.
Health psychologists help people to do this, by looking at aspects of
behaviour such as diet control, lifestyle and how people monitor their
own health. By now it should come as no surprise to discover that one of
the most important factors in managing diabetes, as well as other
behaviourally based disorders, is that people should have a sense of
control over their own health. People who see their illness as not under
their own control are likely to suffer more, and to do things which will
make the situation worse, than people who see what happens to them as
the outcome of their own actions. A passive approach to an illness such
as diabetes has demonstrably worse outcomes than an active management of
the problem. So health psychologists are also involved in training
people in techniques for managing their own lifestyles, stress levels,
and so on. HEALTH EDUCATION Another aspect of health psychology is in
health education programmes: public campaigns which are designed to
encourage people to take up healthy behaviours and minimize risks.
Anti-smoking campaigns, AIDS avoidance campaigns and, more
controversially, advice about what constitutes a healthy diet are the
kinds of area in which psychologists have been involved. Persuading
people to take up healthy lifestyles is not as easy as it may sound.
Simply giving people information doesn't really work, because there is
often quite a difference between what we know and what we do. We may be
aware that something is risky, and yet do it anyway. And there are also
social factors involved, which can inﬂuence what we actually end up
doing. For example, there is a big discrepancy between the number of
young people who are

324

aware that they should use a condom when they are having sex, and the
number who actually do. Even though the risk of AIDS is high, and the
consequences of contracting HIV can be tragic, many people still engage
in extremely risky behaviours. Psychologists studying this area have
identiﬁed a number of factors which maintain this risky behaviour, such
as the belief that sticking to only one partner will minimize the risk
-- even though the partnership later breaks up and the person then
enters another relationship -- or the idea that it detracts from the
spontaneity of the experience, and makes it seem too 'planned'. There
are questions of habits: many older people are reluctant to adopt condom
use because they have established sexual habits without them. And there
is also, of course, the question of a power imbalance between men and
women, since some men oppose the use of condoms and many women do not
feel conﬁdent enough to insist on their use. It is these kinds of factor
that show how complex the problem of risk avoidance really is. It goes
much deeper than simply providing people with information, and an
awareness of human psychology is necessary to tackle these complex
issues. As we have found so often, healthcare and the promotion of
healthy behaviour involves understanding the human being on a number of
different levels. It is far from being simple and obvious.

Insight Psychologists have found that people stay motivated if they have
manageable goals. So healthy lifestyle programmes tend to encourage
making very small changes at ﬁrst, so that we can do them successfully.
Big changes are harder to keep up with, so we can easily get discouraged
and give up. We can see, then, that psychologists are active in a great
many different aspects of education and health. If you are interested in
these topics, you may like to read the relevant chapters in Understand
Applied Psychology, which go into a little more detail about them. In
our next chapter, however, we will turn our attention to the question of
psychology and the environment.

14. Education and health

325

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Modern psychological practices in education and
health are very different from the common stereotypes of IQ testing and
psychoanalysis. 2 Student motivation can be strongly inﬂuenced by the
learning environment, opportunities for success and the relationship
with the teacher. 3 Highly skilled teachers are able to foster emotional
warmth in the classroom while still maintaining high expectations. 4
Managing and respecting social identities can be a signiﬁcant factor in
successful teaching. 5 Educational psychologists can help people with
speciﬁc learning difﬁculties or poor self-images. 6 Dyslexia is a
controversial diagnosis, because it is sometimes applied more broadly
than it should be. 7 Clinical psychologists may use behavioural or
cognitive methods to help people with emotional disorders. 8 Counselling
psychologists often apply Rogerian non-directive skills to counselling.
9 Health psychologists apply psychological knowledge to health matters
such as doctor--patient communication or the behavioural management of
illness. 10 Health psychologists are often involved in health education
designed to improve whole lifestyles rather than speciﬁc treatments.

326

15 Living in the world In this chapter you will learn: • how an
understanding of proxemics might help us to reduce vandalism • to
identify four psychological aspects of environmental stress • how
psychology can be useful in the prevention of disasters. This chapter is
about environmental psychology, which is the study of how our
surroundings and circumstances inﬂuence how we act and how we feel. It
isn't just physical surroundings which are important in this:
environmental psychologists study the social environment too, in terms
of the other people who are around us and how their presence makes a
difference. Our environment can affect us in more than one way. For
example, it can act as a conﬁning, or restricting force. We adapt our
behaviour to our surroundings, and those surroundings sometimes only
allow certain kinds of actions. If you are a patient in a hospital, for
instance, there are only a certain number of possibilities for action,
partly because the environment allows you only to do certain things. The
kinds of behaviour which are possible for someone out walking in the
hills are entirely different from the kinds of behaviour which are
possible for a mother at home with a small child. Environments also have
the power to produce particular kinds of behaviour from us. How a
patient in a hospital acts is, to a very large extent, determined by the
hospital environment. It isn't just that it restricts the possibilities,
it's also that we realize that certain kinds of behaviour are expected
from us and so we act accordingly. 15. Living in the world

327

Similarly, we tend to speak in hushed tones in a church or holy place
even if we aren't personally very religious, because just being in that
environment produces that behaviour.

Insight Most modern hospitals have been redesigned with smaller wards
and deﬁned areas which 'belong' to the patient and can be a bit
personalized. But it is still a very different environment from home,
and the environmental change is uncomfortable for most people. Another
way that the environment affects us is that it can motivate us to act in
certain ways. Different types of environment encourage us to do
different things. Take going on holiday, for instance. When we are away
from home, we often ﬁnd ourselves exploring new places, or trying out
new foods -- behaviours which we wouldn't be nearly as likely to do at
home. People are also sometimes motivated to stay in a particular part
of the country, even if it means adapting to a less well-paid kind of
work; or to live in a particular kind of house, even if it means hard
work and struggle to get there.

Insight Our environment is much more important to us than we realize. We
act, and react, completely differently in some environments than we do
in others -- not because we are being hypocritical or dishonest, but
because we automatically adjust to different situations. It's part of
our adaptability as human beings.

Proxemics and privacy Human beings are very conscious of space and
places: it seems to be one of those things that is built deeply into our
consciousness. For example, we automatically seem to use distance as a
type of non-verbal communication, which says something about the
relationship that we have with other people. Conventional distances are
different from one culture to the next, but in all societies we stand
closer to people that we like than we do to people that

328

we don't like; we stand further away when talking to a stranger than to
a friend, and we conform to cultural standards about what is the usual,
or acceptable, distance for certain kinds of interaction. PERSONAL SPACE
The area of psychology which is concerned with personal space and the
distances which we keep between people is known as proxemics. Everyone
seems to be surrounded by a little 'bubble' of personal space, and we
only allow people inside this space if we know them well enough. But, as
I've already said, different cultures have different ideas as to how big
that bubble is. What is a comfortable conversational distance for
someone from a Middle Eastern country will often feel too close to a
North European, so if the two are in conversation, it is easy for
tensions to arise. The North European will feel tense and crowded,
because they feel that their personal space is being invaded; while the
Middle Eastern person will feel that the other is being distant and
hostile, and not particularly friendly. Zones of personal distance Hall
(1966) proposed that we have four zones of personal distance, as listed
in Table 15.1. When we look at this table, though, we have to remember
that the distances which Hall provided as examples are drawn from
Europe, Britain and the United States -- and don't represent all of the
subcultures in those societies either. We also need to bear in mind that
one category can sometimes shade into another -- our personal distance
zones aren't really as rigid as they might seem from this description.
Table 15.1 Zones of personal distance. Intimate (0 -- 45 cm)

For lovers, very close family (such as mother and child), or very close
friends. Personal (0.5 m -- 1.2 m) For friends, or family members.
Social (1.2 m -- 3.5 m) For a business conversation, or a discussion
with a stranger. Public (3.5 m -- 7.5 m) For public meetings and
ceremonies, with speakers and audiences.

15. Living in the world

329

It isn't just the distances themselves which vary. Even when people are
very close, the amount of contact that they actually make with one
another depends on their culture. Jourard (1966) observed couples at
pavement cafés in various parts of the world, and observed how often
they touched hands, or made body contact in some other way. London had
the lowest number: many couples didn't make any contact at all during
the period in which Jourard was conducting the observations. Puerto
Rico, on the other hand, had the highest, with as many as 180 contacts
between couples in the course of a single hour. Often we try to protect
our personal space by using markers such as shopping bags or newspapers.
You will often ﬁnd, for example, that people reading in libraries will
mark out a small area around themselves using bags or coats --
establishing a kind of temporary 'territory'. In 1966, Felipe and Sommer
conducted a study in which the researchers deliberately went and sat
down too close to people working in libraries (it's interesting, isn't
it, that we all have an idea of what 'too close' means?). Only one of
the 80 people involved actually asked them to move, but the others all
indicated that they were uncomfortable with the situation. Some people
piled up papers and books to form a barrier; others used body posture to
separate themselves, by turning away from the intruder and hunching
their shoulders or putting an arm around their work; but most simply
packed up their things and moved away.

Insight Try keeping a record through a typical day of how many of your
actions are to do with maintaining personal space or personal privacy.
We often spend far more energy and time on this than we realize.
Protecting privacy Incidentally, this study is another example of the
kind of research psychologists used to do, but which wouldn't be
considered ethically acceptable today. People are entitled to their
privacy and to be allowed to work undisturbed and it is important that

330

modern psychological studies should not cause anyone to feel discomfort
or distress. So a study which deliberately intruded on someone's privacy
wouldn't be permitted by a psychology ethics committee, unless there was
a very good reason indeed for doing it, and unless the people themselves
had agreed to co-operate. The concept of personal privacy is an
important one for environmental psychology, although it is a hard one to
deﬁne. Privacy means different things to different people. Some people
see privacy as being entirely alone; others see it as being just with
friends or family; others, as in the library study, see it as being left
undisturbed to get on with what they are doing even if there are other
people around. Personal privacy is linked closely with social respect,
and we saw in Chapter 6 how important that can be for us. So even if it
just takes the form of respecting personal distance, it's important to
respect people's privacy. This may seem to be a relatively unimportant
point, until we remember that there are some situations in which people
lose all right to personal privacy. One of the reasons why people ﬁnd it
so disturbing to be in hospital, for instance, is because hospital
patients are placed in a situation where all of the normal social
markers for privacy and personal space have disappeared. Nurses and
other people can enter freely what would normally be an intimate zone
for the person, and make bodily contact; and everyday actions become far
more public than they were before. This invasion of personal space and
personal privacy is a serious source of strain for a hospital patient.
We protect our privacy in other ways, too. For example, even an ordinary
family house has certain areas which are 'public', such as the sitting
room, but other areas which are entirely private. In the normal run of
things, a visitor to someone's house wouldn't expect to see the
bedrooms, for example. And even the public access is restricted to
certain people: strangers are excluded carefully, by physical barriers
such as fences and locks, and the area of ground which represents the
territory is carefully marked out. Protecting personal privacy is so
important to us that, for most people,

15. Living in the world

331

what is really upsetting about being burgled isn't so much what has been
lost, as the knowledge that their personal territory has been invaded by
a stranger who has no respect for them or what is theirs.

Insight Progressive retirement homes often give their residents a bit of
garden which they can regard as their own, and cultivate as they like.
This gives them a sense of agency and control, which can do a lot to
overcome the feelings of helplessness which accompany going into a care
home. Defensible space Newman (1972) suggested that having some kind of
defensible space is important in minimizing urban stress, and even
crime. From studying the incidence of vandalism on different housing
estates, Newman found that most of it happened in public places, and not
in areas which were clearly 'owned' by a resident or small group of
residents. The most extreme amounts of vandalism happened in public
areas which were also enclosed or hidden from view, such as lifts or
stairwells. Newman argued that housing developments ought to recognize
the concept of defensible space -- the idea that the people living in
housing projects should have areas which were clearly marked out as
theirs, and which they could look after. By doing so, Newman asserted,
it would be possible to reduce the amount of vandalism. The layouts of
existing housing estates, Newman argued, had been designed almost to
encourage vandalism, because of the way in which they used the space.
Newman identiﬁed four principles for developing areas of defensible
space. The ﬁrst is that there should be clearly deﬁned territories,
which people can see as 'owned', such as individual gardens and
entrances. The second is surveillance: it is important, Newman said,
that an area should be overlooked, so that other people can see what is
going on. The third is image: a building should look secure and well
protected, because this will reduce the number of opportunistic

332

crimes. A building which seems to be an easy target will attract people
who are ready to take advantage of any opportunity, such as an open
window; whereas one that looks secure won't attract them so much in the
ﬁrst place. The fourth principle is that the surrounding environment
should also be open and easily surveyed. There's not much point in a
well-designed housing development which can be reached only along dark,
lonely roads!

Sources of environmental stress Cassidy (1997) discussed the many
different ways that our environments can affect us psychologically. Most
of us, for example, have had the experience of being in an environment
which calms or soothes us. For many people, being out in the country is
a particularly restful and relaxing experience. For others, being in a
bustling, busy market can be an experience which lifts their spirits and
makes them feel happy. But environments can have the opposite effect
too. Our surroundings can make us feel tense, or anxious, or can simply
represent an increased strain as we go about our day-to-day lives. In
1982, Herzog and others surveyed a large number of people about which
features of cities they found most pleasant. Trees, grass and water were
popular, as was distinctive architecture which was in harmony with its
surroundings. Old, untidy settings such as factories and alleyways were
considered to be the least pleasant of all. NOISE Other types of
environmental experience can be deeply stressful. Whether we are aware
of it or not, we are taking in information from the world around us all
the time. If a stimulus is continuous, we become habituated to it, so
that we are no longer aware that it is happening. You will probably have
noticed this if you have a fridge that hums. You don't consciously hear
the humming, but when it stops you become aware that it was there in the

15. Living in the world

333

background before. This realization tells you that, even though you
weren't hearing it, the noise was still being registered by your nervous
system. Background stimulation of this kind can be much more intense
than we realize. People who live in small towns or in the country often
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to sleep when they visit a large city for the ﬁrst time,
because they ﬁnd the continual trafﬁc activity too noisy. People who
live in the city don't notice it as much, but their senses are still
registering it. The continual background noise of trafﬁc, machinery and
household equipment is a source of minor, but continual, stress. Loud
noise is even more stressful. People who live close to airports often
have to have special sound insulation installed to protect them from the
noise of the aircraft taking off and landing; and those who live close
to motorways often need a sound screen, such as a thick row of trees, to
bafﬂe the noise. Loud and prolonged noise at work can cause people to go
deaf, which is why operators of noisy machinery are expected to wear ear
defenders; and this sort of noise is a source of stress as well as a
physical health hazard. A high level of noise at work affects our level
of arousal (see Chapter 4) so that we feel 'keyed up', and often
irritable. It also makes it difﬁcult for us to communicate with other
people, which is stressful too. This affects some kinds of work more
than others: in an investigation of the effects of work noise, Poulton
(1976) found that it was skilled jobs, which require concentration or
rapid action which are most affected by work noise. Not all noise is
stressful, though. The noise level at a music concert can be extremely
loud, but doesn't produce serious effects -- although it might, if we
were trying to carry out a skilled task which required concentration.
For the most part, though, the fact that we have chosen to listen to it,
and also the fact that it is musical rather than simply noise, makes a
lot of difference to our reactions. Also, the fact that it is temporary,
lasting only

334

for a few hours, rather than being part of our daily experience, makes a
difference.

Insight Some people are so accustomed to the background noise of the
city that if they holiday in the country, they ﬁnd it hard to sleep at
ﬁrst because of the silence. But this doesn't last long: the relief from
the unconscious stress of noise and pollution soon relaxes them. LACK OF
CONTROL As we have seen so often, if we feel we have some control over
the stimuli around us, then we don't ﬁnd them nearly as stressful. And
this can apply to loud, unpleasant noises too. Glass and Singer (1972)
asked people to solve a set of problems while a loud, harsh noise
occurred from time to time. Half of the people in the study were able to
press a button which would stop the noise, at least temporarily, but
they were asked not to use it unless they really had to. The others
didn't have any way of stopping the noise. The group who could have
stopped the noise if they wanted to, actually didn't stop it at all, but
they performed much better on the problem-solving task than the others.
It seemed that just knowing that they could control it if they wanted to
was enough to remove the stressful inﬂuence. There are other studies
which show how important a sense of control can be in reducing stress.
Lundberg (1976) investigated the levels of stress experienced by male
passengers on a commuter train. The more people there were on the train,
the more stress the passengers experienced, even though there were
always enough seats for everyone. Lundberg also found that people who
were ﬁrst on the train, or who joined it at an early stage in its
journey didn't experience as much stress as those who joined the train
later, even though they had a much longer journey. What seemed to be
important in the passengers' experience of stress was whether they could
choose their own seats or not. People who joined the train early had
more choice in where they

15. Living in the world

335

sat, and were more likely to be able to choose a favourite seat. It
seems that feeling that they had some kind of control over their
commuting experience made a considerable difference to the amount of
stress people felt.

Insight Studies show that commuters feel less stress if they are on a
delayed train which keeps moving slowly than on a train which stands
still, even if the total journey takes longer. The impression that some
progress is being made seems to reduce the stress by a signiﬁcant
amount. TEMPERATURE AND POLLUTION Temperature can be a source of
environmental stress, too. People working in an atmosphere which is too
cold or too hot ﬁnd it difﬁcult to concentrate on their work, which is a
source of frustration. However, we have to be a bit careful when we are
looking at temperature as a source of stress, because there is quite a
big difference between external high temperatures -- warm weather -- and
an indoor hot stuffy environment. Baron and Ransberger (1978) looked at
weather reports and civil disturbances in America, and found that riots
were most likely to happen when the temperature was hot -- although not
when it was unusually or extremely so. This doesn't mean, though, that
rioting is caused by hot weather. As Smelser (1962) and many other
researchers have shown, riots are sparked off by perceived social
injustice, not simply because people feel like rioting. But in hot
weather, more people are out on the streets, and so unfair or unjust
events are more easily noticed and more easily communicated to others.
We also respond more strongly than we realize to levels of pollution in
the environment. Pollution represents a source of physical stress for
our bodies, because they have to cope with semi-toxic substances, such
as lead or nitrous oxides, as well as trace amounts of real toxins, such
as those in commercially grown vegetables. These can also produce mental
effects as well. Rotton and others, in 1978, showed that when people
were

336

experiencing high levels of air pollution they felt less happy, were
more likely to dislike other people, and to see the negative side of
things that happened to them. On a more speciﬁc level, too, Bleda and
Sandman (1977) showed that cigarette smoke could produce depression and
anxiety in non-smokers. MEETING STRANGERS A different facet of stress is
concerned with how we respond to the people around us. In modern
industrial society, crowds are an ordinary part of everyday living. Yet
this is a relatively recent development. For most of our history, human
beings have tended to live in small village or nomadic communities,
consisting of 100 to 200 people, so everyone would be known
individually. In a situation such as this, encountering a stranger is a
rarity, so anyone new would automatically be an object of interest. The
problem is that we still have many of our biological adaptations to
meeting strangers, which evolved during the millions of years when
meeting strangers was rare. We respond differently to strangers than we
do to people who are familiar, and our response is more aroused and
tense. Yet in city or town life in modern societies, we meet strangers
all the time -- in fact, we are more likely to encounter strangers than
friends. So the mechanisms which evolved to adapt us for a life in which
most people are known and familiar become overloaded, because they are
continually being activated. It is for this reason that so many people
ﬁnd crowds stressful. In a crowd, we are unable to maintain our usual
personal space, which is a source of tension. People sometimes even bump
into us, which we ﬁnd even more stressful, and we often perform quite
complicated dodging manoeuvres when walking down a crowded pavement, in
order to avoid bodily contact with strangers. We are also liable to make
eye-contact with strangers, and eye-contact is one of the most powerful
signals of all. Eye-contact -- looking directly into someone's eyes
while they are also looking at you -- isn't a signal that we take
lightly. Prolonged eye-contact is a sign of intense interest in the
other 15. Living in the world

337

person. At its extremes, it can signal love -- or its opposite,
hostility and threat (there is no chance of confusing the two, because
the muscles around the eyes are arranged quite differently). We look at
someone who is speaking to us, which is a signal that they have all of
our attention. We look away from someone if we don't want to disturb
them, or make them feel self-conscious. So even ﬂeeting eye-contact, of
the sort we have with strangers, is stressful when it happens often
enough. In situations where prolonged eye-contact might happen because
the same strangers have to remain close by, such as in a lift or a tube
train, we tend to look upward or out of the window in order to avoid it,
which is why advertisements tend to be placed high up. City-dwellers
learn to cope with this type of stress, of course, but it is present in
the background nonetheless.

Insight Being surrounded by strangers is one of the unavoidable aspects
of city living, and an unconscious source of environmental stress. As a
result, it makes defensible space at home even more important, and adds
to the already high pressures which homeless people experience. CROWDING
Crowding can produce stress in other ways too. In a well-known study
back in the 1960s, Calhoun showed that laboratory rats that were allowed
to breed freely and become overcrowded became much more aggressive, even
killing one another as part of the competition for living space and
food. Since this behaviour would normally be totally alien to these
animals, it showed how much stress the crowding had created. There are
indications, too, that human beings become much more aggressive if they
are crowded. Loo (1979) studied young children in a day nursery, and
found a strong link between bad temper and crowding. The more children
there were, the more quarrelsome the youngsters became. Similarly,
McCain et al. (1980) showed that prison riots and also suicides were
much more common when

338

prisons were overcrowded than when they held their intended number of
prisoners. In another study, Kelley (1982) showed that there was a
strong link between the density of the population in 175 American cities
and the amount of crime. Even the types of area which were relatively
low in crime showed more crimes as the population increased -- and that
included all sorts of crimes, ranging from car theft to murders. Kelley
drew the implication that population density, in and of itself, is one
source of environmental stress which shows itself in increased crime
rates -- although there are, of course, other factors which inﬂuence
crime as well.

Disasters and accidents Experiencing ongoing environmental stress is one
thing: experiencing a disaster is quite different. From time to time,
events happen which have massive implications, both for the people who
are involved in them but also for the smooth and safe running of society
as a whole. The nuclear explosion at Chernobyl, the Hillsborough
football stadium disaster, the Zeebrugge Ferry disaster, the Kings Cross
ﬁre, the Hatﬁeld train crash and many others were traumatic events of
such magnitude that they affected the lives of thousands of people: not
just those who were directly involved, but many others as well. SYSTEMS
AND ERRORS Psychologists studying how these disasters have happened ﬁnd,
repeatedly, that they show a similar pattern. In each case, a large
number of minor problems have occurred fairly regularly, but these are
overlooked or tolerated because they are part of a much more complex
system, because they would be awkward or expensive to correct, and
because the chances of them escalating into a serious problem are
considered to be low. However, eventually, these ignored minor problems
combine, to produce tragic and disastrous consequences.

15. Living in the world

339

These problems are often a direct result of ignoring psychological
factors in the situation. As we've seen in this book, psychological
factors are many and varied, and so are the ways in which they manifest
themselves in complex systems. The shift work practices in the ferry
company, for example, meant that the people who were operating the
Herald of Free Enterprise were unlikely to be functioning at their most
alert, which became a major factor in how the error took place. As we
saw in Chapter 4, people work better with some shift systems than with
others, and this needs to be taken into account in any complex system.

Insight Errors and mistakes are bound to happen sometimes. No system can
be designed to be completely foolproof; but if we recognize that people
are human, we can design our systems so that small slips don't turn into
major disasters. Similarly, there are some designs which are likely to
reduce errors, and some which make errors more likely to happen.
Ergonomic psychologists investigate the best possible locations for
warning and alert signals, and also which types of signals are most
needed. The lack of alert signals on the bridge to indicate that the bow
doors were still open was another factor which led to the Herald of Free
Enterprise disaster. It might seem a trivial factor in itself, but
combined with the other factors involved, it made all the difference.
The important thing about these kinds of factors is that they make the
whole system more vulnerable. People don't act like robots: sometimes
they make mistakes. So any type of complex system has to be able to
allow for the occasional mistake on the part of its human operator, and
it has to be designed in such a way as to ensure that these mistakes are
less likely to happen. Having a shift work system where people on duty
are overtired and less alert makes mistakes more likely; having a ship
control system which doesn't point out vital information such as whether
the bow doors are closed or not also makes mistakes more likely.

340

The kinds of mistakes which people make aren't random: they are ones
which can be taken into account when complex systems are being put
together. The psychologist James Reason performed a number of studies of
everyday errors and mistakes and found that they tend to fall into three
categories: those to do with skills, those to do with knowledge, and
those to do with the rules that people are working by. Skill-based
errors Skill-based errors are often concerned with the way that highly
practised actions can become so automatic that we don't need to pay
conscious attention to them (see Chapter 9). This means that sometimes
we fall back on habitual routines when really we intended to be doing
something else. You've probably done something like this yourself, such
as turning down your usual route to work or school instead of going in a
different direction, because you weren't thinking about it. Since this
is quite a common type of human error, Reason argued that it needs to be
taken into account when a complex system is being designed. If a mistake
of this sort would be serious, then it is important to make sure it
doesn't happen, by making sure that the kinds of routines that people
are asked to follow in different circumstances are different enough from
one another, that people don't just slip into automatic routines and
habits. If two systems involve similar patterns of activity, then this
sort of mistake is much more likely to happen. Knowledge-based errors
Most kinds of knowledge-based mistakes come from the fact that people
simply don't have the knowledge that they need in order to take
effective action. An operator who has been trained only in one
particular job, and who hasn't had special training for what to do in an
emergency, can easily make a mistake simply because they don't know what
the best thing to do is. So if the failure of effective action could
result in a disaster -- no matter how unlikely -- it is important that
people should be aware of how to deal with it.

15. Living in the world

341

The way that this is overcome in ordinary working life is through
training. It is training, whether through explicit courses or through
simulations, which gives people the knowledge that they need to deal
with problems so that they don't develop into disasters. Any
organization which is involved in potentially risky processes needs to
ensure that all of their staff -- not just those who are nominally
responsible -- receive appropriate training, because it can happen that
the 'responsible' person may not actually be present at the time. They
might, for example, have gone to the toilet when an emergency happened.
Even though they were only away for a couple of seconds, if their junior
or assistant didn't know what to do, a slight problem could have
escalated into an emergency by the time they came back. So industrial
psychologists emphasize the importance of all staff being informed and
trained about appropriate actions in the event of unusual events.
Rule-based errors Rule-based mistakes are often associated with tackling
problems that haven't arisen before. Usually, people will try to deal
with these by applying rules or principles which they have used in other
situations. As we saw in Chapter 7, we use our existing mental schemas
to direct what we should do in new situations. Sometimes, though, the
rule the person tries to use is inappropriate, and this can have serious
consequences. Another kind of rule-based mistake happens when we are
simply applying an inappropriate rule. To return to the Zeebrugge ferry
disaster, Reason showed how the way that the directors of the company
saw their job was an example of people working within an inappropriate
rule. They deﬁned their primary task as being to keep their shareholders
happy, rather than being to ensure that the ferries ran safely on a
day-to-day basis. This led to the adoption of practices which were
cheap, but not safe. This point may need a little explanation, because
it is not saying that the company's ﬁnances don't matter. Ultimately, of
course, a company which doesn't make a proﬁt won't be able to run. But
most similar companies would see running the ferries safely as

342

their primary objective, on the grounds that it will ensure conﬁdent
passengers and more proﬁtability in the long run. The directors of the
ferry company, though, aimed for proﬁtability at the expense of safety
and efﬁciency. As the outcome of the disaster showed, it was an
ineffective policy in the end. But it is a clear example of applying
inappropriate rules for the situation. POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
Whenever we are involved in any kind of sudden loss or bereavement, we
experience grief. Grief is an extremely disabling emotion, which can
last for a very long time and has a number of complex elements. Ramsay
and de Groot (1977) identiﬁed some of the main components of grief, and
these are listed in Table 15.2. As anyone who has experienced the loss
of someone they love knows, the complexity and intensity of the
experience can be overwhelming at times. Table 15.2 Components of grief.
Shock Disorganization Denial Depression Guilt Anxiety and/or panic
attacks Aggression

Resolution Re-integration

A feeling of numbness and unreality. Being unable to perform even
simple, routine tasks. Refusing to admit that it has really happened.
Feelings of pining and despair. Blaming oneself for the death, no matter
how unrealistically. A frightened response to being overwhelmed by
emotions. Hostility and anger at the unfairness of the bereavement,
sometimes targeted at medical staff or relatives. Accepting the fact of
the bereavement, as the worst of the grief dies down. Beginning a new
life without the dead person. Many people ﬁnd it hard to do this
straight away, but begin to manage it after a couple of weeks.

15. Living in the world

343

Insight Often, just knowing the symptoms of grief helps people to cope
with it. People who lose a close friend or relative can be almost
overwhelmed by the rapid changes of emotions like guilt, anger and
anxiety. Discovering that this is only to be expected at such a time can
be very reassuring. For people who are involved in major disasters, the
experience is even more severe. In addition to the grief which they
experience as a result of the death and loss involved in the event,
there is also the shock of the experience itself. This is often deeply
traumatic and can have lasting effects. Clinical psychologists working
in this area have identiﬁed a syndrome known as post-traumatic stress
disorder, or PTSD for short. Although it has been known for some
considerable time, it is only recently that PTSD has become acknowledged
as a clinical problem in its own right. Post-traumatic stress disorder
happens in people who have experienced severe emotional traumas. It
occurs in people who are engaged in prolonged and dangerous ﬁghting, in
people who have experienced torture, and in those who are involved in
major disasters. If the stress is serious and continuous enough, it
seems that most people will be affected in the end. Swank (1949) in a
study of 4,000 survivors of the Normandy campaign, found that soldiers
experienced what was then known as shell shock (but is now recognized as
PTSD) if three-quarters of their companions had been killed, no matter
how resilient they seemed to be. Emergency workers who have to deal with
major disasters can also experience PTSD. Taylor and Frazer (1982)
studied the people who helped out in 1979, when a DC10 on a tourist
ﬂight crashed into a mountain in Antarctica. All 257 passengers and crew
were killed, and it took ten weeks to recover and identify the bodies.
Several of the workers who had been helping to recover the bodies
experienced persistent images of the disﬁgured corpses or suffered
nightmares of air crashes. Those involved in recovering bodies from the
World Trade Center in New York in 2001 were provided with special
counselling, to help to minimize the effects

344

of the trauma -- an example of how widely recognized this syndrome has
become. Symptoms of PTSD There are three main groups of symptoms in
post-traumatic stress disorder. The ﬁrst involves re-experiencing what
happened. People suffering from PTSD often have recurrent nightmares of
the event, and may also experience vivid memories of it during the
waking day, which are extremely distracting as well as distressing. The
second group of symptoms occur as the mind attempts to cope with the
trauma. These are known as avoidance or numbing reactions: people often
feel detached or estranged from others, and distant from everyday life.
The third group are to do with the increased arousal level of the body,
so they include the inability to sleep or to stay asleep for very long,
irritability, and a tendency to outbursts of anger. These symptoms are
similar to those which people would be likely to experience after any
disturbing event, but what makes them distinctive in PTSD is how strong
they are, and how long they last. Although sometimes the symptoms don't
appear until some time after the event, they can go on for several
months, or even years. They can also disappear for a while, and then
reappear again. Archibald (1963) found that 15 years after a traumatic
event had taken place, two-thirds of survivors still showed symptoms of
PTSD. Often, though, people don't recognize that what they are
experiencing is actually post-traumatic stress disorder. Mitchell (1992)
described how doctors were trying to treat the residents of the Scottish
village of Lockerbie for some time after an American airliner exploded
above the village, causing deep trauma and shock among the residents.
But the doctors were not aware of PTSD, and so were at a loss as to how
to proceed. When residents received insurance leaﬂets describing the
symptoms, the local doctors realized that what they were treating was
actually a speciﬁc and recognizable syndrome, rather than just a
collection of individual reactions.

15. Living in the world

345

It matters whether the disorder is recognized, because it is possible to
organize therapy which helps people to get over it -- but only if people
know what is happening. Some clinical psychologists specialize in this
type of therapy, working with the victims of disasters to help them to
overcome the problem and return to normal living. Although the symptoms
may not disappear altogether, having therapy does help people to get
over the most severe problems more quickly, and to cope with it better.

Insight The most important aspect of PTSD is that it is possible to
recover from it. But it does need professional help: traumatic
experiences have to be brought to the surface and talked out, because
bottling them up means that the mind can't learn to deal with them
properly. Post-traumatic growth The experience of surviving traumatic
events is not always negative in the long term. Sometimes, these
experiences help people to re-evaluate their lives and to live in a
different, and more positive way. Having their worlds turned upside down
can make people more aware of what really matters to them, and as they
recover, they ﬁnd that they are able to develop a much more positive
outlook on life. Linley and Joseph (2003) reported four aspects of the
psychological growth which can occur as a result of traumatic events.
People may change their philosophy of life, learning to appreciate every
day as it comes and value what really matters. They may develop a
greater sense of personal resilience and strength, with more of an
acceptance of their own limitations. Such people may also change their
activities, working for positive social change, whether that be through
political activities or social ones. And many report changes for the
better in their relationships with friends and family. Linley and Joseph
also found that people who experience such psychological growth after
trauma also tend to show better long-term adjustment, and fewer symptoms
of post-traumatic

346

disorder. Because of this, they argued that the therapy provided for
post-traumatic clients should include a focus on positive psychological
growth, so that people can be helped to gain from the experience rather
than remain as victims. Some 43 per cent of the victims from one
disaster reported positive life outcomes of this type, and the
researchers believe that with therapeutic help, this ﬁgure could be
higher. We can see, then, that psychology can be usefully applied, not
just in understanding how disasters and accidents take place, but also
in helping people to recover from the worst of their effects. The most
important message, though, is the one which becomes apparent when we
look at how these disasters happen in the ﬁrst place: that if we take
full account of psychological factors in the design and management of
complex systems in the ﬁrst place, they are much less likely to happen.
This doesn't mean that they absolutely wouldn't happen, of course --
nobody could promise that -- but it would minimize the risks. And when
the consequences of failure are so very extreme, anything which
minimizes the risk of a disaster is worthwhile.

15. Living in the world

347

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 Environmental psychology is about how our social
and physical environments affect us. 2 People's behaviour is shaped by
the environment they are in to a surprising extent. 3 Personal distance
is an important indicator of social roles and relationships. 4 Studies
show that having areas of defensible space in new building schemes
reduces vandalism and encourages people to take care of the area. 5
Contact with strangers is stressful, and crowding may increase
aggression. 6 Environmental stress can result from factors like noise,
temperature and pollution. 7 People experience less stress if they feel
that they have some degree of control over what is disturbing them. 8
Many disasters originate with small errors which result in major systems
failures. 9 Errors may be skill-, knowledge- or role-based. 10 Survivors
of major disasters often experience post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) which can continue for life if they do not receive therapy.

348

16 Developing psychological understanding In this chapter you will
learn: • how to describe the different activities psychologists engage
in • why it is necessary to study human beings from several different
angles • about the main methods of collecting psychological evidence. If
you've read this far, you'll have gathered that psychology is a pretty
wide-ranging subject, covering a great many different aspects of human
functioning. But psychology is also a profession, and professional
psychologists put psychological knowledge to work in all sorts of ways.
This mixture of academic and professional psychology means that
psychology itself is very wide ranging. It is also changing all the
time, as psychologists learn new things and develop new methods of
working, so there's always something new to discover.

Insight Whether you study psychology formally or just have a casual
interest, it's always helpful to know a bit more about people. But it
won't ever give you all the answers about a single person, because
psychology is about processes and how things happen, rather than about
the end result.

16. Developing psychological understanding

349

What do psychologists do? That doesn't mean, though, that every
psychologist has to know everything there is about psychology -- that
would be pretty impossible. Speaking personally, I've been studying it
for over 30 years now, and I'm always conscious of how much I don't
know! But psychologists always specialize in one way or another.
Academic psychologists, for example, generally work within a very small
area of psychology. Their task is to conduct research into that area,
identifying the fundamental mechanisms and processes which are taking
place, and exploring how they can contribute to our understanding of
people. Professional psychologists also tend to specialize, dealing with
just one area of applied psychology. They use the work of academic
psychologists and also conduct research of their own, and put that
knowledge to use in helping people in one way or another. Their research
also feeds back into academic psychology -- in fact, most areas of
academic psychology have been inﬂuenced at one time or another by
theories and evidence obtained from professional psychology. The
psychological professions Professional psychologists can be found at
work in almost any area which involves dealing with people. Forensic
psychologists, for example, work with police and prison staff in
tackling many different aspects of crime. Sports psychologists work with
coaches and competitors, developing ways of maximizing competitive
performance. Consumer psychologists are at work in advertising and
market research, working out how to reach new markets. In the sister
volume to this book, Understand Applied Psychology, I described 18
different areas of applied psychology, which are listed in Table 16.1.
If you're curious about these, or want to learn more about psychology,
take a look at that book.

350

Table 16.1 Areas covered in Understand Applied Psychology. Applied
Cognitive Psychology Applied Social Psychology Applied Bio-psychology
Applied Developmental Psychology Clinical Psychology Counselling
Psychology Health Psychology Forensic Psychology Educational Psychology

Applied Psychology of Teaching Occupational Psychology Organizational
Psychology Engineering and Design Psychology Space Psychology Sport
Psychology Consumer Psychology Environmental Psychology Political
Psychology

Insight Professional psychologists, like other professionals, are
obliged to keep their knowledge current by continuous professional
development (CPD). So being a professional means that you keep learning
for all of your working life -- you can't just sit back and think your
initial training will give you everything you'll ever need. Professional
training for psychologists takes many years -- typically, three years
for a ﬁrst degree, followed by another three years in specialist work
and a couple more years in supervised practice. But there are other
types of work that psychologists do too, and the 18 areas in the list
are only a sample. As a rule, though, people who begin to study
psychology don't usually know what area of work they want to go into
when they have ﬁnished. What they do know is that they are interested in
people and want to learn more about them.

Insight Professional psychologists like clinical or educational
psychologists spend as long in training as doctors or lawyers --
sometimes even longer. They need that time to develop enough knowledge
and expertise to be able to take responsibility for tackling
psychological problems without making serious mistakes.

16. Developing psychological understanding

351

Some people just study psychology for interest and no other reason.
Others become interested in a particular topic and aim for an academic
career which will allow them to do research. Some people decide that
they want to go on to further training so that they can become a
professional psychologist. And sometimes people feel that having a ﬁrst
degree or an A level in psychology is enough, and they go into careers
as policemen, social workers, doctors, nurses, personnel ofﬁcers or one
of any number of occupations which involve dealing with people. Whatever
decision they make, most people ﬁnd that having a good knowledge of
psychology is helpful to them. Knowing about psychology may not give you
all the answers, but it does help you to ask the right questions and to
go about seeking solutions in an intelligent way. In an article I
published in 1996, I listed a number of different skills which
psychology graduates have, and which are useful in all sorts of working
contexts. Those skills are listed in Table 16.2. As you can see, there
are a lot of them; and they come about because psychology is such a
complex subject to study and has so many different areas.

Developing psychological knowledge So, how do psychologists gain their
knowledge? People, as we have seen, are extremely complex, and
understanding the ways that our minds work is never going to be a matter
of one simple explanation. Everything we do is inﬂuenced by a diverse
range of experiences, from our biochemical state to the culture we were
brought up in and the situation we are in right now. It's the
psychologist's task to bring all these together and try to make sense of
them. Psychologists, though, are scientists, and most psychological
knowledge is developed as a result of some kind of empirical research.
As researchers, psychologists tend only to work in one small area at a
time. It isn't possible to conduct research into the whole of human
nature -- we have to concentrate on just one bit at

352

Table 16.2 The skills acquired in psychology degrees. Literacy Numeracy
Computer literacy Information-ﬁnding skills Research skills Measurement
skills Environmental awareness Interpersonal awareness Problem-solving
skills Critical evaluation Perspectives Higher-order analysis Pragmatism

Writing research reports, discussion papers and essays. Statistical
analysis and understanding. Using information technology of one sort or
another. Using databases, journals, libraries, etc. Obtaining systematic
scientiﬁc evidence. Operationalizing and designing complex measures.
Understanding how environments inﬂuence people. Social communication and
social skills. Sizing up situations and applying different strategies
and approaches. Appraising how adequate explanations of evidence are.
Exploring issues from several different angles. Spotting recurrent
patterns and systems. Learning how to get on and make the best of
things. (Hayes, 1996)

a time, or everything would be too complicated. So quite a lot of
psychological knowledge consists of small bits of research, each of
which can throw a little light onto a situation, but isn't enough to
explain it on its own. LEVELS OF ANALYSIS This means that it is very
important for psychology to have ways of linking together those pieces
of research, so that they can form coherent explanations for what is
going on. Scientiﬁc explanations are known as theories, and they are
just as important in psychological knowledge as empirical research.
Without theories to bring together research ﬁndings and make sense of
them, there 16. Developing psychological understanding

353

wouldn't be much point in doing research in the ﬁrst place, because it
wouldn't really tell us anything -- it would just be a collection of
'ooh-look-ain't-it-interesting' facts, and we can get those from quiz
shows or everyday observation. Actually, just about all psychological
research is driven by theory in the ﬁrst place. People conduct research
in order to investigate whether a particular theory is true; and their
ﬁndings are obtained in such a way that they can test the theory, to see
how well it holds up in reality. It's all very well having a plausible
idea, but lots of plausible ideas really don't work very well when we
actually look closely at human beings. Part of the deﬁnition of a
scientiﬁc theory is that it can be tested against empirical evidence,
and challenged or refuted if it doesn't seem to work. There are other
kinds of theories which don't exactly work in the same way, but we don't
usually count these as scientiﬁc ones. Even theories, though, can
generally deal only with one aspect of human functioning at a time. If
we really want to get to grips with what human beings do, we need to
look at it using several different levels of analysis at the same time.
Levels of analysis, which are sometimes known as levels of explanation,
are all about the way that we choose to study something. If we wanted to
look into the human activity known as reading, for example, we might
decide to study it by investigating what happens to the nerve cells in
the brain as we read. This would be the neurological level of analysis,
because we would be studying the neurones which are involved in that
activity. Another psychologist, though, might choose to look at reading
in terms of how we process the information that we receive, mentally.
This would be the cognitive level of analysis, because it is concerned
with our cognitions -- how we perceive, remember and apply information
that we come across in everyday life. A third psychologist might choose
to study reading in terms of its functions in society -- what children
and adults learn from books and other publications, and how this
inﬂuences social living. This would be the socio-cultural level of
analysis.

354

All these levels of analysis, and quite a few others, are involved in
understanding reading. Although we might conduct research into only one
level at a time, getting the whole picture of what is going on when
people read needs all of them. So if they are really about explaining
human behaviour, the theories that we develop need to be able to bring
together, or at least connect with, several different levels of
explanation. We looked at the main levels of explanation in Chapter 1,
so we will conclude this book by looking at some of the different types
of research methods that psychologists use to collect their evidence.

Insight It is sometimes claimed that knowing how the brain works will
tell us all about psychology. But even if we could map the ﬁring of
every single neurone, we still wouldn't know what someone was thinking
about, or why they were thinking it. No single level of analysis can
tell us everything.

Conducting psychological research Most psychological research is about
gathering evidence. That evidence might be used to support or refute the
theories which have been developed to explain what is going on; or it
might be used to identify how interventions may be more effective.
Gathering psychological evidence is a bit like detective work. It is
always easy to jump to conclusions about an answer. If a crime has been
committed, you can always ﬁnd someone who is certain who is responsible
-- but sometimes they are completely wrong. In the same way, when we are
studying something in psychology, it is easy to jump to conclusions
about it. After all, we all think we know about human beings. But
sometimes, as with the crime, our conclusions are simply wrong. So the
psychologist, like the detective, has to put in hours of painstaking
work collecting evidence, to ﬁnd out what is really going on. Sometimes
all that evidence will lead to the

16. Developing psychological understanding

355

same conclusion we might have obtained by guessing, or from 'common
sense'. But even though our conclusions might not be earth-shattering,
at least we know that they are based on a solid foundation. Quite often,
though, what we discover is totally unpredictable. Without collecting
the evidence in the ﬁrst place, we would never have known.

Insight The reason why psychological research is so important is because
when we are talking about people, we can't take anything for granted.
Things which seem like 'common sense' may be completely wrong or
completely right. Unless we research it carefully, we can't ﬁnd out
which is which. Psychologists collect evidence in many different ways.
Psychology as an academic discipline has been around for nearly 150
years, and during that time it has passed through several phases. Each
of these phases has left us its methods of research. As a general rule,
these phases occurred because a particular group of psychologists
believed that they had the best starting point for studying human
beings. So the methods that they used can be helpful in giving us an
insight into that particular level of explanation. Introspection
Psychology began life as a special branch of philosophy, so in its early
days the approaches it used were very similar to those used by the
philosophers of the time. For the most part, this involved introspection
-- trying to understand the mind by analysing your own thoughts,
feelings and experiences. Although this method fell out of favour for a
time, because it didn't seem to be scientiﬁc enough, in a more
systematic form it is used in psychology again today. Cognitive
psychologists, for instance, sometimes use a method called protocol
analysis to give them some ideas as to how people solve problems. This
involves asking people to talk aloud about what they are thinking as
they do a task, and analysing what they say. Some psychologists have
found it a helpful way of gathering evidence about problem-solving, or
even quite complex tasks such as musical composition.

356

The early introspectionist psychologists, however, were eventually
overtaken by a different approach to psychology which developed round
about the beginning of the twentieth century. This approach was known as
behaviourism, and those who supported it argued that psychology needed
to become more objective and scientiﬁc. Scientiﬁc, in their view, meant
sticking to things which could be observed directly by other people, and
that meant, effectively, restricting psychology to the study of
behaviour. EXPERIMENTS The behaviourists brought with them a rigorous
approach to scientiﬁc method, which they tried to use to look at the
'pure' elements of behaviour. This meant that they were very concerned
to cut out what they saw as 'contaminating' inﬂuences, and to design
research which just dealt with the important things causing the
behaviour, and nothing else. They believed that conducting tightly
controlled laboratory experiments was the best way to do this. An
experiment involves manipulating a situation to bring about an effect.
The behaviourists, in particular, tried to control their experiments
very carefully. They would try to rule out all other possible inﬂuences,
and then see what happened if the one factor that was left was altered.
This method of study has remained very important in psychology. Some
research into attention, for example, has involved asking people to
identify a single message or concentrate on identifying a signal on a
screen, while different factors in the message have been adjusted. These
experiments are carefully carried out under laboratory conditions, so
that the researchers can be sure that their results really were caused
by the factor they were studying. Action research There are other kinds
of experiments though, which are much more loosely controlled. In real
life, people will always be interested in what is going on around them,
developing their own

16. Developing psychological understanding

357

ideas and acting in the ways that these imply. So it is a bit naïve for
psychologists, or any other researchers for that matter, to expect their
participants to be passive and just do or think exactly what the
experimenter wants them to do. People are not that easily controlled. As
a result, psychologists have also developed ways of carrying out
research which takes more account of the real lives of the people
concerned. Research in organizational psychology, for example, often
consists of action research, in which working conditions or
communication systems are changed, and researchers observe how the
change affects the people working in that particular place. The
Hawthorne experiments that we looked at in Chapter 12 are a classic
example. In these types of studies, the active involvement of the people
concerned is built into both the method and the analysis, and the result
is a much more realistic picture -- even if it is more complicated to
analyse. Although ﬁeld experiments like this can't be controlled as
carefully as formal laboratory experiments, they tell us much more about
people at work than tightly controlled lab studies could ever do. Animal
experiments Unlike a modern psychologist, many of the early
behaviourists believed that one single level of explanation could
provide the key to understanding all human behaviour. This level of
explanation was to do with habits and learned associations. They
believed that all human behaviour was really just chains of learned
associations combined together, in the same way that atoms combine to
form animals, plants, or minerals. This led them to look for the 'atom'
of psychology, or the simplest unit of learning which they could ﬁnd. So
they spent a great deal of time studying animal learning, because they
believed that it was a 'pure' form of learning. They believed that
animal learning, unlike human learning, was 'uncontaminated' by
memories, ideas or imagination, so studying it would help them to
identify how basic units of learning combined to produce complex
behaviour.

358

Other psychologists, too, used animals to study basic units of human
experience. In the 1960s, for instance, many animal experiments were
conducted to investigate visual perception, and animal studies are still
used to investigate some aspects of brain functioning. But animal
experiments are much less common than they used to be in psychology.
Nowadays, psychology is much more concerned with the ethics of animal
research, which fortunately has meant that only studies which are
serious scientiﬁc research and are likely to be of real value in adding
to knowledge, are permitted. OBSERVATIONS The behaviourists, as we have
seen, emphasized rigorous experimentation as the main research method
for psychology. Gradually, however, psychologists with wider interests
began to have more inﬂuence, and people began to use non-experimental
methods for studying human behaviour. For example, it's not really a
good idea to do experiments on children, but there was a lot of interest
in the psychological aspects of child development throughout the
twentieth century. So psychologists who were interested in this subject
had to do their research by observing children, not by experimenting
with them. There are lots of different ways of performing scientiﬁc
observations, but just looking at what is in front of you isn't one of
them. Researchers need to know what they are looking for, and what they
will know if they do actually observe it. Psychologists conducting
observational research also need to make sure that their own unconscious
biases don't affect how they make sense out of what they see. So many
observational studies are conducted in a very systematic way, and
sometimes under quite controlled conditions -- such as watching children
play in a specially equipped playroom which has video cameras or
observation windows, so that they can be observed without interfering
with their play. Alternatively, psychologists sometimes conduct
observational studies of behaviour in the natural environment. This
approach

16. Developing psychological understanding

359

is known as ethology and, nowadays, it has become one of the main
methods of studying animal behaviour. But it doesn't just apply to
animals -- ethological studies are very useful when we are looking at
families, for example. We have learned a lot about how parents interact
with their babies by carrying out ethological observations. Surveys
Sometimes, psychologists want to make large-scale observations of what
people do or think, and they do this by conducting surveys. A survey
involves a special questionnaire, which is given to a large number of
people. By analysing their answers, the psychologist can observe general
tendencies, or trends, in what people are doing or thinking. Surveys
about AIDS, for instance, have helped psychologists to understand more
about people's attitudes towards it -- although they still don't tell us
very much about what people actually do. They tell us what people think
they might do, which isn't always the same thing. Psychometrics Another
very special type of observation that psychologists use is known as
psychometrics. Psychometric tests are tests which are designed to tell
us something about the person's mind. They usually take the form of
special questionnaires, which have been carefully constructed and
tested, and which can sometimes give us useful clues about someone's
personality, skills, or abilities. Intelligence tests and personality
tests are examples of this approach to research. But it is important to
remember that they only give us clues -- psychometric tests don't have
all the answers, and they don't give the whole picture. They can be
useful in supplementing other information, but they are not complete
research methods in themselves. CASE STUDIES Experiments and
observational studies, for the most part, tend to deal with information
from large numbers of people. This approach dates back to the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century,

360

when it was assumed that people, on the whole, were pretty similar. The
general approach to society at that time involved understanding 'the
masses', and the masses were not really seen as individuals. During the
second half of the twentieth century, though, attention became much more
focused on the individual person, and this in turn affected
psychological research methods. One outcome was that psychologists began
to ask much more detailed questions about individuals and their
experiences. To do this, they began to concentrate on just a few
individuals, or single cases. Case studies weren't new to psychology:
many famous case studies had taken place in the past. But they were
regarded by the behaviourists as somehow being less scientiﬁc than
large-scale studies. More recently, though, psychology has begun to
accept the case study as a regular research method which can give us
useful information. We have learned a lot about how the mind works
through case studies of people with cognitive problems. One case study,
for example, was of a respected academic who was completely unable to
recognize people's faces. She was above average intellectually and, in
all other respects, her mental functions were normal. Studying this
single person in detail gave the psychologists undertaking the case
study some useful evidence about how the mental skill of face
recognition is organized in the brain. Account analysis As we have seen,
psychology in the twentieth century was deeply inﬂuenced by the
behaviourist's insistence that studying behaviour was the only truly
scientiﬁc approach. But in the later part of the twentieth century, it
became increasingly apparent that this simply wasn't good enough. Two
people can be in a similar situation, but each of them can interpret
what is going on quite differently. Their interpretation will inﬂuence
how they react, and that will inﬂuence what happens in the end. So if we
really want to understand people, we also need to study how they make
sense out of the world that they live in.

16. Developing psychological understanding

361

Towards the end of the twentieth century, psychology became increasingly
concerned with social and personal meanings. After all, two people may
experience very similar events, but it might mean something very
different to each of them. Obviously, it is difﬁcult to get at this kind
of information using laboratory experiments or observations, and so a
different research method became popular. This became known as account
analysis, because it is all about analysing the accounts which people
give of their own experiences.

Insight One of the most useful trends in modern psychological research
is that we are now much better able to analyse what people say and
believe than we used to be, and we also realize how important it is.
During the behaviourist period, that sort of thing was almost completely
ignored. Interviewing Psychologists often collect accounts by conducting
interviews. Interviewing is a skilled affair, because the person doing
the interview needs to make sure that the other person feels relaxed and
conﬁdent. After all, if you don't feel able to trust someone, you
wouldn't be prepared to tell them much about your feelings or thoughts,
would you? So an interviewer has to be good at encouraging people to
speak, and at striking up a good rapport with the person they are
interviewing. There are lots of ways of analysing accounts. Some
psychologists look at the ways that people express their ideas, and the
metaphors and assumptions which they use. This is known as discourse
analysis. Other psychologists look at the types of reasons, or
attributions, which people give to explain why things happen. And some
concentrate on identifying the main themes which emerge from what people
are saying. Each of these methods is a type of qualitative analysis -- a
way of looking at the meaning of the information, rather than just
collecting information about the numbers of people who reacted in
particular ways.

362

We can see, then, that psychologists have a wide range of tools to help
in their detective work. Incidentally, I have presented these research
methods as if they were developed only at certain times during the
century. This isn't really true. If we look back, we ﬁnd that individual
psychologists have used almost all of these methods at some time or
other. But different methods are seen as important at different times,
by psychology as a whole, and this is the process which I have been
describing. It's important, because it affects how much inﬂuence a
particular piece of research can have -- both in psychology, and in
society as a whole. This book has only really been able to give you a
very superﬁcial 'taste' of modern psychology. But I hope that you have
found it an interesting one. Psychology is an intriguing area of study
and one which can give us many insights into why we are like we are. As
long as we resist the temptation to go for simplistic answers, and bear
in mind that there can be a lot of different inﬂuences on how we act at
any one time, we can learn a great deal -- and we already have! The
companion book to this one, Understand Applied Psychology, discusses
some of the ways that psychological research has been used to help
people in all sorts of different ways. If you're interested in learning
more about psychology, you might enjoy reading that book too. It is my
ﬁrm belief that understanding more about human psychology will also mean
that we come to understand one another much better -- and that is why I
have devoted such a large part of my life to learning about it, and to
writing about it and carrying out psychological research of my own. I
personally have always enjoyed the study of psychology. I hope that you
have enjoyed this sample of it, too. Nicky Hayes

16. Developing psychological understanding

363

10 THINGS TO REMEMBER 1 To be a professional psychologist involves many
years of advanced professional training. 2 Psychology graduates also
work in many other professions to do with people. 3 A psychology degree
provides a very broad range of skills which enables psychology graduates
to take on many different jobs. 4 Psychologists use many different
research methods, which often depend on the level of investigation they
are applying. 5 Introspective methods have been used since the early
days. One modern form is known as protocol analysis. 6 Laboratory
experiments in psychology involve rigorous control of variables to
identify speciﬁc causes. 7 Action researchers work in the real world and
use principles of ecological validity rather than experimental control.
8 Animal experiments are now very rare in psychology, and very carefully
controlled so that animals do not suffer distress. 9 Observational
studies including psychometrics and surveys are often used by
psychologists, alongside other research methods. 10 Many modern
psychologists favour qualitative research methods such as interviewing
and account analysis, for their real-world relevance.

364

Taking it further Other books by Nicky Hayes include: Understand Applied
Psychology, London: Hodder Education (2010) A Students Dictionary of
Psychology, London: Hodder Arnold (1998) Foundations of Psychology,
London: Thomson Learning (2000) A First Course in Psychology, London:
Nelson Thomas (1993) Managing Teams: A Strategy for Success, London:
Thomson Learning (2001)

Websites Chapter 1 http://www.ryerson.ca/\~glassman/approach.html
http://www.psychoanalysis.org.uk Chapter 2
http://www.nickyhayes.co.uk/nicky/abstracts/org.html
http://chiron.valdosta.edu/whuitt/col/regsys/self.html Chapter 3
http://www.personalityresearch.org/attachment.html
http://faculty.babson.edu/krollag/org_site/soc_psych/
moscovici_soc_rep.html Chapter 4
http://www.eruptingmind.com/emotions-psychology
http://www.trinity.edu/mkearl/spsy-emo.html Taking it further

365

Chapter 5 http://tip.psychology.org/bandura.html
http://www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/ssehs/research/
centres-institutes/sleep/pop_articles/phenomena.html Chapter 6
http://www.scapegoat.demon.co.uk Chapter 7
http://www.simplypsychology.pwp.blueyonder.co.uk/
perception-theories.html
http://www.holah.karoo.net/cognitivepsychology.htm Chapter 8
http://www.personalityresearch.org/evolututionary.html Chapter 9
http://www.tastyhuman.com/animal-psychology
http://www.psychologytoday.com/basics/emotional-intelligence Chapter 10
http://www.spring.org.uk/2008/07/way-we-were-10crucial-child-psychology.php
http://www.socialpsychology.org/develop.htm Chapter 11
http://www.ageconcern.org.uk/
http://www.executivepsych.com/psychotherapy/life-transitions.html
Chapter 12
http://www.careersinpsychology.co.uk/careers-organisationalpsychology.html
http://www.socialpsychology.org/io.htm Chapter 13
http://www.psychwatch.com/sport_psychology.htm
http://www.ithaca.edu/cretv/research/tv_lives.html

366

Chapter 14 http://www.nickyhayes.co.uk/nicky/exams/examstress.html
http://www.psychwatch.com//healthpsych_page.htm Chapter 15
http://www-personal.umich.edu/\~rdeyoung/envtpsych.html
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/environmental-psychology Chapter 16
http://www.bps.org.uk/careers/what-do-psychologists-do/areas

Disclaimer The publisher has used its best endeavours to ensure that the
URLs for external websites referred to in this book are correct and
active at the time of going to press. However, the publisher has no
responsibility for the websites and can make no guarantee that a site
will remain live or that the content will remain appropriate.

Taking it further

367

Index academic psychologists, 350 accidents, 339--47 accommodation, 197
account analysis, 361--2 achievement motivation, 219--20 'acid' (drug),
97--8 acquired dyslexia, 315 action/adventure computer games, 283 action
research, 357--8 active remembering, 146--50 activity theory, 242
adaptation, 190 adolescence, 227--32 adrenaline, 67, 68 adulthood,
234--40 ageing, 246--51 ageism, 244 aggression, 123--5, 288--9 air
pollution, 336--7 alcohol, 90--1 amphetamines, 96--7 anger, 64--71
animals experiments, 358--9 and learning, 158--9, 175--80 studying,
157--9 applied psychology, 255 arcade computer games, 285 areas of
psychology, 8--10 arousal, 66, 72--4, 345 Asch effect, 34--5 assertion,
38--41

368

association learning, 175--6 attachments, 17--18 attributional styles,
75--6, 118--19 attributions, 47--8, 75--6, 302 authority period, family
life cycle model, 237 autism, in children, 187--8, 317--18 automatizing
actions, 198--200, 292--3 availability, 138 avoidance reactions, 345
awfulization, 77--8 baby-boom generation, 235 baby-talk, 16--17 Bandura,
Albert, 117--18, 193--4, 228, 319 behaviour shaping, 188, 320--1
behaviour therapy, 319--20 behavioural motivation, 111--12 behavioural
treatments, 324 behaviourism, 4, 133, 357 bereavement, 343--4 Beyond
Freedom and Dignity, 189 bio-psychology, 10 biodiversity, 165 biological
rhythms, 84--107 bodily kinaesthetic intelligence, 203 body language,
226 body schema, 192 bonding, 17--18 the brain, 98--102, 199

brain development, and learning, 179--80 brain scans, 101--2
brainstorming, 136 Burt, Cyril, 305 caffeine, 90 cannabis, 94--5
'canteen culture', 270--1 case studies, 360--2 CAT scans, 102
categorization, 29--31 CBT (cognitive behaviour therapy), 321
cerebellum, 292--3 cerebral cortex, 110, 184 cerebrum, 163--4, 179--80,
198--200, 293 challenges, 298--9 childhood developing personal
constructs, 224--6 motivational development, 218--21 play, 210--15 skill
development, 221--4 social development, 215--18 childhood autism,
187--8, 317--18 childhood learning, 193--5 chromosomes, 170--1 circadian
rhythms, 86--9 classical conditioning, 184--6 client-centred therapy,
23, 322 clinical psychology, 318--21 cloning, 172 closure, 141
co-operation, 33--41 coding memories, 150--2

coevolution, 167--9 cognition memory, 146--55 perception, 139--46
studying, 133--4 thinking, 134--9 cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT), 321
cognitive dissonance, 121--3 cognitive learning, 195--7 cognitive maps,
195--6 cognitive motivation, 113--19 cognitive psychology, 9 cognitive
therapy, 76--7, 321 comforting, 216 commitment, 62 communication
non-verbal, 43--5 verbal, 45--8 community, self in, 25--6 companionate
love, 62 comparative psychology, 10, 159 competence, 192--3, 298--9
competition, 287 compliance, 33--41 componential intelligence, 205
computer games, 282--91 conditional positive regard, 22 conditioning
classical, 184--6 operant, 186--9 and society, 188 conditions of worth,
22--3 consciousness biological rhythms, 85--9 and drugs, 89--98
neurones, 84 sleep, 102--7

Index

369

consummate love, 62 contextual intelligence, 204--5 contingencies,
190--1 coping strategies, 74--8 counselling, 321--2 creative play, 214
crime rates, 339 cross-sectional studies, 247--8 crowds, 337--9 crying,
14--15 cultural differences, in social representations, 49--51 cultural
inﬂuences, 24--8 dance, 292 Darwin, Charles, 159, 161, 165
decision-making, 137--9 deep dyslexia, 315 defence mechanisms, 116--17
defensible space, 332--3 denial, 116 deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 160,
169--73 depressive attributional styles, 75--6 developmental dyslexia,
315--18 developmental psychology, 10 dieting, 110--11 disasters, 339--47
discourse, 45--8 discourse analysis, 46--7, 362 discrepancy, 191
disengagement theory, 241 dispositional attributions, 47--8 DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid), 160, 169--73 doctor--patient communication, 323
double helix, 170

370

dreaming, 3, 105--7 drinking alcohol, 90--1 drugs, 89--98 dyslexia,
314--17 ecstasy (MDMA), 95--6 education and psychology, 305--6 social
dimensions, 311--13 student motivation, 307--11 educational
disadvantage, 313--18 educational psychologists, 313--14 EEGs
(electroencephalographs), 99--101, 103 egocentric speech, 212
egocentricity, 222 eidetic imagery, 151 electro-encephalographs (EEGs),
99--101, 103 emergent properties, 6--7 emotional intelligence, 206--7
emotions negative, 63--71 positive, 56--63 empty-nest period, family
life cycle model, 238 enactive representation, 150--1 encounter groups,
322 encouragement, 220 endorphins, 93, 94 enkephalins, 93, 94
entrapment, 138 environment, effect of, 327--8 environmental psychology
disasters, 339--47 effect of environment, 327--8 environmental stress,
333--9 proxemics, 328--33 ergonomics, 273, 340

Erikson's stages of life span development, 229--31 errors, 339--43
ethology, 159, 360 eugenics, 201 evolution, 159--69 evolutionary
psychology, 166--7 experiential intelligence, 205 experiments, 357--9
explanations, discourse analysis, 47--8 exploratory play, 213--14
external motivation, 297--8 eye-contact, 337--8 facial expressions, 14,
226 failure, handling, 301--2 family life cycle model, 236--9 fear,
64--71 feedback, 294--5 ﬁght or ﬂight response, 64--7 ﬁgure-ground
perception, 142 ﬁnches, Galapagos Islands, 161--2 ﬁrst impressions,
143--4 forensic psychologists, 350--1 formal play, 214 free play, 214
Freud, Sigmund, 3, 106, 306 frustration, 124--5 fundamental attribution
error, 48 Galapagos Islands, ﬁnches, 161--2 gene therapy, 173--4 general
learning, 179 genes, 170--1 genetic code, 170--1 genetic mechanisms,
169--74 genetic mutations, 160 genotype, 172--3

Gestalt principles of perception, 140--2 goal setting, 298--9 grief,
343--4 group standards, 259--60 groups, 29--31 groupthink, 136--7
habits, 111--12 hallucinogens, 97--8 happiness, 78--82 health education,
324--5 health psychology, 322--5 healthcare, 318--25 Heim, Alice, 200
helping other people, 51--2 heroin, 93--4 heuristics, 138--9 hierarchy
of needs, 128--9 Hindu belief systems, 26 homeostasis, 110--11
homophobia, 117 honeymoon period, family life cycle model, 237 human
evolution, 162--9 human resource management, 263--70 Hutt, Corinne,
213--14 hypnotism, and memory, 149--50 iconic representation, 151
identity, 24, 272 identity diffusion, 231 imaginary playmates, 211--12
imitation, 193--5 implosion therapy, 186 imprinting, 176 individual
explanations, cognitive motives, 114--15 Index

371

individual psychology, 9 individual self, 24--8 infancy, 12--18 infant
learning, 189--93 infatuation, 60 informal leadership, 260--1
information processing, 310 initial teaching alphabet (i.t.a.), 316
insight learning, 196 instinctive learning, 177--8 institutionalization,
320--1 intelligence, 200--7, 247--9, 305--6 intelligence tests, 202--3
intelligences, Gardner's, 203--4 intensity, of positive energy, 59
interdependent period, family life cycle model, 238 interest, and
memory, 154 internal motivation, 297 interpersonal intelligence, 203
interpretive period, family life cycle model, 237--8 interviewing, 362
intimacy, 62 intrapersonal intelligence, 203 introspection, 3, 356--7
involvement, of positive energy, 58 i.t.a. (initial teaching alphabet),
316 Japanese people, idea of self, 26--8 jet lag, 88--9 knowledge-based
errors, 341--2 Korsakoff 's syndrome, 91

372

lack of control, 335--6 latent functions, of working life, 256--7 latent
learning, 195 lateral thinking, 135--6 launching period, family life
cycle model, 238 layers of self, 26 leadership, 265--70 leadership
styles, 266 learned helplessness, 80--1, 118--19 learned optimism, 80--1
learning animals, 158--9, 175--80 in childhood, 193--5 cognitive, 195--7
and computer games, 290--1 forms of, 183--9 insight, 196 latent, 195
levels of, 175--81 skills, 197--200 social, 189--93 and teaching see
teaching, psychology of learning curve, 293--4 learning difﬁculties,
313--18 learning sets, 196--7 leisure computer games, 282--91 deﬁning,
275--6 sport, 291--303 TV watching, 276--82 levels of analysis, 353--5
levels of explanation, 5--8, 131 levels of learning, 175--81 levels of
organizational culture, 270--1

levels of processing, 153 life-long development, theory of, 229--31 life
span approach, to adolescence, 231 life span developmental psychology,
252--3 life-transitions, 235--40 limerence, 60--1 linguistic
intelligence, 203 locus of control, 76--7, 119 long-term relationships,
62--3 longitudinal studies, 248 loving, 60--3 LSD, 97--8 lucid dreams,
105--6 marijuana, 94--5 Maslow's hierarchy of needs, 128--9
mathematical-logical intelligence, 203 MDMA (ecstasy), 95--6 memory,
146--55, 249--51 memory changes, 148 mental set, 134--5 mental training,
295 mid-life crisis, 239--40 the mind studying, 3--4 understanding, 1--3
mind, theory of, 41--3, 318 mitochondrial DNA, 171--2 modelling, 193--5,
319 modernism, 4, 258 modes of representation, 150--2 morphine, 93--4
motivation

athletes, 296--9 behavioural motives, 111--12 cognitive motives, 113--19
for learning, 307--11 physical motives, 110--11 social motivation,
119--31 student, 307--11 motivational development, in childhood, 218--21
motivational levels, 128--31 MRI scanning, 102 music, 292 musical
intelligence, 203 natural selection, 160--2 negative attributions, 302,
321 negative emotions, 63--71 negative reinforcement, 187 Neisser's
perceptual cycle, 144--6 neurones, 84 neurotransmitters, 84 nicotine,
92--3, 293 noise, 333--5 non-verbal messages, 43--5 noradrenaline, 67
nurturing period, family life cycle model, 237 obedience, 36--8, 40--1
observations, 359--60 occupational psychologists, 273 one-trial
learning, 176 operant conditioning, 186--9, 319, 320 Opie, Lorna and
Peter, 212 organizational change, 268--70 organizational culture, 270--2
overcrowding, 338--9

Index

373

pain avoidance, 175 parent--child interaction, 16--17 partial
reinforcement, 188 passion, 62 Pavlov, Ivan, 175 peak performance,
299--302 perception, 139--46 perceptual cycle, 144--6 perceptual set,
143--4 performance anxiety, 300--1 personal constructs, 113--15, 224--6
personal relationships, 20--3 personal space, 329--33 PET scans, 101--2
phenotype, 172--3 phobias, 185--6, 319 physical motivation, 110--11
physical play, 210--11 physical skills, 292--6 physiological psychology,
10 Piaget, Jean, 192, 216, 222--4 Piagetian stages, 223 pineal gland, 86
plateau learning, 294 play creative, 214 exploratory, 213--14 formal,
214 free, 214 with objects, 213--14 physical, 210--11 pretend, 211--12
social, 214--15 with words, 212 pollution, 336--7 Pollyanna technique,
81 population density, 339

374

positive attributional styles, 76 positive emotions, 56--63, 310--11
positive psychology, 78--82 positive regard, 21--3 positive
reinforcement, 187 positive thinking, 81--2, 299--300 post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), 344--7 potency, of positive energy, 58--9
potential, 201--2 practice, 296 praise, 220 preparedness in learning,
177 pretend play, 211--12 principles of perception, 140--2 privacy,
330--2 private self, 26--8 problem-solving, 134--7 process-oriented
leaders, 267 processing information, memory, 152--4 professional
psychologists, 350--1 programmed learning, 309--10 prosocial behaviour,
280 protocol analysis, 356 proxemics, 328--33 proximity, 141
psychoactive drugs, 90--8 psychoanalysis, 306 psychologists, 350--2
psychometrics, 360 PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder), 344--7 racism,
123--5, 126--7 re-experiencing, 345 reaction-formation, 116--17 reading,
and TV, 281--2

rebellion, 38--41 reciprocal inﬂuences, 252 reinforcement, 187
representation, modes of, 150--2 repression, 116 research, 355--63
respect, 120--1 retirement, 240--5 retirement period, family life cycle,
238 rewards, 186--8, 286, 297--8 risk avoidance, 324--5 Rogers, Carl,
20--3, 321--2 role-count, 242 role transition, adolescence as, 228--9
romantic love, 62 rule-based errors, 342--3 scapegoating, 123--5 schema
development, 222--4 schemas, 147--8, 191--2, 197 school psychologists,
313--14 'scientiﬁc management', 257--8 seasonal affective disorder,
85--6 self-actualization, 21--3, 129, 276, 322 self-concept, 18--23
self-efﬁcacy beliefs, 117--19, 211, 220--1, 286 self-esteem, 22--3,
29--31, 312 self-fulﬁlling prophecies, 19--20, 115 self-improvement
computer games, 285 Seligman, Martin, 78--9, 80--1 sensation-seeking,
and computer games, 286--7

sensitivity training, 264 set weight, 110--11 setbacks, 301--2 shift
work, 88--9 siestas, 87 signs, 44--5 similarity, 140--1 simulation
computer games, 283 situational attributions, 47 skill-based errors, 341
skill development, 221--4 skill learning, 197--200 Skinner, B.F., 4,
187, 188--9, 309 sleep, 102--7 smiling, 14 smoking, 92--3, 293 social
cognition, 9 social comparison, 126--7 social competence, 217 social
development, 215--18 social dimension, of positive energy, 59 social
exchange theory, 242--3 social expectations, cognitive motives, 115
social groups, 29--31 social identiﬁcation, 28--31, 125--8, 311--13
social identity, 272 social inﬂuence, 218 social interaction, 287 social
labelling, 243--4 social learning, 189--93 social motivation, 119--31
social networks, 24 social play, 214--15 social psychology, 9, 33 social
relationships, 19--20

Index

375

social representations, 48--54, 124--5, 272 social respect, 120--1
social scripts, 53--4, 193, 224, 278--81 social skills, 225--6 social
understanding, 278--9 sociobiology, 165 spatial intelligence, 203
speciﬁc learning difﬁculties, 313--18 'speed' (drug), 96--7 spelling,
316--17 sport psychology, 291--303 sports computer games, 284 stages of
life span development, 229--31 stem cell therapy, 173--4 stereotyping,
126, 244 stories, and memory, 147--8 strangers, meeting, 337--8 strategy
computer games, 284 stress, 72--8 strokes, 267, 268 student motivation,
307--11 surface dyslexia, 315 surveys, 360 survival learning, 176--8
survival of the ﬁttest, 161--2 symbolic representation, 151--2 symbols,
44--5 systematic desensitization, 186

social dimensions, 311--13 student motivation, 307--11 team building,
263--5 teamwork, 263--5 teasing, 216 television, 276--82 temperament,
201--2 temperature, and environmental stress, 336 theories, 353--5
theories of intelligence, 203--7 theory of mind, 41--3, 318 Theory X and
Theory Y (McGregor), 262, 266 therapy, 318--21 thinking, 134--9 time and
motion, 257--8 token economy systems, 320--1 transactional leadership,
267--8 transactions, 190 transformational leaders, 268--70 triarchic
theory of intelligence, 204 TV watching, 276--82

Tajfel, Henri, 28--9 task-oriented leaders, 267 teaching, psychology of
and educational disadvantage, 313--18

vandalism, 332--3 verbal communication, 45--8 verbal culture, 212
'victim mentality', 80--1, 118--19 video games, 282--91

376

unconditional positive regard, 21--3, 322 the unconscious, 3
understanding other people, 41--8 unemployment, 256--7 University of the
Third Age, 243

violence, and computer games, 288--9 visualization, 295, 300 Vygotsky,
Lev, 212, 218 'War of the Ghosts' story, 147--8 Watergate trials, 146--7
Watson, J.B., 4 whistleblowers, 41 Wii games, 287, 289 Wilson, E.O.,
165, 166 word games, 212 words, and memory, 149--50 working groups,
270--1 working life expectations, 261--2 human resource management,
263--70

latent functions, 256--7 motivation, 259--61 organizational culture,
270--2 'scientiﬁc management', 257--8 social aspects, 259--60
unemployment, 256--7 working teams, 263--5 Yerkes--Dodson Law of
Arousal, 73--4 Yothu Yindi rock group, 25 zone of proximal development,
218, 222 zones of personal distance, 329--30

Index

377

Notes

Image credits Front cover: © chas53 -- Fotolia.com Back cover: © Jakub
Semeniuk/iStockphoto.com, © Royalty-Free/ Corbis, ©
agencyby/iStockphoto.com, © Andy Cook/ iStockphoto.com, © Christopher
Ewing/iStockphoto.com, © zebicho -- Fotolia.com, © Geoffrey
Holman/iStockphoto.com, © Photodisc/Getty Images, © James C.
Pruitt/iStockphoto.com, © Mohamed Saber -- Fotolia.com


