Title Here, up to 12 Words, on One to Two Lines

An excellent introduction paragraph begins with an indentation and a
strong hook. APA style provides for up to five heading levels, shown in
the paragraphs that follow. After writing a hook (the first sentence of
your paragraph), one is often best off providing some basic background
information about your topic itself. This can include references to the
topic, the period, or even the modern world. This essay will discuss how
to write a paper in APA format, including how to write the first body
paragraph, the second body paragraph, and a conclusion. To begin, one
should first start a description of how to write the first body
paragraph.

**Insert Primary Subheading Name Here**

**First Body Paragraph**

The first body paragraph is indented and begins with a hook, introducing
the first topic of discussion. In this instance, the first point to be
discussed is how to write a first body paragraph, as mentioned in the
thesis. You will often have to include in text citations that almost
always follow an author, date format, like this (Lastname, 2022). Keep
in mind that every paragraph must be at least four sentences long unless
the essay is a short discussion post of fewer than 500 words. Once one
has completed writing the first body paragraph, they use a transition
sentence (just like this one) to introduce their next topic of
discussion: the second body paragraph.

**Second Body Paragraph**

The second body paragraph is indented and begins with a hook,
introducing the second topic of discussion. Every paragraph tends to
focus on one central point without jumping around to too many different
topics. Don't forget to ensure you have proper in-text, which will
likely follow the author, date format (Lastname, 2022). This keeps an
essay neat and orderly and the paragraphs of proper length. Once again,
one must use a transition sentence to introduce the next issue of
discussion in their essay, the conclusion.

**Conclusion**

In closing, the easiest way to begin a conclusion is with another strong
statement about the essay itself. Once again, one is best served to
provide some background information on the topic at hand, allowing the
reader to think about what they have learned. However, the essential
part of a conclusion is a restated thesis, which the following sentence
will show a prime example. The prior discourse has discussed how to
write an excellent, double-spaced paper in APA formatting, explicitly
highlighting: how to write the first body paragraph, the second body
paragraph, and a conclusion. The essay\'s final sentence is what is
known as a clincher, or an excellent statement that allows your reader
to flow off into the sunset and ponder what they have just learned. All
in all, writing an essay is a crucial skill that will be necessary for
many decades to come, and mastering this fine art is a skill that is
sure to pay dividends in the future.

References

> *CNN International - Breaking News, US News, World News and Video*.
> CNN. (2021). Retrieved from https://edition.cnn.com/.
>
> *Save Time and Improve your Marks with CiteThisForMe, The No. 1
> Citation Tool*. Cite This For Me. (2021). Retrieved from
> https://www.citethisforme.com/.
