SADHGURU

DEATH An Inside Story

PENGUIN BOOKS

Contents Death Blow: An Introduction

PART I: Life and Death in One Breath Death Chapter 1: What Is Death
Death: The Most Fundamental Question Mortal Nature Exploring Death Is
Death a Calamity Stop Inviting Death Chapter 2: The Process of Death
What Makes Us Tick A Bubble of Life and Death Understanding Life and
Death Pancha Pranas: The Five Vital Energies The Sequence of Death
Chakras: The Gateways of Exit Chapter 3: The Quality of Death Types of
Deaths Predictions of Death Negative Energies Suicide: A Perspective
Succour for the Suicidal The Consequences of Suicide Chapter 4: Can
Death Be Hacked Cheating Death The Dance of Death

Transmigration Seeking Immortality Seeking the Next Dimensions Chapter
5: Mahasamadhi Samadhi and Death Enlightenment and Death Mukti and
Mahasamadhi A Few Mahasamadhis

PART II: The Gracefulness of Death Become Me Chapter 6: Preparing for a
Good Death Does Death Need Preparation Sleep, Ojas and Death Why Do
People Fear Death How to Deal with the Fear of Death How to Live One's
Old Age The Wisdom of Vanaprastha Ashrama The Practice of Sallekhana The
Significance of Dying in Kashi Chapter 7: Assistance for the Dying The
Importance of the Last Moments of Life Helping Suffering People Die
About Dying at Home Rituals from Death to the Disposal of the Body Is It
All Right to Donate Organs Dematerializing the Body Chapter 8:
Assistance for the Disembodied Why Are After-death Rituals Needed
Runanubandha---The Web of Debt Kalabhairava Karma---An After-death
Ritual at Isha The Scope of Kalabhairava Karma Training People for Death
Rituals The Death of Infants

The Parent--Offspring Connection in the Afterlife The Importance of
Death Anniversaries Ancestor Worship Of Heaven and Hell Chapter 9: Of
Grief and Mourning The Essential Nature of Grief Going beyond Grief
Articles of the Dead Empathetic Death Large-scale Death and Its
Consequences Mourning Period Memorials, Samadhis and Pyramids

PART III: Life after Death The Dark One Chapter 10: The Life of a Ghost
What Are Ghosts Ghost Troubles Ghost Solutions Dissolving Frozen Beings
Nirmanakaya Downloading Beings Chapter 11: The Riddle of Reincarnation
Taking on a New Body The Arithmetic of Reincarnation Past-life
Recollection in Children Exploring Past Lives Baby Hitler Couples for
Lifetimes The Only Enduring Relationship Life beyond a Thousand Moons
Birth: Always a Beginning The Rebirth of Lamas My Past Lifetimes

Will I Come Back Chapter 12: Final Round One Drop Spirituality Once You
Made a Mistake of . . . Footnotes Chapter 1: What Is Death Chapter 2:
The Process of Death Chapter 3: The Quality of Death Chapter 4: Can
Death Be Hacked Chapter 5: Mahasamadhi Chapter 6: Preparing for a Good
Death Chapter 7: Assistance for the Dying Chapter 8: Assistance for the
Disembodied Chapter 9: Of Grief and Mourning Chapter 10: The Life of a
Ghost Chapter 11: The Riddle of Reincarnation Chapter 12: Final Round
Glossary Follow Penguin Copyright

PENGUIN ANANDA

DEATH Yogi, mystic and visionary, Sadhguru is a spiritual master with a
difference. Absolute clarity of perception places him in a unique space,
not only in matters spiritual but in business, environmental and
international affairs, and opens a new door on all that he touches.
Ranked amongst the fifty most influential people in India, Sadhguru is
known as a speaker and opinion maker of international renown. He has
been conferred the Padma Vibhushan, India's highest annual civilian
award, accorded for exceptional and distinguished service. Sadhguru has
initiated large-scale ecological initiatives, such as Rally for Rivers
and Cauvery Calling, to revitalize India's severely depleted rivers.
These projects have found phenomenal support among India's people and
leadership. They are internationally accredited and recognized as game
changers that can establish a blueprint for global economic development
that is ecologically sustainable. Sadhguru has been a primary speaker at
the United Nations General Assembly and several other UN forums. He has
also been regularly invited to speak at establishments such as the World
Economic Forum, the World Bank, the House of Lords, the University of
Oxford, MIT, Google and Microsoft, to name a few. With a celebratory
engagement with life on all levels, Sadhguru's areas of active
involvement encompass fields as diverse as architecture and visual
design, poetry and painting, aviation and driving, sports and music. He
is the designer of several unique buildings and consecrated spaces at
the Isha Yoga Center, which have received wide attention for their
combination of intense sacred power and strikingly innovative
aesthetics. Three decades ago, Sadhguru established the Isha Foundation,
a nonprofit human-service organization, with human well-being as its
core

commitment. Isha is supported by over nine million volunteers in more
than 300 centres worldwide. app.sadhguru.org isha.sadhguru.org
facebook.com/sadhguru twitter.com/SadhguruJV youtube.com/sadhguru

Death Blow An Introduction

We all want to live well, and when it is time, die well too. This is the
essence of most human aspirations. Within this, much, if not most, of
human endeavour is dedicated to living well, and the outcome reflects
it. Humans have achieved much in terms of living well. We have managed
to acquire more comfort and convenience than any other generation in the
past. However, when it comes to dying well, it cannot be said that we
die in any way better than our ancestors. Many factors explain why
humans were successful with living better but not dying better---the
most significant of them being the disparity between the way we treat
life and death in our societies. Everywhere in the world, life is mostly
considered a success that is to be sung and celebrated, but death is
considered a failure that is to be shunned and mourned. Oddly enough, in
the construed dichotomy of life and death, it is 'life' that is a
four-letter word, not 'death'. Yet, in the world, it is death that gets
the bad press. Death is a word whose mere utterance can hush dinner
conversations. Children are taught never to utter the word at home,
unless the God of Death chooses to visit while the adults are on a quest
to invent overly woke euphemisms that try to mask the bluntness of the
event with vanity. It is said that humans do not know much about death
because they do not know much about life in the first place. Death is a
brief occurrence at the end of a long life. But even after having lived
a full lifetime, people are clueless about simple questions about
life---like, where did we come from and where are we going. So confusion
about death is understandable. However, it must be acknowledged that in
recent times, humankind has indeed travelled far from its simplistic
understanding that 'Life is God's gift and death is His wrath.'
Traditionally, it was only religion that people looked up to for the
unravelling of this mystery. Adjudication of matters related to death
and

dying was mostly in the hands of shamans and priests of various kinds.
It was only in the past couple of hundred years, when a slew of medical
discoveries began making a considerable impact upon health and mortality
on a global scale, that people began turning to modern science for
answers on death and dying as well. The success of modern science in
dealing with matters of death and dying can be seen in the phenomenal
improvement in just two of the key global health parameters ---life
expectancy and infant mortality. No better testimony to the success of
modern medicine is needed than the burgeoning global population of 7.75
billion people on the planet. With this development, modern medicine has
firmly dislodged everything else as the final adjudicators of all
matters of life and death. Modern science, characterized by objectivity
and universality, has now enabled people to look at death in ways that
were not possible before. However, the blazing trail left behind by
modern science is not without its blind spots, dangers and destruction.
One major outcome of death being handled by modern science is what has
come to be called the 'medicalization' of death. Death, especially in
the more advanced countries, is no longer looked at as a natural
phenomenon but as a medical condition, with even ordinary life events
and conditions being treated as risks and diseases. Death being preceded
by excessive and often aggressive medical interventions has become the
new norm. Moreover, humans have never been comfortable with their mortal
nature. So the success of medical science has only breathed a fresh
lease of life to the historic quest for immortality. Riding on the
shoulders of modern science, people have now begun to speculate if
deathlessness is not in fact the norm and death an aberration. It has
emboldened people to wonder if death is not just one more disease that
needs to be conquered ---something that our super sleuths in white coats
will surely do within our lifetime. Our growing capability to interfere
with the fundamental life process has undoubtedly increased our
propensity to overdo it. One reason why scientists appear akin to the
six blind men studying an elephant---getting parts right while missing
the whole---is their keyhole vision of life. Death---just as life---can
be understood as having three components. There is a biological part, a
psychological part and a

metaphysical part that causes the biology and the psychology to happen.
In recent times, our understanding of the biology of death has greatly
increased. Today, we have a much better understanding of the point
where, biologically, life ends and death begins. In terms of psychology
too much progress has been made. What makes a person? Is it Nature or
nurture? What is the role of each? These aspects too are much better
understood. But the more profound questions of why death or life
happens, and how, are still largely not understood. Unfortunately,
today's science has access to the being only from the point where the
body begins to the point where it ends. Science does not even
acknowledge the possibility that something could precede life or succeed
death. The hypothesis that life is just a chance occurrence in this vast
universe of infinite permutations and combinations of factors is riddled
with many holes. The simple fact that an unseen force abruptly turns on
the biology for a period of time, and then turns it off equally
abruptly, begs a deeper investigation even by the standards of science.
While science stops where the body drops, the religions of the world are
full of speculation as to what happens after that, leaving one lost
somewhere in the no man's land in between. It is in such times that the
presence of a yogi or a mystic like Sadhguru---who draws primarily from
an inner experience rather than tradition or scriptures or academic
learning---becomes invaluable. Sadhguru is a modern mystic and a yogi
who has touched and transformed the lives of millions of people around
the world with his unique insight into life and the tools of
self-transformation. One afternoon, almost four decades ago, Sadhguru,
then a 'young man at his cocky best', had a deep spiritual experience
that changed his world view and life entirely. 'Suddenly, what I had
thought all my life was me was all around. I did not know which was me
and which was not me.' It also made him deeply ecstatic. Over the next
few months, the experience became more stabilized and a living reality.
This spiritual realization also brought back a flood of memories of his
past lives and a deep understanding of the process of life and death.
This experience made Sadhguru set out with a plan to teach the whole
world to live as joyfully and ecstatically as he does.

Over the past four decades, this has turned into a global movement aimed
at self-transformation. But looking back it is unclear as to at what
point did Sadhguru, who has been considered a foremost authority on
joyful living, begin being regarded as an authority on death as well.
Was it when he began recounting clearly his past lives? Or was it
twenty-five years ago, when he articulated for the first time the
purpose of his current life--- to consecrate the Dhyanalinga, the dream
of many accomplished yogis, which was entrusted to him by his Guru three
lifetimes ago? Or was it when several people around him were able to
recollect their association with him in their past lives spontaneously?
It is not very clear when, but soon people began to turn to Sadhguru on
matters of death and dying as well. However, Sadhguru has not always
been the most communicative about death. In fact, one would think he was
being evasive. Too many people who thought they could extract the
deepest secrets of life through a single innocuous question---'What
happens after death, Sadhguru?'--- have been disappointed. To their
dismay, they were usually teased by responses like, 'Some things are
known only by experience!' Others who wanted to know how to communicate
with the dead were told to worry about communicating with the living
first. People who asked about the existence of souls were told they had
two of them--- one under each foot. Yet all his teachings and practices
have not been without a tinge of death or more. Sadhguru is probably the
only person on the planet who would, in a deadpan tone, talk about death
to a hall full of people, first thing in the morning during certain
residential programmes. He would then lead them through a guided
meditation on experiencing death first-hand. He is probably the only one
who would teach the 'The Way of Effortless Living' by initiating people
into a deathlike experience of meditation, to be practised twice a day.
He is also the ambitious person who sets out to teach everyone in the
world the ways to live joyously; but on finding that he is falling
short, pragmatically embarks on teaching them methods to die peacefully
at least. He is also the person who assures people, 'If you have been
initiated by me, or have made the mistake of sitting in front of

me totally, even for one moment, there is no rebirth for you.' And the
list goes on. Once when we were filming Sadhguru for a DVD, somebody
asked him, 'Why is it that in most Eastern traditions, a very high level
of sanctity is accorded to the moment of death? Why is it that the
moment of death is granted a sort of a quasi-spiritual status?' Speaking
outside his usual script of deterrence, Sadhguru said that if the moment
of death is handled properly--- if there was proper preparation, proper
guidance and perhaps some outside help as well--- then, in spiritual
terms, even that which probably did not happen in life could happen in
death. This was a revelation to me. I had never heard of anyone speak of
death as a spiritual possibility. Some discussion followed this, but
since it was mostly outside the scope of the video being filmed,
Sadhguru did not elaborate further. I was very intrigued. Did Sadhguru
just say that there is a big spiritual possibility hiding in plain sight
in the much-feared, much-abhorred aspect of life--- death? Was there a
huge free ride waiting to be taken at the moment of death, and we were
oblivious to it? If so, why haven't we heard of this before? Why is it
not being spoken about more? Why are we not alerting people to it? Could
Sadhguru offer the necessary guidance for the preparation, could he give
the required 'help'? Of course, he could. But would he? Could he be
coaxed into opening another front in his engagement with the world?
Sadhguru was certainly willing, but the task of compiling the book was
not as easy as I had imagined. I had assumed it would be a simple task
because, after all, if one knew something, how difficult would
articulating it be? Well, that assumption turned out to be somewhat
premature, because explanations can only traverse from the known to the
unknown, and in this case, the gap turned out to be rather formidable.
The grand phenomenon of life cannot be constrained to the period between
birth and death, as seen by modern science. It goes back all the way to
the beginning of Creation and extends all the way to wherever the
Creation is heading. Hence, any understanding of death that does not
take this fact into account is bound to be incomplete and incorrect. In
the first part of the book--- Life and Death in One Breath--- Sadhguru

describes the essential mechanism of life and death using several
approaches. He describes the Yogic understanding and further simplifies
this using the example of the familiar soap bubble. Taking the discourse
beyond the usual boundaries, Sadhguru traces the origins of life from
the beginning of Creation to the cycle of birth and death that we all
undergo. He also talks about the different kinds of deaths and what
choices we have in death. He concludes the first part by describing the
highest form of death--- the dissolution of the Self--- which is the
goal of all spiritual seekers. In addition to explaining the underlying
mechanics of birth and death, one of the objectives of the book is also
to help one achieve a 'good' death. In the second part of the book---The
Gracefulness of Death--- Sadhguru clarifies what a 'good' death is and
what preparations we can make for it. Moreover, when a person is dying,
he is in the most vulnerable situation, unable to help himself. Sadhguru
explains what assistance one can provide in such situations and the
difference that can make for the dying person. He talks about how the
person's journey after death could be assisted by doing some simple
acts. He also shares some precious insights into grief and how we can
deal with it in a meaningful manner. The afterlife is strictly not a
part of the process of death and dying, but a by-product of it. In the
third part of the book--- Life after Death--- Sadhguru offers us
insights into this much- misunderstood and maligned aspect of life.
Here, Sadhguru talks about ghosts and spirits, their origins and their
lives, what they can and cannot do to us and how we can protect
ourselves. He also talks about the process of reincarnation, what passes
on from one birth to another and what is lost. He also examines if our
previous lives are of any relevance to our present lives at all. In this
context, Sadhguru talks about his own past lives and answers the
question people frequently ask him---will he be coming back? The book is
in no way complete in presenting all that we seek to know about death
and dying. Nor is it the sum total of all that Sadhguru has to offer.
But we hope it will be an active force to dispel the gamut of
misconceptions about death in the world. The most significant aspect of
the book, however, is how the tools offered by Sadhguru and his

presence in our midst can help us make our own death more graceful and
spiritually significant. In all the ensuing chatter about death and
dying, it is hoped that this primary purpose of the book is not lost on
the reader. Swami Nisarga

PART I Life and Death in One Breath Death Life and death live in me at
once Never held one above the other When one stands far, life I offer In
closeness, only death I deal In death of the limited Will the deathless
be How to tell the fools Of my taintless evil.

CHAPTER 1

What Is Death

Death is the most fundamental question. Yet, people can ignore it, avoid
it and just live on in their ignorance simply because all kinds of
idiotic stories have been spread in the world in the name of religion.

Death: The Most Fundamental Question Do you know you will die one day?
Oh, I bless you with a long life, but anyway, you will die one day. We
cannot be sure about other things in your life. We don't know if you
will get married or not, or if you will get a job or not, if you will be
successful or not, but this one thing is guaranteed in your life: you
will go straight to your grave! One of the biggest human follies is to
engage with death in the third person, as though it is an abstract event
that happens to other people, not us. Do you know that about 160,000
people in the world, who were alive yesterday, are not there today? Each
second, two people die in the world. And one day, it is going to happen
to you and me too. It does not take enormous research, or intelligence,
or even education, to know this. This knowledge is inbuilt in every
human being. Yet, we think we have an unlimited lease of life. This
situation is best expressed in the Indian epic Mahabharata. The five
Pandava princes, who are the protagonists, are lost in the forests.
Severely starved and parched, they scour the nearby hills for water and
food. They spot a lake and, as they try to drink from it, they are
confronted by a yaksha (a celestial being) in the form of a white crane
who insists they answer his questions first. Refusing to be stopped by a
mere bird, one by one, they try to drink from the lake and drop dead.
Only Yudhishthira, the eldest of them, is left. Always the humble and
righteous one, Yudhishthira ignores his thirst and engages with the
yaksha, who fires a volley of questions about life at him. One of those

questions being, 'What is the biggest wonder of life?' Without
hesitation, Yudhishthira famously answers, 'Hundreds and thousands of
living beings meet death at every moment, yet the foolish man thinks
himself deathless and does not prepare for death. This is the biggest
wonder of life.' The yaksha is pleased with this answer, so he allows
him to drink from the lake and also restores the lives of his dead
brothers. This happened 5000 years ago, but the human psyche regarding
death has changed very little since then. Death is a very fundamental
question. Actually, death is closer to us than the statistics we read
about it. Each moment, death is happening in us at the organ and
cellular levels. This is how, with just one look at your insides, your
doctor knows how old you are. In fact, death began in us even before we
were born. Only if you are ignorant and unaware does it seem like death
will come to you someday later. If you are aware, you will see both life
and death are happening every moment. If you as much as breathe a little
more consciously, you will notice that with every inhalation there is
life, with every exhalation there is death. Upon birth, the first thing
that a child does is to inhale, to take in a gasp of air. And the last
thing that you will do in your life is an exhalation. You exhale now,
and if you do not take the next inhalation, you will be dead. If you do
not get this, just do an exhalation, hold your nose and do not do the
next inhalation. Within a few moments, every cell in your body will
start screaming for life. Life and death are happening all the time.
They exist together, inseparably, in the same breath. This relationship
goes even beyond the breath. Breath is only a supporting actor; the real
process is of the life energy, or prana, that controls physical
existence. With certain mastery over prana, one can exist beyond breath
for substantial amounts of time. Breath is a bit more immediate in its
requirement, but in the same category as food and water. Death is such a
fundamental aspect, because if one small thing happens, you can be gone
tomorrow morning. Why tomorrow morning ---one small thing now and you
could be off the next moment. If you were like any other creature, maybe
you would be unable to think about all this, but once one is endowed
with human intelligence, how can you just ignore such a significant
aspect of your life? How can you avoid it

and live on as if you are going to be here forever? How is it that after
living here for millions of years of life, human beings still don't know
a damn thing about death? Well, they know nothing about life either. We
know all the trappings about life, but what do you know about life as
such? Fundamentally, this situation has come about because you have lost
perspective as to who you are in this Universe. If this solar system, in
which we are, evaporates tomorrow morning, no one will even notice it in
this Cosmos. It is that small, just a speck. In this speck of a solar
system, Planet Earth is a micro speck. In that micro speck, the city you
live in is a super-micro speck. In that, you are a big man. This is a
serious problem. When you have completely lost perspective as to who you
are, how do you think you will grasp anything about the nature of life
or death? One reason people can ignore death and continue to live on in
their ignorance is simply that the religions of the world have spread
all kinds of idiotic stories about life and death. They created some
silly, childish explanations for everything. 'How was I born?' 'The
stork brought you.' 'Where are you going to go?' 'To heaven.' This
explanation is very simple but absurd. At least, they could have chosen
a more efficient mode of transport than a stork. Storks migrate only in
a particular season, so all the children should have been born in that
season alone, not during other times! Moreover, if people are so sure
that they are going to heaven after they die, I ask them, 'Why are you
delaying your departure, then? Why not go right now?' All these silly
stories have snuffed out the basic human curiosity about life and death.
Otherwise, sheer curiosity---if not the pain and suffering of
life---would have strongly propelled many people to seek answers to this
fundamental question.

Mortal Nature People always think that reminding themselves of God will
make them spiritual. Not at all. If you keep thinking or believing in
God, you will not do your job properly, but you think you will produce
good results. You will not study for your exam and you think you will be
first in class because of your prayer. Such people become more brazen
than others

about life because now they have God's support. Always, people who
believed that God is with them have done the most violent things on the
planet. 'God is with me' gives you a new confidence, which is very
dangerous. If you think of God this way, you will not become
spiritual--- you could actually become very brazen and stupid. Once it
happened: there were two young boys---very energetic boys--- in a
neighbourhood. Usually, when young boys are very energetic, they are in
constant trouble. The same happened with these boys also. Their parents
were very embarrassed by them because the entire community was
discussing their children. So, not knowing what to do, they decided to
take them to the local parish priest to correct them. Because the boys
would be too strong to handle together, the parents decided to take them
to the priest separately. They took the younger boy first, made him sit
down in the priest's office and left. The priest walked in with his long
robes and walked up and down the room a few times with a grave face. The
boy sat there, his eyeballs doing the ping-pong act. As he walked up and
down, the priest worked out a strategy. He thought, 'If I remind this
boy that God is within him, all his mischief will go.' So he
dramatically stopped mid-stride and, with a booming voice, asked the
boy, 'Where is God?' The boy looked bewildered. He started looking all
around because he thought God must be somewhere in the priest's office.
The priest saw that the boy was not getting the point. Thinking that he
should give him a little clue that God is within him, the priest leaned
on the table and, pointing at the little boy, boomed again, 'Where is
God?' The boy looked even more bewildered and looked under the table.
The priest saw that the boy was still not getting it. So he walked
around, came close to him and, tapping on the little boy's chest, boomed
again, 'Where is God?' The boy now got up and bolted out of the room. He
ran to where his elder brother was and said, 'We are in real trouble.'
The elder brother asked, 'Why? What happened?' He said, 'They have lost
their God and they think we did it.' Thinking about God, you will think
that you can do idiotic things in your life, and with a prayer,
everything will be fixed. This is not becoming spiritual. It is only
when you become conscious that you will also die, you will turn
spiritual. Only when this awareness of mortality

seeps into you, you will turn inwards. The moment you address the mortal
nature of who you are, you will also want to know what the source of
this life is. You will develop the longing to know what this is all
about, and what is beyond this thing. It will become a natural quest.
That is the spiritual process. No one would seek spirituality if they
did not know that they would die. When you are young, you think you are
immortal. Slowly, as you get older, at least your body definitely
reminds you that you are mortal. And when you are faced with death or
the death of someone dear to you, you will surely begin to wonder what
all this is about. If you are aware of the mortal nature of your life,
where is the time to get angry with someone or to quarrel with someone
or to do anything stupid in life? Once you come to terms with death, and
you are conscious that you will die, you will want to make every moment
of your life as beautiful as possible. Those who are constantly aware of
the mortal and fragile nature of Existence do not want to miss even a
single moment; they will naturally be aware. They cannot take anything
for granted; they will live very purposefully. Only people who believe
they are immortal can fight and fight to death. In the Indian tradition,
cremation grounds are always held to be very sacred. When someone dies,
even if it is someone that you do not know, it hits you somewhere. In
any genuine spiritual practice, there is always the smell of death. If
you go deep enough into it, it will remind you that you are mortal.
Whatever sadhana 1 we have been teaching you, whether it is Shoonya, or
Shakti Chalana, or Shambhavi Mahamudra---even more so with Samyama 2
---essentially, there is a tinge of death in it. If there is no tinge of
death in it, there is no spirituality; it is just entertainment. If
someone taught you a superficial la-la practice, it may make you feel
good, but there is nothing more to it. Traditionally, every yogi started
his spiritual pursuit in the cremation grounds. In fact, many Masters
have used this as a spiritual process. Gautama the Buddha made it
compulsory for his monks. Before he initiated anyone who came to him, he
asked them to go and sit in the busiest cremation ground for three
months, just watching the corpses burning. Even today, if you go to
Manikarnika Ghat 3 in Varanasi, a

minimum of half-dozen bodies will be burning there at any given time.
And it is handled like a normal business, very casually. These days,
there is not enough time for them to fully burn the body, because even
before one body is fully burned, the next body has already come. So they
throw this half-burned body into the river. It is actually very good for
you to see that this is how people are going to treat you also one day.
When I was young, I had no knowledge of all this. But from the age of
eight to seventeen, I happened to spend an enormous amount of time in
the cremation ground. It simply intrigued me. Everyone talked about so
many eerie things happening there; I had heard stories that spirits hang
upside down from trees. I wanted to see these things for myself. So I
spent many days and nights in the cremation grounds. There was one very
close to our home and another at the foothills of Chamundi Hills. The
one at Chamundi Hills was very busy. Anytime you went there, there would
be at least four or five bodies burning. Whenever I went trekking, I
spent the nights there because the hill would be cold, but here there
was a fire burning all the time. So I would sit by the fire and simply
watch the burning. There was also a lot of drama that used to happen
around the pyre. Usually, when people come with a body to the cremation
ground, they are all crying like they have lost everything in life and
all that. Then they set fire to the body. They stay there for half an
hour or forty-five minutes and then they leave. The fire is still
burning, but they leave. Probably they have other business to attend to,
but I would sit there, watching. If you have carefully observed a body
being burned on a pyre, the first thing that burns up is the neck
because it is narrow. When this happens, unless they have made a large
and proper arrangement of firewood, the half-burned head invariably
rolls off the pyre like a football. It looks a little eerie---a head
rolling off the pyre! Probably because firewood is expensive, or because
they do not have sufficient experience in arranging a proper pyre, this
used to happen often. It would happen after three-anda-half to four
hours of burning. By that time, no relatives would be present, so I
would be the one to pick up the heads and put them back on the pyre.

I spent many days and nights in the cremation grounds just sitting and
looking and helping these bodies burn fully. It set forth a completely
different kind of process in me. I know you would want to avoid this,
but it is good to sit down and watch the bodies burning continuously.
Living in the comfort of your house, it is very easy to think you are
immortal. But when a body is burning in front of you, it is not very
difficult to see that this could be you tomorrow. Mentally and
emotionally, there may also be reactions, but the most important thing
is that your body perceives life in its own way. The sight of another
body burning deeply unsettles it. It brings a different kind of
awareness and sense within you. Many things that you have imagined about
yourself will all get burned in the cremation ground if you sit there
and keep watching what happens. When you are watching the bodies burn,
you should not think about it. Simply look at it; just look at it and
look at it and look at it. After some time, you will see, it is just
you. It is not any different. It is your own body. Once you can replace
that body with yours and still sit there, there is a deep acceptance of
death. This is not a psychological process. When your very body
perceives the fragility of its existence, there is a very profound
relief and acceptance. Once there is a deep acceptance of death, then
life will happen to you in enormous proportions. It is only because you
tried to keep death away, life has also stayed away from you. This is
why almost every yogi spent a significant amount of time in the
cremation grounds at some point or the other in his life.

Exploring Death An incident occurred when I was still in school, which
made me deeply intrigued by death. I was thirteen at that time. I was a
fairly unusual child in school, but, usually, no one dared to tease me
because I would beat them up. But there was this girl named Sucharita,
who was a little crazy and, for some reason, she would go on teasing me,
'Jaggi 4 the Great! Jaggi the Great!' I was irritated, but I ignored it.
Once, after a school vacation, she did not come back to school. Every
day, when her name was called during attendance, some of us would squeak
out a female

voice and try to answer her attendance for fun. This happened for a few
days. Then this girl's brother, who was junior to us by two years in the
same school, told us that his sister had died of pneumonia during the
vacations. That really freaked me out. Not because someone had died, but
because someone who was alive and here with us had vanished just like
that. I became deeply intrigued by this. This girl was my age, doing
many things in class, and she was suddenly gone. They said she was dead,
but I wanted to know where she could have gone. Until then, to me, it
was only old people who died. But being of my age group, the girl had
brought death to my doorstep. Now it was no more a curiosity question,
but a very existential one. I wanted to know where the hell do people go
when they die and what happens after death. I had already asked these
questions to many people even before this incident occurred. I had also
spent a lot of time in the cremation grounds in the town, but still I
did not know what happened after death. So I thought I would undertake a
journey to death myself and see what happens. My father is a physician,
so he had a medicine cabinet at home. I knew there were lots of
medicines in it. Among them, I found a bottle of Gardenal Sodium. It is
a kind of barbiturate that can put you to sleep. The bottle was supposed
to contain a hundred tablets, but when I took them out and counted,
there were only ninety-eight. Someone had opened it and used up two. I
thought ninety-eight tablets should be strong enough a dose to cause
death. Next, I went through my cupboard. I had some money and lots of
personal property like marbles, catapults and a few bird pets, which are
of great value for a young boy. I decided to give them all away because
I was going to die anyway. Some things I gave to my brother, the rest I
distributed among my close friends. I told them I was leaving. They all
thought it was one big joke. Then one day I decided that I would do it
that night. I did not eat my dinner that night because I knew if there
was food in the stomach, these things may not work very well. I told my
family I was not hungry and went to the terrace with the tablets. I
popped in all the ninety-eight pills and just went to sleep, hoping that
I would know where all the dead people go.

In the morning, they did everything to wake me up, but I would not wake
up. Usually, it was always a little hard to wake me up in the mornings,
but this time I just did not wake up at all. Then my father saw that I
was limp. Everyone became terrified and took me to a hospital. They did
a stomach wash, put me on oxygen and all that, but I did not wake up.
For three days, I was lifeless and in a deep sleep. On the third day, I
slowly came awake. Still lying down on the bed, I slowly opened my eyes.
The first thing I saw were the rafters in the ceiling above the bed.
Immediately, I recognized where I was. I had seen those rafters many
times before when I had visited my father at the Railway Hospital, where
he worked. So there I was, lying in a bed in his hospital with all kinds
of tubes sticking out of me. It was very frustrating, because I had gone
through all this trouble hoping to see where one goes after death, and
all I see are the damn rafters at the Railway Hospital! That was a
desperate attempt to know what happens after death, but I had learned
nothing about it. The only consolation was that I learned that this was
not the way to know. Later, I managed to bully my friends into returning
most of the stuff I had distributed to them, and life carried on! Many
years later, when I was a young man living life at my cocky best, a deep
experience came unasked that changed my perspective about life and death
completely. On one warm September afternoon, I was just sitting alone on
a rock in Chamundi Hills. I had my eyes open---not even closed---when
something began to happen to me. Suddenly, what I thought all my life as
me was all around---my inside had become the outside. I did not know
which was me and which was not me. The air that I was breathing, the
rock on which I was sitting, the atmosphere around me---everything had
become me. It was crazy because what was happening was indescribable.
What was me had become so enormous, it was everywhere. I thought this
lasted a few minutes, but when I came back to my normal senses, the sun
had set and it was dark. My eyes were open. I was fully aware, but what
I had considered as myself until that moment had disappeared. From the
time I was eight years of age, I had not shed a single tear. But now, as
I was sitting, tears were flowing to the point where my shirt was wet.

I have always been peaceful and happy---that has never been an issue.
But here I was, drenched with a completely new kind of blissfulness. It
was about 7.30 in the evening. About four-and-a-half hours had passed
like this. When I went back home, this sort of experience became
recurring. They became more and more frequent. For a period of time, it
was a bit of a war between a phenomenal experience with a flood of
memory and my super-smart intellect. The intellect struggled; it would
not give in. The only thing that my mind could tell me is that I was
losing my balance. But the experience was so beautiful that I did not
want to lose it. It was absolutely fantastic, but at the same time,
somewhere I was thinking this could be some kind of madness going on
because it was too good to be real. Questions about death did not even
come into the picture because life was happening in such proportions.
But this experience made me realize that people don't die. They may have
disappeared from your perception, but they don't die. They live on. I
was flooded with lifetimes of memories and experiences that made me
realize that the past few lifetimes for me were about the same work, in
the same place and to some extent with the same people! It is this
understanding of life (and death) that has shaped my life since then. In
a way, death is a fiction created by ignorant people. Death is the
creation of the unaware, because if you are aware, it is life, life and
life alone---moving from one dimension of Existence to another.

Is Death a Calamity People think that death is a tragedy. It is not.
People living their entire lives without experiencing life is a tragedy.
If you die, there is really no tragedy. That is the end of whatever
problems you are experiencing in life. But if you are alive and not
experiencing life in its totality, that is a true tragedy. This is
expressed very beautifully in a Sanskrit verse. It says: 'Jananam
Sukhadam Maranam Karunam '. 'Jananam' means birth or life. It says life
is a pleasure or joy. This is so. If you learn to handle your body and
mind properly, your experience of life will be a pleasure

or joy. But 'maranam', or death, is 'karunam', or compassion. Death is
compassion because it relieves you. Right now, people have a distorted
orientation of life. They don't want to die. They don't realize that if
you were ever condemned to become immortal, or if death were taken away
from you, it would be the most horrible thing to happen to you. However
beautiful your life becomes, if death comes at the right time to you,
you are very fortunate. If it comes late, if life stretches itself
beyond a certain point, that will be the worst kind of suffering. Then
you will find that when death comes, it will be a great relief. Life
needs a certain amount of tension to keep it going, but in death, there
is relaxation. In fact, death is the highest relaxation. However, if you
also know the relaxation of death when you are alive, then life becomes
an utterly effortless process. If we look at life and death as a
happening in terms of your experience, your inhalation is life and your
exhalation is death. You can experiment with this: take one big
inhalation and see how your body and your mind are. Now do one big
exhalation and see how your body and mind are. Which do you find is more
relaxing? In fact, whenever tension builds up in you, the natural
mechanism in the body wants to exhale. This is what you call a sigh. It
relaxes you a little bit. Life needs a certain tension. Otherwise, you
cannot keep it going. Death is utter relaxation. This is how it would
have naturally been if your mind had not banished death as evil. If your
traditions and cultures had not taught you that death is evil or a
calamity that should be avoided, believe me, you would breathe in a
completely different way. If you observe people around you right now,
you will see that for almost 99 per cent of the people, their exhalation
is never complete. Their mind has rejected death so their exhalation
will not happen totally. They will inhale, but exhalation does not
happen totally. This is one of the reasons why, over some time, you
build up so much tension within the system that it is reaching a
breaking point---both mentally and physiologically. The greatest
calamity of the human mind is that it is against death. The moment you
reject death, you also reject life. You think life is right and death is
wrong. It is not so. Life is what it is only because death is. A

river always happens between two banks. But you are standing on the
right bank and say, 'I don't like the left bank, it should disappear.'
If the left bank disappears, the river also will disappear, the right
bank also will disappear. If the right bank has to be there, the left
bank also has to be there. It is like, could there be light without
darkness? One who does not embrace death will not know life at all. If
you sit here saying, 'I don't want to die, I don't want to die, I don't
want to die,' all that will happen is you will not live. You will anyway
die, but by denying death, you will not live well until then either. If
you are afraid of death, you will only avoid life; you cannot avoid
death. Even now, in some cultures, death is held as something that is to
be celebrated, not mourned. After all, from somewhere you got released
into this planet within this atmospheric space. Within that, however
large a space you occupy, it is still a small prison. But death is an
endless possibility. So there must be much more joy, much more of a
sense of excitement about this than birth. For someone who is aware of
this possibility, there is no such thing as life and death. Life is
death, and death is life; they are not different. Death is in fact life
in a very intense form. People who have experienced moments of great
danger in their life clearly know this. It once happened: two old men
met in a tiny little town in Indiana, USA, in a local bar. And both of
them were sitting grumpily at two different tables and drinking. Then
one guy looked at the other and saw a birthmark on the other person's
temple. So he walked up to him and said, 'Hey, is that you, Joshua?'
'Yeah, who are you?' 'Don't you recognize me? I am Mark. We were in the
war together.' He said, 'Oh my God!' and they lit up suddenly. They were
together in World War II and it had been fifty years since then. So they
sat down at one table and started drinking, talking and eating. They had
seen about forty minutes of action in those treacherous trenches of
World War II in Europe. Forty minutes of blitz. They talked about those
forty minutes in so many vivid ways for over two hours. After they were
done with all this talk, one guy asked the other, 'What have you been
doing since then?' He said, 'Ah, I have just been a salesman.' Forty
minutes of war, they spoke for two hours with great

excitement but fifty years of life after that were just summed up as,
'I've just been a salesman!' That is how it happens. Moments of danger
are moments when you experience both life and death together at the same
time. These are the moments you realize that life and death are here at
the same time. They are not two separate things. They are one inside the
other. Life is all packed like this. The Creation and the Creator, life
and death---are all packed one inside the other. It takes attention---a
lot of attention---to see it. Otherwise, one just lives on the surface,
half alive. If you don't know life and death at the same time, you will
know only one half of life. Being half alive is a torture always. If you
want to live as a full life, you should look at your mortal nature every
day, not only when you are beyond a certain age. Every day of your life,
you need to be aware that you are mortal. It is not that I want to die
today, but if I do, it is all right with me. I will do everything to
protect myself, to nurture myself, to take care of myself, but if I have
to die today, it is okay with me. Only then can I step out and live.
Otherwise, I cannot live.

Stop Inviting Death If avoiding death is avoiding life, dodging life is
inviting death. For most people, if life becomes unpleasant or
burdensome, then, knowingly or unknowingly, they start dodging life.
Once you start dodging life, you are invariably inviting death. There is
no better method in the world to dodge life except to invite death.
Either you do it consciously or you do it unconsciously. One major
contribution to the multiple, complex ailments that you see on the
planet these days is that people are trying to dodge life and, in the
process, are inviting death. The body is only cooperating with this. The
body is just fulfilling your desire to invite death. Ask, and it shall
happen! People are trying to avoid life because they think it is unsafe.
You should know that the only safe place on the planet is your grave.
Nothing happens there. There is no safety in life itself. Like I said
earlier, tomorrow morning you may be dead, no matter how much security
you create for yourself. I am not wishing you this, but it does not
matter how

healthy you are, how well you are right now, tomorrow you may be dead.
It is a real possibility. So there is no such thing as security in this
life. The moment you start seeking security, naturally, you become
deathoriented. Unknowingly, you will seek death. In India, it is a
tradition that whenever you see a sage or a saint, you should not miss
the opportunity to get their blessings. So many times, people come to me
and say, 'Sadhguru, please bless me that nothing should happen to me.'
Really, what kind of a blessing is this? My blessing is that let
everything happen to you. Let everything that is life happen to you.
Have you come here to avoid life or to experience life? If you want to
avoid life, I have better technology than Inner Engineering. 5 If you
want to avoid life, all it takes is 2 metres of rope to hang yourself
from the ceiling. And it is not expensive either! I am talking of
efficiency; when alive, to try to avoid life is very negative. Our
aliveness is a very brief happening but we shall be dead for a very long
time. So taking one's life is not really an option. This happens by
mistaking the psychological drama for the existential life. The moment
you think of security, you are assisting death. I want you to know:
death does not need your assistance. Death is superefficient. On the
other hand, life needs your assistance. If you notice, whatever you do
with life, no matter how much you do with life, there is still something
more you can do with it. Life needs all your attention and efforts.
Death does not need your support. It will anyway happen and it will
happen with absolute efficiency. There is no failure here, as all shall
pass. People think nothing new should happen to them, but they want an
exciting life. How is this possible? This is a no-win situation you are
creating for yourself. What can happen to you at the most? At most, you
will die. There is nothing more that can happen to you. And whatever
happens in your life, you did not come here with an investment. You came
empty-handed. You cannot lose in this life. See how wonderful it is!
Whatever happens, you are still on the profit side, so what are you
complaining about? This happened about ten years ago. At that time, the
stock market in India was going down. Some people in Mumbai brought a
man to meet

me. It seems he was initially worth about Rs 250 million. Then he took a
beating in the stock market. In about eight months' time, he was worth
only about Rs 30 million. Now the man was broken, depressed and wanting
to commit suicide because he had only Rs 30 million. He was in a bad
state, so they wanted me to help him. I thought this was funny because,
for many Indians, Rs 30 million is more than heaven. If you give an
option between heaven and Rs 30 million, they will choose Rs 30 million.
But this man is depressed and wants to commit suicide because he has
only Rs 30 million! This is not just about him; you are doing this to
yourself all the time too! Let new things happen to you. If you create
this kind of nothingshould-happen-to-me situation within yourself, you
will become stagnant. Stagnation is death. If life does not move on, if
new possibilities don't arise within you, you are living dead. This is
the reason that even when nothing has gone wrong with people's lives,
you can see so many long faces on the street. For most of them, life has
worked out far better than they ever imagined. Materially, we are all
living much better than our fathers and grandfathers did. But still
there are these long faces on the street. This is happening not because
something has gone wrong. This is because of stagnation. You cannot live
with stagnation because that is like living death. Being 'living death'
is a fantastic experience but to be deathlike when alive is horribly
painful. If you are alive, it is wonderful. If you are dead, we are not
bothered about you. There are too many dead people walking, which is why
there is such misery on the planet. They were all bright and alive at
one time; now, slowly, they are half into the grave. Yes, with time the
physical body will deplete. That is why if only psychological and
physiological processes are in your experience, it is only natural that
with the passage of time, you will deplete. Only if the fundamental life
energy is in your experience, if the right things are done about the
life process, then you will not deplete with age and rather become
greatly enhanced. So it is only life which must be constantly cranked
up. There is no need to invite or practise death, because death does not
need your support.

CHAPTER 2

The Process of Death

What you are calling as life, right now, is like soap bubbles being
blown. The entire Yogic process or the entire spiritual process is to
wear this bubble thin, so that one day when it bursts, there is
absolutely nothing left and it moves from the bondage of existence to
the freedom of non-existence, or Nirvana.

What Makes Us Tick If you want to understand fundamentally how life and
death work, you need to understand how Creation works and the role
played by the various memories that are present in Creation. When I say
memory, it is not only what you remember. Memory runs much deeper in its
many layers. According to the Yogic system, memory is basically an
accumulation of impressions. Further, there are fundamentally eight
types of these memories in Creation. The most fundamental of these
memories is Elemental Memory. According to the Yogic system, the first
step from the unmanifest to manifest is the formation of Pancha Bhoota
s, or the five elements. These elements are: prithvi (earth ), jal
(water ), agni (fire ), vayu (air ) and aakash (ether ). The names
represent a particular quality and not the substance itself. These
fundamental elements have different characteristics and are manifest in
all aspects of Creation and are the most fundamental basis of all
Creation. Of these, Elemental Memory is the memory that decides how
these five elements interact and play out in life. The next layer of
Creation is the material substance that the Universe is made of. The
rules of how they play out are contained in what we can call Atomic
Memory. Today, every child is taught atomic theory in school. The word
'atom' comes from the Greek word atomos , meaning indivisible. When
modern science discovered the atom, it was believed that atoms were
indivisible and the most fundamental building blocks of the Universe.

Today, of course, we know that it is not so. Over two dozen subatomic
particles have been since discovered and more are possible. Atomic
Memory relates to how subatomic particles, atoms and in turn molecules
of various physical substances are made and how they behave. Elemental
Memory and Atomic Memory together constitute what can be called
Inanimate Memory. This memory governs the inanimate aspect of life. The
other types of memory relate to animate life and can be called Animate
Memory . Of these, the most fundamental layer of memory is Evolutionary
Memory , which relates to how the evolution of life has taken place.
This is instrumental in you having two eyes, two hands, taking the shape
of the human form and not any other creature, and so on. Upon this layer
is Genetic Memory , which comes from the genetic material passed on by
your parents that makes you the unique human being that you are among
all the other humans. This memory decides the colour of your skin, the
shape of your nose and other such things. The next layer of memory is
Karmic Memory , which is an accumulation of all the impressions that you
have gathered, not just since birth but all through your previous lives,
and the process of evolution. This will play out in your life in so many
ways beyond one's understanding. The next three layers of memory are
impressions or accumulations related to your mind or the mental body.
There is a large body of memory that you are completely unconscious
about, which we can call Unconscious Memory . Then there is another body
of memory that is just beneath the Conscious Memory that we can call
Subconscious Memory . And, finally, there is Conscious Memory itself,
which you can recollect and articulate. All these eight types of memory
will play out in your dayto-day life according to the impressions
accumulated and the situations you are faced with. Broadly speaking,
these are the layers of memories that make you the life you are. Now,
there are many ways to look at the essential nature of life. One of them
is that there are two seeds that make our lives. One is the seed planted
by our parents, which gave us a body, and the other is the seed planted
by the Creator, which gave us the life within. These are two different
types of seeds or, in other words, two different dimensions of

Nature. The first is programmed for certainty, while the second is
programmed for possibility. The body is physical and there is a sense of
certainty of its existence. The life that you are beyond the physical is
a debate for most people; most are uncertain of the nature of their
existence. The seed of physicality that was transmitted by our parents
has a certain set of rules, traits and compulsions of its own. This
aspect of Nature only tries to survive. The survival process includes
procreation. It always tries to avoid everything that threatens its
survival. Now, our parents gave us just a seed and that became the body.
But what the Source of Creation gave us was not a seed in that sense. It
gave itself. This is the reason that all the possibilities that the
Source of Creation holds are kind of encapsulated in us. Whether that
possibility is realized in an individual life or not is questionable,
but the possibility is always there. With these two seeds, when a human
being is born a certain software is set within. This software is a
combination of time, energy and the information that he or she carries
with them from previous lives. These three together will determine
various aspects of one's life. Depending upon the information that is
carried, energy is allotted for different aspects of life, which we will
look at in a bit. In India, this information that is carried forth is
referred to as karma. Of the entire memory or the entire lot of karma
that one has, Evolutionary Memory is only significant for the structure
of who one is. Let us leave it aside. But if all Genetic Memory and the
Karmic, Unconscious and Subconscious Memories that you have flood into
your Conscious Memory right now---you cannot deal with it. It will
become too overwhelming. So out of this entire load, Nature has a way of
apportioning a portion for you to handle or wear off in this birth in
the form of different kinds of activity. Traditionally, in Indian
culture, the whole stock of Karmic Memory a person has is called
Sanchita Karma. You can say Sanchita Karma is the entire warehouse of
karma that a person carries. Out of this stock, a certain portion is
allocated to be handled in a particular lifetime. This is known as
Prarabdha Karma , or the karma that is allocated for that lifetime,
which has some extra urgency to it and expresses a little more

compulsion than the rest of the heap. This is Nature's way of handling
something that is extremely complex in simple, intermediate steps. So at
birth, Prarabdha Karma creates an orientation and Sanchita Karma creates
an unconscious tendency towards various things. However, how much karma
you perform daily and with how much awareness either releases you from
your Prarabdha Karma and Sanchita Karma or it enhances the same. In a
nutshell, these factors are what determine how and for how long a person
will live. In the natural course of life, even if one lives simply in
unawareness, Prarabdha Karma will somehow get worked out. With a little
suffering here and a little well-being there, a little pain here and a
little pleasure there, one will work out one's Prarabdha Karma. They
just need to learn how not to create new karma in this life, that is
all. So the next time when another set of Prarabdha Karma is allocated,
that also will get worked out. This will repeat lifetime after lifetime.
Now, Prarabdha Karma does not per se determine the outside situation,
but it definitely arranges many things on the outside because your inner
arrangements are always finding expression in the external situations.
So in India, whenever one saw someone suffering, they would say, 'Aiyyo
, 1 prarabdha !' It used to be a common refrain because the suffering is
mostly coming from within. In most cases, suffering is a consequence of
how one carries their memory and not necessarily the content. Hence, the
need to fix the context of one's life through spiritual processes and
not so much the content. If you want to see how different people come
with different karmic baggage, you should observe infants. How much of
hand and leg movement one child does is very different from how much
another child of the same age does. This is not because of the
differences in parents. In fact, how much one baby kicks around in a
mother's belly is very different from how much another baby of the same
mother kicks around. Usually, it has very little to do with the parents.
In fact, if you observe, a lot of lethargic parents suffer super-active
children. This is not because of the attitudes and psychological
limitations of the children either. That develops afterwards. This is
because each 'being' comes with a certain level of energy allotted to
activity at birth itself.

Now, even within the allocation of energy to each person at birth, it is
further divided into various aspects. Let us say, according to your
karmic structure, you came with 1000 units of energy when you were born.
Of this, 250 units may be allotted for physical activity, and within
that 100 units for involuntary activity and 150 units for external
voluntary activity. Out of the rest, 300 units could be for mental
activity and another 200 for emotional activity, and so on. This
allocation will depend on what kind of software you have. This is why
you will see each individual has a certain level of energy for different
aspects of life. In children who have not yet been through much
influence, this is very distinctly visible. You can see it in adults
also, but in adults, this could also be ascribed to many influences in
one's life. Now, the way the allocated energies are expended within you
has serious implications on your life and death. In today's world,
because of the impact of technology, the energy allocated to physical
activity is mostly unused in people. If you were on this planet 200
years ago, the level of physical activity that you would be performing
naturally to fulfil your day-to-day requirements would be at least
twenty times higher than what it is right now. In the tribal village
near the Isha Yoga Center, no one has any sleep disorder. They put in so
much physical activity that by the time they go to bed, they are ready
to die. If they just put their head down on the pillow, they will fall
asleep. If you happen to travel on Indian roads, it is common to see
labourers travelling on top of loaded trucks. They would have loaded
some stones or bricks or some other material into the vehicle and they
would also be travelling in it to unload at the destination. Usually,
you will see them fast asleep, lying on bricks or stones or some other
coarse material in the moving truck, even under the hot sun. This is
because the level of their physical activity is such that they have used
up all their allotted energy. Now, if you initiate them into meditation,
they will easily meditate. You will see that it is the educated people
who cannot sleep or meditate or sit in one place because they are not
using up their allotted physical energy. When they don't use it up, they
cannot sit in one place. Right now, you see a huge upsurge in activities
like trekking, cycling, running, etc. This is not only for fitness. Most
realize that by just being in a demanding

activity, they sleep, think and act better. Their enthusiasm and energy
for relationships and work are enhanced. In a way, in their
consciousness, they have managed to put their concerns about the body
aside. This is why, once you are on the spiritual path, we want you to
exhaust your energies allocated for physical activity very fast. Let us
say, you have 500 units of energy allotted to your physical activity. We
want to finish it off in ten years so that after that if you sit, the
body will simply sit. It has no need to move. Without any physical urge
to move, it will simply settle down. Most people cannot meditate without
sufficient physical activity. So, when we allocate work to people at the
Isha Yoga Center, we do it with a lot of care. Some people work four
hours a day, some six hours a day, some ten hours a day, some fourteen
hours a day, while there are some who work eighteen to twenty hours a
day. The idea is to expend their physical energy. However, if you are
full-time on a spiritual path, if you are a brahmachari , we not only
want you to empty your Prarabdha Karma, we want you to expend the
Sanchita Karma, or the entire stock, too. The idea of being on a
spiritual path is to put life on fast forward. We don't want you to take
ten lifetimes to handle this warehouse of memory. We want you to finish
it now. So we try to open up other dimensions of memory in you. The
reason why so much discipline was always brought into Yogic practices is
that even when things that would otherwise overwhelm you come up, you
should be able to handle them. If you open up things for which one is
not ready, karma can just smother you completely. Once you are full-time
on a spiritual path, we give you sadhana to handle this. Now, you are
willing to walk into trouble. You are not dodging trouble any more.
People want to avoid whatever is unpleasant in their life because they
cannot handle it. Only once we know you can handle your Prarabdha Karma
well, then we can open up the entire warehouse of memory. This is also
the reason why, when a person walks the spiritual path, if they don't
handle the situation properly, they will suffer much more than other
people. While others handle only what is allotted to them, this person
tries to take up the whole stock.

Some people who are at the Yoga Center have gone through these phases:
when they came, we gave them lots of activity. They went through it for
a certain period and then slumped. They could not do anything for some
time. They thought they were physically sick. They went to various
doctors, though I told them, 'Don't go to any doctor, just relax for
some time. Something else will happen.' And after some time, once again
they are swept away by activity because we open up another room in the
warehouse for them. What they should have done in their next life, they
do it now. Actually, there are many more aspects to this---I am putting
it in an overly simplistic manner. The main aim is that we want them to
finish it all now. This is also the reason why many spiritual systems in
the East always had grammar and mathematics attached to them. Yogis want
to develop their body and their mind because if they are born again,
they don't want to be born with small amounts of Prarabdha Karma and go
on for many lifetimes. They don't want to postpone it; they want to
fast-forward everything. They want to enhance their mental capabilities,
so that this time around, even if they were not able to end it, because
they left with very great physical and mental capabilities, when they
come next time, they will get a bigger software. They will get more
Prarabdha Karma. So along with the spiritual process, people took to
grammar, music, astronomy and mathematics, because they want to use
their intelligence in every way. Now, along with the memory and energy,
there is a third dimension--- time---that determines the duration and
nature of one's life and death. Both life and death happen within the
ambit of time. Time ticks away all the time. You can neither slow it
down nor hasten it. You can conserve your energy, you can throw it
around, you can develop it, you can make it phenomenally big or insipid,
but time, it just keeps slipping away. It has its own intelligence, and
it flows according to certain parameters of karmic information and the
energy allotment that is available in one's system. So can we not do
anything about it? We can, but that is a much more elusive dimension of
life than the other two. The other two are much easier to manage and
manifest in one's life. Generating energy and using it the way you want,
not allowing your tendencies to determine the

nature of your thought, emotion and activity is far easier than taking
charge of time. Even Adiyogi 2 took charge of time only when he was in
certain states. When he was in such states where he took charge of time,
we refer to him as Kalabhairava. 3 One who has mastery over one's
information, or mastery over the tendencies caused by the information,
has mastery over the quality of one's life. He or she can determine
whether the self becomes pleasant or unpleasant. One who has mastery
over one's energies will determine the nature of one's activity and how
one lives. They have absolute mastery over their life, but not over
their death. But one who has mastery over time will determine the nature
of one's life and death. They can determine whether they want to live or
die. This is how the three dimensions that constitute your life are
connected to your death.

A Bubble of Life and Death People think in terms of life and death as a
binary situation. You are either alive or dead. You are either walking
and talking or you are dead and gone. This is a very superficial and
simplistic way to understand life and death. In fact, it is incorrect.
Generally, the human perception of aliveness has always been that
something must bleed, otherwise it is not alive. Not any more. Slowly,
as science is advancing, our perception of what is alive and what is not
is changing. Now we know that not just the plants and animals but even
the rock and the soil are alive. The air is alive, the water is alive,
the soil that you walk upon is alive and the very cosmic space is alive.
Today, science proclaims that water has its own memory and intelligence.
Someday, when science goes far enough, they will find that there is
nothing in the Cosmos that is not alive. The important question is, are
you alive enough to perceive it? For me, even a rock is very alive. It
has its own energy and I see that it gathers its own memory over a
period of time. It lives with it. It is only based on this, that a
Dhyanalinga 4 is consecrated. It is only based on this that every deity
in India exists. If we give this combination of energy and memory a
certain amount of vibrancy of energy, it will slowly gather an

intelligence of its own. Once it has a combination of all these three,
it can have intent. Once it has an intent and the necessary energy to
back it, it is capable of action. This is how life is. Right now, our
idea of death is like this: when people say something has died, it only
means that something just relapsed from a dynamic to a more inert form
of Existence. We recognize life as a certain level of dynamism, intent
and capability of action in a human being. If this dynamism sinks below
a certain level, then we say they are dead because, as far as our
perception and our practical purposes are concerned, the things that we
expect from a human being are no longer possible for them any more. He
or she may rot, become maggots, become manure and then a mango or a
coconut. All of them are life, but still we don't consider them alive
because they are not able to find expression as we expect of a human
being. Essentially, there is a scale of dynamism from zero to infinity.
(Actually, there is no zero, that is the whole problem!) Let us say,
Shiva ---that which is not---is zero, and what we consider as Divine is
the highest level of dynamism. There are many levels of dynamism even
among human beings. For example, let us say someone has Alzheimer's
disease. They don't remember a thing, but this does not mean there is no
memory in them. It is very much there, but the dynamism of the memory is
gone. It has become inert. But if the memory goes away completely, your
body also will fall apart right away because what you call as 'this
body' is held together just by memory. Right now, if a man eats a mango,
it becomes a man. If a woman eats a mango, the same mango becomes a
woman. You give the same mango to a cow, it goes inside a cow and
becomes a cow. Is this the smartness of the mango? No. There is such a
strong memory structure in you that whatever you put in, the memory will
make sure it becomes you, not some other person. This is why if you eat
a mango, one part of it becomes your skin in the same skin tone as
yours; it does not turn yellow because the mango you ate was yellow.
Moreover, biologically also, a certain level of dynamism of memory is
needed to bind all organs, cells and atoms together to our intention of
living. Right now, you have trillions of cells in your body that are

functioning the way you want because there is a strong intent that is
holding them together. But if you lose this intent, which is your
ability to make all these atoms and cells function the way you want, we
say you have died. The deterioration of the body begins to happen. The
organism goes through certain disorganization, but it becomes a part of
a larger organism of the planet, Universe or Cosmos. As an organism
ages, it loses its intent. If you lose your intent, then, gradually,
action goes first, then your conscious memory will begin withdrawing and
along with that your energies will follow. The air is alive, a rock is
alive, a tree is alive, an animal is alive, a bird is alive and a human
being is also alive. It is just that they have different levels of
intent, different levels of intelligence and, above all, different
dimensions of memory. 5 That is all. The volume of Conscious Memory that
you are capable of determines your capability of intent. From an amoeba
to a human being, it is only a question of complexity. Every creature
has intent, but it is largely unconscious intent. Only with the human
being there is conscious intent. That is what sets us apart. Right now,
my unconscious intent may be that I want to eat. But my conscious intent
is to write this book, which no other creature really thinks of. For
them, whatever is their unconscious intent is also largely their intent.
Maybe dogs and a few other animals are capable of conscious intent in a
small way, but, beyond that, everything is unconscious intent. But if a
human being is willing, we can develop a large conscious intent from the
banks of memory we have on various levels because there is such a huge
foundation for this life. If you want an analogy, consider this: in a
way, what you refer to as life, right now, is like soap bubbles being
blown. A rock, a plant and a human being are all like soap bubbles of
different kinds. The layer of covering of the soap bubble is the complex
amalgamation of memory--- various kinds of memory. In that sense, the
nine avatars 6 that they talk about in the Hindu tradition are just
different levels of Evolutionary, Genetic, Karmic, Unconscious,
Subconscious and Conscious Memory. The difference between a 'human
bubble' 7 and a 'rock bubble' is just this: a rock bubble is mostly
physical, with a thicker covering and less air inside, because all that
is there is physical matter. It is only its physical

integrity due to Inanimate Memory that holds it together, not so much a
conscious web. You can break it with a hammer and it will be gone. But
if you break a human bubble with a hammer, only the body will break. The
web of Karmic Memory contained within is such that it will always find
another way to create another bubble or physical form. The entire Yogic
process or the entire spiritual process is to wear this bubble thin so
that one day when it bursts, there is absolutely nothing left. It then
moves from the bondage of existence to the freedom of non-existence, or
Nirvana . What I am saying might disappoint a lot of people because what
I am telling you, in other words, is that there is no such thing as an
encapsulated life. This whole thing about the soul, the 'being' and
other fancy things are all made up to give solace to people. If you tell
them there is no substance within them like that, they will become
terrified. So what about the person or the personality? There is no such
thing as 'this person' either. It is only a web of memory that creates
an illusion of 'this person'. This is why when a person's memory is
removed or dislodged in some way, like in Alzheimer's disease or
something else, their personality is one thing that dies immediately.
Suddenly, they are not the same person any more. But still they have
their own traits. It is like a scorpion has its traits that are very
different from a grasshopper's. Similarly, people who have lost their
memory will have different traits but no personality. If the Conscious,
Subconscious and Unconscious Memories are gone, if they are either
dislocated or maybe wiped out, the Genetic Memory will come into play.
If the Genetic Memory is wiped out, then the Evolutionary Memory will
play. Even then, life is not completely gone because it has not
completely dissolved. If you take out the memory altogether, if you pull
the plug on it, it collapses completely and then the bubble cannot hold
the air. Here, what you refer to as air is the fundamental life energy.
You can call it consciousness. Consciousness is a quality, not a
substance. It is the nature of the Cosmos. You just blew a bubble and
caught some amount of it. What we are trying to do with conscious living
or with sadhana is catch as much air as possible so that you are one big
bubble, and the wall of the bubble becomes very thin. You don't want to
be a tiny little bubble

---you want to become one big bubble because dissolution is an imminent
possibility for a sufficiently big bubble. With sadhana, you blow a huge
bubble. You want to blow this in such a way that it will never again
exist anywhere as the same memory form. For this, you have to grow it
really big. Essentially, enlarging a bubble means making the wall
thinner and thinner. With sadhana, you wear it out from the inside. You
stretch it. You stretch it so much that it will burst one day. You make
it so big, where the memory stretches itself so thin, that when it is
broken, it is really gone. Suppose, somehow---either due to life
experience or intelligence or wisdom or whatever---someone blew a big
bubble, and it cannot be ignored any more. The moment such a life rolls
out of the mother's womb, it will depict certain qualities, simply
because it is a big bubble. Everyone will be looking at that. A hundred
other bubbles may be floating about, but everyone will look at that.
This is what we call an evolved 'being'. It does not matter whether one
becomes a spiritual teacher or simply walks on the street---wherever the
person is, people cannot ignore that being because there is a certain
level of activity and intent. Now, using this analogy, what happens when
someone dies? Your physical self is largely an accumulation of Genetic
Memory and Evolutionary Memory. The other dimensions of memory are not
in it so much. It is the energy body which holds that memory, largely.
So when death occurs, whatever memory you gathered on the surface---the
Genetic, Evolutionary and other Memories---is gone but the deeper layer
of Karmic Memory remains intact. Therefore, it seems to be almost
eternal in your experience. It is in this context people say that the
soul is eternal. It is not eternal, but in your experience, if something
goes beyond your body, you call it eternal. In that sense, this
long-term memory within you, which will carry on through death, which
will determine the nature of your future life and experience, is
eternal. Of the eight types of memory that you carry, all the seven
types of memory will go when you fall dead. Evolutionary Memory, which
is instrumental in you taking the shape of the human form, is gone.
Genetic Memory, which decides the colour of your skin, the shape of your
nose and such things, is also gone. The Conscious, Subconscious and

Unconscious Memories are also gone. Once you become disembodied, it is
largely only the Karmic Memory which holds you together. In the process
of death or disembodiment and the continuation of life process, we must
understand that only one memory---the Karmic Memory--- remains. Within
this, you may categorize something as Sanchita Karma and something else
as Prarabdha Karma, but, essentially, it is karma which remains. One way
to handle this bubble is to capture a larger piece of life. Now, even if
you did not do anything much about dismantling your karma, the karmic
wall becomes very thin simply because the 'life size' became more. The
other way is to wear down the karmic wall. Very few people with properly
intact karmic substance know how to just open the karmic wall and leave
one fine day. The rest have to wear it down. The reason why an enormous
amount of activity is generally prescribed on the spiritual path is that
if you cannot blow your bubble thin from within, you try to wear it out
from outside. Either way, you try to make the walls as thin as possible.
The reason they said you should go and sit in a sacred place like the
Dhyanalinga or some other energetic place or that you should go on
yatras, and so on, is to fix your karmic body. The karmic body is
subject to influences because this whole thing has happened because of
the accumulation of influences. So you can undo the karmic body by the
right kind of influences, or by being in the right spaces, in communion
with the right kind of people and the right kind of atmosphere. This is
the idea behind structuring spiritual life in a certain way so that one
is constantly active, but it is not about oneself. The moment it is
about me, karma will grow; immediately, the karmic wall will gather
substance. Its walls will become thicker and thicker. The moment it is
about me, I will have a strong sense of likes and dislikes---I can do
that, I cannot do that; I can talk to this person, I cannot talk to that
person; I want to love this person, I want to hate that person, and so
on. These kinds of things will become a natural part of me the moment it
is about me. So the whole spiritual path in India has been designed in
such a way that the karmic wall does not gather substance. At the same
time, you go on enhancing the volume of life that you gather. It does
not matter how

much brains you have, it does not matter how much knowledge you have,
the significance of your life is always determined by the volume of life
you captured. So the idea is to increase the real substance of life, so
that the cover or package becomes irrelevant. When it becomes
irrelevant, it will dissolve. When it dissolves, this substance that was
captured, which does not belong to you and which is anyway there
everywhere, you become part of it. When you have a thick wall, you are
like a golf ball, because only a little bit of life is there; the rest
is all karma. Now, if something pushes you a little, you will bounce all
over the place. But if you have become a big bubble, if something pushes
it, it will just glide, that is all. It is not going to hit this wall
and that wall and go all over the place. This is the way life is
happening to people: people who are very enslaved to their karmic
structure, if you just pat them on the shoulder, they will bounce all
over the place. But somebody who has grown in a certain way, whatever
hits them, even if a bus hits them, they don't go all over the place.
They will just glide away. See, not everybody who takes to a spiritual
process, or sadhana, is going to burst into Enlightenment. But why they
are living like that is because they are wearing down their karmic
bodies. When the time comes, if the bubble becomes incompetent to house
Genetic Memory and Evolutionary Memory, then it cannot retake another
body. Embodiment is not possible; it is over. All of it may not be gone,
but the ability of the bubble to come back is over. If you burst the
bubble completely, it is possible to completely eject out of this cycle.
Then we would not call it death. It is the ultimate end of life. To do
this, if it was a big bubble, you simply touch it and it would be
completely gone. It does not need much action. Simply of its own nature,
it can burst. Even with a soap bubble, if you try to poke it when it is
small, it will only stick to your hand. It will not blow up. It will
take a lot more action to burst it, but big bubbles just burst upon
contact or on their own. This is why many spiritual paths try to do just
this: they try to blow the life bubble bigger and bigger with each
lifetime so that one day it will burst on its own. But even when the
bubble is small and the walls are thick, if people acquire the necessary
wisdom and the intention, or if

they are on to very powerful spiritual processes, they can crush it in
the present lifetime itself. They don't have to wait for lifetimes to
grow it very big.

Understanding Life and Death If you want to understand what happens
during death, you must have some understanding of the mechanics of how a
human being is built. In Yoga, we look at everything---the entire
organism---as the body. This body is a composition of five sheaths.
These five sheaths, or kosha s, as they are known, are Annamaya Kosha ,
Manomaya Kosha , Pranamaya Kosha , Vignanamaya Kosha and Anandamaya
Kosha . Each sheath has a distinct purpose and properties. The outermost
periphery or outermost sheath of a human being is the physical body. It
is called the Annamaya Kosha. Anna means food, so we call this the 'food
body'. When you were born, you were just 2.5 or 3 kilograms in weight.
Now you are about twenty times more. All that came only from the food
and nourishment you ingested. So what you call the 'body' is just an
accumulated heap of food. That is how it gets its name. The second layer
is the Manomaya Kosha. Mana means the mind. This is the mental body. It
comprises your thoughts, emotions and all the mental processes, both
conscious and unconscious. Today, doctors talk a great deal about the
psychosomatic nature of many ailments. This means that what happens in
the mind affects what happens in the body. Every fluctuation on the
level of the mind has a chemical reaction in the body, and every
chemical reaction in the body in turn generates a fluctuation on the
level of the mind. When you say 'the mind', people generally think it is
located in one place. It is not so. The mind is not in any one place.
There is an entire anatomy of the mind. There is memory and intelligence
in every cell in the body. There is a whole body of mind, which we call
Manomaya Kosha. This is the entire mental body. The physical and mental
bodies are like your hardware and software. Hardware and software cannot
do anything unless you plug into quality power. So there is a third
layer of the self, called the Pranamaya Kosha.

Prana is life energy. This is the energy body which powers and drives
the Annamaya Kosha and the Manomaya Kosha. All these three---the
physical body, the mental body and the energy body---are physical in
nature. It is easy to understand that the Annamaya Kosha is physical
because you can see it and feel it. But the Manomaya Kosha and the
Pranamaya Kosha are also physical in nature. It is like this: you can
very clearly see that a light bulb is physical, but the electricity that
runs through it is also physical. So is the light that emanates from the
bulb. All three are physical. Similarly, the physical body is grossly
physical, the mental body is a little subtler, while the energy body is
even more subtle but still of the physical realm. These are the only
three dimensions of the self you are aware of right now. All these three
physical dimensions of life carry the imprints of karma, or Karmic
Memory. Karma is imprinted on the body, the mind and on the energy. It
is this karmic structure that holds the being together. The fourth layer
of the self is called the Vignanamaya Kosha. Gnana means knowledge.
Vishesh Gnana or vignana means extraordinary knowledge or knowledge of
that which is beyond the sense perceptions. This is the etheric body. It
is a transitory body---a transition from the physical to the
non-physical. It is neither physical nor non-physical. It is like a link
between the two. It is not in your current level of experience because
your experience is limited to the five sense organs and these organs
cannot perceive the non-physical. If you learn to find conscious access
to this dimension, there will be a quantum leap in your ability to know
the cosmic phenomenon. The fifth sheath is known as the Anandamaya
Kosha. Ananda means bliss. It has nothing to do with the physical realms
of life. Only the physical can be here and there. Anything that is
non-physical is neither here nor there. It is everything and nothing. So
the deepest core is that dimension which is beyond the physical. It is
nothingness. When I say nothing, you should put a hyphen between no and
thing ---no-thing. It is not a thing, it is not physical. It is beyond
the physical nature. It cannot be described or even defined. So Yoga
talks about it only in terms of experience. When we are in touch with
that aspect beyond the physical, we become blissful.

So Anandamaya Kosha is called the 'bliss body'. But it is not that a
bubble of bliss lies within your physical structure. There is no such
thing. It is just that when you access this indefinable dimension, it
produces an overwhelming experience of bliss. It has no form of its own.
When someone drops dead, only their outermost sheaths---the Annamaya
Kosha and the conscious parts of the Manomaya Kosha---are lost. One does
not drop dead completely. The rest of the structure is still intact; it
will seek another womb and manifest itself once again in the physical
plane. This is why death is not dissolution---you will pop back in no
time. But if the energy body, the mental body and the physical body are
taken away, the bliss body will become a part of the Cosmos. Only if the
energy body, the mental body and the physical body are in place can they
hold the bliss body in place. When they are no more, the bliss body is
also no more. Now, they are completely no more. This is the whole story
of life, death and dissolution.

Pancha Pranas: The Five Vital Energies If you want to further understand
how the separation of the physical body happens at death, you need to
have some understanding of the Pranamaya Kosha, or the vital energies
that govern life. In Yoga, we call this prana. It manifests itself in
five basic dimensions. These are called Pancha Vayus , or Pancha Pranas
. There are other forms to it, but it will get too complicated to go
into it. So we will just look at these five dimensions. These Pancha
Pranas are in charge of various activities or processes in your body.
The first one is Samat Prana or Samana Vayu . This Samana Vayu is in
charge of maintaining the temperature of your body. By activating the
Samana Vayu, you can activate your energies in such a way that you
become less and less available to the external elements in Nature. If
you have travelled in certain parts of the Himalayas, especially if you
have gone to places like Gomukh or Tapovan, you will see some sadhus
living there in the extreme cold, in bare minimum clothing. These are
glacial, sub-zero-temperature areas, but these sadhus can be found
walking around barefoot. This is because, by doing certain kriya s or
mastering certain mantras, you can activate the Samana Vayu and create

a kavacha , or a shield, around yourself. You can create a cocoon of
your own energy whereby the external elements don't bother you so much
any more. This is not only about the cold; even the heat will not
disturb you. It is like you have an internal air conditioning where both
the heat and the cold do not disturb you so much any more. Generating
heat in the body is one aspect of Samana Vayu, but it is also very
healing in nature. If your Samana Vayu is high, your very presence
becomes healing for others. Samana Vayu is also in charge of your
digestive process. If your Samana Vayu is high, you will notice whatever
you eat, your stomach will become empty in about an hour and a half.
Your stomach should always be empty because both your physiology and
your mind function at their best only when the stomach is empty. So
yogis always want to keep their stomachs empty. An empty stomach does
not mean you starve yourself. You just burn up the food as quickly as
possible. Samana Vayu is also related to the sun, the basic source of
energy and temperature. The sun is the heating source of the planet and
the body. Samana Vayu is important because one's life and its span are
related to the cycles of the sun. Through the sun, Planet Earth has also
become the source of warmth---or a minor sun---by itself. So
establishing a deep connection with the planet will lead to an ageless
sort of existence in terms of energy and vitality. With this, a yogi can
transcend the solar cycles 8 and be released from its grip. He can
become independent of the physical source of life in the solar system.
Such a yogi's life and death will be most interesting to witness, as,
without any transcendental quality, he will manage death with the ease
of a breath. The next aspect of prana is called Prana Vayu , which is in
charge of your respiratory process and your thought process. If you
carefully observe, for every kind of thought that you get, your breath
will change in a subtle way. You sit here and think about the ocean, you
will observe that your breath will be one way. You think about the
mountains, it will be another way. You think about a tiger, it will be
yet another way. The reason why thought and respiration are so directly
connected is simply because both these are handled by the same energy
known as Prana

Vayu. Prana Vayu is related to the Earth. It is earthy in nature. This
is the only planet in the solar system to have a breathable atmosphere
and therefore the possibility of respiration. So this is the only planet
where there is an active intellect or thought process. The next aspect
of the prana is called Udana Vayu . Udana means to fly. You may weigh 70
or 80 kilograms on the weighing scale, but you don't feel the 70 or 80
kilograms on you because Udana Vayu creates buoyancy and makes you less
available to gravity. There are Yogic practices to activate this. There
were whole schools of Udana Vayu in China, where those who gained
mastery over this prana could float around a little bit. You might have
seen this in the movies, where it is a little exaggerated. But the body
becomes lighter because of a more buoyant force in the body. For a
martial arts fighter, to be buoyant is important. There have been many
cases where certain ballet dancers, footballers and martial arts experts
have executed what all physicists believe is simply impossible, by
leaping up to incredible heights. They have defied gravity simply by
creating more buoyancy within the body. If you have complete mastery
over udana, they say you can even fly. But more importantly, if you
activate your udana, you become less and less available to gravity. On
the weighing scale, you are still the same, but in your experience, you
will feel as if the body has become so light. You don't have to carry
it. It is like it is floating around. This is another way of making you
less of a body. Udana Vayu is also in charge of your ability to
communicate. Now, if your Udana Vayu is active, your ability to
communicate with people will come naturally to you. Udana Vayu is
related to the moon. The cycles of the moon are intimately connected
especially with the female body. Only because our mothers' bodies were
in sync with the cycles of the moon were we born. The moon, being the
manager of the feminine dimension of life on the planet and the platform
upon which life is built, becomes the determining factor as to when the
body can truly come to an end. Once Udana Vayu has left, the very
platform that provided the needed foundation for life to build itself
upon is not there. Hence, from this point on, seeking the next womb
begins in earnest.

The next aspect of prana is called Apana Vayu . Apana Vayu is in charge
of your excretory system and the sensory function. Only when the
excretory system is efficient at the cellular level will you have the
necessary sensitivity for sensory perception. And hence such importance
is being given to the purificatory aspect in Yoga. When I say excretion,
I mean not just the outcome of digestion, but excretion on the cellular
level that needs to happen. Every moment, the cells are pushing out
impurities at the cellular level. This excretory system will be
efficient only when the stomach is empty. When there is food in the
stomach and digestion is in progress, the excretory system slows down.
So if excretion does not happen properly, the body becomes impure. When
the body becomes impure, lethargy and other kinds of dullness will
settle. Once this inertia manifests in the body, it will slowly be
transmitted to the mind also. So Apana Vayu cleanses the system in a big
way. The next aspect of prana is called Vyana Vayu . Vyana Vayu is that
which knits all these billions of cells into one organism. There have
been some instances of certain yogis whose bodies did not show any signs
of decay for months after their death, even though no preservation was
attempted. This is particularly common among Tibetan monks. This is
possible because when they die, they leave a certain amount of Vyana
Prana in the body, which preserves it for a long time. You may have
heard of transmigration, where people leave their bodies and enter
another body. If one has mastery over one's vyana , one can leave one's
body at will. Now, this leaving of the body is not the pinnacle of Yoga;
it is a simple aspect of Yoga. If you activate Vyana Vayu in your body,
you slowly become loose inside your body. Now, the question of getting
identified with the body does not arise within you. This gives you a
completely different sense of freedom in your life because maintaining
the awareness that 'I am not the body' comes naturally to you. This is
like if your clothes are very tight-fitting, slowly, you will tend to
think that is you. But if you wear loose clothes, you are more conscious
that these are clothes, not me. Now, another aspect of Vyana Vayu is
that it is also in charge of your ability to move or your locomotion.
You will see your ability to walk

will come so naturally to you when your Vyana Vayu is high, even if you
are not a seasoned walker. Vyana Vayu is a very important aspect of
spiritual growth. It also enhances your intuitive nature. There are many
more aspects to pranas or vayu s, but, fundamentally, this is how they
affect the physical body. A basic understanding of the pranas is
necessary to understand how death happens because, at the moment of
death, each of these pranas recedes differently and affects the dead
differently. The process of death or the process of disembodiment
extends well beyond the point where the breath has stopped.

The Sequence of Death Definitions are central to the progress of modern
science. To study anything, they must be able to define it first. But
when it comes to defining death, modern science ties itself into knots.
The best definition they have for death is 'the absence of life'. But
then again they have no definition for life either. Defining death or
being able to determine the point of death correctly is a necessity
because of the social, medical and legal aspects to life and death. In
the olden days, they said if the breath has stopped, the person has
died. But then some people who were declared 'dead' by this definition
came back to life and a whole lot of chaos ensued. So they went a step
further and said if the pulse stops, i.e. the heart stops, then it is
death. But again people came back to life even after their breath and
heart had stopped. Today, they have a battery of terms---clinical death,
brain death, somatic death, heart--lung failure, whole-brain death,
higher brain death, and so on---to hide behind their inability to
precisely define death. This problem is essentially because they are
only looking at the manifestations of the process of death and not the
cause, which is the exiting of the Pancha Pranas from the physical body.
This happened many years ago. A research institute invited me because
they wanted to check my gamma waves. Apparently, these are patterns of
neural oscillations in the brain that show a correlation to mental
activity. At that time, I did not know what these gamma waves were or if
I even had them in my brain. I don't usually put myself through these
indignities, but that day, due to an obligation, I gave in.

They connected me with fourteen electrodes and asked me to meditate. I
said, 'I don't know how to meditate.' They were a little taken aback.
They said, 'But you teach everyone meditation.' 'Yes, I do. But I teach
meditation to people because they don't know how to sit still.' In
reality, there is no such thing as meditation. There is only
stillness--- many levels of stillness. Because it is very difficult to
teach people stillness, the term 'meditation' is used as an
intermediary. So I said, 'If you want, I will sit still. Totally still,
on all levels.' Then they said, 'Okay, sit still; we will check that.'
So I sat down. After about fifteen minutes, they started hitting me on
my knees with some metallic object. Then they tried my ankles and then
they moved to my elbows---you know, that funny place where it hurts the
most. I thought, 'This must be a part of their experiment,' and kept
quiet. But it became very persistent and painful. Then I slowly opened
my eyes and asked, 'Did I do something wrong?' All of them gave me a
weird look. I said, 'Why are you looking at me like this?' They said,
'Our monitors have gone flat. According to our machines, you were dead.'
I said, 'That is a great diagnosis!' Then they came up with a second
opinion. They said, 'You are either dead or you are brain-dead.' I said,
'I will take the first one. "I am dead" is okay with me. But don't call
me brain-dead, that is insulting.' This is what happens if you let
machines decide death. Your breath stopping, heart stopping or your
brain going flat on the monitors is not death. Only when the Pancha
Pranas exit the physical body completely it is death. When the breath
stops, or when what we call as death happens, the withdrawal of the
pranas happens over a period of time. All the pranas do not exit the
body at the same time. There is a definite pattern in which they exit.
This can be observed in some simple ways. For example, it is
well-documented that if you keep a dead body for over two to three days,
you will notice that the hair will grow. If it was a man and he used to
shave, you can see this from the facial hair. The nails will also grow.
Therefore, in countries where they preserve the dead bodies for a longer
time, the undertakers clip the nails and shave the beard. This is not
because the skin has dried or shrunk. Those factors may make a small
contribution, but it is mainly because hair and nails are special in a
way

because there is no sensation in those parts of the body even when you
are alive. There is no sensation in these parts because there is no
Prana Vayu in them even when you are alive, but the other vayus are
present there. So immediately after death, when Prana Vayu has exited
the body, these parts of the body are not affected much. This is why you
will observe minimal growth there until the other pranas exit the body.
It is only because the process of withdrawal of the pranas spans over a
period of time, there is a window of opportunity for outside
interventions and manipulations that can sometimes 'revive' the dead
person. It is only because of this it is possible to assist the dead in
their journey after death or allow for processes like transmigration. We
will be looking at this in more detail in Chapter 4. An overview of the
withdrawal process can be summarized as follows:

Samana Once the breath stops, the slow process of the five pranas
exiting the body will begin. Vayu Of these, Samana Vayu is in charge of
maintaining the temperature of the body. The first thing that happens
after death is that the body starts cooling down. Since the differential
between the atmospheric temperature and the body temperature is
significant, the Samana Vayu exits much faster than Prana Vayu. Within
twenty-one to twenty-four minutes from the breath stopping, Samana Vayu
exits the body completely. Prana Vayu

Once the breath stops, Prana Vayu also starts exiting the body. This
means the respiratory action and thought process will begin to recede
along with the withdrawal of Prana Vayu. Prana Vayu exits the body
completely within forty-eight to ninety minutes after the breath stops,
depending upon the nature of death. If it is a natural death out of old
age, it should be over within sixty-four minutes. But if it is a young
and vibrant body, then it can prolong up to ninety minutes. Till this
time, the respiratory and thought process is on, if not in the usual
sense, in a vague manner. This is why cremation should be deferred for
an hour and a half, at least. If you keep the body of the person whose
breath has stopped on earth or open soil, there is a possibility of
revival with a little intervention from the outside. If other aspects of
the system are conducive, then the soil and elements can reignite the
needed energy to revive life. This is why, in the olden days, dying
people were placed on the ground outside the house, hoping for revival.
But, today, with the body being laid on a cot or a concrete floor, the
chances of revival are very remote.

Udana Vayu

Between six and twelve hours after the breath stops, Udana Vayu exits.
Once Udana Vayu goes away, then the buoyancy in the body is also gone.
Suddenly, the body becomes heavy. The weight does not increase, but you
can feel the weight much more simply because Udana Vayu is gone. This is
why people feel a big difference between carrying a live person and a
dead person.

Apana Vayu

Somewhere between eight to eighteen hours after the breath has stopped,
Apana Vayu exits the body. Once Apana Vayu starts receding in a major
way, then the sensory aspect of the body is gone. Even after someone's
breath is gone and they are declared dead, they can still feel
sensations. There have been any number of cases where people get
terrified because a dead body moves a little bit. There could be mild
twitching in the body because the sensory activity is still on.

Vyana Vayu

Vyana Vayu, which is the preservative nature of prana, is the slowest to
exit. It will continue to do so for up to eleven to fourteen days if the
death is because of old age and life became feeble. If the death was
because of an accident when the life was still vibrant, unless the body
is totally crushed, the reverberations of this life will continue from
somewhere between forty-eight to ninety days. For that period, certain
processes will continue and there will still be some element of life.
During that time, there are things you can do to assist that life. This
is the opportunity that death rituals in the Indian culture attempt to
make use of.

So with this understanding, how would you define death? Fundamentally,
what we call death is a certain line, or a certain stage, in the process
of disembodiment. In that context, it is appropriate that in the English
language you don't diagnose someone as dead, you declare them as dead.
You declare someone dead when he or she does not respond to your
stimulus or when you do not have access to them any more.

An ordinary person may feel someone is dead if they do not respond to
their calls and other kinds of physical probing. But a medical
professional would not accept this. They have a more sophisticated
understanding of life and also have subtler tools and probes. They know
that with suitable interventions the life can be revived, and the person
can be brought back into the body. But if the process of disembodiment
has crossed a certain stage, then one will not be responsive to these
medical stimuli either. Such a person would be declared medically dead,
but this would still not be considered spiritual death in the Yogic
tradition. A person well versed in Yoga and Tantra has an even finer
understanding of life. They have much subtler tools and techniques to be
able to access that life and possibly restore it. So they would still
not declare them spiritually dead. However, if the process of
disembodiment has progressed beyond a certain point, then even they
cannot restore life into the body. Now, for all practical purposes, that
person is completely gone---he cannot be brought back at all. One can
only assist their further journey, 9 that is all. So the answer to the
question 'When is a person dead?' depends largely upon what the purpose
of the declaration is and what capability does one have to interact with
life at the different stages of disembodiment. The more capable you are,
the more leeway you will have in the situation.

Chakras: The Gateways of Exit The pranic system in the body comprises
various energy channels and their points of intersection, known as
chakras. There are a total of 114 such chakras, 112 of them in the body
and two outside the body. The chakras within the body are classified
into seven main categories of sixteen each. In life, the levels of
activation of these chakras greatly determine the quality of life led by
the person. Correspondingly, how energy moves through these chakras in
death determines the quality of the death too. So each death is
characterized not just by how the pranas

have exited the body but also through which chakra or chakras they
exited. Even if you are liberated within yourself, even if you have
attained a certain state within you, you still need a lot of skill to
leave the physical body consciously. You need to know the science of how
life and the body got connected and what you need to do to disentangle
it. Otherwise, you will not be able to leave the body consciously.
People who are on the Yogic path can simply sit in the open and
leave---just like dropping one's clothes and walking away, because they
know the science of how to leave the body. Depending upon how much skill
and freedom with which someone left the body and from which chakra they
left the body, the situation around each death will be different. For
the sake of simplicity, we talk mostly of only the seven main chakras in
the body. 10 Each is given a name and has certain qualities. For a very
gross person, or if someone leaves in fear---which happens to a lot of
people---they end up leaving through the Muladhara Chakra , located at
the perineum. This is why you will see that at the time of death, many
people will pass urine and faeces with a certain force. This is not
because of incontinence, as people think, but because the prana has left
through the Muladhara Chakra. This is not a good way to die. If we are
not able to leave the body at will, at least we should be able to
welcome it and allow it to happen rather than resist it and struggle
with fear. Generally, if one leaves through the Muladhara Chakra, it is
considered a very base exit. But in rare cases, one who consciously
exits through the Muladhara Chakra can come back with enormous occult
powers.

One who exits through the Swadhishthana Chakra , located in and above
the genital organ, can be reborn with extraordinary creative prowess.
One who exits through the Manipura Chakra , located just below the
navel, can be capable of a very organized sense of action. One may
become a great business person or a great general. Essentially, a genius
of organization in his or her next life. One who exits through the
Anahata Chakra , where the ribcage meets, can become a prodigy in music
or the arts. One may also become a very sensitive poet or a devotee who
can inspire many. The Anahata Chakra also has the possibility of finding
access to all the other dimensions so one could be a potential polymath.
For someone to exit through the Vishuddhi Chakra , situated at the pit
of the throat, is very rare. But if that happens, one will possess an
incredible perception of this world and the beyond. Such a person will
also exist in an absolute sense of dispassion and fearless involvement
in

all aspects of life. A phenomenal sense of clarity will be predominant
in them. Though the Agna Chakra , located between the eyebrows, is of a
higher order, it is more common for people to exit through the Agna
Chakra than the Vishuddhi Chakra. A person who is fully conscious will
leave through their Sahasrara Chakra , from the top of their head. That
is the best way to leave. Normally the prana just leaves, but sometimes
it actually leaves a physical hole there at the moment of death. If you
know, the bit of the skull at the top of the head is not yet formed in
infants for quite some time. That spot is called the brahmarandhra . For
some people, when they leave the body, an actual hole will be found
there. When one leaves through their Sahasrara Chakra, it means that
they were fully conscious. If you want that moment of death to happen in
full awareness, you have to live a life of awareness. Otherwise, at that
moment, there is no way you are going to be aware. One who is conscious
can leave whichever way one wants, but one who is unconscious simply
goes in a fixed way---because their life was a bondage, so death is also
a bondage. If at the moment of death, a person can be 100 per cent
aware, that person will not have to go through rebirth. They will not
take another body---they are released.

CHAPTER 3

The Quality of Death

No two people in the world live their lives the same way. Similarly, no
two people die the same way. People may die in the same situation, of
the same cause, but still they don't die the same way.

Types of Deaths Now, are there some deaths that are good and some others
that are bad? You must know that no two people in the world live their
lives the same way. They may be siblings, living in the same house and
doing the same things, but even then their experience of life will not
be the same. Similarly, no two people die the same way. People may die
in the same situation, of the same cause, but still they don't die the
same way. Right now, if the sky falls upon us and all of us get crushed
under it and die, still, we will not die the same way. It once happened:
a rich man built a big house for his family. It has been a tradition in
India that when you build a new house, you want to welcome some sage or
saint or yogi to your house. They don't do it any more because today
there is too much housing and not enough yogis. So this man invited a
yogi to his house. They welcomed him like a king and did pada pooja 1
and many other poojas. Then they served him a great meal. Then when the
time came to leave, the husband and wife bowed down to him, asking for a
blessing, as per the tradition. The yogi raised his hand and said,
'First, may your father die, then you die and then your children die.'
Hearing this, the man became furious. He said, 'What nonsense! We
invited you to our new house, treated you like a king, fed you well and
you say that first my father should die, then I should die, then my
children should die? What is this rubbish?' The yogi was shocked, 'Why,
did I say something wrong? Is it not good if your father dies first,
then you die and then your children die? That means life will

be in its natural cycle. Before your father dies, if you die, that is
not good. Before you die, if your children die, that is not good at all.
So first your father must die, then you must die, then your children
must die.' In recent times, there has been growing awareness about the
quality of death, and just as there is a Quality of Life Index, people
have created a Quality of Death Index too. Furthermore, as people create
'life goals' for themselves, there is growing awareness that one should
set 'death goals' as well. This is a welcome change; however, they are
working with a very superficial understanding of the quality of death,
as such. People think that if one is free of pain and suffering, if one
does not struggle with it, if one does not die suddenly and if one does
not die alone but instead is surrounded by loved ones while dying, then
it is a good death. On the other hand, they think if someone dies
suddenly or violently, then it is a bad death. These considerations are
very medical and social. Existentially, they are not very significant.
In India, deaths were classified taking into account deeper and
existential factors as to how the death occurred. This is important
because it has a considerable impact on what happens after death and
what kind of assistance can be provided to the person who has died.
Traditionally, in India, people classified deaths as only two kinds---
timely death (Su-mrutyu ) and untimely death (Akaal Mrutyu ). If a yogi
left his or her body consciously at the age of thirty, we don't say it
is untimely. It is timely for them because they decide the time. We call
a death untimely when someone has intent to live, that is, they still
have Prarabdha Karma to work out, but suddenly something strikes them
down and they die. Their body collapsed when the intent was on full
scale---this is an untimely death. If intent itself has gone away, it is
not untimely; it is very timely for that life. Chronological age,
whether you are thirty-five or sixty-five or ninety-five years old is
not the point. The criterion is that the intent is gone. Then, in terms
of life, it is a timely death. I cannot give you an accurate percentage,
but I think we can easily say that more than 80 per cent of the people
do not die a natural death or a timely death any more. Their death is
unnatural or untimely because they die while their intent is still on.
This is

unfortunate, and it has a bearing upon how the death happens and what
happens after that. In a natural or timely death, Prarabdha Karma, or
the information that runs the life, runs out and life becomes feeble.
When the information runs out, life peters out slowly and this is not
torturous. This is very beautiful. When your Prarabdha Karma runs out,
even if you lived a bad life, the last few moments will become very
peaceful, wonderful and perceptive. Suddenly, you will see people become
so wise. They are not attached to anything around them; they show an
extraordinary sense of maturity---something they failed to show
throughout their life. This is because it is a natural death. Natural
death is not a bad death. It is a good thing for you and a good thing
for those you are leaving behind because you are not being forced out of
your body. For this to happen, you need to empty your Prarabdha Karma
before your body wears out. How rapidly you empty your Prarabdha Karma
depends on how quickly you move from one aspect of life to another. If
you are eighty and still think like a teenager wanting to romance
someone, your Prarabdha Karma will not run out. If, at eighty, you are
not rid of what you should have done at sixteen or eighteen and you
still want to go sit on the street side and watch women walking by, then
your Prarabdha Karma will not run out. Now, it will not matter if you
live to be a hundred, you will still die an unnatural death because the
body will run out, but the Prarabdha Karma will not. If a person dies
naturally, he or she clearly knows that they are going to die and you
will see they will display extraordinary wisdom. That possibility is
being completely obliterated in the so-called modern society because
everyone is trying to be immortal at any cost, and they will die a bad
death because of that. You can die well only if you accept your
mortality. There is another kind of death, called Iccha Mrutyu (loosely
translated as 'death by choice'), which, in a sense, is not death, but
actually the transcendence of the cycle of birth and death. This can
happen when a person is into spiritual sadhana and has achieved such a
mastery over their energies that they are able to untangle their life
energies from the physical body without damaging it. The person has
understood where the keys to his or her karmic structure are and is able
to dismantle it

completely. Such a person becomes truly no more. This is considered the
highest kind of death. This is also referred to as Mahasamadhi in the
Hindu tradition and Mahaparinirvana in the Buddhist tradition. In
English, we simply call it Liberation, meaning one has become free from
the very process of life, birth and death. One has become free from the
basic structures of body and mind or free from the karmic structure
which holds these things together. To use the earlier analogy, one has
burst the bubble completely. This is the ultimate goal for every
spiritual seeker.

Predictions of Death One of the most common questions people have for
astrologers and fortune tellers is: 'How long will I live?' 'When will I
die?' If life follows a certain rationale, then is it possible to
determine when it will end as well? More precisely, we saw how it is
karma, the software of life, that determines the span and the nature of
life. So is it possible to somehow read this and be able to predict
death? Now, just as karma is impressed upon your physical body and
mental body, it is also impressed upon your energy body. As the allotted
karma, or Prarabdha Karma, is reaching completion, the pranic body's
ability to hold on to the physical body recedes. Life, as you know it,
which is physical, will begin to lose its vibrancy. At the same time,
the subtle body gathers more vibrancy because the physical body is
losing its grip on the subtle. This is the reason why you might have
noticed that sometimes even a person who has lived a gross life seems to
carry an ethereal peace about them during the last few days preceding
their death. Such a person, you will see, suddenly becomes wise. This
usually happens for people whose awareness becomes acute. However, if
someone is dying a natural death, then with a little bit of
awareness---at least six to eight months in advance---one can clearly
see it coming. Actually, many people unknowingly start talking about it.
They start making strange statements and behave strangely. This is not
out of psychological degeneration; unconsciously they blurt out this and
that. Later on, after they are dead, people look back and say that he or
she had said this or did something which was indicative that they were
aware of

their impending death. An uncle of mine even knew the exact date and
time of his death. Death is not something that will happen suddenly; it
builds up over time. Many a time, the body is setting forth the process.
The person may not be fully conscious of it---the mind may not be alert
enough to grasp it, but the body speaks it in many ways. Apparently,
there have been some studies examining the blood work of people who were
killed violently---through crime or accidents. Their blood tests were
done on a whim or just by chance or, for some other reason, a little
prior to their death---no one knew they were going to die, but by
chance, they got it done. And those reports were found to be completely
haywire. They spoke a different language altogether. I don't know how
far this is true, but this sort of thing is quite possible because it
may have nothing to do with the physiological problems. As the body
approaches its end, the entire body starts speaking the language of
death at that time. So is it possible to predict death? Yes, it is
possible, but it is very limited and highly exaggerated. If I see a
coconut tree, looking at the age and the health of the coconut tree, I
can say when it will first bear flower, when it will bear fruit. I can
also foretell approximately when it will die. I can tell you all this
right now, but in between now and that time, if you chop the coconut
tree down, the prediction becomes false. This is true for human beings
too. Whatever the horoscopes say, someone can die just like that. A
whole lot of people in the world died yesterday in an accident or from
disease or some such thing. Do you think all their horoscopes said they
were going to die yesterday? No. They all said 'long life', but they
died at twenty-five. You may have heard of this: traditionally, in
India, before one marries off their children to someone, they always
scrutinize the horoscopes of the two people. They do this because they
want to make sure that the temperaments of the two people are
compatible. They also want to make sure that their children have a long
and prosperous life. Yet, it has happened many times that even after all
this, the man who they got their daughter married to died in a few days.
Of course, if they were able to know that he was going to die in three
days, they would never have got their girl married to him. This is not
to say that there is no basis to these

calculations. It is just that these calculations are very limited in
scope and their significance is exaggerated. One's death is usually set
in relation to one's solar cycles, which are approximately twelve years
each. In other words, the phase or segment of the solar cycle in which
you will die is largely set. The day and time are not very relevant
because it need not necessarily happen exactly like that. You can take a
few more breaths, or some medic may pump something into you, and you may
live a little longer. All these things can happen. But if you have the
necessary perception and look at a person, it could be easily determined
as to which segment of the solar cycle he or she will go in. It has
happened that it looks like the person is going to die by such and such
time, even their medical parameters indicate death, but still I have
said they are not going to die now. That is because they are in the
wrong segment of their solar cycle to die. Even in their designated
segment, if they pass just that ailment or situation, they may not die
because the death may get pushed for some more rounds. There are many
Indian historical stories where people have chosen a certain time to go.
Not just very accomplished yogis, even kings and others have chosen when
to die. I am sure everyone has heard of Bhishma, 2 of course. He was
completely shot up with arrows during the Mahabharata war. (That he was
lying on a bed of arrows is more of a poetic expression of the fact that
he had many arrow wounds.) Yet he hung around until that time because
his segment had not come. He wished to die in Uttarayana 3 because he
wanted to leave in a certain solar segment. Predictions are basically
about estimating the probability of an event occurring, based on certain
things which could turn out to be accurate. Right now, I can look at the
sky and say if it will rain today or not. I have been right 90 per cent
of the time but sometimes I was wrong. It is the same thing with life.
There is no perfect estimate, but the more knowledgeable you are, the
more accurate your estimates can be. Predicting death is also like this.
This is like if you look at the speed, the angle, the ambient conditions
and all that, you can with some certainty say where the projectile will
land. Rockets, missiles, artillery fire or a golf ball are all worked
upon by

adjusting the angle and the speed of the projectile. Similarly, reading
your energy, how you are working out your Prarabdha Karma and various
other aspects of you, we can say, 'Okay, this is how the trajectory of
life will be.' Based on this, in this culture, it was common for someone
who was well versed with these things to look at someone and say death
is nearing for this person. So they would say, 'You better go to Kashi 4
now.' But some people went to Kashi and ended up living there for twenty
or thirty years. That has also happened. With elaborate calculations,
one can say this is how many years your body will last. But in between,
if you start doing Inner Engineering, 5 you can surprise the guy making
the prediction, because those practices can change the trajectory of
your life and he was unable to factor that. This is why, traditionally,
astrologers said: 'If you are on the spiritual path, we will not make a
prediction for you.' Because with spiritual practices, you are tampering
with these calculations. You may die sooner or much later. All the other
things he said also may happen or may not happen. Predictions may be
accurate or off the mark, but when death is imminent, it can be
perceived in different ways. If you are around animals, you will see
that certain animals can sense death. Dogs, cats, cobras and many other
carnivorous animals can also smell death because, in a way, death has a
smell. All the subtler aspects of the physical have their own smells.
All carnivores have a special sense of smell because their entire
survival process is in their nostrils. They have hearing and vision too,
but these are not as keen as their sense of smell. If they want to know
something, they don't look---they just smell it out. So because they
have such a keen sense of smell, most carnivorous animals know the onset
of death. They can even smell death in advance. Not months ahead, but
within forty-eight days it can definitely be sensed. Human beings can
know it too. For example, with the kind of diet our brahmacharis eat,
very easily one can develop a very keen sense of smell for these kinds
of things. Once the vayus 6 start exiting, there is a certain smell to
them. This is something even modern science is finding out. They have
found that humans have a unique 'death smell' which can be used to train
dogs to find human cadavers. They have isolated some eight key chemical

compounds that make up the human scent of death. They say humans share
this with pigs, for whatever reasons! You can even smell a ghost because
a ghost is just a subtle physical form that can be smelled. All dogs can
do this. When there is a ghost, they start barking because they can
smell the ghost. They cannot see, but they can smell it, so they get
confused. They go and sit in one corner, put their tails between their
legs and bark. They can see that nothing is happening around, but there
is some activity going on, which makes them very nervous. Yet smell is
not the only indicator of death. You can even see death coming. This
happened with one of our residents at the Yoga Center. Just before a
large event in Erode one day, I was talking to three or four of our
teachers about the arrangements for the event. This resident, who was
also a teacher, was standing there. His wife was also a teacher, and she
was there too. I looked at him and I did not do anything. I simply
ignored him. Now, I never ever look at a person and ignore that person.
That is not in me at all. Whoever they are, at least I will nod or do
namaskaram or smile at them. I will definitely acknowledge their
presence in some way. Always. So, after the event, suddenly this
incident came to my mind, 'Why did I do this? I did not acknowledge
him.' I thought, 'Why?' Then the next evening, I asked, 'Where is he?'
They said, 'He has gone to the Himalayas.' I let it pass; I did not pay
attention. You know, in our lives, there is no time to dwell upon
anything, given the pace at which events happen at Isha. If there was a
little time to dwell upon it, it would have been different. I thought
about this and I left it. Three days later, he just drowned in a stream
in the Himalayas. When he was in front of me, there was a certain lack
of presence that was so glaring that I did not respond to him physically
standing in front of me. When there is an imminent death, the defined
boundaries of the body will be somewhat diffused, which will dilute
one's physical presence in our vision. The experience of the physical is
essentially because of its defined boundaries; when that is diffused,
our visual experience is lowered. If I had not been so focused on going
on stage for the event, if I had paid a little attention, I would have
just told him. And normally---at least it was so at that time---if
someone wanted to go to the

Himalayas or such places, they would always tell me and go. But these
people---the resident, his wife and a few other people---decided to go
without telling me. His death happened accidentally, but if it had not
happened that way, it would have happened some other way. He was heading
for it, and it was so visible, but I did not pay enough attention at
that time. So then are there signs that a common man can observe to be
able to predict one's death? Yes, definitely. The transition from life
to death is a transition from a certain level of dynamism to a certain
level of inertia. When this happens, there are certain things you can
certainly notice within yourself. There are certain sure signs which can
tell you, but it is such a complex process, it can always go wrong.
Another reason why this is difficult is that people are no longer
sensitive to what their body expresses on a daily basis. The body keeps
changing all the time---even on a day-to-day basis, even within the day,
the body is changing all the time. With everything, we have become
modern, so we don't know a thing about these aspects. Most people don't
even know when it is a full moon or a new moon without looking at the
calendar. But the body clearly reads these things. If you are able to
read these expressions, you will definitely know where the body is
heading. Some very simple signs are very noticeable in the sense organs.
For example, a person for whom this transition towards death has begun
will not be able to look at the tip of their nose. Even a person with a
short nose can still look at the tip of their nose in normal conditions,
but when the process of death has started, your eyeballs will not focus.
For those who are practising Bhrumadhya Sadhana , 7 they will suddenly
see that the eyeballs will wander like they are loose. They cannot go
there. With breath also, it is very noticeable. When you breathe, if you
observe carefully, you will see that once the process of death is near,
the breath will not go into the lower lobe of the lung. You will breathe
mainly from the middle and upper lobes. It is to help the organs shut
down one by one. But maybe you are an asthmatic, or someone who breathes
like that most of the time, so you don't have to think, 'I am going to
die.' If you are very conscious of the different agni s 8 in the body,
you will notice when certain dimensions of fire are gone. Once it is
gone, you

know it is only a question of a limited amount of time. Foreseeing death
up to four to six months is very much a possibility. So at that time, if
you become meditative, you will go peacefully and joyfully, and the
shutting down will happen well. Otherwise, if you fight it and do this
and that, you will leave in ugly ways; it may become painful and
disturbed . I can say a few more things about it, but we must understand
the consequence of what we say. People will not keep this to themselves.
They will look at someone, and if their beard looks a little yellowish,
they will make a prediction that this person will die in three days
because someone told them it is a sign. They will not keep quiet about
it. They will tell this person and everyone around him that he is going
to die in three days. They will even gather around him just to watch the
prediction come true. Just the level of confusion and nonsense they will
create will be huge. And if this person does not die, they may think
they have to help him! I am not saying there is no relevance at all to
knowing when one will die. We could also help people a little more with
this. But there is no saying how people will use or misuse these things
or confuse themselves completely. Above all, if they notice some signs
in themselves---right or wrong---they might think they are going to die
in three days. And instead of becoming more peaceful and calm, they will
become fearful. All this is possible. This is why it is said that you
must be ready for death every moment of your life. You should live your
life in such a way that if you were to drop dead the next moment, you
still have ended it reasonably well. You trying to deal with it at the
last moment is not the way. Moreover, if you understand that you are
mortal, you look at it all the time. And if you are looking at it all
the time, you will notice it. When it is time, you will know how to sit
in a conducive place and die. That is the best way.

Negative Energies Using negative energies to cause harm to someone else
is a very ancient practice in the world. In India, they made a whole
science of it. Of the four Vedas, 9 the Atharvana Veda is all about
occult practices. It also talks extensively about how to use the
energies to your advantage and to

someone else's detriment. It explains how if someone who has mastery
over this wants to use it, extreme suffering and even death can be
caused. There is no doubt about it. One simple way people try to hurt
others is through a curse. Now, what is a curse? It is a certain level
of black, negative thought that is directed towards you. Because of
this, you become sick. When this happens, if you don't find a good
doctor, you can become mentally unstable or even die. In the olden days,
most people who became mentally unstable would die in a very short time
because they would do something which would kill them. Either that or
they would not eat and just run themselves down. Only a certain kind of
people who were in a state of peaceful madness or pleasant madness would
last long. It is possible for curses to even kill the person who curses.
If they don't know how to let out the poison they generate, it could
kill them. Or it could kill someone else. Right now, let us say, someone
wants to curse you to death. They have generated a certain amount of
blackness in their minds and let it out, but you happen to be a little
away, or in some way, you are not available to this. Another person who
happens to be close by may receive the curse and die instead. This is
like every time you fire a gun, it is not necessary you hit the person
that you aim at; you may hit some bystander. In fact, it is a bystander
that gets hit most of the time. Some people suffer unexplained levels of
tragedies or disturbance after they visited a certain place. Everything
goes wrong in their life. Then, suddenly, they recover one day and
become okay. It is very dangerous to say these things because then
people will start imagining things and create a lot of drama about it.
But at the same time, it is very much possible that other influences
that they are not conscious of have touched them. Today, you need not be
too worried about people trying to harm you because there are not too
many people who can do occult or black arts. Even if there are people
who claim to do these things, they are of doubtful capabilities. In the
past, everyone had a family witch doctor just as they had a family
doctor or lawyer. This used to be so in southern India and to some
extent in the north also---they would not do anything

without consulting them. That tradition has more or less died out
completely. What we see of these things today is mostly exaggerated fear
and little understanding of the tradition. Human imagination has no
control and, unfortunately, there are many charlatans who are using fear
as the key. If there is fear, negative impact will keep happening,
because fear itself is black art. Otherwise, why would people get scared
in a horror movie? They scream, they hold hands in fear, some even get
up and run away, when we all know it is only light falling from the
projector. If you simply keep your hand across the projector, the ghost
is finished. Everyone knows this. Still, all the drama keeps happening.
People are not acting scared; it is actually happening to them. So, in
many instances, fear itself can work like black art---you don't have to
do more. Essentially, the entire Atharvana Veda is about how to use your
energies to create well-being or destroy one's life. Because these arts
are like double-edged swords; you can swing it both ways. Manifesting or
avoiding illness, death or disaster is also possible. If one wants to be
able to kill someone, it is not that simple. It takes a lot to actually
cause death to someone unless they manage to put something in the food.
I don't mean a chemical poison; there are certain energetically charged
forms that could be put in the food, which would enter the system.
Depending upon how vulnerable you are to these things, accordingly, at
that pace and intensity, these things would grow within you. As it grows
in the system, it slowly destroys everything about the person. It can
eventually cause death. But to be able to do this, one would need access
to the person's food. Without that, causing death to someone would take
a lot. I think there are only a handful of people in the world today who
could do that---as acquiring such capabilities will demand extreme
striving and risk to their own well-being and life. This, fortunately,
is a deterrent. Most of these people are using the psychology of fear to
make things happen, but they can certainly cause a lot of disturbance.
Beyond psychological factors, they can cause havoc in the energy system
and in turn in the body. In terms of disturbance, it is relatively
easier to disturb people mentally. This is so especially for women. A
woman has a greater

biological responsibility of bearing a child and keeping the race going,
so she goes through phases in her physiology, which makes her vulnerable
at certain times. In terms of harm, harming the body is not so easy to
do. The body is an organism which is reinventing itself every day in so
many ways. When I say reinventing itself, let us say, you eat 1 kilogram
of food. Of this kilogram of food, at least about 300--400 grams become
the body. So a certain reinvention and recycling is happening in the
body. Because it is reinventing itself every day in a certain way, the
body has protection of its own. If you want to do something to the body,
let us say, cause some ailment to the person, it will take much more
capability to do that than to psychologically freak someone out. The
content of the mind keeps spinning on old things, so psychologically
freaking someone out is the easiest thing to do. Of the five elements
that make our body, water, because of its liquid nature, is the easiest
to influence. In the science of bhoota shuddhi , 10 thought, emotion and
blood are all under the management of the water element. Considering
their vulnerability, it is natural for evil intentions to aim towards
the water element in our system. If someone wants to do something
physiologically, the easiest thing to affect is the blood. When someone
is under some kind of negative energies or that kind of influence, their
blood work will go crazy. This is always the sign. This is not in any
way connected with any of the organ functions. Every day, it will
manifest differently because blood is the flowing part of who you are.
After the mind, blood is the most susceptible thing. The next thing that
can be affected is your liver or your kidneys because, once again,
certain things flow through these. But if someone wants to cause a heart
attack to a person, that is very difficult, because the heart just
pumps--- there is no chemical process. Sometimes, there are certain
types of people who manage to cause neurological disorders also. But by
and large, these are the main kinds of harm they can cause to a person.
In the twenty-first century, it is very hard to believe that such things
are possible, but unfortunately they do exist. Above all, it is
vulnerability of fear that generally does a large part of the work. If
one, either through

devotion or meditativeness, comes to a sense of fearlessness, that is
the simplest way of being above such base arts.

How to Get Rid of Negative Impact If one is already suffering from the
ill effects of the black arts, what is the best way to rid oneself of
these effects? There are many ways to sort out these situations; one
simple way is to be in the space of the Dhyanalinga for three days. If
you notice, there are two shrines at the very entrance of the
Dhyanalinga---the Vanashree and Patanjali shrines. Together, they form a
15-degree angle with the Dhyanalinga. This is created so that these
negative influences are just taken care of as people enter the space,
even before they seek anything else. If people just walk in that space
for about 60 or 70 feet towards the Dhyanalinga, these negativities will
be removed. A human mind is a structure with a million rooms. When one
accidentally breaks into a new segment of one's mind, what they know or
do not know and their basic character may change; sometimes even new
languages may surface. And this could be easily misunderstood as being
possessed by a new force. Once inside the dome, those who think they are
possessed by some beings or who are impacted by the occult and such
problems should sit either within the 15-degree angle in front of the
Dhyanalinga or behind it. That space has been specially created to
remove these influences. People who are affected by these negative
influences should come to the Dhyanalinga on three specific days: one
day before the new moon, on the new moon and the day after the new moon.
They should offer a lemon on each of these days to the Dhyanalinga. They
can also sit in the Linga Bhairavi 11 and do an abhishekam , and it will
be over. A Linga Bhairavi Yantra 12 can also definitely take care of it.
If one has such a powerful energy form in one's house, there is no
worry. But the Linga Bhairavi Yantra has a limited range that is
effective for only around 2000--2500 square feet. Even that depends on
the layout of the house. Suppose a house is in a zigzag shape, then the
fringes of the house may be out of range. The Linga Bhairavi Avighna
Yantra may work for

4000 square feet, but, again, it needs to be centrally located in the
house for maximum benefit. If people are in touch with it, negative
energies will not individually affect them. That is for sure. Having a
Linga Bhairavi Yantra or Avighna Yantra may not be possible for
everyone. So a simple fix is to come and spend some time at the
Dhyanalinga. It is a big yantra. They can come and make use of it. If
there is something very serious, where we think something terrible may
happen to them, we can prepare some other device, but we have done that
only once or twice. It takes lots of work to do it. It is not the good
kind of work, not the kind of work I like. Consecrating an Adiyogi or a
Devi or something like that is a joy. These are terrible things to do,
but they are useful. If there is strong sadhana, one does not have to
worry about all these things. For such a person, all these things don't
matter. For example, if the brahmacharis sit in Siddhasana, 13 with
their eyeballs rolled up intensely, it will all be gone in two minutes.
Then one can go and sleep in the cremation ground and still be perfectly
fine. They said Shiva always slept in the cremation ground to convey
that it does not matter where the hell one is, when, internally, one is
fully fired up. But for regular people who are constantly influenced by
what is around them, periodic purifications are needed. Otherwise,
slowly, inertia will set in. These are not big things. But these small
things can slow down people. This is happening to people all the time.
You might have picked it up in so many places; you don't know. It can
come from the food that you eat, the places that you walk upon, or the
air that you breathe. It could even be just the atmospheres that you
went into or certain spaces that you came in contact with, and so on. It
can make life difficult because, now, certain inertia has set in. It is
extra weight, that is all. But if you have just a little extra load, you
will see everything suddenly becomes much more effortful. So it is
always best to do some sort of periodic cleansing of these things.
Traditionally, there were systems in this society where people
periodically went through some cleansing. This is also the significance
of people taking a dip in the river in all the holy places in India. You
go and dip yourself three times in the river---in flowing water---it
becomes

a big cleansing. This is one reason why people bathed in rivers. It is a
simple way to cleanse yourself from these influences. Of course, today,
you cannot dip yourself in a river because flowing rivers are so few,
and even those are highly polluted. But if there is a good river, and if
you bathe every day in the river, that is a simple way of washing off
everything. It is klesha nashana , 14 where, instead of fire, you use
flowing water to cleanse. A shower is not very effective for this
because, in most places, the shower does not have that much volume of
water to make a difference. Using at least a mug or a bucket is better.
Teerthakund, 15 of course, will do the job. Rain is also good klesha
nashana. Rainwater can do wonders to one's energy. These are simple ways
by which one can protect oneself from the little bits of negative
influences that one may have gathered unconsciously.

Suicide: A Perspective Suicide is one classification of death that has
become a growing epidemic of our times, even though our generation of
people have more comfort and convenience than any other in the history
of humankind. Today, there are many studies that suggest a large
percentage of the population has contemplated suicide at least once in
their lives. Among these, a significant percentage of people have
attempted suicide at least once. Currently, in the United States, more
people kill themselves every year than those who get killed by homicide
and war put together. And more people die of suicide than road accidents
in recent times. This is an indicator of things going seriously wrong
with humanity. So is there any reason or cause for so many people to
feel suicidal? Well, there is really no good or bad reason to commit
suicide. They just need a reason, that is all. And you can make any
reason a good enough one if you want to. If you want, today, from
morning till evening, you can find a hundred reasons as to why you
should not live. As for me, I am always searching for a reason to live.
16 Otherwise, I have no reason. So it is not a question of higher or
lower reason; it is just that people find a reason, something that
pushes them sufficiently to do that.

For a majority of people, they feel suicidal because life isn't
happening the way they want. Except for medical reasons, the rest is
largely because of unrealistic expectations. You are just a tiny speck
in this Creation. If you look at yourself in the context of Creation as
a whole, you are nothing. If you understand that you are nothing, you
will be only too glad that things are happening to whatever extent they
are. You will be too glad that when you are a bloody nothing---when you
don't know one thing from another, when you are sitting on this planet,
in the middle of nowhere, in this vast existence---at least you are
breathing, your heart is beating, you are living and everything is
working out well. You don't know anything, nor can you control it, nor
can you manage it, but still it is happening well. So if you understand
the real context of life, you would only be too glad to be alive. It
once happened: a salesman decided to venture into a new housing
development. He thought no other salesmen would have gone there because
it was a new development. He wanted to be the first one, the early bird.
So he knocked on the very first house that he saw there. A lady came and
opened the door. Without giving her a chance to speak, he slipped into
her house, took a lot of cow dung from his bag and threw it all over the
new carpet. He said, 'See, I have a wonder vacuum cleaner. Watch this, I
will clean this carpet without leaving the slightest odour. If I don't
do it, I will eat every piece of this dung myself.' The lady asked,
'Would you like some tomato sauce to go with it because we still do not
have electricity in the house.' If you feel you have a bad deal in life,
and you should commit suicide because of it, what you really need is a
little bit of tomato sauce. Eating just dung, you feel like dying. With
tomato sauce, it tastes a little better, and then you suddenly want to
live. There are many people for whom life is not happening the way they
want it to, but they don't turn suicidal because they have hope that
tomorrow things will be better. The poor man on the street buys a
lottery ticket, so he has to live for a month at least, until the
results are out. He has the hope that when he wins the lottery, he will
live like a king. After the results are out, there is the next lottery
for him. This is how he keeps going. He does not turn suicidal. But for
the rich man, the lottery has already happened, and he knows it does not
make too much of a difference. There is a deep

sense of hopelessness. It is not that you have to consciously seek
suicide. You will become death-oriented because the experience of life
has become unpleasant. It is only natural that you will try to dodge
anything that is unpleasant. This is why, unless you make your
experience of life very sweet, you will naturally become death-oriented,
not life-oriented. Fundamentally, people want to commit suicide because
in some way they don't know how to handle life. It is like you want to
find a permanent solution to a temporary situation in life. That is all
it is. Either they don't know how to handle their emotions, thoughts,
physical ailment, financial or family situation---there is something
they don't know how to handle. When you are trapped in that situation,
it may look like it is the end of the world in your understanding.
Essentially, you do not know how to handle a specific aspect of your
life. So you think the best thing is to end life. It is ignorance,
ignorance about the nature of life. In my perception, I would say about
5 per cent of people are committing suicide because of incurable
diseases which they don't know how to handle. It is so painful and
horrible that they feel it is better to die. Another 2--3 per cent of
the people are committing suicide because they are trapped in horrible
situations---they are in a war zone, or in the hands of an enemy, or
somewhere else where they are being superexploited and have no way to
get away from it. There may be another 10--15 per cent who are
committing suicide for financial reasons because they feel trapped in a
society which is ruled by money. They may have a family and end up
without any money, and they just don't know what to do with themselves.
They will end up on the street and have a horrible life. They cannot
think of themselves being like a homeless man out there begging for food
and living; they just cannot imagine the indignity of that. So they
commit suicide. So about 20 per cent of the people committing suicide
need to be treated compassionately because life has been cruel to them
in some way. These are people who are being tortured by the world. The
world is not compassionate to them, and they get trapped in certain
kinds of debilitating situations. Unfortunately, they decide to take
their own life, because, if they live, it is worse. For these people, it
is the world that

needs to be fixed. A lot of fixing is needed in the world because
sometimes people do terrible things to each other. There is also a small
percentage of people who want to end their life just like that, not for
any reason. They have nothing else to do today, so they want to end it.
Trust me, there are people like that! I am talking about a life that
just wants to end. They have no suffering, no depression, nothing.
Simply, they feel like dying today. I could safely say about 2--5 per
cent of the people have that tendency. This is another kind. Then there
are those on the spiritual path who think they should end it. When
someone is spiritually evolving, a moment like this comes because your
intellect is not able to grasp the profoundness of the experience that
is happening to you. So, today, let us say, you sat down in meditation
and felt like you were totally bodiless. Then the first thing your mind
says is, 'Maybe I am ready to leave.' It will try to interpret it as,
'It is enough; everything has happened.' Really! There are people at the
Yoga Center who keep writing to me every six months, saying, 'I think I
am just ready to leave.' But when I ask them not to eat one meal, they
struggle with even that! These people must understand that their
interpretation of what is happening is completely wrong because they
don't have an intellect capable of grasping what the hell is happening
within them. For every little experience beyond the body, your mind or
intellect may start saying, 'Oh, I am ready to die.' No, you are not
ready to die. It is just that with any dimension of experience beyond
physicality, you think it is death. You don't understand there is a
whole dimension of Existence, which is beyond the body, which is for the
living---not for the dead. Unfortunately, most people enter that realm
only with death, that is a different matter. But the nature of the
intellect is such: 'Okay, if this is not life, what else is it? This
must be death.' So these people think they should die. People who are on
the spiritual path who feel, every now and then, that their time has
come, need firm guidance. This is why spiritual processes were always
conducted tightly under the supervision of a Guru. Your spiritual
process is not yours; it is his. This looks scary in the twenty-first
century, but that much discipline needs to be maintained in

spiritual seekers so that there is no question of you jumping into
something because of the wrong conclusions you make in the process of
your evolution. You should know that if life is not making enough sense
to you, it is obvious that you don't have enough sense. Instead of
seeing that 'I lack sense,' you are projecting that life does not make
sense. Of the remaining people, there are those who kill themselves
because they have a predisposition towards suicide. They want to
terminate life even if there are no external stimuli for doing so. If
you notice, there is always a small percentage of people who are
suicidal no matter what you do. No matter how you counsel them or what
treatment you give, they will keep going back to being suicidal over and
over again. For some reason, in these people, their karmic software has
developed a glitch, and it keeps attempting to shut down again and
again. These are a different kind. For the rest of the people, their
urge to commit suicide is fundamentally rooted in ignorance. Usually,
people who are struggling hard in difficult situations will never commit
suicide. Even though a thousand things don't happen the way they want,
they will work harder, but they will not commit suicide. But people who
sit in one place and think life is not happening the way they want will
commit suicide because they are dwelling on that. Probably, more things
in my life are not happening the way I want, than in your life. But I
don't dwell on that because I have a thousand other things to do. If you
sit alone in a room and go on thinking about how many things are not
happening your way, you will feel like ending your life. That is how it
is. However, for the majority of people, this thing about them wanting
to end their life is just a lot of drama. Please see, whenever you feel
suicidal, it is only because life is not happening the way you want it
to happen. Today, if life is not going the way you want it to go, you
want to end your life. But if things get a little better tomorrow
morning, you will start making plans for the future. By tomorrow
morning, if something is going right, you want to live, and you want to
live long enough to have your third baby. You even want to have
grandchildren. But when everything looks bleak, you think of suicide.
This is a self-destructive game that you are playing in your mind; there
is no existential basis to it.

Succour for the Suicidal If you honestly look at it, in the grand scale
of things, you are really of no consequence in this Existence. Whether a
thousand bubbles are floating in the air or 999, what is the big
difference? How many human beings like you and me have come and gone?
But some people think they have a God-given purpose and God made them
especially for something. Now, when things don't happen that way, they
will freak out because they have such grand ideas about themselves, they
have become too important in their own thought process. Once you have
become too important in your own thought process, you will be like a
tyrant, super confident and bombastic. A diffident person will sit there
and get miserable for the same reason. So between the two of them, who
is more stupid? I think the miserable one is more stupid. But a tyrant
can cause more pain. The miserable will cause pain to themselves, but
the bombastic one will cause pain to everyone else. Well, I'm not
chastising you for your stupidity, as the word stupid simply means to be
amazed or stunned. When one is stunned by the drama that is happening in
their psychological space, the phenomenal value of the life process will
be lost upon them. So don't be stupefied by your own psychological
drama. Most people who want to commit suicide do it not because the
world is torturing them; it is because they are torturing themselves
through their own thoughts and emotions. They drive themselves to this
point, simply because they have not made an attempt to know anything
about the fundamental nature of their own existence and the mechanics of
life that they are. Silly little thoughts and emotions that they created
become a Universe in itself. When their Universe begins to collapse,
they think they must end their life. This is simply because there is no
Asatoma Sadgamaya 17 in them. They are asatoma ; they have decided to
live in darkness. Whatever you give them, it does not matter what, they
will turn that into darkness, into a problem. You give them a spiritual
process, they will make that also into a problem. Get them married, they
will make that into a problem; get them divorce, they will make that
into a problem. Get them educated, they will make that into a problem.
Leave them uneducated, they will make that into a problem. Poverty,
riches,

wealth and everything they will make it into a problem because they are
in ignorance. That is all. Ignorance in this context does not mean you
don't know nuclear science. Ignorance in this context means you don't
know a damn thing about the nature of your life. You are trying to live
here without exploring a damn thing about the nature of your life. You
are busy with your own thought with your own emotion, with your own
silly little things that you are creating around yourself. You are
living in your own Universe. You must understand that there is no such
thing as your Universe. Your Universe is an illusion. So this is why I
bless everybody that the sooner you are disillusioned, the better it is
for you. People say, 'Oh, I was disillusioned,' as if it is a tragedy.
No, it is a great possibility. With disillusionment, all your illusions
got destroyed. Isn't it fantastic? Another positive word for
disillusionment is Enlightenment. Enlightenment is when all illusions
collapse. Right now, you selectively keep some illusions and some you
collapse. If everything collapses, you are Enlightened. If you learn how
to handle your disillusionment joyfully, then there will be no suicidal
thoughts. A lot of people threatening to commit suicide are doing it
only to get attention. Sometimes, it goes bad---they only tried to
create some trouble for everybody, but it went bad. It is a terrible
thing. It is also true that what people go through just before
committing suicide is worse than the death that follows. So if somebody
wants to commit suicide, people think, 'Oh, they need sympathy.' But if
you approve of this, then every time there is a little difficulty,
people will try to kill themselves. For every little bit of difficulty
that someone faces, he or she will think it is the most difficult
situation and want to go. The moment you bring this approval into the
social structure and social psyche, too many people will start killing
themselves. It is best that people understand this: you did not create
life, so you have no business to take it either---whether it is yours or
someone else's. It is as simple as that. There are life situations; some
are okay, some are not okay, some are horrible. Still, it does not give
you the right to take a life because you are incapable of creating one.
People who want to commit suicide need sympathy sometimes, but mostly
they need a little treatment and very cautious levels of disdain.

Once it happened: a young boy and girl in a local college fell in love.
They had really become very passionate and intense. Then, of course,
coming from traditional families, the parents came in the way because of
caste distinctions. They said, 'No way. Over our dead bodies.' Usually,
this is a common proclamation the parents make. It is just a threat;
they will not die. If the families do not oppose, most love affairs will
fall apart. But the moment they resist it, it becomes like a cause. It
is like they are fighting an injustice and people will rally behind
them. So it went on and a big social scandal happened. When this
happened, the lovers thought all this trouble is because of themselves,
so they decided that they will end their lives. So they went up the
Velliangiri Mountains. On top of these mountains, there is a place where
you can leave your body. From there, you have a clear 700--800-feet drop
which will give you a free fall without touching anything before you are
splattered on the rocks. Some people have discarded their bodies
consciously, 18 others fall and do it. So the boy and girl reached the
top and stood there, hand in hand. They were just about to jump, when
the girl said, 'Raju, I am so scared. You jump first.' (Somehow the name
of the idiot in all the romantic movies is always Raju!) The boy was in
full form, so he said, 'Come, hold my hand and jump.' She said, 'No, you
do it first, then I will come. I will be right behind you.' The boy had
seen too many Hindi movies, and he jumped. The girl stood at the edge of
the cliff and screamed, 'Oh, Raju, I love you.' Then she started
thinking very pragmatically. 'Now, Raju is gone. My love is gone. All of
the problem is gone. When the problem itself is over, why waste one more
life.' So she walked down, and because she could not go back home, she
came and settled down at the Isha Yoga Center. For many people who are
on the verge of committing suicide, just one moment of distraction is
all it takes to prevent it. Most people who managed to overcome that one
moment went on to live for a long time. Those who really want to commit
suicide generally become quiet. In Yogic traditions, they say: if a
person sits alone in a room in the dark, without lighting a lamp or
turning on the light, this means that either they are going to commit
suicide or they are going to become a yogi. Both are

in a way connected. 'I became a yogi' means, in a way, consciously, I
killed myself. Even the man who commits suicide has no intention of
killing the body. He wants to kill himself. Because he does not know how
to do it, because he thinks that the body is him, he hangs the body.
Otherwise, he would have just hanged his persona. So if somebody sits
alone, without light, with eyes open, you know they are heading for
suicide most of the time. If it is in the world at large, maybe 1 per
cent of the time, but if it is in the Yoga Center, we would say, 10 per
cent of the time they are heading towards something else which is a
bigger possibility. They may be just practising Samyama! 19 Now, what
can be done for people who chronically feel suicidal? Western science
tends to look at suicidal tendencies only from the angle of psychology
and physiology. Though their interventions are getting better, they are
inherently limited to these two domains. In Yoga, the physiology and the
psychology are only consequences of something deeper. Treating the
consequences alone is like treating the symptoms and not the ailment. In
Yoga, a suicidal tendency is considered the result of an aberration or
distortion at the energy level of the person. For such people, only
bringing a certain amount of exuberance to their energies will bring
them out of it. There are tools and methods to do this, and it is
possible to pull most people out of it. Time, energy and organization
are the only barriers to this. If bringing about exuberance in their
energies is not immediately possible, the next best thing you can do is
to become exuberant yourself. Is it not true that if you are feeling a
little low sitting in a dreary office and you go into a beautiful
garden, everything becomes wonderful and you are suddenly lifted up? So
please be the flower for them. With some fragrance and beauty, even
those who are feeling depressed or miserable will rise a little bit.
Depression, grief and joy are all infectious. You have to make up your
mind as to what you want to infect the world with. If you are exuberant
and they are in your company, it can make a big difference. But today
all you are willing to dedicate is a phone line. It may also help to an
extent. As I already said, you did not create this life. So you should
not talk about ending it unless your identity as a separate being or a
separate

person has disappeared and you and the Source of Creation are the same.
If you come to that point of evolution, then you can throw away your
body consciously. You are allowed to do it. But you are not allowed to
do it by damaging the body or by hanging from a tree. Once you are dead,
we don't mind burying you under the tree, but hanging from a tree is
neither good for you, nor for the tree. Moreover, whether life has been
a good deal or a bad deal, if you have a larger purpose, everything is a
stepping stone for your ultimate well-being. Now, everyone's life is
precious to them. It is naturally so. But if someone has gone beyond
that and tried to take their own life, if they are still alive I would
say an absolute No to suicide. But if it has already happened, we should
respect their decision and leave it there. In spite of it being the most
precious thing, if someone has taken the extreme step of taking their
own life, it does not matter how silly it looks to you and me, we should
respect their decision because that is how it is. But for those who are
alive, you have no business to do that. In terms of the karmic
structure, in terms of the spiritual evolution of a being, suicide is
100 per cent unjustified---no question about it. You have to see every
situation as a possibility to move towards freedom rather than getting
entangled. If you use every situation as a stepping stone, then there is
no question of suicide. If a spiritual process becomes active in
societies, suicide can almost disappear completely, except in cases of
pathological mental derangement. They might do something because it is
not in their control as to what they do.

The Consequences of Suicide For a person to die of suicide is a terrible
way to go. But in terms of life, is there a difference in what happens
to them after that? You must know, in terms of life, whether it is
suicide or natural death or accident or whatever, it does not matter how
you broke your body. Whether one broke one's body by eating badly, or
whether one smoked and smoked, or drank and drank, or fell in love with
someone and broke their own heart, or simply shot oneself---for the
Existence, it does not matter how it happened. They broke their body
while the Prarabdha Karma was still on. That is all that life cares
about.

However, it matters as to how one worked towards it. Let us say, someone
smoked happily by choice and died. Someone else had some financial
problem and became utterly miserable about it, and broke their heart and
died. Here, the two deaths are very different things. The smoker is
better off because he worked himself to it joyfully, while the other
person did so miserably. Society will not like it that a smoker, drinker
or drug addict can be in a better state when he dies than someone who is
toiling endlessly. But that can happen because how one worked towards it
is important. The existential has no moral compass. It is about life and
the ingredients of life, not about social or psychological judgements.
Socially, you may think that being above ten other people is a great
thing, but this life does not think like that. Are you making a pleasant
experience of it for yourself, or an unpleasant experience---this is all
that life cares about and the consequences come accordingly. You need to
understand that either with suicide or with another kind of death, you
are only killing the physical body. You can only kill the physical body,
but with that, you are putting an end only to the Annamaya Kosha and the
conscious parts of the Manomaya Kosha, that is all. You cannot end it
completely. For that, you have to dissolve the subtler portions of the
body, which needs something else altogether. Now, if you kill the
physical body, the rest of the body, which is still intact, will try to
find one more physical body. It will have its own scope and
limitations---accordingly, it will choose the new body. It may
immediately choose, or it may choose after ten years, or it may choose
after a hundred years. The duration depends on certain factors. Till
certain things are over, it will hang around; it cannot seek another
body. It hangs around here and there not because you died of suicide or
accidental death or heart attack, but because your allotted karma had
not been finished before death. Suppose your suicide is timed such that
your Prarabdha Karma is almost over, then it is as good as a natural
death. If you look at it on that level, as far as this body is
concerned, whether someone kills you or you kill yourself, or if you
overate and got a heart attack, or whatever---it does not matter. If you
don't live properly, you will get a disease and die. So would you call
this a suicide? Society calls it suicidal. When someone

is smoking away to glory, they say it is 'suicidal', but not a suicide.
But if you jump off the mountain or if you hang yourself, only then we
call it a suicide. But these are mere societal, technical and legal
terms. In terms of life, did you exhaust your Prarabdha Karma or not?
This is the only factor that matters and determines what happens after
that. This happened about thirty years ago. At that time, I had a
coconut and mango plantation, which I had set up from scratch, in a very
remote place. There was a very beautiful lake in front of my farm.
Things were going well. There were no proper buildings there, so I used
to pitch a tent and stay in it whenever I went to the farm. It was nice
this way, I liked it. Those were my motorcycle days. Sometimes, I had
some help who would cook something for me; other times I used to ride
down about 5 kilometres to a little restaurant in the nearest village
and eat something. One morning, I was riding down and, very close to the
restaurant, I saw a group of people had gathered around a well. I
stopped to inquire what was happening. They said a woman had jumped into
the well and killed herself around 3.30 or 4.00 in the morning. I sat
there on my motorcycle, thinking a little bit about what could have
happened in her mind, for her to walk out of her house at that time, in
the dark, and jump into the well. She must have struggled with what
would happen to her young children and all that. Whatever suffering she
was going through, it must have been a great struggle to come to that
decision. I am sure she would have definitely been terrified about
jumping into the well. But still she went ahead and did it, probably
hitting the walls on the side or falling into the water and drowning
slowly. We don't know which way it happened. No one had ventured into
the well to get her body out, so I volunteered. I went down the well
with a rope for about 85--90 feet and saw her body floating about 3 feet
below the water. She was a very young woman, maybe in her late twenties.
Getting her out was not much effort: all I had to do was tie the rope to
her body and come up. The villagers hauled her out. Later on, I went on
to my breakfast. From an early age, the moments when I munched on my
food have always been moments of enormous depth for me. Here something
else is happening---the food that you are

eating is slowly becoming a part of yourself. Something that was not you
is becoming you. Something which was in the ground somewhere else, in
the market, in the vessel, on the stove, is suddenly becoming a part of
you. It is a huge love affair, actually. Those moments have always been
moments of enormous depth for me. So I sat there eating my dosa, chewing
slowly. At that time, this woman was still hanging around me. I got
deeply involved with her. I was actually going through the whole process
of her life---her pain, her fears, sufferings, and everything. It is
very difficult to describe this. For almost three-and-a-half days, I sat
at the farm doing nothing. I sat there under a tree most of the time,
unmindful of the need to eat and sleep. When the people who worked for
me felt I needed to eat, they would bring something and keep it in front
of me. Otherwise, day and night, I just sat under this tree. And this
woman was all over me. When young people commit suicide, particularly in
very great distress, they linger around for a long time. People are
generally scared to go to or even pass through such places where this
kind of death has taken place. But it is not the place; it is the
person. If we handle the person, then the place is cleared. This is when
a ritual like Kalabhairava Karma, which we will look at later, becomes
very important.

CHAPTER 4

Can Death Be Hacked

When the body is still strong, what is meant to be can always be
transcended.

Cheating Death The idea that death is a catastrophe that should be
avoided at all costs has somehow set forth this quest to do all kinds of
ridiculous kinds of things in the hope that we can cheat death or save
someone from the jaws of death. People's imaginations have been fired on
this, in part because of many colourful tales from lore. These stories
have created a lot of hope in people that death can probably be cheated.
To some extent, this is also fuelled by the science fiction of stellar
travel, where they put the body into some sort of a deep freeze or sleep
mode and then wake up in another era altogether. But, fundamentally, by
doing certain things you can postpone it, but you cannot cheat death;
you cannot avoid death. In India, there is a belief that if someone is
on the deathbed, then you should chant the Mahamrutyunjaya Mantra or
perform the Mrutyunjaya Homa , which will avert death. Mrutyu means
death, jaya means victory. So the mantra and homa are supposed to grant
you victory over death. However, people have been doing the Mrutyunjaya
Homa for thousands of years, but no one has survived through all those
years! No one won mrutyu. It is a silly understanding that winning over
mrutyu is to live forever physically. No one has succeeded in that till
now. But one who is beyond the body has won over death. I am not trying
to dismiss the ritual completely. But how it is done, by whom it is done
and how many have actually benefited from it is questionable.
Definitely, to some extent, something could have happened, certain
situations may have been averted. There is no question about that. But
we should not interpret jaya as victory. Mrutyunjaya can

mean that you have transcended the fear of death. If you transcend the
fear of death, in a way, death does not matter. I have not looked at the
ritual in detail, but in my understanding, probably in ancient times,
they performed this to give one freedom from the fear of death.
Somewhere along the way, advertisements and the commercial aspects of it
took over, and they started saying you will never die if you do this.
About fifteen years ago, something like this came our way. A person in
Coimbatore took his own horoscope to an astrologer for some purpose.
Looking at the horoscope, the astrologer was taken aback and said, 'This
person is already dead, why did you bring this to me?' The person was
very disturbed by this, so he consulted a few more astrologers. They all
said the same thing---the person whose horoscope this was supposed to be
was dead. Finally, someone brought him to us. Looking at this person's
energies, I pointed out the places in the Dhyanalinga where he should
sit to strengthen those aspects of his energy system. He did that and
went home. This is one of those rare horoscopes where someone clearly
foresaw that he would die at this time. But due to his karma in this
life or his sadhana or the way he lived his life or whatever, he had
gone beyond that foreseen time of death. In some ways, he was a dead man
alive. So I said, 'Anyway, you crossed one line, let us cross one more,'
and asked him to sit in different places in the Dhyanalinga which we had
marked for him. Without asking questions, he went and sat there. If he
is alive and well today, it is his doing. Recently, I came to know he is
still alive and fine, and he has no clue as to how he survived. Now,
this became a big thing, and people started asking, 'Is it possible to
avoid death by sitting in the Dhyanalinga?' See, people die due to
different reasons. And I am not talking about medical reasons. Let us
say, two people are dying of the same illness---perhaps renal failure.
But, energy-wise, they need not be dying of the same cause. They may be
dying of two different energy causes---the energy may be exiting in two
different ways. Accomplished yogis sometimes do certain things to avert
what would otherwise have been a moment of death for them. They do this
by slowing down everything in the system and entering into samadhi 1

states. They say this happened in the life of the Indian saint Shirdi
Sai Baba. He was suffering from severe asthma, and one day he suffered a
severe attack when it felt like he was going to die. So he decided to
rid himself of the ailment entirely by going into samadhi. He told his
disciples that there would be no sign of life in his body for some time
and they should protect it for three days. If after three days there was
no sign of him returning, then they should bury the body in a particular
spot. That night he went into samadhi. Both his breathing and his pulse
stopped. The next day, the villagers came and, being concerned that he
was dead, wanted to at least properly bury him in the spot he had
indicated. Fortunately, one of Sai Baba's disciples did not budge and
prevented them from doing so, placing his Master's body on his lap all
the while. Finally, after three days, Baba showed signs of life and
became normal again. He lived for thirty-two years after that, because
he managed to avert death at the appointed time by going into samadhi
and recharging his pranic system. In samadhi states, your sense of time
is lost because it is only measured by the progress and the cycles of
the physical. Let us say, you are sitting in an air-conditioned hall
which is uniformly lit from morning to evening. The only reason you will
know time is because of the weariness of the body. As the day
progresses, your body keeps time. Every three or four hours, it will
tell you that you have to go to the bathroom. It will tell you that you
are thirsty. It will tell you that you are hungry. This is the only way
you will know time. Without the cycles of the body, you don't know time.
So if you slow down the cycles of the body by going into samadhi, you
may lose the sense of time, and, then, in your experience, there is no
time. So what is ten years to other people may get reduced to one year
because you made your cycles ten times slower. So for the clock outside,
you cheated it. But you did not cheat time because time is not in the
clock. The clock is like your bladder. It keeps a count of things inside
of you. It is not that the clock is generating time. Time is a
completely different dimension altogether. Only because of the physical
cycles, because the Earth spins, because the planet revolves around the
sun, you are keeping time with those physical manifestations

or physical expressions. But, actually, if there were no planets, there
would still be time. Time is the platform for Creation to exist. Without
it, Creation would not exist. Now, if you slow down your metabolism, if
you as much as breathe fewer number of times in a minute, you will live
longer. You will not be deceiving time. It is just that you slow down
the body and stretch that time. If you distance yourself from the body,
you deceive time. Samadhi works like that. But if you deep-freeze the
body, you will go through life without experiencing it. Let us say, you
deep-froze the body for a hundred years and then woke up. You will not
gain any life because you did not live for those hundred years. If you
were living for these hundred years, it means something. You did not
exist, but you just popped up after a hundred years---it is like a
prisoner who served twenty years in jail and then came out. There is no
real gain in that. When it is so easy to reproduce and have a new body,
why do you want to preserve the old body? What is the point? This is all
an Egyptian dream. You should see how those mummies are now---all dried
rubbish. Now, there are some other specific situations or programmes
where we tell people, 'Don't worry, for the next few days or weeks, we
will ensure that you will not die.' Once it so happened that I was in
the middle of a programme, and they brought in a brahmachari who had
been bitten by a snake. I said, 'He will not die just because a reptile
bit him. That much life we have taken into our hands.' And he survived.
There have been some other situations like this; so, over time, some
people started asking, 'Sadhguru, can you cheat death?' We are not
cheating death. We are only making sure life happens, that is all! Right
now, to stabilize my own system, I am using certain help from outside to
do that in a certain way. 2 Similarly, in the advanced spiritual
programmes at Isha, I act like a peg for everything else because
everything else is connected to me at that moment. This is why we are so
horribly finicky about every small thing during the programmes. We are
finicky about where people sit, where they stand, when they come in,
when they go out, and all that. If they get up for as much as going to
the bathroom, we don't let them, because if we don't maintain the
tightness of the atmosphere, we will not be able to be a peg that holds
and

supports. We want everything to happen in a certain way, because once
the situation becomes loose, then managing it becomes almost impossible.
When everyone is focused in one direction, it is easy to do what we have
to do with them. When we did not have the necessary infrastructure and
conducted these programmes in external premises, many big lumps of the
size of lemons used to form on my spine. It used to stay for two or
three days because that is the kind of strain the body was taking. Now
that we have our own constructed places, at least one aspect of it is
handled. It is so much easier to do these programmes in a place which is
dedicated to it rather than doing it in a place where every day
something new is happening. Now, taking someone else's life and death
into our hands is very much a possibility. If you look at it that way,
you can say each life has its own trajectory as to when it is born, how
it lives, what it undergoes, how it dies, and so on. The essence of the
spiritual process is getting them all into one trajectory, not with
everyone going by their own trajectory. Especially in a programme, the
basic thing is to get everyone into the same trajectory. If you have all
of them focused in such a way that at that moment their lives become one
trajectory, then it is easier to hold them. It is easier to ensure that
life happens in a certain way for them. This is what we ensure in the
programmes. If they are all flying in their own trajectories, you cannot
be holding 500 people together. You cannot ensure these things. This is
not foolproof, but it is foolproof enough to take a chance. It is not
absolute, but it is 99.9 per cent absolute. The rest depends on managing
the situation. It is not just this; a lot more is being done. It is just
that it will look like too much mumbo-jumbo if I talk about it. Almost
every day, at least a dozen photographs of people who are on their
deathbed come to me. People want to know whether they will die or not,
or if something can be done for their recovery, whether it is the right
time for them, or if something can be done for them. It is dealt with
without making too much drama about it. You could create a lot of drama
about it and become like a superman. But I want to be able to go out and
play golf anonymously. So it is better to be like this.

In an earlier section, 3 I narrated how one of our teachers went to the
Himalayas and died. So if it is possible to avert or postpone death in
some cases, could his death have been avoided? If you attempt such
interventions, there are many things you will have to do. In today's
world, due to various cultural and attitudinal situations, people are
not available to you in that dimension. Maybe people who are at the Yoga
Center are available to some extent, and you could do something with
them. But even they are not fully available. The worst part of this
modern life is everything has to be explained. Life does not work like
that. Tell me, how are you alive? With all your science, explain to me,
what is keeping you alive right now? I will show you how many holes
there are in your explanation. Since you have to explain everything,
there are so many things you cannot do with people. They will put
everything under their limited logical lens and come to their own
conclusions. You can intervene in some way only with a few people. The
rest, you cannot touch, because without a logical explanation you cannot
do anything. This is the nature of life today. Just telling him, 'Don't
go,' would not have worked. So was it meant to be? Not necessarily. When
the body is still strong, what is meant to be can always be transcended.
Maybe I would have asked him to go on a long sadhana, but he would not
have complied just because I asked him to. If I had told him to go into
silence for forty-five days, he would have thought that he was being
punished and maybe he would have slipped out of the back door and death
could have happened in many other ways. In today's world, you cannot
tell someone, 'Just do this.' You have to explain it to them, but it is
not possible to explain these things, because, for one, it may not be
logical; secondly, it is not so black and white. Even in your own
perception, it is not like it is 100 per cent certain that this person
is going to die. It looks like they will die. There are certain
indications which say death is close, so I think they may die. But they
may not die. You see a grey area, you see danger and you step back. That
is about it. You cannot say, 'This is it; it is definitely going to
happen.' There are some cases where you can say that, but those cases
are rare. Life is not like that. There is a twilight zone always.

Now, why would a Guru or someone who is capable of intervening,
intervene at all? If there are spiritual reasons, we will intervene. Or
in some moments of compassion, we may intervene. But it is not good to
intervene all the time because, after all, you are not avoiding death,
you are only postponing it. When you do that, what comes next may not be
as good as what has come now. So you need not always intervene. But,
today, twenty-first-century morality is such that they will say, 'You
could have intervened, but you did not. That amounts to murder.'
Twenty-firstcentury people think they are all eternal people; they are
not going to die. Till you print their obituary, they are not dead!
People are in that state of denial about their mortality.

The Dance of Death Being able to raise the dead is a deep fascination
for most people. For them, that is the ultimate test of someone's
spiritual powers. Most people are living like the dead anyway because
they are unconscious of many things within themselves. If people are
living unconsciously, it is as good as death. So, in a way, the whole
spiritual process is about raising the dead. In that sense, raising the
dead is my work, but that is not what people are asking about. They are
very interested in knowing if I can make a corpse come alive again. This
is a very immature desire that stems from some historically famous
incidents. On my first trip to the United States, I happened to address
a gathering where a staunchly religious man stood up and asked, 'Can you
raise the dead?' I said, 'Why would I do such a stupid thing?' It is a
stupid thing because the dead should remain dead, is it not? If all the
dead came back, could we live here? Are we not glad that they are all
dead? You are probably thinking of one person---your husband or your
wife or your father or your mother or someone like that. But I am
talking about all the billions who have died on this planet till now,
including the dinosaurs. Only because they are dead, it is possible for
us to live here. And what kind of a fool would bring back the dead? Only
someone who has no sense of life at all and absolutely no perception of
life would interfere with the life process and bring back the dead.
Transforming yourself is one thing, meddling and fixing life around you
is another thing. Life has

a certain process much deeper than you can understand. So don't cut it
and meddle with it by doing silly things. It once happened: it was the
dream of an elderly couple in Texas to visit Jerusalem, the Holy Land.
So they made the trip and relished every step that they took there. They
took the road that Jesus walked with the cross and visited the place
where he walked upon water and all that. Unfortunately, in all this
excitement, the wife had a heart attack and died. Now, the local funeral
director came and made an offer to the husband, 'See, we can do all the
rituals for your wife for just \$6000. But if you want to transport her
back to Texas, it will cost you \$24,000, and we don't know what the
funeral charges in Texas are.' The man thought about it and said, 'No, I
will take her back to Texas.' They asked, 'Why? This is the Holy Land,
this is the best place to bury her, and it is cheaper too.' He thought
about it again and said, 'No, I am taking her to Texas.' They asked,
'Why? It does not make sense. Why do you want to do this?' The man
replied, 'In Texas, the dead stay dead.' Historically, there have been
many people who were declared dead, but they came alive after some time.
Sometimes, they popped out by themselves from their coffins even during
their funeral. So this is also one of the reasons why people are looking
for some miracle to bring their dead back to life. But these were not
cases of miracles or someone meddling with life but that of
misdiagnosis. Today, defining death is a big challenge because science
has learned that death is not an event but a process that could stop
progressing or can even reverse itself due to various reasons. In fact,
medically, they even have a term for it---they call it the Lazarus
phenomenon, when someone who was declared dead comes back to life after
some time, with no explanation. In India, there have been many instances
where someone died and they took the body to a yogi or someone like that
and then the dead person was revived. But these too are not 'revivals'
in the true sense. It is more like going to a doctor of a different
kind. Mostly, these were deaths that were caused by snakebites. When one
is bitten by a snake, the prana takes a much longer time to leave the
body. In the meantime, if the effect of the venom wears out or if there
is an external infusion of prana, then it is possible for the person to
be revived. Doctors who work with

snakebite deaths may have seen this: with certain kinds of snakebites,
especially that of the cobra, or naga , family, when everything has been
done and the victim has still not been revived, sometimes if you put
them on a ventilator, after a while, they make a recovery, just like
that. I experienced something like this in my own life. I have been
bitten by cobras at least five or six times in my life. Once, it almost
killed me. I had picked up this cobra, but I did not notice that there
were two of them entwined together. It was not the mating season, but
for some reason, they were together and, when I picked one up, the other
one fell on my foot and bit me four times. Its venom started to get me.
It must have hit the bone the first few times, so it kept going until it
hit the flesh and let the venom out. Once the venom enters your body,
you experience a different kind of pain. It is not just the biting or
the poking kind of pain. It is like an injection---when they pierce a
needle, there is one kind of pain; when they inject the medicine, there
is another kind of pain. So I put the cobra away and started to attend
to the bite. I knew, whatever happens, I should not fall asleep. This
happened in a remote area where there were no people nearby. I had my
bicycle with me, so I just took my cycle and went to the nearest house I
could find. There was a lady there. I told her that a cobra had bitten
me, so I needed lots of tea. She became hyper but was sensible enough to
make me a pot of black tea. I drank it and managed to stay alert without
falling asleep or losing consciousness. Later, I made it back home.
Initially, I thought I would tell my father because he was a doctor and
he would take me to the hospital and do something. But then something in
me said, 'What the hell, let me see what will happen.' I was feeling
okay, but my eyelids were feeling a bit heavy. Moreover, I did not want
to freak my parents out or bring undue attention to my activities. So I
just sat down and practised a little bit of Yoga. I was not doing the
Yoga to avert the poison, but I was feeling drowsy, so I did some Yoga.
After that, I had an early dinner and went to bed. In the morning, I was
a bit groggy, my eyelids swollen and heavy, but I had survived. This may
have happened because the cobra probably did not deliver a full dose of
its venom, or maybe just staying awake and hanging on helped tide over
its effects. There was no manipulation of life involved

here. But, generally, when a cobra bites, there is a greater possibility
for revival because the prana withdraws more slowly from the body than
usual. However, until the point where Udana Vayu has withdrawn
completely from the body, revival is a possibility, at least in
principle. There are some Tantric processes to do this. But after Udana
Vayu has left the body, there is absolutely no chance to revive someone.
Reviving the dead is not so big in the East, but the Tantric system in
India was always big on making a corpse walk. Once the body has been
shed, once the legs have fallen, you cannot walk. A dead man cannot
walk, isn't it? But that is not true. They can be made to walk. This is
because, as we already saw, death happens slowly---the withdrawal of the
life process happens step by step. When the lung, heart and brain
activity stops, they declare you dead, but the life process is still
continuing and you can rekindle that. It is by using this that tantrik s
make dead bodies walk. Sometimes, this is also done on corpses that are
burning on the pyre. I have not seen this personally but I know people,
people who will not lie about such things, who have seen corpses that
were burning on the pyre be made to get up and walk. This happens
because, at that moment, when the burning begins from the outside, the
life process retreats and it creates a concentrated space where life is
happening more intensely at that moment. Some people are able to make
use of that and rekindle the system in such a way that suddenly the
corpse gets up and walks a few steps. For some time, it behaves as if it
is alive and then falls dead when the life exhausts itself. This is
possible because when the corpse is brought for cremation, there is
still some life energy in it. It is not good enough to beat the heart,
make the circulation happen, make the brains work and all that, but in
the cellular level there is energy, lots of energy. When the fire
touches it, it inflames that in a certain way. Now, by investing a
certain amount of energy into the corpse, you will be able to get it to
perform some action for some occult purposes---like, how your phone
battery is dead but still you can make an SOS call. All the Tantric and
Aghori 4 practices have relevance only because of this phenomenon.
Otherwise, what is the point of sitting on a dead body and doing all
those things? If dead means completely dead, what is there

to do with bones and flesh? They are not sitting on the body to revive
it. They have no interest in reviving the body. They want to use this
little spurt or energy to transport themselves into something. They are
trying to extract that little life and use it. That is the basis of
animal sacrifices. When sacrifices are not possible, they try to use a
freshly dead body. This is not as if the dead person is being brought
back to life, nor is it of much spiritual significance. Now, in the
West, some people have started a project where if you pay a huge sum of
money, your body is cryogenically frozen and kept intact after your
death. The hope is that in the future, when there is a technological
breakthrough to restore your body, you can come back to life. This is
absolute stupidity and immaturity. Normally, after an injury or
something like that, when a person goes into a deep state of
unconsciousness, the body tries to escape the pain and suffering because
it may not be strong enough to bear both the shock and the pain of it.
It is a kind of defence mechanism that switches off everything. Such a
person may recover, once the body is strong enough to sustain life. But
in cases where life has completely left the body or the bodies are being
artificially kept alive for many years in a coma, there is no person in
the body. You are just keeping a heart and two kidneys and a few more
organs alive. That is not really life as such. This is like when someone
gives their kidney, that kidney is kept alive for a few hours somewhere
else---not in anyone's body, but outside. It is kept alive artificially.
A coma state is very similar. Whether you keep a kidney or two kidneys
plus heart, plus this and that, it is about the same. There is no person
any more. Technology is there to keep the body alive and, in the future,
you may be able to revive it too. But your particular life coming and
choosing the same body is far away. In other words, this someone taking
up the same body after twenty-five years is just rubbish. If such a
thing ever happens, it cannot be the same person. By accident, it could
have happened that some other consciousness or disembodied being got
into it. That is all. But it is such a great business idea. The pharaohs
of Egypt spent the money needed for mummification then. But, even now,
it is good

business because you pay in advance, not on revival! Unfortunately,
there is no benefit for the mummified one. I doubt such a thing will
ever happen, but something like this can happen in a different way. You
may have heard of yogis leaving their bodies, going somewhere and
returning to take it on. Sometimes, it so happens that before he comes
back, another yogi takes on the body and goes away. It is like you park
your motorcycle and go somewhere; meanwhile, someone else picks it up
and leaves! Such things may happen, but the chances are very remote.

Transmigration The Eastern and Native American cultures were big on
transmigration--- the process of someone taking on the body of another
person, usually a freshly dead person. In India, it is called Parakaya
Pravesha ---entering another body. It is considered one of the
Ashtasiddhi s, or the eight great capabilities for a yogi. There are
many instances of transmigration in Indian lore. One famous instance is
that of Adi Shankara. In ancient India, there were neither heretics nor
the persecution of people for their personal beliefs. Whenever people
had something new to propagate, they would debate with those holding
opposing views. During his time, Adi Shankara was a formidable debater.
His sense of logic was astute. You don't argue with a man like that. But
once a famous religious scholar challenged Adi Shankara to a debate and
lost. Then that man's wife manoeuvred herself into the argument. You
know how women are, they are fiercely protective of those dear to them.
She said, 'You defeated my husband, but he is not whole. We are two
halves of the same thing. So you must debate with me also.' How can you
beat this logic? So the debate started with the woman. Then she saw she
was losing. So she started asking him questions about human sexuality.
Nevertheless, Shankara continued to debate with her. Then she went into
more details and then she challenged, 'What do you know by experience?'
This was a trap because Shankara was a brahmachari. He realized that
this was a trick to defeat him. He said, 'I need a month's break. We
will pause the debate here and resume after a month.' He then went into
a secluded cave. He told his disciples, 'No matter what

happens, don't allow anyone into this cave because I am going to leave
my body and look for another possibility for some time.' It so happened
that a king was bitten by a cobra and had just died. Normally, when
someone dies, from the moment the breath stops, it takes about an hour
and a half for the Prana Vayu to exit completely. The other pranas will
be still present and exiting slowly, but the Prana Vayu will have exited
completely by then. But when the cause of the death is a cobra bite,
this takes up to four-and-a-half hours. So, in many ways, this is an
ideal condition for one who wants to enter that body. Shankara left his
own body to take the king's body. He left behind his vyana in the system
because his body needed to be maintained for him to be able to come
back. He took the king's body to answer the woman's questions
experientially. So he went through that process. When some wise people
around the king saw that a man whom they had declared dead had suddenly
sat up and was full of energy, they became suspicious. They could
recognize by his behaviour that it was not the same person. It was clear
to them that there was someone else in the same body. They sent soldiers
all over the kingdom to look out for dead bodies and burn them
immediately. Their intention was that now since the king had come back
alive, he should not leave and go back. So what if he was a different
guy? He looked the same. And it was very important for the kingdom to
have its king. So the soldiers were sent everywhere to find and burn all
the dead bodies. The soldiers managed to locate Shankara's body in the
cave and wanted to burn it. His disciples tried to mislead them saying
that their Guru was not dead, but in shavasana and would wake up soon.
Suspecting fraud, the soldiers built a pyre in the cave itself and
placed Shankara's body on it. Just as they were about to light the pyre,
sensing this situation, Shankara relinquished the king's body and
returned to his own. The king dropped dead once again and Shankara
returned and went on to win the debate he had left midway. A person who
does this kind of circus with his energies usually does not live long
after that, because all this expends a tremendous amount of energy. It
is said that Shankara left his body shortly after this incident, at the
age of thirty-two. Actually, no one knows how or where he left his

body. He was last seen in Kedarnath. This incident may have accelerated
his departure. There is another famous incident involving a yogi who was
later known as Thirumoolar in Tamil Nadu. His original name was
Sundaranathar. He was from southern Tamil Nadu and travelled to Mount
Kailash. It is said that he was initiated there by Shiva himself. After
spending many years at Mount Kailash, he returned south to meet his
contemporary sage friend Agastya Muni, who had settled in Tamil Nadu.
While passing through a forest on his way back, he saw a herd of cows
crying. Their cowherd had just died of a snakebite. Moved by the sorrow
of the cows, he decided to take the dead cowherd's body for some time
and console the cows. He left his body inside the hollow of a tree and
entered the body of the cowherd. The cows became happy and he herded
them back to the village. He then came back to the tree to retrieve and
re-enter his own body. But to his surprise, his body was not to be found
anywhere. So he continued to live in the body of the cowherd. People in
the village were very surprised to see that their simple cowherd now
espoused spiritual teachings and composed many spiritual hymns. His name
was Moolar, so, out of respect, they began calling him Thirumoolar
(Thiru is a Tamil honorific), and he became known by that name. Over
3000 spiritual compositions are attributed to Thirumoolar and they are
sung even today. Are such things possible? Very much possible. There are
many more examples of transmigration in India. Is it a feat? Not really.
All it takes is a little bit of an understanding of the mechanics of how
life happens within you. Now, if one wants to enter the body of someone
who is alive, it would take a lot more. Either the person whose body you
enter into must also be accomplished enough that they can make space for
the other person, or they must be extremely weakened because of disease
or something and it is like they are halfway gone. If it is a
full-blooded body and there is no awareness of anything, then it is not
possible. All this is occult. It is not of spiritual significance,
really. It is also one way of sometimes proving to yourself or to others
that such things can be done. Or sometimes these things are done to do
something that you do not want to do in your own body. The reasons can
vary. Sadhguru Sri

Brahma also did something like this towards the end of his life, in a
desperate attempt to fulfil his Guru's dream. 5

Seeking Immortality Immortality has always been a fancy pursuit of the
affluent. When people became affluent, they felt they had everything,
but still, life had not happened to them. So they wanted to hang on.
Immortality has also been the quest of miserable people in the world. It
is a misunderstanding that people who are joyful, people who live their
lives really well, are unwilling to die and they seek immortality. If
joy becomes your companion, other things may have no place in your life.
If you notice, when you are joyous, you are not greedy any more. You are
very generous. You will give away anything at that moment. It is only
when you are miserable, you are very greedy. Happy people are loosely
attached to life. They are willing to drop off at any time. People
always think that miserable people want to die. It is not so. Miserable
people cling to life more than anyone else. The more miserable they are,
the more they cling to everything around them. Even if they live for a
hundred years, they will cling a little more and a little more because
they have never really lived. All the time, they were so immersed in
their own misery that they never had any time to live. A happy person
does not cling to anyone. When a person is blissful with their life,
they are not bothered whether they are going to be reborn or not. They
are not even bothered whether they are going to be alive or dead
tomorrow. They are so blissful. When you are really happy, you don't
need anyone. You don't need your wife, you don't need your husband and
you don't need your God. When you are very happy, all gods are
forgotten. God is the creation of miserable people. Because there are
lots of miserable people in the world, God has thrived. If the world was
full of blissful beings, God would disappear. If all of us are truly
happy, God has no business in this world. We can handle ourselves. We
need God only because we have created so much of misery within ourselves
and above all such a fear of suffering.

When you become really happy, happy beyond words, when your joyousness
transcends all limitations, you are ready to die. You feel, 'This is it;
I am willing to dissolve myself and go now.' Joy prepares you for death.
A man who is ready to simply die when everything is well is a man who
has seen life. Lovers who have tasted the joy of togetherness, even for
a short while, are willing to die. Have you not seen this? A miserable
man is not ready to die because he has been a miser about living. He
never lived, so he thinks that if he gets one more year, he will live
better. Most people are like this. In the past, every king, every
powerful person on the planet always sought to somehow become immortal.
But, in reality, if you really want to curse someone, don't wish them
death; wish them an endless life. That would be the worst curse for
anyone. If someone lives by sadhana, and through sadhana, he or she
extends their life, then it is different. This is not stretching life
forcefully; on the contrary, you are providing life with the necessary
support to fledge itself out further. In Yoga, we have always been
saying humans can live up to 160 years. But rarely in recent times have
we seen anyone living up to that age. On average, global life expectancy
has gone up significantly. This is largely because of the medical care
and all the supplements that people routinely take. It is causing other
problems, but it is giving an extension of life. Many organs are
rejuvenated because of the battery of minerals and nutrients one takes.
Now, they say, if we somehow survive for another fifty years, we can
live for 500 years because, by then, technology would have advanced so
much that we can culture a new heart and a new liver and a new kidney in
a laboratory and refit ourselves with everything new. Some people were
telling me how they are going to live for 400 years. They have made
plans. They are making contracts with laboratories, with doctors, as to
when they will replace which organ, whether it is still working or not
working. They have already decided this by looking at one's genetic
predisposition and other biological markers. They have already decided
that at the age of eighty they will replace their heart, at the age of
eighty-five they will replace their kidneys and all the bones

and joints, and so on. These are the kind of plans they have made to
live for 400 years. Such people will suffer immensely for this.
Extending the life of the body may become possible, but unless you have
sadhana in your life and a certain level of mastery over your system,
you will not have a mind if you live that long. You will live like a
zombie. Without the needed sadhana, if you stretch the body, the mind
will cop out. You will find many people with still-sturdy bodies but
their mind gone because they have run out of their Prarabdha Karma. It
is like you have the hardware but you have run out of the software
required to run it. They are unable to open up the next dimension of
memory because they have no sadhana. That just leaves an empty screen.
Wanting to live long is not a problem. But this thinking of forcefully
increasing the lifespan arises from a certain arrogance against life
which I don't like. This happened in the year 2050: A few scientists
made an appointment with God. They met him and said, 'Hey, old man, you
have done pretty well with the Creation; but everything that you have
done, we can also do now. So we think it is time you retire.' Then God
said, 'Oh, is that so? What is it that you can do?' They said, 'Just
watch this.' They pulled out their test tubes and conical flasks and all
that. They took some soil and mixed various things with it and produced
a live baby and it started crying. 'See, here it is. We can make life.
So where is the need for you? You can retire.' To this, God said, 'That
is great, but first get your own soil.' If you want to work on the
extension of the life of your body, you need to do it with the right
kind of sadhana, not with outside fixing. If you do the right kind of
sadhana, when the body is stretched, along with it, the Prarabdha Karma
will also open up. It will open up other dimensions of karmic substance,
and there will be substance to keep this going. If there is no substance
for the being, but there is substance for the body, you will become like
a ghost. At least, a ghost does not occupy space and does not eat food.
You will eat food and occupy space, but you will live like a ghost. If
you do sadhana and live for 400 years, then you would be of tremendous
value to the world. You will be of value not just because you will live
long and have immense wisdom, but because of who you are and what you
have become. Because of the sheer maturity of life, it will

organize itself in that way in your body. Your 'being', or what you are,
will float around effortlessly like a bubble. In terms of sadhana, Hatha
Yoga is very important because you need a good physical base. Moreover,
if you are in such a state within yourself that when you close your
eyes, you have no sense of time, then time is deceived by you. If the
cellular aliveness is kept up in a youthful manner, the body can last
because it can rejuvenate itself. Most importantly, if you are burning
your karma strong enough, new levels will naturally open up. Without
sadhana, you have no way of digging deeper into the larger karmic
substance or what you call Sanchita Karma. Such a person will not be
able to sustain life-extension. Also, your experience of life will not
be enhanced in any way just because you live for a greater number of
years. A reasonable number of years, yes, but simply extending years is
not going to make your life any greater, in your experience. If you just
say, 'I am 150 years old,' others may be impressed, but in your
experience, what is the difference? You must decide if, for you, life is
an account book or a phenomenon. If it is an account book, numbers
matter. If it is a phenomenon of experience, then numbers don't matter.

Seeking the Next Dimensions People ask this question: If my life is
going well, why not continue this endlessly? What is wrong with this?
Why seek something else? Now, it is not because we are suffering this
that we want to move on. The very nature of the being is such that it
wants to go to the next dimension or to the ultimate dimension. It is
like this: after you were born, you learned to walk. It was the most
exciting thing. And then you grew up, then you got married, you made
money, you produced children and you died. And again you were born,
again you were excited about standing up and you were also excited about
riding a bicycle and again you met your boyfriend and you were very
happy and then you were disappointed and again you got married. This is
happening again and again. Suppose you actually realize this, not
because someone told you, but because you actually saw that you have

done this a thousand times over and still are going through the same
process again and again. Would you want to go through it again? About
people's lives going well: people think if they are married, if they
have a house and children and if they have tons of money in the bank,
they are living well. That is not so. Living well means that you have
grasped all aspects of life. If you have grasped everything that is
there to know about life, then you have broken through the bubbles of
memory in which you are storing these different things. If it all bursts
out in you, you would definitely like to move on to the next dimension.
Once one realizes one is repeating the same thing, they will suffer.
They will want to move on to the next dimension. Or look at it this
way---suppose we make you watch your favourite movie over and over
again. Seven times a day, every day, for the next one month. After all,
it is a wonderful movie and you like it the most. You will be coming out
with tears in your eyes when you watch it the first five times or ten
times. Then unless you are totally gone, you will see, it is just a play
of light and sound. Once there is no involvement from you, you will
simply sit back and look at it. Suppose, in addition to this, I also
took you to the projector room and it really sinks into you that the
whole goddamn thing is just two wheels and a light bulb tricking you,
churning up all these emotions and making you believe all this. You may
still enjoy a movie, but you will not be involved any more. The longing
to move on to the next dimension becomes urgent, especially if you look
back and realize you have been in the same movie for a long time. This
dimension is about 'this' and 'that'. In your present state of mind,
'this and that' or 'that and that' is interesting right now. But the
next dimension is just 'this and this and only this'. What is seemingly
many, will turn out to be One. This may not seem to be interesting to
you right now because you can think, feel, understand and project only
from the dimension in which you exist. But that is how it is. The sooner
you realize that you have been in the same dimension, the more you will
long for what is beyond that. Until then, it will seem uninteresting to
you.

CHAPTER 5

Mahasamadhi

Mahasamadhi is the end of the game. The cycle is over. There is no
question of rebirth; it is complete dissolution. You can say this person
is truly no more.

Samadhi and Death People often make an association between samadhi and
death. They think samadhi means some deathlike situation. It is far from
that. The word 'samadhi' has been largely misunderstood. It is made up
of the words sama and dhi. Sama means equanimity and dhi means buddhi ,
or the intellect. If you reach an equanimous state of intellect, it is
known as samadhi. The fundamental nature of the intellect is to
discriminate. This discriminatory quality is very important for
survival. You are able to discriminate between a person and a tree only
because your intellect is functioning. If you want to break a stone, you
have to discriminate between the stone and your finger. Otherwise, you
will break your finger. Discrimination is an instrument that supports
and executes the instinct of survival present in every cell of the body.
If you transcend the intellect, you become equanimous. But this does not
mean you lose the ability to discriminate. If you lose the
discriminatory intellect, you will become insane. In the samadhi state,
your discriminatory intellect is perfectly in place but, at the same
time, you have transcended it. You do not make a distinction---you are
simply here, seeing life in its true working. The moment you drop or
transcend the intellect, discrimination cannot exist. Everything becomes
one whole, which is the reality. A state like this gives you an
experience of the oneness of the Existence, the unification of
everything that is. In this state, there is no time or space. Time and
space are a creation of your mind. Once you transcend the mind as a

limitation, time and space don't exist for you. What is here is there,
what is now is then. There is no past or future for you. Everything is
here, in this moment. Samadhi is a state of equanimity where the
intellect goes beyond its normal function of discrimination. This in
turn loosens one from this physical body. A space between what is you
and your body is created. Death means the physical body is completely
lost. There is no contact with the physical body. Samadhi means that the
physical body is intact, but the contact with the physical body has
become very minimal. For the sake of understanding, people have
categorized samadhis into eight different types or levels. Of these
eight, they have been broadly categorized as savikalpa and nirvikalpa
samadhis. Savikalpa samadhis are samadhis with attributes or qualities.
They are very pleasant, blissful and ecstatic. Nirvikalpa samadhis are
without attributes or qualities. They are beyond pleasant and
unpleasant. Those who go into nirvikalpa samadhi states are always kept
in protected states because their contact with the body becomes very
minimal. The smallest disturbance, like a sound or a pinprick, can
dislodge them from their body. These states are maintained for certain
periods to establish a firm distinction between oneself and the body. It
is a significant step in one's spiritual evolution, but still not the
ultimate. As we mentioned earlier, sometimes, yogis go into deep states
of samadhis for certain periods because they want to evade certain
situations within themselves, or they want more time to work out their
karma. Let us say, a yogi knows that his life situation is such that the
next day he will have to leave his body, but still his karmic score is
not settled, his karmic account is not complete. So he does not want to
go. Instead, he goes into a samadhi state for, say, a week or ten days.
Now, he gets a short extension to finish what he wants to finish. This
is a way of turning the clock back, this is a way of deceiving the
process of time. When someone makes himself neither the mind nor the
body, he avoids the Kala Chakra , or the wheel of time. So one deceives
time and stays there and gets extra time for himself. Samadhis by
themselves have no great significance in terms of SelfRealization, or
knowing the true nature of the Self. Many of Gautama the

Buddha's disciples went into very long samadhis. They did not come out
for years. But Gautama himself never did so because he saw it as
unnecessary. He practised and experienced all the eight kinds of
samadhis before his Enlightenment and discarded them. He said, 'This is
not it. This is not going to take you any closer to Self-Realization. It
is just moving into a higher level of experience and you might get more
caught up because it is more beautiful than the current reality.' If
your goal is set, if you have made Self-Realization the top priority in
your life, then everything else which does not take you one step closer
is meaningless.

Enlightenment and Death How are death and Enlightenment related? Death
and Enlightenment are entwined in the sense that if the life energies
become overly intense, you cannot keep the body. Also, if the life
energies become too feeble, you cannot keep the body. Only if it is in a
certain band of intensity can you hold on to the body. If you raise the
intensity beyond a certain pitch, you will get Enlightened and leave. If
you drop it below a certain level, you will die. This is the natural
process. Most of the Enlightened people cannot hang on to the body
unless they do some tricks with it. Either they should know the
mechanics of the body very well or they must constantly create some
conscious karma---like some desire or some longing which will look
absurd in their life because it does not fit into the rest of the person
at all. People may think they are crazy, but they have to carry on with
it just to keep their body going. This is the reason sadhana is
inevitable if you want to work your karma out in stages. At Isha, we
don't believe in sudden Enlightenment. If sudden Enlightenment happens,
most people may not be capable of withstanding it. It may cause either
death or absolute introverting. If you do not know this, thousands of
people realize in the world, but 90 per cent of them will leave at the
moment of Self-Realization. The moment one realizes, 'I am not this,'
one cannot stay in the body any more, because they do not have the
maturity nor the understanding to stay and continue the work. So the
moment someone realizes, they will slip out of the body; that is the
end. This is why most realized beings go unnoticed.

It is a rare few who attain a certain level of understanding, who manage
to retain this body with their Self-Realization. There is a lot of
sadhana going on here at Isha. In terms of real activity, for me,
programmes are a very small part of my life, though they take a lot of
time. The activity is very different. There are many people here who, if
I let them go, will become fully realized beings. But they do not have
the mastery over their systems to retain their bodies. They will drop
their body if I let them go. So, usually, we peg them down at the last
step so that their body can run its natural course. To peg them down is
not a good thing to do, but you know we have taken social
responsibilities. So I always peg them down at the last step and let the
body run its natural course. When it finishes a certain phase, then we
will leave it to them. So, to have reached the final step and still
retain the body, one must either understand the technology of the body
or one must play some kind of drama to hang on. People ask me, 'What is
your trick to keep the body?' I have no compulsions. I have an anklet on
my foot which is actually more of a shackle. It is not just an anklet,
it is like a fix. It is done in a certain way. It is loaded with mercury
and certain things have been done to it. It is a live thing. If you
don't see this anklet on me one day, just know that there is very little
time left.

Mukti and Mahasamadhi In the Indian way of life, reaching God or heaven
is not the highest goal of life. They always spoke about mukti or
Ultimate Liberation or freedom from the cycle of birth and death as the
highest goal of life. But in English, when you say the word freedom or
Liberation, people visualize becoming a bird and flying in the sky. If
you are a birdwatcher or if you have seen birds flying, you will know
that even the most magnificent birds like the hawk or eagle are
constantly looking down at the ground while flying. They are looking for
something to feed on, down below. They may not even be enjoying the
flight. For them, it is a survival process, just like you going to the
office. So mukti, when translated, could create wrong images in one's
mind.

The words Moksha and Nirvana are also referring to mukti. Nirvana is a
more appropriate word because Nirvana means non-existence. What it means
is that you are free from the very burden of existence. When I say you
are free from existence, I am not talking about existence as a quantity
and you are free from that. You are free from your own existence. Your
existence is finished. When there is no existence, you are even free
from freedom, because freedom is also a certain bondage. As long as you
exist, one way or the other you are bound. If you are existing
physically, it is one kind of bondage. If you leave the physical body
and you exist in some other way, there is still another kind of bondage.
Everything that exists is ruled by some law. Now, mukti means you have
broken all laws and they can be broken only when you cease to exist.
That is the ultimate freedom. Ultimately, every seeker wants to go
beyond existence. They do not want to be in the process of existence,
which may mean birth and death or hanging around or whatever. Whether
you are actually physically born or not, as long as you exist, you are
going through some process or the other. Existence is always a process.
Existence is not a thing. The sun is a process, the whole solar system
is a process, the galaxy is a process, all the galaxies put together is
a process. If you want to be free from all processes, it means that you
must cease to exist; there is no other way. Existence, as you know it,
must cease; only then there is no process. What is the use of this? When
one really looks at one's life and sees, 'What is the use?'---that is
exactly the thought which makes one seek mukti. Right now, such a depth
of 'What is the point?' is still not occurring to people, because people
are still children. They might have grown-up bodies, but in terms of
understanding, they are still children. They want to see this, they want
to see that. Let us say, the memory of a hundred lifetimes opens up to
you, you will see that you are going through the same nonsense over and
over again. Then you will definitely ask the question, 'What is the
point? Once again getting into the womb of another woman, another
childbirth, another nonsense---what is the use?' If you ask this
question in the deepest possible way, your longing for mukti will become
absolute.

Mukti means you want to become free from the process of life and death,
not because you are suffering. People who are suffering cannot attain
mukti. You are fine, you are joyful, but you have had enough of
kindergarten, you want to move on. However beautiful your school life
was, don't you want to go to college? That is all. Death means the end
of the physical body; everything else continues and finds another body
soon; whereas with mukti, everything comes to an end. In a way, mukti is
the end of death---and birth as well. Mukti is also called as
Mahasamadhi. Mahasamadhi means one is able to walk out of one's body,
consciously, without damaging it. Generally, if you want to leave the
body, do what you want, you cannot come out of it unless you damage the
body in some way. Unless you make the body unsuitable to cradle the life
that is within, life will not leave. When things go bad, people say, 'I
want to die,' but they don't, because they cannot. Mahasamadhi means
without using any other external means, you leave the body at will. For
someone to be able to do this, it needs tremendous energy. Such a person
knows where the body is connected to life, and they untie it and leave.
Mahasamadhi is when you are also transcending discrimination so that
there is no such thing as you and the other. It is completely finished.
Now, as you sit here, there is you and the other. It is a certain level
of reality. But Mahasamadhi means that individual existence is finished
and who you are does not exist any more. Mahasamadhi is essentially that
dimension of equanimity which gathers such a level of intensity that one
can effortlessly dismantle the very nature of physical existence. One
can dismantle not just the physical body, or the Annamaya Kosha, but
also the Manomaya Kosha, Pranamaya Kosha and the Vignanamaya Kosha. When
the life within and life without become one, naturally, this dismantling
happens. Once these four koshas are dismantled, that life is truly,
truly no more because the fifth body, the Anandamaya Kosha, or the bliss
body, is essentially consciousness or the fundamental life element.
There is nothing to dissolve there. It will just mingle with life as it
always did. This is the end of the game. The cycle is over. There is no
question of rebirth, it is complete dissolution. You can say this person
is truly no more. It is the

fortune of seekers at Isha that they have been in the presence of
Mahasamadhi. Its fragrance and essence permeates Isha Yoga Center. In
reality, death is not the end because there is no such thing as death.
Death exists only to one who has no awareness of life. There is only
life, life and life alone. But Mahasamadhi means the real end. This is
the goal of every spiritual seeker. Even an accomplished yogi will
struggle with it because it is not simple. Or, rather, it is so simple
that one who has a mind can rarely figure it out. What is referred to as
jeevasamadhi is a samadhi where a person decides to close oneself in an
enclosure and end one's life. One reason for doing this is that he or
she does not want to trouble people after their death. They want to
handle the body themselves before they go. That is how this thing
started. Another reason is that there are realized beings who are free
in a certain way within themselves but lack the know-how to leave at
will. Even if you are liberated within yourself, even if you have
attained to a certain state within yourself, to leave the physical body,
you need the skill, you need to know the science of how this body got
connected and what you need to do to disentangle from it. This
understanding has to be there, otherwise, it will not come. Such a
person, who is liberated but cannot disentangle from the body by
themselves--- will seal themselves in an enclosure, so that slowly as
the breath goes away, they will leave. But there should be no struggle
in the body. If there is even a little bit of struggle, it just amounts
to suicide. People who are on the Yogic path will not do such a thing.
They will sit in the open and leave because they know the science of how
to eject from the body, how to leave the body. Just as you drop your
clothes and walk away, you can drop your body and walk away. It is
possible. This is Mahasamadhi. There is also something called Diksha
Mrutyu , where the Guru initiates one into death. It is not a deathlike
experience but death itself. It is very good to do this if you have
everybody's permission and are in a mature society. This is usually done
when the Guru sees someone who is capable of attaining Mahasamadhi, who
has the potential but does not know how exactly to do it. So you
initiate them in such a way that they can leave. It is perfectly fine.
For that life, it is

fantastic, actually. But in today's society, it is a disaster for one
who gives this initiation because of all the social repercussions that
will arise.

A Few Mahasamadhis We have seen Mahasamadhis of two people whom we knew
and who were dear to us. One was Swami Nirmalananda, who I knew for a
long time, and the other was Vijji, my beloved wife. Swami Nirmalananda
lived in Biligiri Rangana Betta, or BR Hills, in the southern Indian
state of Karnataka. In his younger days, Nirmalananda travelled outside
India for many years, visiting holy men from all religions. During World
War II, he was in Europe and was deeply disturbed by the suffering he
saw there. He then came back to India in the 1960s and, towards the end
of his life, set up an ashram in BR Hills. He spent eleven years in
silence there. I first met him when I was probably twenty-one years old.
I used to trek a lot in BR Hills, mostly alone. One particular time, I
was in the forest for five or six days. So when I came out, I was really
hungry. I had not had any food for over twenty-four hours. I went back
to the place where I had parked my motorcycle, got on and rode up the
mountain. There was not a single restaurant there, but I knew
Nirmalananda's ashram was there and he would have food. In the ashram
there was a little temple and about twenty-five steps leading up to a
small cottage. In those days, I wouldn't get off my motorcycle for
anything. So I rode up the steps and leaned my motorcycle on the wall of
the cottage. I was smeared with mud and slush, after days and nights in
the wild in the rains. Hearing the motorcycle right outside his room,
Nirmalananda came out and looked at me. He always had a permanent smile
on his face. He used to go into periods of silence, so he was in silence
on that day. I told him I was very hungry. Then he did something
strange. He came out and touched my feet. I was someone who had never
even bowed down in a temple, my whole life. I would never ever touch
anybody's feet. It was unthinkable for me. And this man came straight to
me and held my boots, which were covered in slush. I was deeply
embarrassed. I knew people considered him a great man, but I did not
want to know how great he was---whether this man was a sanyasi or was

Enlightened or whatever. It did not mean anything to me. All I wanted
was his bread, but he came and touched my feet. This somehow disturbed
me. But, anyway, I was hungry, so I ate the bread and honey he gave me.
After that, I went to BR Hills and met him many times. A sort of
relationship developed between us---we kind of warmed up to each other.
(Actually, I was the one who warmed up---he was always warm towards
everyone.) He was mostly in silence. Sometimes, he spoke to me, but
mostly he would write and I would speak. Subsequently, my own process 1
happened and I started teaching Yoga. Many years passed and I met him
again after a long gap. By then, I was fully bearded and my wife, Vijji,
was with me. She also liked Nirmalananda and we visited him together a
few times. We used to have long conversations during those visits. Now,
sometime in April/May 1996, Vijji, my daughter, Radhe, and I visited
him. While we were talking to him, he suddenly said that the following
January, at the onset of Uttarayana, he wanted to leave. I asked him,
'Why?' He said, 'I have lived as a yogi, I don't want to live as a rogi
.' 2 He was then seventy-three years old. He was all in tears and he
told me he really was not clear about how to leave. He had already built
a small samadhi 3 for himself. He said he wanted to sit in the samadhi
and leave. He was apprehensive if it would happen or not and had a lot
of questions about it. Suddenly, this became a different kind of a
situation. It was no more a casual visit. This was Nirmalananda's
ashram. He was the man everyone came to see and I had also gone there
with my wife and daughter, but now he was consulting me. Though I had
met him many times, he was now moving towards his final phase and was in
a little bit of confusion. He did not know how to do this. He was just a
simple and very joyful person. He had realized a few things, but still
he did not know the mechanics of 'how' because he had no exploration of
his own system. He was just aware. So I opened up to him in a completely
different way. We started discussing things which I have never discussed
anywhere. I talked to him about what he should do, what he should not
do. As death always

happens because of the body being damaged either by disease or injury,
to shed the body that one has acquired without any sort of damage to it
demands a certain mastery. So I had to go into details of how he needed
to prepare himself. Vijji was there. She was listening to all this and
she burst into tears and cried relentlessly. I just ignored her and
continued to speak to him because she could be crying for joy, she could
be crying for anything. The sheer intensity of things always made her
cry. She was like that. As I was talking, Nirmalananda was also
overwhelmed by what I was saying. He was also weeping off and on and
asking me more questions. It was then that we knew that Nirmalananda
would leave. Because I knew he would leave shortly, in December 1996, we
took a large group of meditators and went there to see him one last
time. He had already announced the date to many people. He had written
one last letter to everyone he was in correspondence with. The news had
appeared in the press too. By then these so-called 'rationalists' in
Karnataka had started a big press campaign against him. They said this
man was going to commit suicide and was trying to glorify himself with
all kinds of nonsense. They wanted the government to prevent the suicide
and all that. They even got two police constables posted in the ashram
to prevent this. When I visited him the last time, he broke down and
wept. He was really pained by this. He was a very gentle being. For his
temple, he would not even pluck flowers from his plants. He worshipped
his God only with the fallen flowers because he did not want to hurt the
plants. He would never pluck a fruit from a tree either. He would take
it only if it fell down. That is how he was. He said, 'I don't even
pluck a flower from a plant, but they put police on me,' and he wept. I
said, 'What is your problem? The police are sitting there. You don't
worry about this.' Eventually, the policemen were withdrawn, but some
people were still creating a ruckus in Bangalore and Mysore. He was
supposed to leave on 15 January, but he left on the 10th itself. He left
five days early because he feared that the rationalists would come and
simply make a racket. On that day, he sat outside his cottage on a
bench. Just a few minutes before noon, in the presence of a small crowd,

he simply left. Nirmalananda was someone who needed a Diksha Mrutyu;
instead, we gave him a certain understanding of Mahasamadhi. My wife,
Vijji, was deeply influenced by Nirmalananda's Mahasamadhi. She felt if
one has to go, this is the way to go. Anyone associated with Vijji knew
she was not someone who took one step at a time. She took no steps in
Yoga. She did not do Yoga for her health, she did not do Yoga for her
well-being. She did not care about her wellbeing. She did Yoga only
because it meant something to me. It actually meant nothing to her. Any
number of times she openly spoke about it to people. People thought she
was a total sacrilege. 'She is Sadhguru's wife, and look what nonsense
she is talking?' they felt. But she was talking what was true for her.
When all this talk about leaving the body business with Nirmalananda was
going on in April/May, she was sitting there and silently crying.
Halfway down the hill, there is a very beautiful place full of wildlife,
so when we were driving back, I stopped the car there. Vijji was still
crying, so I was joking about this and that. Then she said, 'Whatever
you were talking about to Nirmalananda, I want that.' So I jokingly
said, 'Oh! You want to leave? That is great. When are you going to
leave?' And things like that. But she was very serious and was picking
up a pitch. I thought, 'Okay, this is no more a joke, it is getting
big.' Then I said, 'Okay, let us see if you can do it, you just chant
"Shambho", 4 let me see.' The scene is very clear in my mind even now.
My little car was parked by the side of the road. I was standing there
and Radhe was playing around with something. This was a deserted road
where only once in twenty to thirty minutes a vehicle passed by. Vijji
was kneeling in the middle of the road and telling me she wanted to go.
And I said, 'Okay, you chant "Shambho".' This is all the sadhana I gave.
I gave it to her casually. I did not sit down and initiate her into
something fantastic or specific. I never thought she would have the
perseverance to stick to it the way she did. It takes a lot to do it
because your attention should be on it for twenty-four hours of the day.
Otherwise, these things will not develop in you. I knew she had certain
qualities in her; when she set her mind on something, she went all out.
But I never thought she would have the determination to go all out.
Especially being the emotional person that

she was---her emotions towards me and Radhe---I thought it would be
enough to deter her. But she picked it up. She started picking up so
much momentum that, within a short time, she was somewhere else. She was
not the same person any more; she was going away. She was no more my
wife, but a super-intense sadhaka . I tried to slow her down a little
bit because nobody can sustain that kind of intensity for too long. It
will burn out. I would say, 'What is the hurry?' Our daughter was not
even seven years old. Vijji herself had gone through a phase of problems
and struggles within herself and was now blossoming into a wonderful
possibility. So I said, 'Things are working out well for you also, why
now?' She said, 'Right now, my inside is feeling absolutely beautiful
and outside everyone is wonderful to me. This is the time I want to
leave. Right now, I am in a space where I want to be; I want to leave
like this.' I again said, 'What is the hurry now? You can wait for a few
years, enjoy this and then go.' She replied, 'Right now, you don't want
me to go, but after a few years would you want me to go?' I did not know
how to reason with her or stop her. I tried all means of persuasion but
nothing worked. She was already involved with the Dhyanalinga
consecration. Many things that had to be done as a part of the
consecration were not easy at all. 'Difficult' is not the word because
it would be extremely difficult for any normal person to do those
things. But she gave herself to it and did fabulously well. She had set
forth towards this process for her leaving. She wanted to leave after
the consecration was over. For three consecutive full moon days---in
December, January and February---she wanted to cook and serve the
brahmacharis. Not with a serving spoon, but with her own hands. The
desire to serve with your own hands is part of Indian culture. She
wanted to do this on three full moons, and on the full moon in February
she wanted to leave. The consecration process, as it was going, was sure
to be over before 23 January. But I knew something was going to happen
which would postpone the whole thing in a big way, putting everything at
risk. So somewhere on 14 January, I made the people involved take a vow
that by the next full moon in February, we would finish it. No

matter what, whatever it takes, we would finish it. They said yes, but I
said, 'That is not enough, you have to really take a vow.' I actually
made them shout three times, that we are going to do it. I am so
absolutely committed to fulfilling my Guru's will, that I am willing to
get into someone's womb, take birth, make that woman go through all
that, grow up, all with a single-point agenda of doing one thing. I am
that relentless. It was my Guru's dream to consecrate the Dhyanalinga
and, somehow, it was passed on to me. I had spent lifetimes trying to do
this, and now that we were this close to finishing it, I wanted it
completed with Vijji by my side. Without her, it would have meant
starting all over again and that was almost impossible. While the plans
for consecration were in progress, concurrently, Vijji's plan of leaving
was on. We had visited her parents and my relatives one last time. She
tried to convey the same to the family, but no one grasped it as she was
healthy and well. When she said this was her last visit, they thought
she was angry with them. We also attended a family wedding after a very
long time. I had been so absent at these social occasions that many
people met Vijji for the first time only then. Then, on 21 January, we
dropped our daughter, Radhe, off at school. Vijji had already been
telling Radhe for some time that she was leaving. Radhe's birthday is in
March, so she was telling her she would not be there for her birthday,
and by then she would be gone. The girl and Vijji were talking in a very
matter-of-fact manner that she will not be there and how I would come
and do this and do that. I said, 'Why are you doing this to the girl?
Leave her alone.' She said, 'No, no. I have to tell her. I don't want
her to feel I left without telling her.' We came back from Ooty on the
evening of 21 January. On the evening of the 23rd, she left. What she
thought would happen on the full moon in February happened a month
early. On that day, there was an exceedingly rare and archetypically
appropriate planetary alignment. They say it happens once in 200 years.
It was also Thaipoosam , a day that many sages of the past had chosen
for their own Mahasamadhi. So these things also factored in.

Vijji---an intensity that cannot be contained, a few weeks before
Mahasamadhi.

On that evening, a group of people from the Yoga Center had assembled in
the shrine, as they did on full moon evenings. Vijji had already cooked
for them. We were going to meditate together and she was to serve them
food after that. A few minutes after everyone had sat down for
meditation and closed their eyes, she got up and went to the

bathroom. I was a little irritated with this because once we sit down
for meditation, no one moves even a limb, let alone get up and leave.
But she went to the bathroom and returned a few minutes later. She had
taken off her gold bangles, earrings and toe rings, left them in the
bathroom and returned. After some time, she just uttered 'Shambho'
thrice and slumped to her left. And that was it. I noticed something was
off and asked one of the brahmacharis to attend to her, and another
fetched some water. But she was gone by then. What she had accomplished
is not a child's play. Even accomplished yogis will struggle to attain
this. Even a gnani 5 like Nirmalananda, who spent his lifetime in
spiritual sadhana, struggled to attain this. To throw this life out of
this body without injuring the body, it takes something else. One has to
generate a tremendous amount of energy, which requires intense sadhana.
She knew the methods to achieve this and she was working towards this.
But I never imagined that without my assistance she would be able to
generate the necessary energy. Moreover, there were certain things to be
done, which she had no way of knowing. For example, when we initiate
people into certain sadhana, we give them something like a metal ring or
a bracelet to wear. They are never supposed to remove it unless the Guru
says so. This is because, sometimes, during that kind of sadhana, you
might accidentally slip out of your body. If there is some metal on
certain parts of your body, it will prevent it. I had never mentioned it
to her. Yet, somehow, intuitively, she had taken off all her jewellery
at that moment. She must have seen that they were preventing her from
leaving. Some people ask me, could she have been stopped? The
consecration work was still not complete. Moreover, she was my wife and
she was leaving behind a small child, so why did I not stop her? Could I
have stopped her? I say, yes, it is possible. Anyone could have stopped
her. You should know, not just a Guru, anyone can stop you. You have
heard all those old stories where some sages were meditating and
something would come and distract them. Why, even Shiva himself got
distracted. 6 So a simple distraction can do it. It does not take any
Guru or some spiritual capability to distract them. It is just that if
they have gone beyond a certain point, then whatever you do, such things
cannot distract

them. Still, a Guru can hold them if he wants to, but, at the same time,
if they have gone that far, who would want to hold them? You may hold
them before they go to that point, but if they have gone to that point,
you will not hold them. There is no point holding back such a person; it
is against the very grain of our existence. Mahasamadhi should not be
confused with committing suicide; as I have explained, it is different
as it does not damage the physical body. Moreover, walking away from a
healthy, living body means you have enough mastery over your life to
make it or break it. So when someone is leaving in that way, with such
intensity, you don't try to stop them. It does not matter who he or she
is, whether this is your father, your mother, your wife or child, what
does it matter? Such things don't exist in that plane. Somebody being a
wife or a husband is only true in our psychological and physiological
sphere. Yes, Vijji was my beloved wife, but when she got into a certain
state, I no longer saw her as my wife. She became a possibility that is
transcendent and beyond personal relationships. Her name was Vijaya
Kumari, which means 'victory's daughter'. The highest-possible victory
for any being became hers. All her life, she used to say that she was
proud that she was my wife, but with this she made me proud as her
husband and Guru.

Vijji She knew Love and nothing more She was Love and nothing more The
Lord needs Love and nothing more She wooed him with Her Love and She is
no more

There have been many other instances of how people left their bodies at
will. One such interesting case is that of Layman Pang and his daughter.
Layman Pang was a lay Buddhist famous in China in the 9th century AD .
He was born in a wealthy family, but at some point, he, his wife, his
son

and daughter renounced all their possessions and lived an itinerant life
while being dedicated to spiritual pursuit. One day, when he was about
seventy years old, he decided it was time to leave his body on a
particular day. At that time, only his daughter was living with him. On
the appointed day, the two of them prepared the room for his departure.
He took a bath, donned his robe and sat crossed-legged on his bed. He
wanted to leave at noon. So he asked his daughter to look outside the
window and let him know when it was exactly noon. Having been raised
under the tutelage of her father, Layman Pang's daughter, Ling-chao, was
an accomplished spiritual seeker herself. Layman Pang often commented
about Ling-chao's ability to grasp things very quickly. On that day,
Ling-chao sat looking out of the window, waiting for noon. Suddenly, she
reported to her father that there was an eclipse. 'Is that so?' Layman
Pang asked. 'Yes, please come and see for yourself,' she answered. Then
Layman Pang rose from his seat and looked out the window. Immediately,
Ling-chao jumped on her father's bed and, sitting cross-legged, left her
body in a moment. When Layman Pang returned and saw what had happened,
he said, 'My daughter's way was always quick. Now she has gone ahead of
me.' People say Ling-chao tricked her father to leave before him. But it
may not be so. Probably, Layman Pang had prepared the ambience so well
that his daughter was instinctively drawn towards the bed and the nature
of the energies he had created was such that she, who was also a
spiritual practitioner, was able to leave the body at that instant.
Layman Pang looked at the situation and calmly went out, gathered
firewood and performed a cremation ceremony. He then observed the
traditional mourning period of seven days, at the end of which the
governor of the province visited Layman Pang to pay his condolences. As
they were talking, sitting by the side of the governor, Layman Pang left
his body.

PART II The Gracefulness of Death Become Me I was borne in my Mother's
womb but she did not create me I eat the salt of this Earth but I do not
belong to her It is through this body that I walk but I am not it It is
my mind through which I work but it could not contain me In the
limitations of time and space I live but it has not denied me
unboundedness I was born like you, I eat like you, sleep like you and I
will die like you but the limited has not limited me Life's bondages
have not bound me As the dance of life progresses this space, this
unboundedness has become unbearably sweet Become love and reach out
Become me

CHAPTER 6

Preparing for a Good Death

Most people in the world believe that if they die in their sleep, it is
wonderful. What a horrible way to go!

Does Death Need Preparation If death is inevitable, what is the need to
spend time and energy preparing for it? You must understand that what
you refer to as death is a unique happening. It is the very last moment
of your life. Almost everything else in your life may happen many times
over, but the final moment when you transcend the limitations of your
physical body will happen only once in your lifetime. It is the last
thing that you will do in your life. Moving from the physical to the
non-physical is the greatest moment in your life. So is it not very
important that you make it happen most gracefully and wonderfully?
Moreover, let us say, you want to go to Coimbatore city from the Yoga
Center. It is just 30 kilometres away, so, typically, you just hop on to
some bus and go. You don't book a seat on the bus ten days in advance,
take a huge suitcase, pack your lunch and water bottle and all that. If
there is no transport available, you may even walk the distance. But if
you want to go on a long journey, you book your tickets, take food,
water and whatever else you may need for this long journey. Now, if you
want to go to Antarctica, you take just about everything with you, isn't
it? You should know, when compared to the journey after death, the
journey from your birth to death is just a short one. The time a being
spends in an embodied state is nothing compared to the time one spends
being in a disembodied state. Yet you have done too much preparation for
this. You have bought enough clothes to wear for three lifetimes,
footwear for eight lifetimes and a whole lot of other things. But for
the journey after

death, which is a very long one, should you not make adequate
preparations too? Why dying well is very important is because, when a
being is disembodied, whether one's experience becomes heavenly or
hellish largely depends on how one dies. Not entirely, but largely so.
Preparing for death is not about gathering a lot of information and
satisfying one's curiosity about something to come. If you want to make
use of the opportunity that death presents, you cannot approach it with
fear. This is not something that you can handle all of a sudden at that
moment. So it is important that on many levels we prepare for death
beforehand. If you can manage this last conscious moment of your life
gracefully, you will at least go through the disembodied phase well. You
will not make it hellish. Unfortunately, most people create fear at that
moment. They just cling on, saying, 'I don't want to die.' Some people
actually desperately cling on to a bed sheet or someone's hand or
something. This is not a good way to go. With just a little bit of
preparation, guidance and even a bit of help, what is now considered a
catastrophe can become a huge opportunity for spiritual possibility. In
a way, from a spiritual perspective, what did not perhaps happen in life
can be accomplished at the moment of death, if it is handled sensibly.
This is because it is very easy to untie the knots of everything that
you have accumulated at that final moment. But if you are unprepared or
become fearful of it or are ignorant of the ways of life, you will
create resistance towards it and miss that possibility completely.
Everyone should know how to die by themselves. I have been telling
people that when I die, I will make sure that no one has to even carry
me to my grave. I will walk to my grave. You know, they had built a
samadhi for me at the Yoga Center many years ago. It is still there at
the Yoga Centre. We had always planned to leave at a certain time, once
the Dhyanalinga was done. So we prepared this. We had many discussions
about it like, 'Don't put too many steps because maybe at that time I
will not be able to climb down too much,' and so on. We worked out
details of how the door, the bolt and the locking mechanism should be
for me to lock it from inside, one final time. We did this because I was
planning to

walk into my grave myself so that those four people would be spared some
labour. But the samadhi structure did not get used and money got
wasted---that is another matter, though. So everyone must make
preparations for their death---not just externally, internally too. You
must be able to sit quietly and die. When death is imminent, most wild
animals will withdraw to a place where they just sit. They don't eat
anything and they die. When even animals, creatures that crawl, have
that much dignity about their death, why do human beings want drama
around them? In life, they want drama, but at least death should be
conducted in a dignified way. Ideally, I would like to teach the whole
population a way where they can live beautifully, blissfully, every
moment of their life. Then, naturally, one will leave in the best
possible manner. But as I am getting older, I am realizing that it is
taking a lot of time and effort. So if that is not possible, I would
like to at least teach them how to die well, so that they can manage at
least the last moment of their lives sensibly. It is my wish that for
some reason, if people cannot live blissfully, they must at least die
well. But much more is possible if one makes an effort in this
direction. This possibility is available not only for accomplished yogis
but also for any sensible person who is willing to take instructions
that are beyond one's understanding. People on the spiritual path often
go one step further and choose the time, date and place of their death.
They are able to fix it beforehand and leave at that time, because they
have created the necessary awareness within themselves so that, when the
time comes, they can bundle the life energies and leave the body
consciously. To leave this body consciously and walk away without
damaging it, just like taking off your clothes, is the ultimate
possibility in your life. If your awareness has grown to such a point
that you know where you as a being and this physical body which you
gathered are connected, then you can disentangle yourself whenever the
moment is right for you. This is the ultimate kind of preparation you
can make for your death. When we talk about making preparations for
death, people ask, 'What if the death is sudden? How can such a person
die well?' Death is never sudden. You may not have foreseen it, but it
is never sudden. Today's

movies are big culprits in spreading this fallacy of instantaneous
death. They think of life as a quantity which is sitting inside that
goes pop! when someone is shot. It is not like that. Look at it this
way: suppose I shoot you in the head right now, will all your breath go
off at once? No, it will happen slowly. Once the compression of the
ribcage is gone here, it will slowly dribble out. Similarly, life
dribbles out, over some time. But the moment the body turns inert, your
experience of life is gone. Your experience of the body and your senses
is gone, but the experience itself is still there. This is so even when
you are sleeping. There is an experience there, but you are unable to
turn inward and access this experience. Once your senses are
disconnected, you have no experience of the world or the body, but the
experience of presence is still there. Now, suppose a man was shot in
the head, does he also have the opportunity to die peacefully? Let us
say, a man fell down from the roof and died. From your perspective,
because you see the body breaking up, you may think this is a violent
death. But for the man who has fallen down, he may have died a very
peaceful death within himself in those last few moments. Or he may have
died a violent death. The violence is not in the way the body breaks.
The violence is in the way that the human being experiences it in that
moment. As an outside observer, you are judging the violence by what
happened to the body. But you cannot know what happened to the being.
Only he knows, unless you know the ways to know it. Someone may die
surrounded by his or her family, but at the last moment, they may have
just looked at their fiendish relative. You may think they died
peacefully in their bed, but, no, they might have become terrified and
died a violent death! Someone might have died in a car crash where their
body broke into bits, but at the last moment they might have just said,
'Shiva', or some other thing and died peacefully, we don't know. The
violence of the death is not determined by what happened to the body; it
depends on what happened within that person. A man who is shot in the
head is in no way in any kind of disadvantage compared to a person who
is dying of some disease or old age or whatever. You need to understand
this: however sudden the death is---whether it is a heart attack, car
crash, air crash or a bullet in the head

---still, there are a few moments between injury and death. Even if a
man's head is chopped off all of a sudden, he has still got a few
moments between that injury and death. Those few moments can become
moments of awareness if he has put in a certain amount of awareness into
his life. On the other hand, even if someone gave some people a hundred
years of lifespan, it is possible that in these hundred years they do
not become aware. That is the reality of life. Someone who is suddenly
shot has just a few moments, but it is still the same reality. If you
had lived a life of awareness, then it is very much possible that even
at the last moment you could become aware. If this has to come, you have
to build a life of awareness. Only then you can be aware in your death.
That is why it is important to develop this awareness during your life
so it does not matter how death comes to you---you will have the ability
to die well. Some people are able to live well only if good situations
come to them. Some people live well whichever kind of situation comes to
them. This is so with death as well. If you develop the necessary
capability, whichever way death comes, you can maintain your awareness
and die well. If you have not lived a life of awareness, the possibility
of you suddenly becoming aware in an extreme situation like death does
not arise at all. Let us say, the doctor tells someone, 'You have
cancer, you have got just one month to live,' how many of them become
aware because they have one month's preparation time? They may just
become paranoid. Only a few become aware and make use of this advance
intimation.

Sleep, Ojas and Death There are certain preparations that one can do for
death involving sleep and generation of ojas . 1 Now, is there any
connection between sleep and death? Fundamentally, the dynamism of the
physical has to touch the inertia of the non-physical. This is the
Shiva--Shakti principle. Shiva is inertia, Shakti is dynamism.
Everything in the physical Universe has to go through that. It is
happening in so many ways in Existence. Whether it is an atom, an
amoeba, a human being, the planet, the solar system, or the
Universe---all of them are going in these cycles of dynamism and

inertia because this is the most fundamental cycle. Lifespans are
different depending upon who you are, what you are, but it is the same
principle in operation. Inhalation--exhalation, wakefulness--sleep,
day-- night, life--death, creation--dissolution---all these are
fundamentally the same process. In a way, what you call sleep is also
like death. You die, but you wake up with the same old goddamn body.
Actually, even with sleep, if you are very tired and go to bed after a
good sleep, it feels like you woke up with a new body. Death is when you
went to sleep and woke up to find the body has shrunk. You have to grow
it again! Now, if you are conscious during this transition between the
states of dynamism and inertia, you may get off the bus. If you can move
from wakefulness to sleep while remaining fully conscious, you will very
effortlessly move from life to death also fully conscious, because in
its fundamental essence, it is not different. It is just moving from
dynamism to inertia. If you are able to move consciously from one state
to another in these cycles from Shakti to Shiva, then you have
transcended a whole lot of things. You can try this with your sleep
tonight. When you are falling asleep, when you are going from the state
of wakefulness to sleep, see if you can be aware at that moment. If you
can be aware at that moment, then you can be aware at that moment when
you go from body to bodiless state. Most people sleep without any
awareness. But that final moment when you are transiting from
wakefulness to sleep, if you can simply be aware, you will be awake in
your sleep. If you can manage this awareness, something tremendous will
happen. Now, if you consciously bring some quality to the last few
moments of your falling asleep, that will continue into your sleep as
well. Let us say, you make the moment of falling asleep very loving or
happy within yourself, you will see that quality will continue through
the sleep also. That is exactly what will happen with death also, but
far more enhanced. If, at the final moment, a certain quality is brought
in, then that quality will continue. Instead of learning to stay awake
when you are sleeping, which is much more difficult, you can learn to
sleep when you are awake. This is

easier to get. If you do some sadhana, you can get it. This is what
happens in Shoonya 2 meditation---you are awake but you are asleep. The
body thinks you are asleep, that is why it drops the metabolism. But you
are awake. When you are sitting in Shoonya, suddenly, the body thinks
you are gone and, in your experience, your hand disappears, your leg
disappears, and so on. You kind of sneaked up on the body. The body does
not know you are awake, but if one thought arises, suddenly, it realizes
that you are sneaking up on it and the legs and hands come back. Staying
awake in your sleep will take much more but sleeping when you are awake
is a possibility. But if you learn to maintain awareness during either
of these transitions, it will help you immensely to go through the
transition from the embodied to the disembodied state. A much simpler
but not so effective way forward is Isha Kriya. 3 The process of death
can also be greatly assisted if you are able to generate or gather a lot
of ojas. In some Far East cultures, an Enlightened being is referred to
as an enso . The word enso means a circle. Why a circle? Why do you
think your automobile wheels are all circular? Triangular wheels would
be jazzier, isn't it? Why is it circular, not triangular or rectangular
or whatever? Because anything that is circular has the least amount of
resistance. So an Enlightened being is referred to as an 'enso' not
because they are round of body but because they have generated
sufficient ojas that their passage through life and death happens with
the least amount of resistance. In Yogic culture, this is sort of fondly
or mischievously referred to as stealing from the Earth. This body is a
loan that you have taken from Mother Earth. She is very generous with
this, but when it comes to reclaiming, she is very stringent. She will
not let you take even one atom as a souvenir. She will collect every
atom back. So the yogis learned how to steal from the Earth. That is,
they convert the physical into the nonphysical. Now, she cannot claim it
back. She cannot recognize it. This non-physical thing is known as ojas.
Sometimes there are people on certain types of sadhana and, during that
time, they will eat huge volumes of food. Usually, it is handled in
seclusion, so people don't get to see these things. They eat the kind of
volumes that no human body can consume. They eat ten people's food,

but they will not gain an ounce and they will not have any kind of
health problems. If you eat that much food, your stomach would burst.
But they will not gain any weight because, at that particular phase,
they are transforming the physical into the non-physical. Normally, the
food that you eat becomes flesh and blood. But if you do certain things
with your system, it will transform the physical into the non-physical.
You will develop ojas, not body. If you have sufficient ojas around you,
your passage through life and death will become very effortless. You
will go through the whole process smoothly. Having ojas gives you a
certain body when you lose yours. It is like you are not made for water,
you are not a fish. So if you are lost in the ocean, you would like to
have at least a piece of wood. A piece of wood would mean a lot in those
circumstances. If you have one piece of the kattumaram , 4 it is good
enough. If you have two pieces of the kattumaram, you can ride and go
where you want. So when you lose your physical body, if you have a piece
of body, you will see you can direct your boat which way to go. That is
the intent of developing ojas. If you have ojas, then you also lubricate
your life so that your movement through this world also becomes easy. So
how does one gather ojas? The kriyas that you practise in the morning
and evening are one way of generating ojas. If you are doing kapalabhati
, 5 if you do it powerfully enough, you develop ojas. Right now, when
you do kapalabhati, you may feel the general heat in the face and head.
That is okay for health and well-being. If you do proper kapalabhati, it
will become one-pointed; heat will get generated at one point, just at
the top of your head. If you do kapalabhati like that, then ojas will
develop. Right now, the brahmacharis are doing various sadhanas of Surya
Kriya. If you do that, ojas will develop. The kumbhaka sadhana 6 that
they practise will develop an enormous amount of ojas. When you develop
ojas, if you watch carefully, you will not have a clear-cut shadow.
Because of the ojas, the light will get confused or diffused. Erasing of
physical boundaries not by damage but by enveloping oneself with ojas is
also Yoga or union.

Why Do People Fear Death

The fear of death has come because of a certain sense of ignorance and
unawareness. Most people are terrified even by just seeing a dead body.
I understand that for people who loved them, for people who cared for
them, losing someone dear is a big loss. But why are people afraid of
seeing a dead body? Living bodies can be dangerous, I can understand
that. They can do many things to you. They can pretend to like you, but
tomorrow they may kill you. But dead bodies are absolutely safe, yet
people are afraid of them! In many parts of the world, children are told
not to even utter the word 'death' inside the house, because they have a
stupid hope that if you don't utter this word, it will not enter the
house. This morbid fear of death is not natural. Maybe the majority of
people have subscribed to it, that is different, but the fear is not a
natural process. Death is a natural process. If life happens, then death
is natural. Being afraid of something natural is unnatural. The fear of
death is simply because we are not in touch with reality. The fear of
death has come to us because we have gotten deeply identified with this
body. Our identification with this body has become so strong because we
have not explored other dimensions. If we had explored other dimensions
of experience, if we had established ourselves in other dimensions of
experience, the body would not be such a big issue. You talk of your
body as if you came with it. You did not. You only gathered it. You
gathered it while in your mother's womb and continued gathering it after
your birth. Whatever we accumulate, we can say, 'This is mine.' But you
cannot say, 'This is me.' Now, if I take the cup from which I drink
water and say, 'This is my cup,' you will think, 'Sadhguru seems to have
some problem. But let me listen some more, everyone says he is wise.'
But after some time, if I say, 'This is me,' then you will definitely
say, 'Let me get away from this person.' But you are doing the same
thing with your body, which is why you make such a big fuss about
shedding it. Suppose you overate and gathered a lot of body during the
next few weeks and then worked out and dropped some of it, you don't
call it death. You gathered something and you put it back. No big deal.
You would be happy and relieved, not distressed, about it. It should be
the

same with death. What you know as death is just a little bit of purging.
With age, the flesh is beginning to lose its vigour, so it needs to be
cleaned up. Either you put back what you gathered joyfully or you put it
back crying. That is a choice you have. Death is like you picked up a
spadeful of soil and threw it back. But, instead, if you look at this
spadeful of soil and get very attached to it, you will cry like a child
when it falls off your spade. It is like a child, who picked up a little
pebble from somewhere, came home and lost it. He is heartbroken. He
cries inconsolably. If all that you know is just the body, then this is
what will happen to you. But if you had known something in your life
that is more than the body, then shedding the body will not be a big
deal for you. What you refer to as life is essentially like a term loan
from a bank. They may give you a ten-year loan, but it is not yours; you
must pay back. With some tricks, you can extend it to twelve years. If
you are very tricky, you can stretch it to fifteen years. If you are
super tricky, maybe you can stretch it to twenty years. That is about
it. Beyond that, no one has stretched it until now. People may tell you
stories that someone lived for 4000 years, or 10,000 years because they
probably want to make a movie, but no one has stretched life that much.
There are ways to hibernate life so that you still maintain your intent
beyond the body and you can once again take a body and come back. That
is a different matter. That is not stretching your life. That is
handling the natural cycle consciously. Now, generally, in society,
people have been convincing you that, after all, the fear of death is
natural. Whatever the majority of people do, they say it is natural. If
the majority of the people were smoking cigarettes, people would say
smoking is a natural thing, isn't it? This was happening in the past.
Even now, certain groups of people say it is natural. A human being is
not made to smoke; you are not an automobile! It is not natural for you
to smoke. But people will make it natural. When I was growing up, my
lack of fear caused a lot of anxiety to my father. He would keep saying,
'What will happen to this boy? There is no fear in his heart about
anything.' One day, I turned around and asked him, 'When did fear become
a virtue?' Fear is not a virtue, but people

have made it so natural that they think something is missing if there is
no fear. Similarly, right now, the fear of death has been made natural
by society. Somewhere along the way, the fear of pain has become mixed
with the fear of death because a lot of people think death is going to
be painful. This is why they request doctors to give them something so
that they can go painlessly. Death is not painful, believe me. It is
very nice. It does not happen because of any particular thing. It is
just happening all the time. It is just that at some point people
realize that it has happened to them, other times they don't realize it.
The breaking of the body can hurt. That can be painful, but not death.
The disease that causes death may be painful, the injury that causes
death may be painful, but death itself is not painful. It once happened:
Shankaran Pillai fell off the second floor and screamed. People gathered
and asked, 'Why? Did the fall hurt you?' He said, 'You idiots, it is not
the fall, it was the stopping.' In people's understanding, often one
thing gets mixed up with the other. The fear of pain is a physiological
thing. The body builds this up as a survival mechanism, in anticipation
of pain. It is a physiological reality and you don't want to go through
that because you know how unpleasant it can be. But the fear of death
has no basis because death is not painful. Yet why do people fear death?
Let us say, you took a loan of a million dollars from me, and in ten
years' time, it grew to a billion dollars. Now, if I tell you that I am
coming to your house, you will welcome me wonderfully. If I ask for my
million dollars, you will happily give it back and maybe something on
top of it too. You will regard me as your great friend because I gave
you the money ten years ago. But if you have squandered the million
dollars I gave you, if I say I am coming to your house, I will feel like
death to you. You will shiver in your pants. Actually, for many people,
their debt collectors create more fear in them than their death! The
fear of death is also like this. Planet Earth is telling you it is time
to pay back your loan. No interest, nothing. If you made something truly
wonderful out of it, you will joyfully pay it back and go. But if you
made nothing out of it except living your life psychologically, you will
be terrified. Those who have not made good use of it will always try to

dodge. Those who are successful in knowing and existing as a fullfledged
life are willing to pay back joyfully without any problem. Those who
never really lived and only thought about it are scared and bewildered.
If you really look at it, you are not afraid of physical death as such.
Suppose you have grown old and God offers you a deal, 'Okay, you give me
this old body and I will give you a new body,' who would not want to
take it? So you are not really afraid of losing the body as such. The
fear of death is about what you think you will lose by death. The fear
of death is essentially the fear of loss. If someone is going to lose
their job or all their money or someone who is very dear to them or a
person whom they are very dependent upon, they will have greater fears.
What they go through is just like what they go through if they are going
to die. People even kill themselves rather than go through that. The
real fear is not that the body is going to break one day. 'What will
happen to me?' is the real fear. Fundamentally, the only thing that can
get hurt, the only thing that can feel trampled, the only thing that can
be abused in you is your ego or your persona. You are only constantly
afraid of losing this image that you have built of who you are. That is
the biggest barrier, a bubble that you are unwilling to get out of.
Actually, if in some way we devise ways to disgrace you and abuse you,
not physically but in every other way, you would actually wish death
over that. Now, death would be a gift, death would be a benevolence
rather than going through all that. Sometimes, this same fear gets
translated into many different aspects. One person will make their fear
of death into: 'I am not worried about dying, but my children, how they
will suffer?' So they will suffer with that fear. Someone else suffers
from the fear of 'I don't want to die' kind of thing, simply because
they do not know anything beyond that. This is a fear of losing
everything that I know as myself and the world and life. Have you
noticed, people who have been convinced that they are going to gain by
death step into it without any fear at all? If you understand there is
nothing to lose, because anyway you came with nothing and there is
nothing to lose, the fear of death will not be relevant.

How to Deal with the Fear of Death Right now, your whole experience of
life is limited to this body. No matter what kind of teachings other
people give you, it does not matter. Someone may tell you that you are
not the body or that you are the atma (soul), or the paramatma (super
soul) 7 or whatever, but in your experience, this body is you. Whatever
Gitas 8 they may read to you, whatever Upanishads they may read to you,
your experience is still limited to the physical body. So you fear
losing it. But if you explore and establish yourself in other dimensions
of experience, the body will become an easy thing to handle. Life or
death will not make such a big difference. Fundamentally, death means
you are shedding what you have gathered in this life in terms of
physical content and psychological content. You may think many things
about yourself as a person, but as far as the planet is concerned, it is
just recycling itself. It pops you up and pulls you back. In that
pop-up, you have an opportunity to transcend this whole cycle. But
whether you transcend or not is entirely up to you. Moreover, when your
experience of life is limited to the physical body, then you not only
fear death but also fear life and seek security. And this fear of life
in turn makes you court death, because seeking security is courting
death. Have you noticed, if people feel insecure they will just curl up
and sleep? They just go back into that foetal position. The need is to
go back into the womb. The womb is not really in the mother; the womb is
really in death. The physical mother is just a small manifestation of
that, but the real womb is in death. When people feel insecure, they
want to drink and sleep because sleep is just a small manifestation of
death. People want to sleep absolutely like a log because it gives
freedom from life. This whole 'courting death' thing has come because of
the need for security. From where did the insecurity spring, first of
all? Insecurity comes to you because of limited identification. You
identify yourself as a body, and only because of that, there is all this
insecurity. Your body is a fragile bubble that you have blown. The fear
of death is simply because you are existing here in this vast Existence
as a tiny person. If you have tasted the unboundedness in you, if you
truly experienced yourself beyond the

limitations of the physical and the mental, there would be no fear. This
is why there is so much emphasis on using your time and life to know
that which is beyond the physical. That is why you must do sadhana. But
a lot of people who have a fear of death try to become immortal. They
try to beat it. This is a wrong approach. If you fear death, now, you
must see what the basis of this is. Instead of seeing how to transcend
your limited identification, if you try to become immortal, it is just
distraction; it will not get you anywhere. If your experience of life is
established beyond the physical body, shedding it is a very simple
affair. When you want to change your clothes, you just change them,
isn't it? If you don't like it, you are through with it and you walk
naked. It is up to you. You need to understand, once this body has run
its course, it will go anyway, whether you like it or not, whether you
approve of it or not. As long as it exists, taking good care of it is
definitely our business. But if you are paranoid about ill health or
death, you will not take good care of it. In your anxiety, you will
destroy the body. The very anxiety of what may happen to this body will
destroy the body. Confronting your fear of death can bring tremendous
clarity and transformation in one's life. This happened some decades
ago. Once I was in Bangalore city and I went to the vegetable market. I
was not there to buy anything; I just like to walk through the vegetable
markets. So I was walking and suddenly I saw this vegetable vendor who
was all bright and lit up. I could not believe that a man like this was
selling vegetables. I looked at him and instantly our eyes locked and I
laughed. He also started laughing. Then I went to him and we started
talking about things in general. Then I asked him, 'How come a man like
you is selling vegetables here?' He was evasive. He said, 'I am just
doing my work here.' We bantered a little more and I finally found out
what had happened. It seems he was an ordinary vegetable-seller. One
day, he became ill, so ill that he thought he was going to die. But each
day it got postponed by one more day and one more day. For four months,
this went on--- every day he would think, 'This is it!' But at the end
of the day, he would still be alive. In these four months, because of
constantly being with

death, something tremendous happened within him. His energies exploded
into a different state altogether. He became so blissful, he cared not a
hoot about whether he retained the body or not. Once he did not care,
his body recovered completely. Mortality is freedom from the mortal
coil. The foundation of ignorance is mistaking the accumulated body to
be oneself. Breaking that is Enlightenment. Now, he came back to his
vegetable shop and began selling vegetables. He saw that his ill health
brought such a miracle into his life, so anyone who comes to buy
vegetables from him, he blesses them: 'May you also become ill like me.'
When he says ill, he is not wishing you ill. He is wishing that somehow,
if through health it has not happened to you, at least through ill
health may you wake up, because that is what happened to him. So
whatever it is---illness, death or any calamity that happens around
---you can either use it to liberate yourself or you can use it to
entangle yourself. Calamities, especially like death and illness, are a
tremendous opportunity to look beyond the limitations of what you
normally understand as life. It need not happen to you; if you are
intelligent, you can learn from other people's experiences. You have
heard about Gautama. He saw just one sick man, one old man and one dead
body, and he realized, 'Any day, this can happen to me, so there is no
point in running away from it.' If someone is ill, or someone is dying,
I want you to sit with them and see that this could have been you and
that this could be you any day. The most horrible illness that someone
has got---we don't want it, we are not wishing for it---but you should
know, any day, it could be you. It does not matter whether you are
eighteen or eighty, it could be you today or tomorrow. Now, if you are
already in fear and at the end of your life, what to do? Fundamentally,
the problem is that we think there is a solution for anger, there is
another solution for fear, there is another solution for depression.
No. There is no treatment as such for these things. This may look
simplistic, but the fundamental reality is that your mind is not taking
instructions from you. There are two significant faculties that human
beings have---a vivid sense of memory and a vivid sense of imagination.

Fear means your imagination is out of control. So it is a question of
taking your faculties into your control rather than fighting fear. In
reality, there is no such thing as fear. Actually, you are making it up.
Generally, people think that if the process of survival gets better, if
food and shelter are taken care of, the fear will go away. But affluent
societies are clearly proving that is not the case. They are making a
big statement: give us as much food as you want, as much shelter as you
want, it does not matter, we will experience fear for something else.
The terror that someone goes through among the civilian population in a
wartorn country is much more acute, but you will see, when they get a
break from the bombing, they will all play, sing, dance and be happy,
because suddenly they realize the value of life. But the fear that
affluent societies suffer is endemic; it is simply on, day in and day
out. Fear is not because of a situation; it is simply because your own
psychological system is not in your hands. It is essentially the nature
of how you keep your mind. Unfortunately, people try to handle a
consequence without understanding the cause. Fear is a consequence of a
certain situation within you. When you try to handle fear, you are
trying to handle the consequence. What is needed is taking charge of
your physiological and psychological process, paying attention to the
process of how we generate thoughts, how we generate emotions, how we
conduct our body and how we manage our chemistry. People think talking
about death more openly, gaining more exposure to death, will help them
overcome the fear of death. It is only partially true because it is in
the way you do it. It need not work for everyone. Someone may watch
people dying and get terrified, or someone else may watch a lot of
people die and become callous. They just don't care. There are a whole
lot of people like that. If you go to burial or cremation grounds or
even the morgues, in most places, the person just does not care. He
thinks he is immortal. It is all a question of your awareness and how
you look at it. If you are ready for it, in some way you are sensitive
to it, then it could do something for you. But many people may become
completely insensitive. It is always dependent on the individual person.

So are there certain practices that you can still do, certain kinds of
ambiences that you can create around you so that you can gradually take
control of your faculties even at the moment of death? One thing you can
do is remind yourself about death---your death. Every day, just spend
five minutes reminding yourself that you are mortal and today you may
die. Just remind yourself this much and wonderful things will happen to
you. Gurdjieff was a nineteenth-century mystic and spiritual teacher who
lived in Europe. During his time, he was called a rascal saint. A
rascal, because his methods were so drastic---he did crazy things with
people. He gave a solution to the world: he said if you want to have the
whole world Enlightened, we must plant a new organ in everyone's body.
The purpose of this organ would be that several times every day this
organ should remind you that you will also die. Just reminding yourself
constantly that you are mortal and you may die today will take away your
fear of death. The Shoonya meditation that we initiate people into is
not an implant, but it also reminds you of death. Every day, when you
sit down for Shoonya meditation, you see your personality has dissolved
and there is just a certain presence. During the meditation, everything
that you consider as 'myself' will become nothing. It is as if you die.
When you open your eyes, it is all there again. So twice a day, every
day, you consciously die. If you just as much as practise this
consciously, when the time to actually die comes, it will no more be a
big issue. This will release you from the fear of death. There are other
practices and processes that can distinctly establish the two dimensions
of energy, Ida and Pingala . 9 Once these dualities are distinct in your
experience, the flame of Sushumna ---that energy that is beyond
dualities---is experienced. In experiencing the non-dual, the duality of
life and death will become one. It is the illusion of duality and the
attachment to one of them that makes death a fearful expectation---of
being wrenched away from that which you know. Gaining mastery over the
Pancha Pranas, the five manifestations of life energy, or gaining
mastery over the five elements also takes away the distinction between
life and death. Once the borders of life and death---the two dimensions

of the same---are breached and you can consciously transact with both,
there will be no room for fear. So do people who fear death always die a
terrible death? It could work out both ways, actually. Some people who
were always afraid of death may just go through it just like that,
without any issue when the actual moment comes. On the other hand,
people who think they are very brave may not know how to deal with it at
that time. There are many factors to it. The karmic content of one's
life always plays a big role and what kind of life you have led until
then definitely factors in. But it is also about what form the death
came to you in, what kind of context. In certain types of context, they
may be terrorized even if they are otherwise not disposed towards it. In
certain types of contexts, they may come to terms with death just
because the context was such. This is why, in the Indian culture, they
always say that a dying person must be treated with the utmost care and
respect, and there has been a great amount of emphasis about setting the
right context. We will be looking at this later in the book.

How to Live One's Old Age Every creature in the world, except man, seems
to know how to die gracefully. If you walk in a forest---even in one
that is rich with wildlife ---unless it is an animal that has been
killed by a predator, you will not find a carcass just lying around like
that. Why the forest, even in the cities, where the birds are mostly
crows these days, you will not find a dead crow just like that. They all
know when it is time to die, so they withdraw to a quiet place and
gracefully die. It is only the human being who is oblivious of this and
dies in a manner that is becoming increasingly graceless. When death
comes, people who did not know how to live will definitely have problems
with how to die. In many ways, old age can be a great blessing because
the whole experience of life is behind you. When you are approaching
death, it is an opportunity, because when energies have become feeble
and they are progressing towards dropping the body, it is much easier to
become aware of the nature of your existence. When you were a child,
everything was beautiful, but you were eager to grow up because you
wanted to

experience life. When you became youthful, your intelligence got
hijacked by your hormones. Whatever you did, knowingly or unknowingly,
it just pushed you in that direction. Very few people are capable of
raising their intelligence beyond the hormonal hijack and looking at
life with clarity. All others are trapped in it. During youth, when the
body is vibrant, it is very difficult to make yourself aware because you
are so identified with your body that you don't see anything beyond
that. However, as you age, this recedes. As the body loses its vibrancy,
you become more and more aware because you cannot identify with that
body which is receding. When you come to old age, all the longings are
over and the experience of a whole life is behind you. So once again,
you are childlike, but you have the wisdom and experience of life. It
can be a very fruitful and wonderful part of your life. If you take care
of your rejuvenation process well, old age can be a miraculous part of
your life. Unfortunately, most human beings suffer their old age simply
because they don't take care of their rejuvenation process properly. In
their old age, very few people can even smile. This is because the only
thing that they knew in their life was the physical body. Once the body
begins to recede, they become despondent. It might not have become
diseased, no terrible cancer needs to have come, but in every step that
you take, age is telling you, 'This is not forever.' If you establish
yourself in other dimensions of experience, the body becomes an easy
thing to handle. Old age and even death can be a joyful experience. For
this, you need to know when to leave and exit gracefully. When death is
definitely going to happen in the next week or two, it is so much easier
to become aware. There are certain things that can be done to become
more aware at that time. One should just lie down. Now, if you do not
know anything else, if there is no help from outside, the best thing is
to just simply see what you are not because even if you are unable to
see what you are, you can easily see what you are not. Now, the vibrancy
of the body has dropped so much but the life is still on. So you can see
within yourself the disparity between what is you and what is the body.
It is better that you spend time just seeing the distinction

between what is you and what is your body. You will pass quite
effortlessly. Even on a daily basis, one can make this awareness a part
of one's life. When you are hungry and want to eat, just postpone it by
ten minutes. Be conscious of your hunger, do not get busy with some
other activity. Consciously postpone your meal and wait. Even when you
normally sit for a meal, just be conscious of your hunger while looking
at the food. Do this for just two minutes. Such simple methods can
slowly establish the distinction between the experience of oneself from
the physical body. There are, of course, more sophisticated ways of
conducting this. Being hungry is a time when it is much more obvious
that your body is an accumulation. Hence, there has been such
significance attached to fasting in all traditions. In India, they
always said you should not die among your family. People used to go to
the forest to die, a practice called Vanaprastha Ashrama. It meant that
after a certain stage in life, people withdrew from the family and
society and retired into forests or ashrams that were set up for this
purpose, and lived there joyfully. But today, unfortunately, old age
means 'hospital ashrama'. When the time comes, the best place to die is
always under the open sky, not the hospital. If you want to go into the
mountains and sit there by yourself and die, that is fine. That was the
widely prevalent practice at one time. Even Dhritarashtra, who was the
emperor during Mahabharata, took up Vanaprastha. He along with his
queen, Gandhari, and his brother's wife, Kunti, went into the forest
after the Kurukshetra war, with just Sanjaya as an assistant. They had
all become old, so they chose to go to the forest to die rather than die
in the palace. Though Dhritarashtra was blind, heavily biased and stupid
in many ways, that much awareness was there in him that he should handle
his death sensibly. This is the significance of cultural intelligence or
what is called samskara . This is missing in the world today. Kunti had
suffered all kinds of hardship all her life; now, her children had won
the war and become emperors, so at least now she could have enjoyed the
palace and died in comfort. But she too decided to go and die in the
forest. This is the great wisdom that was prevalent in those times,
thanks to the culture

of truth-seeking. It so happened that one day the four of them climbed
up a very steep hill and there was a forest fire. Since the three of
them were old, they could not run or fight the forest fire, so they just
decided to offer themselves to the fire. Dhritarashtra told Sanjaya,
'You have served me very well till now, but you are still a young
man---go away. The three of us will give ourselves to the fire.' Sanjaya
refused to leave them, and all four got willingly burned in the forest
fire. What Dhritarashtra and the others did was something rather
extreme, but the general population walked the well-charted path of
Vanaprastha Ashrama, which was more calibrated and worked very well for
everyone. Vanaprastha can be done in a more organized way.

The Wisdom of Vanaprastha Ashrama In ancient India, when couples took up
Vanaprastha Ashrama, they often withdrew together and lived a very
simple 'back-to-basics' kind of life, until their death. This was to
ensure that they died well or had a good death. Now, to the modern mind,
this may sound very harsh and illogical. After all, it appears that when
you are young and healthy, when you can rough it out, you are allowed to
live in well-built homes with all the comforts and in the midst of
society, but when you are approaching old age, when you are ailing and
infirm, you are required to give up everything and live in the forest,
fending for yourself? But if you look at it deeply, there is a lot of
wisdom in this practice. It was one simple way to ensure that even
people who did not have the mastery to drop their body at will could
attain a good death. This practice has its origins in the Varnashrama
system, where they looked deeply at human nature. They took into
consideration all the aspects of human life---one's needs, capabilities
and possibilities and evolved a set of guidelines that ensured the
well-being of the individual and the society. Accordingly, they
designated the nature of the activity to be performed and the ideals to
be pursued during each of these stages of life. This division of stages
was not hard and fast, but more in terms of broad guidelines as to what
to emphasize upon at each phase of one's

life. Nor were all the stages compulsory. One could skip one or two
stages and go on to the next, depending upon one's inclination.

Vanaprastha Ashrama does not mean challenging yourself with many harsh
hardships in your old age. There is no point doing that because anyone
will break under sufficiently tough conditions. Essentially, the idea of
Vanaprastha Ashrama was to withdraw from a place that has four walls.
You don't want to live in four walls, because it creates a certain
illusion, a sense of immortality. Maybe because you are already in a
box, you are already in a coffin, it feels like you are forever! The
four walls of your home create a false sense of immortality. But you
will see, if you just sleep outdoors, you will feel so vulnerable. Even
if you don't understand this, your very body will understand this very
clearly when you sleep outdoors. Maybe most of you don't experience
anything because you are sitting in your room with your music turned on
or glued

to your phones, but if you are out in the jungle, just one storm---with
all the lightning, thunder, rain and the wind---and you will see how
vulnerable the human body is. Even in just one night, if you stay out,
suddenly, a certain wisdom will arise within you. So Vanaprastha Ashrama
meant being in communion with the vana , or forest. The fundamental idea
is that after living in a home all your life, now, as the end nears, you
move closer to Nature and be aware of this vulnerability. People build
homes, in the first place, not to make themselves immortal, but because
a human child is not designed to grow up outdoors completely. Unlike
other animals, it takes some time for a human body and mind to get to a
certain level of maturity. We have seen this happen here---a mother
elephant delivered a calf near the Yoga Center gate. She just stood
there around the baby for three days and, after that, both of them just
walked away into the jungle. This is a natural thing for them. This is
not the case with a human child. A human child needs a few years of
nurture and protection. So we did some things, like building a home, for
this protection. And we put in more and more protection. We did
overprotection and super-overprotection, that is a different matter.
But, essentially, the idea of wanting to build a home came because the
children cannot endure the outdoors. So at that time, along with the
children, the adults also enjoyed the comfort of four walls, which is
fine. But then, they had enough sense to understand, 'If I live like
this, I live with a lie, thinking I am immortal.' So to make it very
clear, not just intellectually, but in every way, the first thing is to
step out of four walls. This is why sadhus and sanyasis never sleep in
any built areas. When they sleep, they will only sleep under a tree. If
the weather is very harsh, they will sleep in a cave or some naturally
protected place. But they will not go into buildings and sleep. Even if
they build buildings, they build just the roof. The sides are open. Even
if they build walls, they are always mud walls. The idea is that you
must be in touch with the earth, you must be in touch with the elements.
It constantly reminds the body. The understanding may not be there in
your head, but the arrangement will constantly remind your body that you
are just a pop-up and you will go back. This is the idea, and there is
great benefit in this.

I have seen this with mountaineers---there is a certain quality about
them that is hard to come by otherwise. Recently, I met a bunch of
European and American mountaineers who have scaled many mountains in
South America and the Alps. When I met them, I just felt the way they
are. There is a certain stillness and ease about them, which comes after
enormous amount of sadhana. It takes a lot of work to get there. But
every day risking their life, every day not knowing whether they will
live today or not, has brought a certain stillness and ease in them. You
understand you are mortal; you know if you want to make one mistake, you
are dead. Just because people go to Vanaprastha Ashrama, it does not
mean they are going there to die. It means they have become conscious
that they have to die. Vanaprastha Ashrama is to bring a deep sense of
mortality home to this body. Once this body is completely conscious it
is mortal, it will arrange itself properly. Suddenly, you will view
everything--- property, money, relationships and all that---from a
distance. You understand this is a web that you created for your
survival. This is very important, because without that a human being
will live a very idiotic life. If it knows it is mortal, it calibrates
itself well. It will live much longer. It will not foolishly waste its
energy. We have seen this happening---not so much in India, but in the
US--- people who moved into the Isha Institute of Inner-sciences,
Tennessee, became much healthier. In the Yoga Center in India, when we
opened the Vanaprastha Ashrama, most people who moved in were young so
it may not be so visible. But there, many of the people who moved in
were already over sixty-five, some of them even seventy. You can see
that in the last eight to ten years, they have become so much fitter,
younger and healthier. They look much better and stronger than ever
before, simply because of living outdoors. Of course, there is Yoga that
they are practising but they are also in good shape because they are
constantly walking up and down, working in the forest and being exposed
to the elements. Another reason Vanaprastha Ashrama came into practice
was because it is not good for people to die at home in the midst of
their family and relatives. Right now, in the world, people consider an
unattended death

to be bad. People think that when they die, the entire family should be
around them. That is the worst way to die because you are looking at all
these familiar faces and still connecting to the same reality you are
now departing from. When you are at home among family members, two
things happen: your body gets connected with every other body there. I
am not talking about physical or psychological connections---those will
be there--- beyond that also, your body will develop certain
connections. Secondly, a family or a home means a whole lot of
over-organization of life for today, tomorrow and the day after
tomorrow. When you live at home or with your family, you will get sucked
into it. This connection with the other bodies and the over-organization
of life will create an enhanced sense of the self in a person. This will
make it very difficult to let go of things. Moreover, if you die among
the family, you will die with a huge sense of attachment, which is not
good for what happens after. You must understand, family does not mean
attachment alone. If at the last moment of your life you look at your
son, daughter, wife or husband, it is not just love but many other
things that will come within you because the relationship has not been
only about love. Now all those memories and emotions will also come,
which again is not a good thing to happen. This is why, in this culture,
people wanted to die in a space of nonattachment. They wanted to die in
a way that had nothing to do with their body, their attachments, their
struggles and their things. They wanted to die in a space which was more
spiritual in nature. Even in the olden times, not everyone took to the
forests like Dhritarashtra and his family did. Most people moved into
one of the ashrams, of which there were many in various parts of the
country. In today's conditions, for the Vanaprastha Ashrama, you don't
want to go into the forest and take a chance with forest fires or
elephants or tigers. Before you die, they may kill you. Or even more
likely is that the forest department may arrest you for trespassing!
Yes, vana means forest. But vana also can mean garden. So it is best to
withdraw into a protected outdoor space. If dying in Nature is not
possible, the next best option is to withdraw from everyone that you
know, particularly relatives and close friends. It

is best not to have anything around you that reminds you of the life
that you have lived. Set aside your relationships and whatever
runanubandha s you have. Even gods and goddesses are not necessary
because that also is runanubandha---a relationship that you have
created. If you have built sufficient awareness, the best way to go is
that no one attends to you. If you have not built the necessary
awareness, then you may feel terrified when the moment comes. You may
want someone to hold your hand. It is all right. If not in awareness,
you will leave at least with a little bit of love or comfort. It is
okay, but you should keep this to the minimum. So when is the right time
to move into Vanaprastha Ashrama? In the tradition, they said after you
are forty-eight years of age or when you have completed four solar
cycles, it is time for you to enter Vanaprastha Ashrama. In today's
world, that age may not reflect that stage of life. Moreover, these
stages of life can occur differently to different people. So the
chronological age is not the criteria. After a point in life, one should
make an assessment of one's situation at every stage in life. It
happened once: there were two women entrepreneurs in Bangalore. One day,
the two of them met over coffee. In the course of the conversation, one
of them said, 'I insist that all the people who work for me must take a
one-week vacation every six months.' The other one asked, 'Wow! Why is
that so, isn't it expensive to do that?' She said, 'No, no, that is the
only way I know who are the people I can do without.' So every once in a
while, after every stage of your life, it is good to reexamine one's
situation. It is good to check how relevant you are to the situation
around you, what your priorities in life are, and whether it is time for
you to withdraw. And as we saw earlier, moving into Vanaprastha Ashrama
is not about going to die; it is to live your life with a certain kind
of awareness and preparation, so that death can happen in the best
possible manner. This is not an invitation to death but a profound
acceptance of the human condition.

The Practice of Sallekhana In the Indian way of life, we say, you have
three choices for living. You can live as a bhogi or a rogi or a yogi,
but you can die only as a yogi or a rogi. A bhogi is one who is lost in
material or sensual pleasure. A rogi is

one whose life is contained by the disease he is suffering from. A yogi
is someone who has achieved union or harmony with the Existence. You can
live in any of the three states, but for dying, there are only two
choices: you can either die as a rogi or as a yogi. There is no choice
of dying as a bhogi. At one time, in this culture, a large number of
people chose to die as yogis. But today, they are all choosing to die as
rogis. There is a whole industry that has come up for this---maybe they
feel that they have to support it. Currently, in the US, a
disproportionately large number of healthcare interventions are being
done in the last thirty days of human life. Why do you need so much
intervention at that stage? This effort is not for well-being, as this
results mostly in torturing people to the extreme, knowing fully well
that they anyway have to die soon. So before those last thirty days, let
us say, six months prior to that, you decide to taper down your life and
leave. This is the most sensible way to conduct your mortal nature. Why
some people---even those who are not on the spiritual path--- want to
leave their body consciously is because they do not want to die with
tubes hanging out of their body. They want to slowly run it down and
leave gracefully, rather than go through all kinds of torture. What
happens in the hospital is worse than hell. That is a fact. If you do
not know this, please make a trip and spend a few days in all the
general wards in government hospitals in India. You will see that this
is one place you do not want to end up in. This is the reason why a lot
of healthcare professionals in the US sign the advance
Do-Not-Resuscitate directive. They see the endless struggle that people
go through with tubes and needles sticking in them, just keeping the
body alive and prolonging suffering. They may do this for their
patients, but they do not want it to happen to them when their own time
comes. In the past, people handled it differently in this culture. Let
us say, you did not know any Yoga, and you were over eighty years of age
and were still okay. You would probably last another ten to fifteen
years at the most. But knowing that the body is becoming infirm, let us
say, you took a call, 'This is the time for me to run it down
consciously.' Anyway, you were going to run it down; you just decided to
run it down consciously.

So from two meals a day, you brought it down to one meal for a few
years. Then from one meal, you make it half a meal, and so on. This can
greatly enhance one's lifespan, or bring it down, depending upon one's
karmic and energy situations. But it will definitely ensure freedom from
prolonged suffering. In the past, when people went to Vanaprastha
Ashrama, they usually went from fruit to fresh leaf, fresh leaf to dry
leaf, and dry leaf to just water, and then they stopped the water too.
After that, in three to five days, they exited because they did not want
to die as a rogi. Is this suicide? Definitely not. Suicide happens out
of frustration, out of anger, out of fear, or out of an inability to
bear suffering. This is neither suicide nor euthanasia. This is about
being so aware that you know when life has completed its cycle and you
walk out of it. This is about developing sufficient awareness to
separate yourself from the physicality that you have gathered. In that
level of awareness, one can leave. If you do not attain such a level of
awareness, then the least you should do is make the last moment very
graceful, pleasant, joyful and blissful for yourself. This can be done
if you manage certain things beforehand. If none of this is possible,
then at least one can take the decision not to choose excessive medical
intervention. This will be good for you, and good for the planet. Modern
societies are getting more and more obsessed with extending the human
lifespan at any cost. You must understand that not everyone is geared to
live for 100--105 years. If you want to do that, you must calibrate your
life in so many ways. Unfortunately, for most of these millionaire
immortality-seekers, all they have known in their life is the pleasures
of body, the joys and pains of psychological drama and the intoxication
of power in the world they live in. All of this being physical, they
have not looked beyond that dimension at all. Today, with advanced
medical interventions---hormones or supplements or stem cells or
whatever---they are only managing to somehow keep the body alive. When
people have run out of their software, but their hardware is still on,
they will become like empty shells. There are too many such empty shells
like that in Western societies now. Some people who work with such
people were telling me that there are these eighty-five to ninety-

year-old men and women who have lost all their memory, but they remember
one thing from their adolescent times, that they must attract the
opposite sex. They have forgotten everything else, but this one thing
has remained due to the chemical nature of that aspect of life that
etches itself in one's system. They can barely walk, they are in
wheelchairs and all that. But whoever comes---visitor, worker,
anyone---if they are of the opposite sex, they want to grab them. Every
day, in an attempt to appear attractive, they wear all kinds of
lipsticks and smudge themselves with all kinds of make-up or cut
themselves by trying a clean shave. Whosoever they see, they try to grab
them. You see how pathetic it is? But this kind of thing is celebrated
in today's societies. If you are ninety and still romancing someone,
that is considered a great thing. It is not considered a stupid, idiotic
thing, because that is all they have been habituated to. This kind of
situation would not have arisen if, like all other creatures, human
beings knew when and how to die gracefully. So for people who do not
have the capacity to shed the body at will, what can they do to exit it
gracefully? How and when do you make that call? It is not the same for
everyone. One person may be very strong at eighty-five, another may have
to leave at seventy---it depends on many factors. Chronological age is
not the criteria. To know this with some certainty, one needs a certain
amount of sadhana or insight into life. Then you will know when
infirmity is coming, you will know when your body is becoming unstable,
and you will feel you have completed your karma. Otherwise, you feel
lost in this world, which, unfortunately, is the state of most modern
people. In ancient times, there was a lot of community support for
people to consciously take this step of running the body down and
leaving gracefully when the time came. In the Jain community, for
example, they had a practice called Sallekhana, or Santara. The Hindus
have something similar called prayopavesa. In this tradition, when
someone felt they had approached the stage of leaving, if they were so
conscious, they could decide for themselves---it was perfectly
acceptable. If someone was not aware, then they consulted all the people
around, including the family, the elders of the community and their
spiritual head. People then

discussed and debated this. Let us say, someone gives an application
saying, 'I think it is time for me to do Sallekhana or prayopavesa.' So
they would debate, discuss and say, 'No, this is not the time for you.
Why do you want to do this?' They would list out all the things that
were yet to happen in the person's life and all the responsibilities
that he or she had to fulfil. But the person says, 'No, no. I think I
have done enough of that. My body is not letting me stay; I need to go.'
Then they would say, 'We have to consult so and so,' who is considered
to be a spiritual head of the community. They would consult him together
and decide, 'Okay, I think it is time for this person to go. Maybe not
now, but next year.' So he or she would decide to go the following year,
based on the society's advice. They would then be formally initiated
into a process by the spiritual head. The process itself could be
long-drawn and in many stages. At each stage, the spiritual head would
review the progress and make sure that this was really the right thing
for this person. Even if there was the slightest doubt about it, it
would be called off, and the person would be taken off it. Let us say,
this was about me. Maybe, I will say, 'Okay, in another six months, I
want to leave.' So I may consult people at the Yoga Center, 'I think I
have done enough, you are taking care of the Yoga Center wonderfully. I
don't think Devi 10 needs me, or the Dhyanalinga needs me or anyone
needs me. I think it is time for me to go in a year's time.' They say,
'No, no, Sadhguru, you must be here.' I say, 'Okay, how long?' They say,
'Sadhguru, another twenty years.' I say, 'No, no, max three years . . .'
If everyone is mature or conscious enough, we can talk about this and
arrive at something. Otherwise, you just utter the word death , all hell
will break loose. When the entire society is conscious that death is an
inevitable part of our life, we can sit down, negotiate, guide each
other, arrive at something and decide that this is the best way to do
it. This is just like fixing an arranged marriage in India. Let us say,
your daughter has come of age, so when to get her married? The family
sits down and discusses and debates about it. They ask the girl her
views. They listen to what she has to say, look at the overall situation
and see

what is best and finally arrive at a date, isn't it? Similarly, death is
also another part of your life; you should handle it so. In the past,
this was very widely practised, though in many different forms. Even
kings chose to take to Vanaprastha Ashrama and Sallekhana or prayopavesa
towards the end of their lives. One of the most famous people who took
Sallekhana was Chandragupta Maurya. Chandragupta Maurya was the founder
of the Mauryan Empire and the first emperor to unify India into one
nation. No other emperor since has managed to create a bigger empire in
the subcontinent. He ruled from 322--298 BC . Ashoka 11 was his
grandson. When he was forty-two years old, Chandragupta abdicated his
throne in favour of his son Bindusara. He then became an ascetic under
the Jain saint Bhadrabahu and migrated to southern India along with the
Jain monks. At the age of fifty-five, he ended his life through
Sallekhana at Shravanabelagola in Karnataka. Even today, the small stone
enclosure where he lived after taking Sallekhana can be seen at
Shravanabelagola. In modern times, many eminent public figures like
Acharya Vinoba Bhave chose this form of death. So just as you make
efforts to live, you should also make efforts to prepare to die. You
should decide, 'In case I die, I want to die like this.' Right now, let
us say, I am going to die tomorrow. I am not planning to die tomorrow,
but if it comes, am I ready? 100 per cent! Because, all my life, I
prepared for it. Does that mean I am seeking to die tomorrow? No. I will
do everything to see that I live well. I always say, in life, one should
have passion towards the highest, compassion for all and dispassion
towards oneself. Similarly, I would say, if you want to die well, you
have to cultivate a certain amount of dispassion towards your own death.
Otherwise, one will go struggling ---kicking and screaming---which will
not be good for what is going to come next.

The Significance of Dying in Kashi No other city in the world is as
deeply associated with death as Kashi is. It is also one of the oldest,
continuously inhabited cities in the world. There is evidence of it
being at least 12,000 years old. But surely it is

much older than that. Not only was Kashi continuously inhabited for
thousands of years, it was also the most powerful spiritual magnet that
drew people from far and wide. It would not be an overstatement to say
that it would have been impossible to find someone in the subcontinent
who did not want to go to Kashi for whatever reason. Being able to die
in Kashi is only one aspect that drew people to it. But Kashi is not
just about death. In Kashi, both life and death are celebrated with
equal reverence and gusto. People also flocked to the place for its
splendour and grandeur. Over thousands of years, people from all over
India have settled in Kashi and they live in neighbourhoods, each of
which retains some of its original identity and linguistic flavour.
Kashi, in many ways, is a microcosm of Indian civilization and a
civilizational centre of India. The word Kashi means light. The city is
a tower of light, in the spiritual sense. The idea and the purpose of
creating such a tower of light was to assist you to gain access to that
dimension within you which you could not access by yourself. A cosmic
possibility is manifested as a reality here---that is what Kashi means.
Kashi is not the only such place that was created like this---many more
have been created like that. But Kashi is significant because of its
enormity, the aesthetics and the beauty of it. In those times, they say,
there was not another city on the planet which was as beautiful. It had
three-storeyed buildings, which was unheard of at that time. People were
amazed by them. It was too incredible in their experience that houses
were built on the riverbank with three floors. That was an engineering
feat in itself. Kashi was also the highest seat of spiritual learning.
It is said that hundreds of sages, seers, gurus, Enlightened beings and
scholars lived there, imparting their knowledge to thousands of students
who came from all over the country and other parts of the world as well.
Every spiritual tradition, every sect and sub-sect of Indian
spirituality was represented there. There are close to 3000 temples
within the city itself. Kashi was also the original hub of art, culture
and music. Aesthetically, spiritually, knowledge-wise, and in every way,
it was the most beautiful place of those times. With all these things
put together, it created a powerful draw and the necessary atmosphere to
get people's focus. Many

prominent saints, philosophers, poets, writers and musicians of all
times have lived in Kashi at some point or the other in their lives.
Even Shiva went and lived in Kashi. When Agastya Muni had to leave
Kashi, even he cried paeans about Kashi's beauty and greatness. He did
not want to leave this city. But his work took him down south.
Traditionally, people did not only go to Kashi when they were on their
deathbed. That would have been dumb. People went and spent the last
fifteen to twenty years of their life there because they wanted to live
in the most beautiful place. Living there and leaving their body there
became an important part. So the original idea of creating the city was
to live there. Slowly, because their business was elsewhere, people did
not live there. Even then, they sought to live there at least for the
last part of their life. That is how it got the reputation of being the
city for dying. The city of Kashi is demarcated by a large perimeter
that is known as the Pancha Kroshi route, creating a vast schematic
circle. It is approximately 84 kilometres long. Traditionally, people
believed 'Kashyam Maranam Muktih ', which means that anyone who dies
within this perimeter is believed to attain mukti. It did not matter
what kind of a lousy creature you had been all your life, if you died in
Kashi, you would attain mukti, they said. To ensure this, Shiva takes
the form of Kalabhairava in Kashi. Kalabhairava means the dark one, one
who represents limitless time and space. Kala means both time and space.
It is a deadly form of Shiva. As Kalabhairava, he is supposed to be in a
destructive mode. He is not destroying this or that but destroying time.
All physical realities exist within the ambit of time. If your time is
destroyed, everything is over for you. Kalabhairava does just that. In
Kashi, Shiva, in the form of Kalabhairava, is supposed to personally
bestow Liberation by imparting the Taraka mantra to all who die there.
They say, Yama, the God of death, has no jurisdiction within the
perimeter of Kashi. Neither he nor his agents, the yamadoota s, can
enter the city. Once a person loses their physical body, Kalabhairava
gives them a yatana sharira , a special subtle energy body, for them to
work out their karma. They say the suffering in this yatana sharira is
forty-two times more intense than normal suffering. Because it is so
intense, it is over almost instantaneously. All this is a very beautiful
way of saying

that the normal processes that take place after death are not applicable
and something else that is super intense happens. Traditionally, this is
called Bhairavi Yatana . Yatana means ultimate suffering. It is
something that can happen to you beyond the body, but Kalabhairava will
make it happen to you here. So at the moment of death, your many, many
lifetimes play out in a few moments with great intensity. Whatever
pleasures, sufferings and pains that need to happen to you---spread over
many lifetimes---will now happen to you in a microsecond. This happens
with the kind of intensity that you cannot hold. If suffering has to end
quickly, we must make it super intense, only then it will end quickly.
This is about putting your karmic warehouse on fast forward. If it is
mild, it will go on and on forever. So Kalabhairava creates such
phenomenal pain, which you have not imagined possible, so that after
that nothing of the past remains in you. He makes it as brief as
possible. I have been saying this in many ways: essentially,
spirituality means putting your life on fast forward. You may suffer
much more because everything happens at a fast pace. What you would have
stretched for ten years happens, let us say, in one month. So the
intensity of the suffering that you go through is extremely acute. There
may be moments of ecstasy and joy, but there is so much suffering also
happening rapidly within you. This happens not only in Kashi but in any
consecrated space. In a way, once we initiate someone, we have put them
on Bhairavi Yatana. We can further tweak it up if they want. Just that
they must be ready for it! A consecrated space means just this---it is
concentrated life. By saying the suffering is forty-two times more
intense means that life there is fortytwo times more intense than the
way you know it. So that means you burn fuel forty-two times faster.
That means everything is faster. After some time, once you get used to
it, there is no more yatana, it just burns. You are at a higher rev.
That is the purpose of every consecrated space. This whole longing to
die in Kashi is to empty out your karma bucket entirely at least towards
the end of your life and not make Kashi another item on your bucket
list. Emptying one's karma leads to all experiences happening at a
tremendous pace.

Consecrated spaces like Kashi are good at doing this. Kashi is
definitely not what it was, but it is still significant today.
Substantially significant. However, Kashi is not the only place that is
made like this. There are many other places, but maybe not of the same
magnitude. The Dhyanalinga is one such place, though we cannot
accommodate the same number of people as Kashi. In such places, life
will happen better, and death also will happen better. Will it always
lead to Moksha? Not necessarily, maybe it gets you a little closer. It
is certainly better than what you would have done by yourself. Another
reason why people wanted to live the last part of their life in Kashi is
because there were a lot of Enlightened and spiritually evolved people
there at any given time. In every street, there was an Enlightened being
to meet. And in those days, they did not have indoor bathrooms. So the
entire town would come to the ghat for a dip in the mornings and
evenings. Given the sheer number of such spiritually accomplished people
who visited the riverbanks, invariably, such a person would notice
someone whose death was near and he would do what was spiritually
necessary for them. Moreover, these people would also know a specific
person or ask around for someone who could do what needs to be done for
the dying person. Because of this possibility, even if they lived a life
of ignorance, even if they had no sadhana in their lives, people who
died in Kashi were assured of a very good quality of death. Kashi is
also known as Mahasmashana , or 'the great cremation ground'. Usually,
cremation grounds are situated away from the village or city. They are
at a distance from human habitation because, unless you are on the
spiritual path and it is a part of your sadhana, it is not conducive
both for the living and the dead to be in close proximity to each other.
In Kashi, the city itself is built around this great cremation ground.
Even today, around the clock, the ghats are full of burning bodies
because they cater not just to the people of the city but even to those
from distant places. Whenever there is a death within a radius of a
couple of hundred kilometres, the body is taken to Kashi to be cremated.
The idea is that the person may have been unable to live in Kashi, or
even die in Kashi, for some reason, but they want at least the body to
be cremated

in Kashi and the remains immersed in the Ganga. They say the cremation
fire has been passed on from the beginning of time and has never been
extinguished since. There is a family that has been living on the ghats
there for many generations, whose responsibility is to keep the fire
going and provide it to each and every cremation that happens there. So,
over time, from people wanting to live in Kashi to wanting to die in
Kashi, they wanted to be at least cremated in Kashi. But today people
just want to visit Kashi at least once in their lifetime, and that too
as tourists, not as pilgrims. Of course, the city of Kashi itself has
undergone a sea change. It is no longer in its ancient, glorious form.
Modernity has taken a serious toll on its structure and form. Even then,
the entire atmosphere has some impact on people. More than a karmic
influence, it may bring some psychological realization---an intellectual
realization from seeing life being conducted in a completely nonchalant
way. What is usually done behind the scenes, in seclusion, is conducted
openly there. You don't have to go to a hospice to die. You can just sit
on the riverbank and die. You can be cremated on the riverbank too.
People see it as normal, very normal. So even just visiting such a place
has a certain impact. Though terribly mutilated, Kashi remains a
powerful possibility even today. The time to build new towers of light
has definitely come.

CHAPTER 7

Assistance for the Dying

A bodiless being is a completely defenceless life. That is why that
aspect of life must be conducted with utmost responsibility. When
someone gives this being a little bit of help at the last moment, it
will go a long way. Most of their sadhana for the next time will be
taken care of at that moment itself.

The Importance of the Last Moments of Life Why is the moment of
transition from an embodied state to disembodied state so important? Let
me give you an analogy. Right now, when you are in the body, you are
like a river, going in one direction. When you become disembodied, it is
like you evaporated and became like a cloud. Whichever way the wind
blows, you will go that way. You have no direction any more. At least
the river is clearly going towards the ocean, but we don't know where
the hell the cloud is going. Whichever way the wind blows, it will go
that way. Leaving the body and losing the discretionary mind is like
that. If you had a discretionary mind, you could go either this way or
that. But once you die, you are just fluff, floating around according to
your karmic tendencies. You know, didn't they always tell you that
angels float around in the clouds? Well, they used the correct analogy!
The significance of being a human is that you have the ability to
discriminate and choose the course of your life. If you don't employ
that, then you are not much of a human being. For example, let us say, I
am hungry. But if food comes in front of me, I can still discriminate
and say, 'No, I don't want to eat it.' Because of the discriminatory
capability within me, it does not matter how much compulsion arises in
my body, if I don't want to, I will not eat. That is all. I can
discriminate. Without this, you become like air; you will move by
tendencies alone.

When you lose the body, your ability to discriminate is gone. All the
memory and other mind-stuff are still there; only the discriminatory
process is lost. At that moment, if you create even a little bit of
unpleasantness, then the unpleasantness will multiply a millionfold. If
you create a little pleasantness, the pleasantness will multiply a
millionfold. Why is this so? Let us say, today, you get a little angry;
you can use your discriminatory mind and control it. But if you did not
have this discriminatory mind, the little anger would flare up into
madness. The moment of death is a significant factor because whatever is
the content of one's mind at that moment---pleasantness or
unpleasantness--- it could multiply manifold because of the lack of
discriminatory mind. This is why, it does not matter which part of the
world you come from, which culture you come from, every culture holds
that when a person is dying you must allow them to die peacefully.
During this phase of disembodiment, if your pleasantness multiplies, we
say you are in heaven. If your unpleasantness multiplies, we say you are
in hell. Hell and heaven do not exist as geographical places but as
human experience. You don't have to be disembodied to be in hell or
heaven; even when you are alive, they can exist for you. The advantage
of being here with the body is that sometimes when you get into hell in
your experience, you can employ your discrimination and get out of that
pit. Similarly, sometimes you get into heaven in your experience, but
out of your discrimination, however pleasant the experience is, you can
drop it and move on to the next thing. Even when in the body, someone
who loses their discrimination will stay depressed for long periods of
time if they get into depression, while pleasant experiences will turn
into addictions. In Indian culture, great importance was given to how a
person who is dying should be treated. They said a person must die in
the right space, in the right atmosphere, with the right kind of emotion
and with the right kind of thought. When someone is dying, they said you
are never supposed to say, 'Aiyyo, Amma!' 1 You are supposed to say
'Rama' or 'Krishna' or 'Shiva' 2 or something like that. The idea is to
generate some thought to think beyond oneself. It is a phenomenally
scientific process. It is not an emotional process, because this last
dimension of

thought and emotion that you create becomes the major tendency in that
being. They said, 'Even if it is your enemy who is dying right now, you
must create an appropriate atmosphere and see how he can die peacefully.
Don't do ugly things.' Maybe you shot him in battle, but you take off
your hat when he is leaving, or you say, 'Ram, Ram,' or whatever you
know. This is because these tendencies will go on for lifetimes.
Whatever life they might have lived, at that final moment, if they
generate the right thing, they could go into a good trip, rather than
going into a bad trip. So this is a tremendous opportunity to enhance
someone's life. When someone is dying, at that moment, the whistle has
already been blown and the game is over. There is no point kicking now.
Moreover, your enmity is only as long as they carried this body. Once
they shed the body, the drama is over. They are no more your enemy, nor
are they your friend. He or she is just a piece of life, and a life has
to be treated as a life. When the play is on, each one of us watches,
relates and reacts in many different ways. When the curtains fall, all
stand up. Only one in slumber remains as he was. Everyone else, even
those who did not enjoy the play, stand up and acknowledge that it is
over. It would be fantastic if every act of the play was appreciated or
at least looked upon with respect. If you did not succeed in that, at
least the last scene---that is what death is---should be appreciated.
That is the reason why, when you see somewhere that even the dead are
not treated with respect, something within you is shaken. It is not the
body that needs to be treated with respect but the being who is exiting
slowly who needs it. It does not matter how they lived; at least the
leaving must happen well. Every human being must have that much
intention. This is the least you can do for that person or the life that
we are. Everywhere in the world, people are reasonably aware of it, but
in India it has been a very conscious process. In the Kurukshetra war, 3
the Pandava prince Arjuna was the most skilled warrior, but it was his
brother Bheema who was considered more valiant and feisty. But that
glory got tainted because he desecrated the body of an opponent. In one
of the battles, he was pitched against Dushasana, who was instrumental
in disrobing Draupadi. So Bheema

had taken a vow at that time to avenge Draupadi's humiliation. On the
day of the fateful battle, Bheema not only killed Dushasana in a brutal
manner but he also tore open his chest and drank his blood to fulfil the
vow. Warriors from both sides were aghast by this act of Bheema. Though
he was only avenging an earlier injustice, Bheema's reputation was
tainted forever by his 'dishonourable conduct' because he violated the
war code by not treating the dead body of the enemy with respect.
Another reason why the way we conduct this moment is very important is
because a bodiless being is a completely defenceless life. That is why
that aspect of life must be conducted with utmost responsibility. When
someone gives this little being a little bit of help at this last
moment, it will go a long way. Most of their sadhana for the next time
will be taken care of at that moment itself. If you look around, you
will see how much struggle people go through just to be loving, or to
drop hatred and anger. Sometimes, when I see people struggling with
these things, it beats me as to why they struggle like this. Even to
drop their old feelings and habits, they struggle. But when you help a
person die well, all these things are washed off, just like that. You
are born with the right quality. This is the simplest way to ensure a
being is reborn pleasant. This is not all. More things can be done too.
Even after one leaves the body, we can guide that being. If that person
has sufficient trust in you, during the last few moments, you can also
make them earn what they did not earn all their life. All this can be
accomplished if you can create the right situation for them and help
them to die well. This is a huge contribution to that being's life.
Moreover, if a person truly dies well, then there is no next time for
them. That life moves into the nature of limitless freedom. But all this
cannot be done with one's emotions or good intentions. Just because you
wish someone should go to heaven, they will not go to heaven. If you
want to do such things, then you need to have a different level of
understanding, awareness and mastery over life. Otherwise, those things
are out of the question.

Helping Suffering People Die

When someone is suffering deeply, should we not help that person die?
See, when you were born, your mother suffered immensely. So if we
believe it is okay to relieve someone of their suffering by killing, we
should have killed her or killed you at that time. Do you think people
on their deathbed are suffering as much or more than those in the labour
ward? Not necessarily. This question is coming up these days because we
are seeing more and more people surviving as vegetables here for a long
time. This prolonged suffering would not be there if you did not
unnecessarily interfere with the process of life and go on medically
pushing death. Without this, no one will stay beyond their natural time.
Does it mean that when you get a disease, we should withdraw all medical
support? No, many people have bounced back from all kinds of hopeless
situations. Many times, people thought someone would die, but they just
bounced back and lived on. So should we not give these people also a
chance? Who is to decide who should be helped to die and when? If there
is a 100 per cent medical prognosis that there is no way to recover,
they can withdraw the medication. But where is the need to push someone
into death by injecting a poison or something else? If you withdraw
medication, if the body is not fit for life, life will move on. It is
not for you to decide whether the body is fit or not unless you are
conscious of the extent that you can drop it and go. If you are afraid
of old age and suffering, why don't you start doing some sadhana now to
prepare yourself so that you can leave when you want to? Why do you want
to wait for that moment and ask your son or daughter to give you poison?
Please see, your asking them to poison you is not fair to them. Even if
out of their compassion or love they give you poison, can they ever
forget it? You will go anyway, but why are you burdening those who have
to live for a long time with all these things? You can live in such a
way that you don't need anyone's mercy. You can live your life to a
plan. You live as long as it is effective and you leave gracefully when
you have to leave, not through mercy killing. Why don't you pursue these
options? Right now, it may seem that this mercy killing is fine. In
society today, people may think it is a revolutionary idea. There are
always people who want to be progressive, who are advocating mercy
killing. If you are

really progressive, why don't you empower individuals with the power to
shed their body at will? This is what I am doing---helping people grow
into such a capability that they can terminate their life by will when
the time comes, but not by poison or by a pillow. These days, there is
another kind of situation: because of modern medical intervention, there
are more and more cases of people who remain in vegetative states for a
long time. And some of them bounce back to life even after many years in
that state. So the people around them go through an enormous struggle
trying to decide whether or not to pull the plug on their loved ones.
This happened in Morocco: Shankaran Pillai was living in Europe. He had
aged a little bit and was watching some programme on the television
about old-age homes and hospices. Watching the programme, he told his
Moroccan wife, 'Darling, if it ever happens that I become vegetative, I
want you to pull the plug. I don't want to go through all this. You must
just pull the plug.' She looked at him and got up and pulled the
television plug. So this decision to pull the plug can be very tricky.
Now, about the people who bounce back to life from vegetative or
near-death states, don't think that they died and were put back. That is
not true. It might have so happened that the life force was so shocked,
it became more projected outward than inward. Even in the conscious
state, you are partially outward-projected, mostly inward-projected.
Inward projection of life energies gives you organic unity and stability
of life. Outward projection gives you a strong presence and expression
of life. This see-saw is naturally happening with all life, including
human beings. But human beings with a certain mastery can make this into
a conscious choice of this dimensional shift. Therefore at that moment
it might have been so that you were mostly outward-projected, partially
inward-projected. So life was making a decision, 'To be or not to be.'
This is not a philosophical question but a practical question about
whether the body is fit enough to be or not be. So after doing this 'To
be or not to be' seesaw for some time, if it chose to be , it is not
because of medical workers or a miracle. Maybe the medical workers made
the body a little more hospitable than what it would have been, but it
is

always life which makes the decision to stay because the body is still
hospitable. If one has an enhanced perception, it is possible to make an
assessment of a patient's life chances, based on the vibrancy of the
Pranamaya Kosha, or energy body. It is possible to say if a person's
life energies are intense enough for recovery to happen. On the other
hand, even if the body is not obviously unwell but the patient's pranic
energies are at a low ebb, recovery is impossible, no matter what the
intervention. It is a question of software. If the software has run out,
no matter what you do, it will not renew itself. But not everyone has
the perception to make such a decision. It is therefore best to let life
take its course, rather than allow people to issue a death certificate
for the living. Now, there are two kinds of vegetative states. In one
condition, the body became so inert that you are not able to get it
going, but the mind is active, the emotion is active and all perceptions
are intact. This is torture for the person because the body refuses to
move. This can lead to a lot of suffering because they can see, they can
hear, they can smell, they can understand, but they lack the ability to
do anything. They want to get up and walk but the body has become inert.
Now, it is a very difficult decision for anyone to take. Moreover, many
a time, the person understands all the things that are spoken around
them---whether to pull the plug or not and all that---it is a very bad
situation. It should not happen to anyone, but when it happens, how to
deal with it? This is a hard decision to make---there is no particular
way to do it because it depends on individual sensitivities. The other
kind is where the body seems to be reasonably vibrant and active,
digests food, and everything is happening, but the mind has become
inert. So the body cannot act. The body is still kept alive because you
are keeping it going with all the medical processes. This is like an
empty shell that is kept alive---incapable of any response. If this is
the case, you can wait for five cycles of twenty-one days and then take
a call. After that, if things are still the same, you can pull the plug.
You can be 100 per cent sure that the life cannot be revived. Well, this
may sound very drastic to you, but these days many honest doctors are
asking the relatives to take the patient home when they know there is no
point

continuing to meddle with them. But those who just want to serve bills
to you would be interested in kicking the can. Today, advances in
palliative care and pain relief have reached a point where most of the
pain that a person experiences on the deathbed can be removed with
appropriate medication. But people ask, will the use of painkillers
somehow affect the quality of death that is imminent? Is there some
merit in going through the full suffering on the deathbed? These
questions arise because of all those moralistic teachings in the world
that enduring pain and enduring suffering are virtues and is a way to
atone for one's sins. This happened: a new batch of people landed in
heaven. All of them were golfers. They asked, 'Is there a golf course in
heaven?' Saint Peter said, 'Of course.' They asked, 'Can we see it? Is
it okay?' He asked the Holy Ghost to drive them in a golf cart. So he
drove them through a fabulous golf course, full of flowers, greenery and
everything. When they crossed the third hole, they saw that there was a
pitful of fire and people were burning, screaming and yelling. They
looked at this and asked, 'What is this? We thought there was no
suffering in heaven.' The Holy Ghost said, 'They are religious people;
they insist!' So when someone is on the deathbed, is it okay to use
painkillers? If it is a non-sedative painkiller and if you are able to
maintain a reasonable amount of consciousness, it is perfectly fine to
take them. Why do you want to go through pain if there is no medical
need to suffer it? But if the painkillers are overly sedative and you
are not even barely conscious, then it is not the best way to leave.

About Dying at Home I would like to see a day where people come to
Kayantha Sthanam 4 and say, 'I think it is my time. Is there a place
here where I can stay and die and go? No one needs to carry me up here.'
That would be a good day. Go there, sit happily, don't eat or drink
anything, just die. No funeral, just cremation. That would be an
Enlightened world. Well, that is a faraway thing, that will not happen
right now, but at least you must create spaces where people can die
peacefully with a certain focus.

What is happening today in homes is that, though everyone is going to
die, unfortunately, no one is qualified as to how to handle death. How
is that? In the United States, you will see in every dining hall there
are first-aid instructions as to what to do if someone is choking on
food. But why is anyone choking on food? I have never heard of anything
like that in India. No one chokes on food in India, though, generally,
people in India are hungrier than Americans. People are choking on food
probably because they are talking and eating at the same time. When you
try to input and output simultaneously through the same channel,
something gets confused. If people just shut up and eat, I don't think
anyone will choke on their food. Anyway, for something like choking
while eating, there is so much care and effort to inform people as to
how to handle it, but there is nothing done on how to handle death.
Everyone knows people are going to die. You know your grandparents are
going to die, you know your parents are going to die, but when it
happens, no one knows how to handle it because somewhere they are trying
to avoid it. They think by not talking about it, by not preparing for
it, it is not going to happen. Very few families have the sense to
prepare and say, 'Okay, this person is going to die, let us prepare for
that.' It is time we prepared ourselves to do at least a few things to
ensure that this person who is dying does not have to go through
unnecessary suffering. Now, even when someone is medically dead, they
are not existentially dead because death happens slowly. So there are
certain preparations that can be made to reduce the choppiness of the
moment and assist the withdrawal of life during that time. If you are
dying at home, it is best you withdraw into a clean, white room with
mild-blue light. No photographs, nothing. If there is a tinge of blue
around you, this will help you to die well. Another simple thing you can
do to help is to have a lamp burning twenty-four hours of the day, next
to that person. A ghee lamp is preferable, but you can also use butter.
This creates a certain aura so that the choppy nature of withdrawal can
be regulated to some extent. Next, you can have a chant or something
with the right kind of sounds going on. These should be the kind of
sounds that will touch the fundamentals of who you are. It would be even
better if they are

consecrated sounds or chants or mantras. And better still if you have
internalized it beforehand. Internalizing a chant can be a very powerful
tool in life and in death. This happened in the life of the southern
Indian saint called Swami Ramdas. Ramdas was initiated into the worship
of Lord Rama by his father, through the chanting of the mantra 'Rama,
Rama, Rama'. Over time, his mantra practice became deep. Once when he
was still an unrecognized sadhaka, he was wandering through the
countryside. It was evening and some benevolent person in a village
offered to host him for the night. Ramdas ate the dinner that was
offered to him and went to sleep. But in the middle of the night, the
host realized that someone was chanting 'Rama, Rama, Rama' quite loudly.
He was annoyed as he wanted to sleep. So he went to check on Ramdas. He
was fast asleep. But the owner could still hear the sound of 'Rama,
Rama'. So he slowly went towards Ramdas and sensed that the sound was
emanating from Ramdas's body! His practice of mantra was so intensified
that even while he slept, the body was just reverberating 'Rama, Rama,
Rama'. Such incidents where people have internalized sounds or mantras
have happened in the lives of many other saints. This also happened with
my Divine Guru. I call him Divine because the element of divinity
happened to me only because of His Presence. Palani Swami never told
anybody his name---maybe even he didn't remember. Because people saw him
in many fantastic states around the Palani Hills, they called him as
Palani Swami. Just by sitting in one place, he drew such large crowds
that the local temple priests became a little resentful. They were irked
that this man who did nothing, who begged for his food from others, was
drawing so many people. Meanwhile, they were sitting in the temple from
morning till evening, doing their rituals and duties, but people were
not going there; they were going to this man. So they wanted to find
something against him. One day, they accused Palani Swami of uttering
'Shambho', when doing his morning ablutions, which is something that is
considered a sacrilege. So they brought him before the village panchayat
and charged him with desecrating God by taking his name when going out
to relieve himself in the morning. Palani Swami simply sat there before
this ignorant bunch of judges, with eyes closed and

mouth closed. Then loud reverberations of the sound 'Shambho' could be
heard among the gathering. And that was the end of their prosecution. So
you can internalize a chant like this, where your very energies
reverberate with that sound. In order to reach the point where it is
internalized, you need a certain amount of loud chanting initially. If
you do that in your day-to-day life, it can be a great support when
death is approaching. We have created a collection of sacred chants
called Vairagya . It has five mantras. Listen to the album over and over
a few times, paying attention to each one of the mantras. Each one runs
for ten minutes. Figure out which mantra really draws you. Just listen
repeatedly. When you feel that one of them is really grabbing you, just
go by that. Keep this mantra going all the time---in your car, in your
home, on your iPad, iPod, phone, everywhere. Simply keep them going on
and on for some time. Initially, you chant it loudly like a song.
Slowly, see if you can close your mouth and still keep the same
reverberation up. Initially, unless you chant it sufficiently in the
louder form with some volume, you cannot take it inward. You must create
that memory of the reverberation substantially in your system, where,
even if you close your mouth, the mantra is on. After some time, if you
just remind yourself, it flows because you have created a memory of that
reverberation. Now, the dying person may not be able to do the chanting
themselves. At the moment of death, it takes something for a person to
be aware enough to say what they want to say. Most people die in
unawareness. So in this culture, if someone is dying, people around
always start a chant like 'Ram, Ram' or 'Aum Namah Shivaya', or whatever
they know because they want the dying one also to utter a consecrated
sound that creates awareness. So when someone is dying at home or
elsewhere, you can set up a chant of one of these mantras at a very mild
volume. If they have already chosen their chant themselves or
internalized it, that can be used. If they had not chosen one,
Brahmananda Swarupa could be played for everyone. This will make sure
that a choppy withdrawal of life can be avoided. We could make more
powerful body-exiting mantras available because reverberations can do
wonders for a life that is already

organizing itself to exit. If you cause powerful reverberations of
support, life will organize itself very well, and you will become loose
inside the body. So you can at least have a few days or a few hours of
experience where you are not the body 100 per cent. This will be a
wonderful thing for any human being. But it will also affect people who
are around, so no one should be there when this is being used. Moreover,
we don't know how people will use it. There is no way to ensure that it
will be used responsibly. They may use it in their car when they are
driving, and they may exit by crashing! So it is best to not attempt
these things with the masses and instead use something general like the
Vairagya chants. Of the Pancha Pranas, Udana Vayu can be influenced by
the right kind of reverberations. As we mentioned earlier, Udana Vayu
withdraws between six and twelve hours after the breath stops. By
chanting and lighting sambrani , 5 one can create the conducive
reverberations for Udana to exit swiftly. Otherwise, cremating the
person's body before their Udana exits can cause a certain level of
turmoil. Now, what to do if someone is dying in an ICU or something like
that, where the doctors will not allow lamps and chants and things like
that? First of all, people should not go to an ICU to die. But if such a
situation is inevitable, you could do a few things at home, but they are
not as effective. For example, you can keep some clothing of theirs---
something they have used---wrap it in a white cloth and keep it in front
of their picture and light a lamp. You could play the chant there. It
will have some impact, but not the same as being in the physical
presence. This lamp and the chant should continue up to fourteen days
after one has been certified dead because one may be medically dead but
not existentially dead. Death happens slowly. The withdrawal of the life
process from this lump of earth---the body---happens step by step. For
all practical purposes, the activity of the lungs, heart and brain
stops, so they are declared dead, but it is not yet so. Even if the
person's body is burned, they are still not gone because their movement
into the other realm has not yet happened. Now, when the moment of death
is approaching, it is best to move the dying person out of the house
into an open courtyard or open space. There you must keep them,
preferably on cloth upon open soil in a

north--south alignment, with the head to the north. This is to be done
when death is certain and you want it to happen with ease. If the body
is still in the house, inside constructed atmospheres, the being does
not leave the body with ease. Why put the head towards the north?
Traditionally, in India, they tell you not to sleep with your head to
the north. This is valid only when you are in the northern hemisphere.
If you go to the southern hemisphere, say Australia, you should not put
your head towards the south. Mostly, this body is designed in such a way
that if you remain vertical, it is ideal. Now your heart is located
three-fourths of the way up because pumping the blood up is difficult,
pumping it down is easy, and all the arteries and veins that go above
the heart are very thin. Blood vessels going down are much thicker. As
they go towards the brain, they become almost hairlike. So when you lie
down, the blood can be pumped into the upper portion of the body much
more easily. The heart also makes some adjustments once you lie down.
But despite that there is a certain effect. Now, iron is an important
constituent of your blood. If you are anaemic, your doctor prescribes
you iron supplements. As you know, the North Pole has a very strong
magnetic pull on the rest of the Earth. Now, if you lie down with your
head towards the north, it will pull your blood in that direction, so
there will be increased blood flow to your brain. This is not too much,
but enough to impact the system. This is why, when you sleep with your
head towards the north, you will have disturbed sleep. You can also have
nightmares because of disturbed sleep. Old people may even die in their
sleep if they put their head to the north. Or they can have a
haemorrhage or stroke and things like that. So when you live in the
northern hemisphere, you should not put your head towards the north.
However, when a person is dying, you should place the head towards the
north because it eases and aids the disentanglement process of the being
from the body. During the last moments, even though the physical body
has lost its vibrancy, life still tries to stay there and do things, not
knowing what to do. But the moment you place it outside in north--south
alignment, it just knows it is over. So it will leave the body
effortlessly. It also aids in maintaining a conscious state during the
transition. These are

some simple but effective things you can do to assist someone who is
dying.

Rituals from Death to the Disposal of the Body We already saw that when
it comes to death, the usage of language is significant: you do not
diagnose someone as dead, you declare that they are dead. It is
significant because there is a difference between the two. When you
declare them dead, it is only for you that they are dead. As far as that
person is concerned, in a way, all that has happened is that he or she
is disembodied---they have lost their body. All their life they lived
thinking they are the body, never realizing the physical mass that we
carry is an accumulation from this planet. When suddenly one slips out
of the body, one tends to hover around it, as there is no discriminatory
intelligence. It is in stages that life came into the body and it is in
stages that it will go away. It is believed in Indian culture that the
moment we are sure that someone is dead, we must do certain things
because the situation is rife with possibilities for us to help the
departed being. A person who is knowledgeable about the intricacies of
the process of death can do a whole lot of good for the departed, but
even ordinary people who happen to be around the dying also can make a
huge difference in easing the journey of the departed by doing certain
things, whether they understand it or not. This will be good for the
dead person and also good for the living.

The Laying Out of the Body Even after death has happened, it is good to
place the body in a north-- south alignment, with the head to the north.
As we said earlier, as far as the dead person is concerned, all their
life they lived thinking they are the body, experiencing that they are
the body. Suddenly, they popped out and they are confused. Confused
existentially, not psychologically. They do not have a discriminatory
mind to think. They do not realize that it is over. They linger around
because the body is still there. They tend to make attempts to get back
into the body, which is unfit to sustain life.

This can lead to a certain energy in that place which is neither good
for the person nor for the people living around that space. When you
place the body in a north--south alignment, with the head towards the
north, the being will be pulled away from the body. Once you do this,
certain changes happen more quickly in the physiology of the body that
has been discarded. The being realizes that it is futile to hang around
that particular body because it cannot access it any more. A certain
distance arises between the being and the body, which is very conducive
for what has to happen next for the being.

Tying the Big Toes Together The next thing to do after death is to tie
the big toes together. This is because when you are alive, life energies
are deeply infused into every cell of your body. When death happens,
these energies recede slowly. Functionally, it may be dead, but it does
not die totally; it dies slowly because all the cells in the body are
not dead yet, and they are still making an effort to live. They will try
to draw energy from outside. When they try to draw energy, certain
forces may enter the body. In order to prevent these things, people tie
the two big toes together in such a way that the outer surface of the
big toes are touching each other. Even now, you will notice that if you
put your big toes together, your anal outlet and the Muladhara Chakra
will always be tightly closed. If the Muladhara Chakra is not closed,
the remaining aspect of the prana tends to leave from that chakra, which
is not desirable. Moreover, if the Muladhara Chakra and the anal outlet
are open, it tends to become a lower passageway for the being to enter
the body again. This can cause a very negative situation, which is not
at all good for that being, nor for the living.

Once the Muladhara Chakra is closed, the being cannot get in and
repossession of the body cannot happen. This wanting to possess the body
through the Muladhara Chakra need not necessarily be by the being who
has left the body. There are other beings who seek such a passage. If
someone wants to do certain occult practices where freshly dead bodies
are used, it is always the Muladhara which is made use of because that
is the easiest passage. Other passages will not be as easily available.
So tying the toes together will also protect the body from being used by
people who are into occult practices, which would bind that being in so
many ways. There is also a practical aspect to this. If you don't tie
the toes together, when death happens, the legs will naturally tend to
move apart and spread wide. Once rigor mortis sets in, you will not be
able to bring them back together, and handling the dead body will become
difficult

and awkward. So tying the toes together will prevent the distortion of
the body.

Washing and Clothing the Body In certain communities in India, where
they are still aware of these things, the first thing they do when
someone dies is strip the body naked. The next thing to do is wash the
body with water. One reason is that the person may have been injured and
ill during the last moments, so you want to clean that up. But it is not
just for hygiene purposes that you give them a wash. See, even when you
are alive, if someone tries to give you a bath and they pour water on
your face, you will feel like you are being waterboarded. It feels like
you are drowning. If there is even any little activity happening in the
body, it will all cease. The idea is not to just clean the body, but to
facilitate the complete withdrawal of life from the body as running
water has the ability to clear many aspects off the body. Now, once
again, you lay the body in north--south alignment in an open space. The
body is kept naked, with just a white cloth covering it. This cloth is
also for the people's sake, not for the dead body's sake. There is
nothing to cover, there is nothing to expose for a dead body, but the
living people have issues. So one white cloth, just a sheet, is used to
cover the body. Why a white cloth? The colour white reflects all light
and most of the heat---two factors that can hasten the decomposition of
the cells. This hastening of decomposition is not advisable at this
stage, as certain aspects of prana are still partially functional in the
body. Black or coloured cloth will absorb both light and heat, and
should be avoided. Unfortunately, these days, people have begun clothing
and dressing up the body elaborately. Undertakers in the West actually
do more make-up for dead bodies than what people would do for Hollywood
stars. It has become very lucrative. But in this culture, when you go
back to death, you go back naked, as you were born. Even if you did not
realize it when you were alive, it is at least a realization for the
other people who are watching. It is a knock on their head to tell them
that these things do not matter any more.

Things Not to Do around a Dead Body

There are many customs and rituals for the dead in various cultures, but
there are some things that you should definitely not do around a dead
body. One thing is that you should not sleep near a dead body. This is
so because, in sleep, everyone is far more susceptible to everything
than in wakefulness. We already saw that death is a process and it is
still on for quite some time. If you have kept the body for six, twelve
or twenty-four hours or whatever, the process is still on, and life is
still exiting. So people who are sleeping near the body become available
to such things, which is not good for them. Another thing is that one
should not cook or eat near a dead body. The very nature of food will
draw that energy in that direction. So if you are cooking or eating near
a dead body where the life energies are still exiting, you will be
eating your own relative in some way. This may sound very extreme, but
it is so because food will draw these energies. This is why,
traditionally, people don't cook in the house where death has occurred
for a period of fourteen days. People bring food from outside, for the
people there. But it is not good to eat there either. The very process
of eating itself makes a person vulnerable to influences. The moments of
eating and sexuality are the times when a human being becomes far more
vulnerable than other times because, essentially, human structure has to
open up in some way to take it in. This is the reason why you must bring
down the number of times you eat so that you retain the integrity of the
system. You can clearly observe this: those who eat all the time, even
if they eat less, will not have integrity of system. Sexuality, food and
even constantly sipping water opens up the body to various influences
that will not always work positively for people. It is in this context
that a yogi opens his or her body only when absolutely needed and that
too in a structured and disciplined manner. Constant ingestion loosens
the general integrity of the subtler dimensions of the body. You will
see that the people who keep munching on something all the time will
become loose in the head. It is not that they become fat, that is not
the point. They become loose in every way, there is nothing of strength
or vibrancy or capability simply because they are opening their system
all the time. Also, you do not eat simply anywhere and everywhere.
Always, in India, you never want to

be seen by strangers when you are eating. You don't eat with just
anyone. You eat only with people who know you, with people who have good
intentions for you. But today, even if it is your enemy, meetings happen
over dinner. But at least around a dead body, you should avoid eating.
One should also avoid unnecessary touching of the dead body. Whatever
touching you need to do should be to clean or bathe or move the body,
but one should avoid unnecessarily holding the body, hugging, and all
that. That is not good for you or that life which is exiting. One more
thing is that you do not leave the dead body alone. In India, if someone
close to you dies, you are supposed to keep a ghee, butter or sesame-oil
lamp burning near the body. People are supposed to sit and watch---no
one leaves a dead body alone. The lamp's flame has a purificatory effect
and is like Klesha Nashana Kriya. If it is a regular death, the lamp is
to be placed at the feet. If it is an elevated exit, then the lamp is to
be placed at the head to have a purificatory impact upon the exiting
energy. If there is qualified help, then they may choose to light the
lamp over a specific part of the body. The lamp can be lit even up to
fourteen days after the body is cremated or buried.

Paying Respects to the Dead In almost all parts of the world, if someone
is dead, people who knew the person come and pay their respects for who
he or she was. But in India, a dead person is generally treated as a
Divine being and one bows down to them. It does not matter who they were
when they were alive. When they were alive, maybe they did not deserve
any kind of respect, but now that they are dead, people bow down to
them. This is not out of joy that the person is gone. They bow down to
him or her because he or she is no more that person. Now, what is left
and what is hovering around is of a different nature. This is life. This
is the basis of life, and with that you don't argue. You don't question
its wisdom. You just bow down because it is way beyond you.

The Belongings of the Dead Person

When a person is dead, the articles of clothing that have been
intimately in touch with their body, such as the underclothes, must be
burned immediately. Other clothes, jewellery and other articles are
distributed not just to one person but among many people within three
days. Everything is distributed as quickly as possible so that the being
gets confused. It will not know where to hang around any more. If you
were to give a bundle of their belongings to one person, the being would
go there because the energy of their own body still exists in the
clothes and they are attracted to it. This is done not only to settle
the dead but also to settle the family and relatives so that they too
understand that it is over. It does not matter how involved or attached
you were to someone when it is done, the game is up.

To Burn or Bury You will see if someone very dear to you is dead and
their body is there, you will keep on hallucinating, 'Maybe they are
just sleeping, maybe they will sit up, maybe some miracle will happen.
Maybe something else will happen.' You know, this will go on
unnecessarily. You will see people crying and a big emotional drama
happening. But the moment the body is cremated, you will see everyone
becomes silent. Always. Because now everyone knows the game is up. The
cremation of bodies has also come from a certain understanding of life.
The idea of burning is that no trace of you should remain. Once you are
gone, you are clean gone. Nothing of you should remain. But if someone
exits their body consciously, or even if not consciously, they at least
left gently or seeped out of the system, then you can bury them. But if
they were jolted out of the system, you must burn the body.
Traditionally, in India, you will see agricultural families bury their
dead because most of them would have died of old age---they would have
seeped out. Kshatriya families, which were the fighting class, always
burned their dead because most of them were jolted out of their body
either in a war or while fighting somewhere. Even otherwise, these were
people who lived flamboyant lifestyles of drinking and doing this and
that, so most of the time they broke the body in some way. Such bodies
must be burned immediately. But now there is no one to identify

all these things, and moreover if you put them in a coffin and bury
them, they will not even become part of the Earth for a long time. So I
would say if someone dies when they are still young and vibrantly alive,
it is better to cremate them. Only if someone dies of old age, you can
bury them. If you understand life very well, absolutely well, you can
exit the body in such a way that you exit completely, you gather
everything and leave. If you leave like that, then also you can be
buried. You have completely exited, so there is no hurry. We can even
keep you for a day or two and then bury you. Usually, people build
samadhis for such people so that the energies that they have left behind
can be made use of by other people. Even if we bury someone, we should
put a layer of salt and turmeric beneath and above the body. Don't think
we are making a stew out of them; the idea is that we want the body to
deteriorate as quickly as possible. If you put it in the ground without
these things, the body remains intact for a long time and unnecessarily
certain processes happen, which are not good. Also, in India, another
fear was that there were people doing various kinds of occult sadhanas,
who were always looking for a freshly dead body. If you bury the body
and go, as soon as you go, they will come and dig it up. In recent
times, you don't hear much of such things, but it used to happen often
in the past. If you put salt, that body becomes useless for them. If
they know you put salt, they will not dig up the grave. There are also
certain cultures which practise feeding the carrion to scavenger birds.
As we know, among sailors, there is a practice of burial at sea. These
practices have come out of convenience. Certain religions originated
where there was hardly any wood to burn, hence burial has become big.
There was no question of burning because fuel was extremely precious in
desert lands. Moreover, burial was easy in the sand. A pit could be dug
with bare hands and covered up. Perhaps the custom to bury the dead in a
box came into existence as wild animals smelled them and dug out the
bodies. Slowly, the boxes became more and more elaborate. With the
passage of time, today, most coffins are more and more ornamental, made
of hardwood, steel and even concrete. If you bury a body in these types
of coffins, they will just rot inside.

They will not become a part of the earth for a very, very long time.
This is not good. Another reason for avoiding burial is the question of
what you leave behind. You should experiment with this and see. Enter a
burial ground and see how it feels, then enter a cremation ground and
see how it feels. Let us say, five cremations have happened today, the
cremation ground will be very active, alive with energy. This is a lot
of life, but if you don't have a balanced mind, it can be a very fearful
kind of energy. Fearful not because of anything else but because in some
way it reminds you of your mortality. It is almost like there has been a
sacrifice here---that kind of energy. Yogis and tantriks wanted to hang
around such places because they had learned to use that energy in a
positive way. So what cremation leaves behind is something that is quite
alive, but this is not the case with burial. If you go to a burial
ground, you will see there is a rotting kind of energy. Rotting may not
be the right word because it is not because the body is rotting. It is a
slow release of that same energy. Besides, because the energy hangs
around for too long, it has intermingled in so many ways with too many
lives and the net result is a very stale kind of energy. Burial grounds
do not cause fear in you, but very easily a certain sadness or
depressive mood can set in in a person just by visiting there, even if
no one dear to them was buried there. This is like the feeling you get
in a general ward in a government hospital. It is neither life nor
death. This is not a good thing to leave behind for future generations.

Bringing Home the Body People have this strong sentiment that wherever
the person died, his or her body should be brought home for burial or
cremation. At one time, this would have had some relevance because many
traditional people in this country would not eat anything which was
grown in a place that was beyond a day's walking distance from their
homes. Nothing from outside that area was consumed. Whenever they
travelled, they also carried their food with them. They did not want to
eat food from anywhere and everywhere. So they developed a strong
resonance and a very existential

relationship with the land on which they were living. If you lived like
that, dying in that place and being buried in that place could be very
important. Today, we eat things which come from around the world or at
least around the country and, moreover, we are loitering all over the
planet. So where you are buried does not matter so much any more. It is
more an emotional thing. And if you are already in a foreign country, we
don't know how much of that country you carry. So, existentially, it
does not matter as to where you dispose of the body, but, emotionally,
it does matter for people. Moreover, there is this element of
practicality too. All the family and friends who would have wanted to
participate in the funeral are more likely to be around your own home,
so it makes more sense to bring the body back because many of them may
not be able to travel to the place where this person died.

Cleansing the House Whenever a death occurs in a place or a dwelling,
generally, there are some cleansing processes that are to be done. This
is not just for some hygiene reasons; you want to wipe off that energy
completely from that place. If you want to cleanse the homes or
dwellings, you can do Punya Pooja 6 or something similar, which will
work very well. You can also cleanse it by taking a vibrant fire, like a
camphor fire, all over the house. Just like we do klesha nashana for the
individual body, similarly, you can do klesha nashana for the entire
house. Doing some chants in that space also could be very beneficial.
This need for cleansing is not just for the places where death happens.
Traditionally, even if you attended a funeral, you had to bathe, cleanse
yourself properly and change your clothes before you even entered the
house or touched anything there. In some cultures, the clothes you wore
to the funeral were to be never used again. It was burned because it
gathers a certain aura of death, and you don't want to carry that and
walk around.

Tonsuring the Head after Cremation

A common after-death Hindu ritual is tonsuring of the head of the male
relatives of the deceased. This shaving of the head came into practice
when people generally kept a lot of hair on their head. Today, they are
anyway cutting it every month or so, so whether you shave or not may not
make much difference. But normally people used to have long hair, and
hair is one thing that can easily gather a certain amount of aura. You
know that hair gathers static. People who have a lot of hair have
static--- it will be crackling sometimes in certain weather. Hair has
this capability. Similarly, if you have been in the house where death
has occurred or you are related to that person, you gather an aura of
death, particularly in your hair. It hangs around you. So if you have a
lot of hair, you shave it so that the aura is gone. This is the reason
why they tonsure the heads of newborn babies also. When you were in your
mother's womb, you gathered that aura. After birth, the aura of that is
still there. If it stays with you, you will not grow well. So they wait
for four to five months, so that the baby is reasonably grown and stable
in health, and then they shave the head. Shaving the child's head also
aids in the development of the brain by moving energies towards the head
region.

Spreading the Ashes After the death has happened, it can take up to
forty days for the being to completely leave the body. Even if you have
burned the physical body, they will look for certain elements of the
body like the ash or maybe their used clothes or something that belonged
to them. It could be the sweat or smell of the body because, still the
realization has not come that it is over. This is not desirable, so we
want to eliminate it. One of the things that is done for this is to
scatter the ashes as widely as possible. After cremation, if you keep
the ash in one place, there is a tendency for the being to look for
that. So they are put in a river where they get really spread out. That
way they cannot be found. The effort is to do everything possible to
make the being understand that it is over. This is also for the living
to understand that it is all over. Otherwise you will keep the ash in a
pot in your house and you will become unnecessarily emotional about it.

Another reason why you disperse the ash is that you want to prevent its
misuse. Usually, occult practitioners always gather ash from the
cremation ground when they want to do those types of rituals, where they
want to attract a disembodied being towards them. They will be
waiting---they will be sitting in the cremation ground as if they are
out there to help you. Generally, if they want to do a certain type of
ritual, they will steal the body itself. It is usually the Aghoris who
do this. They are always looking for a young, vibrant dead body so they
can sit on the dead body and do sadhana. Using the Vyana Vayu, which is
still receding in the body, they will activate that body and they will
ride that body in a certain way. Or they want to use their own energies
to activate the dead body to do certain things. In the past, it was not
uncommon. Another kind of people also look for the ashes: these are
occult practitioners who misuse it. This is sorcery. It is because of
all these reasons that when someone dear to you dies, you want to make
sure this ash is scattered as wide as possible. You don't want your dead
relatives to come searching for it or become victims of sorcery. So you
take the ash and put it in the rivers. Or you go to a mountain and,
where the wind is strong, you throw it into the air so that it spreads
all over. In the past, this misuse was not uncommon but today there are
hardly a handful of people who are capable of it. But still it is best
to scatter the ashes so that the being does not get drawn towards it.

Is It All Right to Donate Organs I would say, even if you have not lived
your life in a useful manner, in death at least you could be useful! So
if someone can use the dead body, it is fine. We already saw that all
people don't die the same way, just as all people don't live the same
way. If you look at it technically, people can die out of any one of the
chakras. One can die in any one of these dimensions. If one has died in
a certain way, by consciously exiting the body, then it is not good to
dismember one's body. But if people have died in normal ways, it is all
right to do it. The problem again is, who is there capable enough to
decide this? Moreover, when someone is dead, can one go and tell
someone, 'Okay, your father has died in a bad way,

so you can cut open the body and donate the organs?' It is not socially
advisable or even possible. So it is better that organ donation is open
for everyone rather than making exceptions to it. Moreover, if it is
going to be useful for someone, maybe it is better to do it. Strictly
speaking, there are some disadvantages for certain people if the organs
are taken out, but it is okay if someone is going to see through your
eyes or live better through your organs. Now, people ask if one is on
the spiritual path, can one donate organs? I think, except for the
kidney and a few other things, you are donating the organs only after
you are dead. So donate it, what is the problem? The question is: Is the
little bit of gouging the body that they do after death okay for a
spiritual person? After one is dead, anyway you burn the body or bury
it. If you bury it, the organs will get donated to the worms or plants.
They also make use of it. If you take away an eyeball, the worms will
not miss it. If you die in an accident or something, where the body is
broken but still all these organs are fine, we can take them. It is all
right. It has nothing to do with spirituality. It is only an emotional
problem. If something is useful for someone, if they can see or live
making use of it, it is okay. Moreover, for a person to die with the
intention---'Let my body be useful to ten people'---is a good thing.
Some people donate their entire body for research purposes. These bodies
will be preserved for a long time and cut open to the maximum. If they
start cutting the body within the first eleven to fourteen days, there
is definitely a little bit of harm to that person. If that is the case,
then we can do something so that they completely exit. After that, how
their body is used, it does not matter. But I think it will be well
beyond fourteen days before they start cutting it for education or
research purposes. At that time, it is just like a piece of vegetable.
Whether you give it to the doctors or bury it or burn it, it makes no
difference to that individual. Now, some people worry that if karma is
encoded into even the minutest aspect of our lives, then do the organs
that are received through transplantation also bring the karma of the
donor along with them? People have been doing blood transfusions for
ages now. Blood is far more vital than any other organ and in fact goes
all over the body, to every organ. It has access to everything,
including your brain. But people

are doing fine with blood transfusion, so this should also be fine.
Definitely, there is something that you acquire, but the benefit
outweighs the risks. Is it the best thing to do? No. But is it something
that you do if it is needed? Yes. If the organ is not suitable, or in
some way not going well with the body, it will anyway reject it. The
problem is that we have too much emotion about these things. Your
kidneys are just filters. If you own a diesel car, every 10,000
kilometres or so you replace the fuel filter. So, similarly, you are
replacing your kidney filter. The question is, your filter has already
been used, it is a second-hand filter. So is there a problem? Maybe. So,
now, they are trying to grow new filters in the lab. They are growing
the liver, kidney, spleen, and whatever is needed, in the lab and
storing it. When you need it, you can have it ready-made. It is a good
new filter. You can put it in because the body is a mechanical thing.
Maybe you will turn spiritual more easily if you have all organs
replaced because you will have no sense of your own body. It is a good
thing because you don't have to tell such people, 'You are not the
body!' They know they are not their heart, they are not their liver,
they are not their kidney!

Dematerializing the Body All the after-death rituals are mainly for the
right disposal of the physical body and for assisting the being in its
future journey. However, there are people who help themselves and do not
require any assistance from anybody for this. These are highly
accomplished yogis---they not only leave their body at will, they also
dematerialize it. It is as if they do not want to trouble anyone with
the cremation process! Such a body does not get destroyed, it gets
dematerialized. It has moved from Creation to nonCreation. The whole
process that you see in the Existence is from nonCreation to Creation,
from unmanifest to manifest. But here the reverse is happening. A yogi
with enough mastery of the five elements can do that to his body. There
have been many yogis like this. When they leave, some people leave ash
behind, but many times all that is left is a small puddle of water. How
is this done? Essentially, this body is a play of five elements: 72 per
cent of it is water, 12 per cent is earth, 6 per cent is air, 4 per cent

is fire and the rest is aakash. With aakash, you don't have to do
anything. If you know how to dematerialize these other things,
especially the earth, you will evaporate right here. These people
dematerialize water also, but because it is a larger part of your body,
some amount of it usually gets left out. A little lack of perfection,
that is all. This has happened with many of our meditators who have
Linga Bhairavi Yantras in their homes. On some days, in the morning,
they find a puddle of water near the Yantra. The previous night they
would have cleaned everything and lit a lamp and all that, but in the
morning, there is a puddle of water there. There is nothing to worry
about. This is because some disembodied being has used the Yantra to
dissolve its karmic body completely and, in the process, there is some
water left behind. It is perfectly all right. There are also some
instances in recent history where such dematerializations have been
reported. In the year 1873, a Tamil saint named Ramalinga Adigal,
popularly known as Vallalar, delivered his last discourse and announced
that he would be 'leaving'. In January 1874, he went to his one-room
residence. Before retiring, he placed outside the lamp he had used to
light up his room with, and asked people to meditate with lamps lit from
that lamp. He requested that nobody should open his room, and that if
they did, they would not find him there. The then British government
forced open the room in May, and, expectedly, the room was empty. There
are many such instances where saints and yogis have chosen not to bother
people with their bodies. Another such incident is supposed to have
happened as recently as 1952 in Tibet. There was a famous Master named
Sonam Namgyal. He was a simple stone carver of mantras and sacred texts.
He did not belong to any established spiritual schools or tradition. He
composed his own songs and chants and sang them instead of the
traditional ones. No one had any idea what he was doing. They say he had
been a hunter in his youth and once when he was wandering in the
mountains he had received teachings from a great Master. Once, he fell
ill, and instead of becoming saddened or burdened by it, he became
increasingly happy. He called his family and everyone nearby and said,
'I am going to die soon, and all I ask is that when I die, don't move my
body for a week. You can attend to it after that.'

As predicted, he died within a few weeks and, after that, his family
wrapped his body and placed the body in a small room in the house. At
that time, they felt he seemed lighter and smaller for his size. Over
the week, when they looked into the room, it seemed that the body was
getting smaller and smaller. On the eighth day after his death, the
funeral had been arranged, and when they uncovered the body, there was
nothing but his nails and hair inside. He must have wandered into India
and learned this from the Himalayan yogis at some point because this is
clearly the hallmark of Indian yogis. Dematerializing of the body can be
done through occult processes also. It has very much been in practice
for centuries, particularly in North American tribes. Once, in Mysore, I
saw this happen. I was riding my motorcycle and had stopped at some
place for no real reason. It was evening time and suddenly this bearded
man appeared in front of me, with just a towel wrapped around his waist.
I looked at him and he became a flame, just a burning flame. He burned
for ten minutes and then, poof , he was gone. Then this guy started
appearing in so many ways to me, during a certain period. I would try to
offer some money and, poof , he would disappear just like that. It
happened another time also when we were preparing for the consecration
of the Dhyanalinga. This was again in Mysore. A friend of mine had
opened a new showroom for watches and had asked me to visit it. Vijji
and I decided to go there one day. I parked the car and we were walking
across the road. When we were about to enter the store, a man approached
us. He was also wearing just a small piece of cloth around his waist. He
came and asked for alms. I looked at him and immediately knew he was not
a beggar. So I pulled out my wallet, took out all the money that was
there and put it in his hand. 7 I did not even see how much money was
there. I just took it all and placed it in his hand. The next moment he
was gone, he vanished just like that. Vijji, who saw the whole thing,
was aghast. She got so terrified, she could not sleep for a few days.
She could not digest that this man was standing there and then he
vanished---just like that. I did not pursue this. I regretted I kept the
wallet---I should have just given everything to him. I had a few things
other than money in it, so I kept it.

These are people who have mastered a certain element. They exist as
that. Their manifestation as a physical body is probably not totally in
their control and they cannot stay that way for long. This is why it is
a momentary manifestation and then it is gone. So either through mastery
over the elements, or through Vamachara , people are able to pull off
such things.

CHAPTER 8

Assistance for the Disembodied

As we have responsibilities for the living, we have responsibilities for
the dead.

Why Are After-death Rituals Needed Earlier, 1 we already saw that when a
person dies, the life energy does not leave the body all at once. For
all practical purposes, one may be dead, but if you are a doctor who has
seen enough deaths around you or if you are an undertaker---you would
know that death is a process that happens over a period of time and is
not an event that occurs instantaneously. This is because, during the
process of disembodiment, the Pancha Pranas do not exit all at once but
recede in stages. It is like this, you were not just born one day. It
took a little over nine months before you could become a full life.
Similarly, even one's exit does not happen just like that. Life exits
the body in stages. Usually, a person who is dying can do with some help
at this stage. Everyone dies, and at some point or the other in our
life, we all will lose someone who is dear to us. So we would definitely
like to see that something nice happens to them. Suppose you are living
in a rented house and your landlord asks you to vacate. You vacate, but
in parts. You may take your furniture, but leave your kitchen things;
you may take your kitchen things but leave your bedding, because you are
still not done with the place---you want to keep coming back and stay
connected to the house. When the landlord sees this, he will throw
everything out. In a way, that is exactly what needs to be done with
you. If it is a yogi who has done enough work on his or her five vayus,
when they leave, they will gather everything and go. They do not want to
linger with a dead creature, so when they vacate, they do it completely.
This is a good way to leave, but to leave like this, one needs certain

mastery over one's energies. If a person leaves like this, there is no
need to do any rituals because he has already exited completely. But if
you don't know how to vacate, if you are too attached to the dwelling in
which you have been and you try to vacate in instalments, someone else
can push you out a little bit. This process can be very effectively done
within the first three to five days after the death. Up to eleven days,
the possibility is still pretty good. Up to fourteen days, it is
possible, but after that it becomes difficult. If the one who has died
is very young or very vibrantly still alive after one left the body,
then it is possible to do something up to forty to forty-eight days.
After that, our ability to access that disembodied being diminishes.
When they are still confused and in a transitory state, they are more
accessible. It is like when you have some real big problem confounding
you in your life, then you come to me and plead, 'Sadhguru, please do
something.' Now, you are easy to deal with at that time. But when you
are doing a little well and in comfort, no one can talk to you! These
beings are also like that. In fourteen days, they will settle in their
new accommodations and it will be a little hard to convince them after
that. Moreover, if you do certain things and dismantle the Vyana Vayu,
which is exiting the physical system, the subtle body will not get the
Vyana Vayu that it needs to preserve itself. So it will start crumbling.
Even now, if we remove the Vyana Vayu from your body, it will crumble.
The body will start dismantling itself. When you take away the Vyana
Vayu or limit the amount of Vyana Vayu which is getting into that system
after death, the preservation quality goes away. Now, it becomes
desperate to seek a new body. So these rituals interfere with the
process of Vyana Vayu exiting the body and don't allow it to proceed
further. Now, it is almost like they have gone to a new place or a new
country but they don't have an ID yet. So they cannot find
accommodation, nor can they go anywhere. They will start crumbling.
Death rituals are not just to assist the dead person in his or her
journey, they are also for the benefit of those who are left behind,
because if this person who dies leaves a lot of unsettled life around
us, our lives will not be good. It is not that ghosts will come and
catch you. But it will influence the atmosphere. It will influence those
around, psychologically.

It will also influence the quality of life around. This is the reason
every culture in the world has its own type of rituals for the dead.
Generally, a lot of it is to settle certain psychological factors of the
near and dear ones. In some way, they did have a certain relevance and
science behind them too. But, probably, no other culture has such
elaborate methods as the Indians do. No one has looked at death with the
kind of understanding and depth that this culture has. Right from the
moment that death occurs, or even before it occurs, there are whole
systems to help a person die in the most beneficial way. Having looked
at life from every possible angle, they want to extract the most out of
everything towards Liberation or mukti. If death is going to occur, they
want to make use of even that to attain mukti, in some way. So they
created powerful rituals for the dying and for the dead. Today, these
rituals have become even more important because almost everyone on the
planet is beginning to die in unawareness, without the necessary
understanding of the life mechanism within themselves. In the olden
days, most people died of infections and diseases. So people created a
whole science to help them beyond their body. When they were in the
body, maybe people around could not figure out what the ailment was or
the person did not get the necessary treatment or something else
happened and they died. So at least after his or her death, they wanted
to help them in such a way that they did not hang around for too long
and dissolved quickly. This is how the whole science behind these
rituals evolved. Unfortunately, today, it has mostly become a
meaningless ritual being done without the needed understanding or
expertise. When we do not take care of the dead properly, the adolescent
children in that society will suffer immensely because of this. The
first thing these disembodied beings go towards is adolescent life
because that is the easiest and the most vulnerable human life around.
Adolescence is like a human version of moulting, where growth is very
rapid, not only physiologically but in every other way. Because of this,
during this period, life is very susceptible to influence. If there is
any positive or negative energy around, adolescents are the first people
to absorb it. Among adolescents, girls are even more susceptible to
these things than boys are. But preadolescent children---up to eight to
ten years of

age---are generally immune to these things. Nature has given them that
protection, so you don't have to protect them much. It is mostly
children between ten to twenty years of age who can get affected. When I
say affected, I am not referring to their hormonal stuff or them losing
their way with drink and drugs. That can also happen, but there are
other kinds of influences that they can come under. Today, you can see
how much upheaval children are going through just to face adolescence.
In the previous generations, adolescence was never such a struggle. One
reason for this is that we are not taking care of those who have
departed in an appropriate manner. It is like loose software hanging
around and adolescent life naturally tangles with that. So either
because of conscious knowing or by instinct, people in every culture in
some way tried to create protective atmospheres for the adolescents.
Many traditions always kept the places of their dead as sacred, and
women and children were never allowed to enter those spaces. Whether it
is the Mayans or the Native Americans or people of Latin America---
women and children were not allowed in these places. In India, of
course, there were elaborate guidelines for these places as to who could
go and when and all that. This is not just for psychological reasons.
This has an existential impact on the system and those who are more
vulnerable will get more affected by these things. So in this culture,
after the body was disposed off, there were elaborate processes to clean
the person too. Unfortunately, over a period of time, people distorted
and exaggerated things in such a way that these rituals have become
largely commercial, with some kind of ritualistic circus being
conducted. There are still a few who can do it well, but they have
become very scarce. For some people, this is a potential for perpetual
business, because whatever the state of the economy, people will
continue to die. So when there is such an opportunity, they just cannot
let it go. Entrepreneurship comes alive, not even sparing the dead.

Runanubandha---The Web of Debt If you want to understand how dead people
can affect our lives, you should first understand what runanubandha is.
It is like this: it takes

many things to make an individual human being who he or she is. Of
these, the aspect of bonding is one of great significance. However,
modern societies have grossly neglected it. With everything that our
five sense organs come in touch with, in some way, knowingly or
unknowingly, consciously or unconsciously, we establish a certain bond
with it. This is not just with the people around us but also with the
very land that we walk upon, the air that we breathe and just about
everything that we see, hear, smell, taste and touch. This is because
none of these things happen without investing a certain amount of energy
in it. You cannot see something unless you invest some energy in it. You
cannot really listen to something unless you invest some energy in it.
You cannot taste or touch anything unless something of you is invested.
With this investment comes a bonding. In traditional terms, this is
called runanubandha. Runanubandha exists because the body has its own
memory. It is a certain kind of physical memory that you carry within
you. It is different from the genetic factors that are transmitted from
parent to child. You pick up runanubandha through the course of life in
many ways. One common way is through physical contact. The body
remembers any kind of intimacy you have with any physical substance.
This is the reason why, traditionally, in India, people greet each other
with folded hands because they do not want to acquire that extra
runanubandha that can create bondage and impede their Liberation
process. Contact with certain types of substances also has more of an
impact than others. In India, traditional people never take certain
substances like salt, sesame seeds or oil from someone else's hands
because they want to avoid developing runanubandha. If you just as much
as use someone's clothes, you could develop runanubandha. At the Yoga
Center, all the brahmacharis wash their clothes separately. This is
because all of them are doing sadhana and everyone has their own
specific characteristics. We do not want it all mixed up. Another way to
prevent a mix-up is to coat the clothes with soil in every wash. Sadhus
and sanyasis always use finely sieved red earth to dye their clothes.
The clothes are originally white, but because they are constantly washed
with filtered earth, they

turn mud-coloured. This is to ensure that the only runanubandha that
they have is with the Earth---not with the people or things around them.
Another way you develop runanubandha is through relationships. Even if
you just as much as hold someone's hand, you develop runanubandha. Of
all the relationships, sexual relationships have maximum impact in terms
of the amount of memory that they leave upon you, compared to any other
kind of substance you come in touch with. This is not a question of
guilt or ridding yourself of guilt. Guilt is a social phenomenon. What
you feel guilty about essentially depends upon the norms of the society
you live in. If you feel guilty about something in one society, you may
not feel guilty about the same in another society. This is not about
social conditioning---this is an existential reality. Since Indian
culture is essentially oriented towards Liberation, people took enormous
pains to ensure that they kept their runanubandha only to the extent
that is absolutely necessary when they were alive. When they were
physically present here, because people had a variety of
relationships---blood, sexual or transactional---a certain physical
sameness happened. So there was a runanubandha with the person. When the
person died, efforts were made to obliterate the runanubandha with this
person as much as possible. That is how conscious the culture has been.
You must break this relationship with the dead person for you to be able
to live well, because the nature of life is such that at times you can
become susceptible; then both the right and wrong kind of things can
enter you. If this runanubandha is not properly broken, as can be seen
happening in modern societies, it will definitely affect your
physiological structure. It weakens your body and your psychological
structure in such a way that you will not only suffer from grief, it
will also lead to certain derangement of life. This is why Indian
culture evolved many methods in the rituals that were performed after
death to consciously dissolve the runanubandha.

Kalabhairava Karma---An After-death Ritual at Isha

For a long time, we used to provide this service for the dead,
personally, for people who approached us. If at the instant a person
died, if someone sent me their picture, there is something that I would
do for them in the first three days after death. Sometimes we could do a
lot, sometimes we could do only a little. Sometimes we could even do an
absolute job depending upon who it was. We would not tell them what we
have done, but we would do something for sure. Till now, we have done
this for thousands of people. But as the number of these requests
increased, we thought this service needs to be scaled up. Now, at the
Yoga Center, we do a proper ritual called the Kalabhairava Karma. This
will greatly aid and assist the journey this departed being has to make
now. All it requires is a photograph of the dead person and a piece of
cloth used by them. It would be good if the blood relatives of this
person are present while the ritual is being performed at the Yoga
Center. So how is it possible that with just a photograph and a piece of
cloth we can assist the person who has died in their journey? One way of
understanding life is that everything that you know as life right now is
in some way an imprint of a certain memory. Now, when I say memory, I am
not talking about just remembering something in the conscious mind. It
goes beyond that. You are in the human form, with two hands, two legs
and all that because of the Evolutionary Memory. In this human form,
there are specific manifestations like the skin colour, the shape of the
nose, the shape of the eyes, etc., because of Genetic Memory. Even when
these things are the same or similar, each human being is different in
some way because of individual Karmic Memory. There are layers and
layers of memories like this. Now, these memories are present in the
mind, body and the energies of a person and play out in so many ways.
Essentially, what you call 'individual lives' are these small bubbles of
memory---different levels of memory that have become different kinds of
creatures. Of these creatures, a human being has the most complex
memory. Because of the complexity of memory, the enhancement of
abilities has happened and the enhancement of suffering also has
happened. Other creatures do not suffer their memory like human beings.
Sometimes they suffer a singular memory. Some birds and animals suffer
one particular memory---maybe its partner died or maybe something else

happened---they become depressed. They just remember that one thing and
they suffer that. But a human being is not like that. He or she can
remember a million small things and suffer a million times over, because
human memory is very detailed and there is a vividness to it. There is a
certain reality to it that is more real than the real. For most people,
what happened yesterday is more real than what is happening right now.
That is their experience of life. They live by memory. When you live by
memory, you live with one foot in the land of death and another in the
land of life. That is torture! If you want to look at it in a very
rudimentary manner, let us say, you walked in your garden. Now, if you
bring a sniffer dog, just by smelling the ground, he will know which way
you went. They can do this for up to three or four days, sometimes even
longer, if there has been no disturbance. This is because you leave
puddles of memory when you walk---as our individual scent is a
consequence of the unique nature of our complex memory structure. That
is why a dog is able to trace it down. So if with just a few moments of
your contact with the ground you are leaving puddles of memory for a
creature like a dog to pick up, imagine how much memory you are leaving
behind throughout the span of your life? How much memory do you think
the clothes that you wore, the places you sat on, the places you slept
on, the objects that you were in touch with and such other things carry?
Once a person is dead, in Indian culture, we always want to wipe out the
runanubandha because we know yesterday has a power of its own. If you do
not liberate yourself from it, yesterday will rule your tomorrow.
Yesterday ruling your tomorrow means tomorrow never comes. Someone said
this very forcefully, 'Leave the dead to the dead.' Leaving the dead to
the dead does not mean ignoring those who died. It just means whatever
happened yesterday, whatever happened in the previous moment, you must
always be conscious it is dead. After a person dies, maybe they have
attained mukti or they have gone somewhere else, we don't know, but
either because you were born to them or you were in touch with them in
some way or the other, their memory imprints are on you. These imprints
are not just in your mind but also in your body and

energies as well. So one important aspect of death rituals is that you
must become free of this, it is very important. Becoming free of memory
and losing your memory are two different things. If you lose your
Conscious Memory, you may no longer remember them, but it does not mean
you have become free of it. This will start to work within you in many
unconscious ways. Therefore, we want to distance ourselves from our
memory. We don't want to lose it; we just want to carry it a little
loosely on us. That is all. So with these death rituals, you do some
things to free the departed but it is also important to free the living.
Some distance must happen. If there are too many puddles of strong
memory, it will also trouble the dead. Close relatives, particularly if
they had very loving relationships with them, will bother the dead. That
is why, in this culture, when someone wanted to die, they went away to a
place where they were not among family. You don't want to be with your
family when you die because, till the last moment, these attachments
will go on. You want to be away, alone, clearly understanding that all
the relationships we have made in this world are essentially of memory.
Once these memories are wiped out, no relationship exists. It is now
easy to establish that dimension within us, to become conscious of that
dimension which is beyond memory, which is life itself. So for the
departed one, we want to shave off as much memory as possible so that
their process of Liberation becomes smoother, easier, not tangled up
here and there. The fourteenth day after a person has died is an
important day while doing the rituals for the dead. This is the day when
all the blood relatives of the person who has died must assemble and
perform some rituals. On such an occasion, in traditional settings, you
will see the relatives of the dead person taking account of who has come
and who has not. They keep tabs if everyone has come because these are
people who have strong memories, or runanubandha, with the person who
has died. They have to come and in some way wash their memory and
release the person. For fourteen days they would have collected all the
little bits and pieces of memories that this person has left behind;
now, they want to assemble the whole thing and dissolve it. This
residual memory should

not live on; it must go, dissipate in every possible way. So everyone
who carries a piece is required to be there. Those days are gone when
the whole clan assembled when someone died. In today's conditions, this
is no longer feasible. Only one or two people come for Kalabhairava
Karma. Furthermore, they grumble, 'Do I have to come? Can I send it by
DHL? Can I FedEx it?' We do not know where all the memories of the
person who died are stuck. So we do whatever best we can. In such cases,
one simple thing to do is that you take a whiff of their memory and put
it in a place which is naturally about disentanglement. Normally, they
tie it in front of a Shiva temple because he is an ascetic---untouched
by anything, always smeared in ash. So with Kalabhairava Karma, we use a
photograph of the dead person and a piece of clothing that was in close
contact with their body. Both these articles will have strong imprints
of the memories of the person. Now, we do a process to dissolve as much
of this memory as possible. What is not possible, leave it to Shiva. We
don't want to put these articles on the Dhyanalinga, so we burn them and
tie the ashes in a cloth to the tamarind tree outside the Dhyanalinga
entrance to take care of whatever is left. Kalabhairava Karma is not a
dig-and-clean process. We just mop up the surface so that nothing holds
as far as possible. For most cases, this itself is enough. It is not
good to put a number to these things, but it is just my guess that maybe
around 10--15 per cent of the people would need very strong processes to
release them. For another 60--70 per cent, you can release them with a
very simple process like Kalabhairava Karma. For another 10--15 per cent
that is in between, if some residue of that person is placed in a
powerful space, which we are doing, it will do the job. If we want to do
a total thorough cleaning, which may be necessary sometimes, it will
need a different level of involvement from both the parties---the person
who performs the ritual and the relatives of the departed one. This gets
complicated. It will need a much higher level of involvement and it does
not always work out well. In case it does not work out well, it could be
an unnecessary disturbance of life for those who are living. We don't
really want to rake it up, so we just wipe clean

everything that is on the surface. This is what Kalabhairava Karma does.
(Kalabhairava Shanti, 2 on the other hand, is mostly for the people who
are living, but sometimes it is for the dead also.) Now, if a close
relative who carries a very strong memory of that person comes and
spends enough time in the Dhyanalinga, even if there is no ritual, it
may still work for that dead person. This is not because of the
Kalabhairava Karma, this is the nature of the place. Even when we are
alive, when we say that the Dhyanalinga will make you meditative, what
we mean is that it will stop the endless mental diarrhoea that goes on
in a person. When mental diarrhoea stops, it means the memory that is of
the rotting kind gets reduced. Now, if there is no food in the stomach,
there will be no diarrhoea, isn't it? Similarly, if there is no memory
rotting inside, there will be no thought process, it develops a distance
from yourself. Dhyanalinga does not care whether you are living or dead.
All he knows is to separate the chaff from the grain. He wants to
separate what is you from what is not you. He does not care whether you
have a body or not. So if the relatives who carry a strong enough memory
of the dead person spend enough time in the Dhyanalinga---say, two or
three days around the full moon or new moon days---it could work well
for the person who died.

The Scope of Kalabhairava Karma Generally, all around the world, when
these after-death rituals were performed, there were two components to
it: one was to handle the emotions of those who were left behind and the
other was to direct the departed being in a suitable manner. So in some
cultures, some scriptures were read aloud to give people an
understanding of what was happening, to allay their fears and reassure
them that everything was all right. There were also some chants and
rituals performed to soothe their emotions. In some cultures, there
would be someone reading aloud as to what was happening to this person
and egging them on to be brave and to move on to the next stage, and so
on. But once you drop the physical body, you don't have the
discriminatory mind, so there is no comprehension of

language. And there is no sound or silence. So there is no question of
this person understanding this or that. That is for the living. With
rituals, you can draw the being to something, you can direct the being
in a particular direction, but you cannot talk to it. The scope of what
can be done with these rituals is wider. For example, there are people
who direct these beings to be reborn specifically in either a wealthy
family or the same family or a royal family. Such things can be done,
but it is ridiculous because there is no guarantee that just because one
is born in a rich family, one is going to live well. There are too many
complexities of life which decide that. Moreover, those kinds of
manipulations are not good to do. It does not work well for that life.
The best thing is to make that 'life bubble' thinner and leave it. It
will find its own way to a better place. So I am personally only
concerned about peeling that life off as much as possible. If possible,
all the way, but at least as much as you can make it into a thinner
bubble than what it is. What will happen, how it will be reborn is not
for you to worry about. Let us say, there is a wind blowing. Depending
on how light a certain substance is, it will land somewhere. A piece of
paper or a feather may go far but a twig or branch may fall just a
little away from you. Sometimes if the weight and the shape are right,
then the feather may travel and not land for months together. The
important thing is to make it light. How far it will fly, what will
happen to it, where it will land, and so on, is subject to life. It is
something that you don't try to direct because those kinds of
manipulations can lead to lots of troubles. Now, once someone is dead,
people are very interested in knowing where the departed person is---in
heaven or hell or whatever. Some people claim to be able to tell you
that. You can determine whether a being is comfortable or in struggle.
Accordingly, you can do certain rituals for that being. This is
possible, but determining geographically where it is is rubbish because
there is no 'geographical where'. If Kalabhairava Karma is done within
the stipulated time, it will find its target. If it is done later, it
may not be as effective. But definitely it will shorten the time the
life just hangs. It reduces the limbo time for sure. By how much? This
depends on each being. If you go back to the

bubble analogy, 3 it depends on how big the bubble is and how thin the
skin of the bubble is. But if it is done within eleven to fourteen days,
we dismantle it to a large extent. If you want to take the bubble
analogy further---after it has lost the body, by itself, the bubble may
float around for a long time. It will keep on floating because it does
not want to lose itself. But once Kalabhairava Karma is done, a quick
cycle will happen. Kalabhairava Karma not only shortens the
hanging-around time but it also makes it a more pleasant journey. Can we
liberate people with these rituals? So can we give somebody Mahasamadhi
through Kalabhairava Karma? It is possible, but not always. There are
various aspects to it. Unless that bubble is so thin already, it is not
necessarily a Mahasamadhi. If there is such a being who is such a huge
bubble but somehow could not burst by its own nature, Kalabhairava Karma
may burst it and it could become Mahasamadhi. But otherwise, it makes
the bubble very thin and fragile, so that it will want to find a
physical body quickly because it cannot last long by itself. In any
case, we can definitely hasten their journey. If you want to do
Kalabhairava Karma for yourself when you are alive, it becomes
Kalabhairava Kriya. Basically, Kalabhairava Karma is being performed so
that after you are dead, we mop up bits of your life that are sticking
around here and there. Kalabhairava Karma is being done to you because
you are not a yogi and you are unable to do the mopping up yourself. A
yogi will withdraw to the forest and die alone somewhere in the forest
because he has done everything that he needs to do for his life. No one
has to do anything for him later. Everything is finished. No
Kalabhairava Karma is needed. When he is gone, it is a complete
evacuation of the space that he occupied. If you do not have that kind
of mastery over your energies, you could do Kalabhairava Kriya. It can
be taught to people but it will need an extreme sense of discipline
about who you are and how you manage your energies and system. It once
happened: a cardiac surgeon had some trouble with his car, so he took it
to the mechanic. The mechanic said it would be fixed in twenty-four
hours. The following day when the surgeon went to collect the car, it
was not ready and there was no responsible answer for the

delay. Six days passed like this and, every day, the mechanic asked him
to come the following day. After a week of this, the surgeon asked the
mechanic, 'Why are you doing this to me? I need to go to work, I have
things to do and I don't have a car.' So the mechanic strutted around a
little and said, 'Well, you are a cardiac surgeon. What do you do? You
fix the engines, just like me. But why are you paid fifty times more
than me?' The cardiac surgeon then realized what the problem was. He
said, 'I fix the engines when they are running. Can you?' Kalabhairava
Kriya is like that. Doing something for the departed is one thing. Doing
the same thing with oneself, when the engine is running, is another
thing. If you want to release this thing when it is still running, it
takes a different level of discipline. If you show such discipline in
everything that you do with your life---that you are not clumsy, you are
alert to every small thing, then you can do Kalabhairava Kriya. After
that, when you leave, no one has to do anything for you. It will be
definitely a great thing to do in one's life, a fantastic thing to do
for oneself. But it will need a sense of discipline, which is a very
scarce material in today's world. Traditionally, they said, if you do
Kalabhairava Kriya for yourself, then you cannot go back to your home or
village and live a social life. You have to live the rest of your life
away from any community, like an outcast. It is not that this person is
an outcast. They just no longer belong there because they have created a
genetic distance. They have got nothing to do with the family or the
community because it is over for them. You can create distance to such
an extent that even the fundamental physiological features of your
system can change. It can be done. Once we started conducting
Kalabhairava Karma at the Yoga Center, people started asking if they
could do Kalabhairava Karma for their dogs or cats also. Please! There
is no need for that. Existentially, one fundamental difference between
animal life and plant life is that a plant does not have a subtle body.
There is a lot of reverberation in it, but there is no subtle body for a
plant. A plant may gather an aura around itself. Certain trees or plants
gather much more than others, so those plants and trees have been
identified as sacred plants in India, as we want to benefit

by being near then. But the plants do not generate it, because they do
not have a subtle body. All rituals done after death are about
transporting the subtle body to the right place. When the subtle body is
not well defined, there is no need to do anything nor is there a
possibility to do something. An animal has a subtle body, but except in
the case of cows and cobras, it is not very defined or very evolved. So
we generally ignore the subtle body of all other animals. The subtle
body of those animals can easily merge and mingle with nature, it does
not really transport itself. Cows and cobras are different because they
have a more evolved subtle body. The subtle body of the cow has evolved
through emotional competence. If you observe a cow, you will see that it
is capable of a range of emotions. Sometimes it is almost humanlike. So
that gives them a subtle body. On the other hand, the subtle body of the
cobra has evolved through the sharpness of reverb perception. Most
snakes are 'stone deaf', but they manage to listen through the entire
length of their body. Theirs is truly 'ear to the ground' hearing, which
is phenomenal. Out of this ability they too have developed a subtle
body. So there is some meaning in trying to do something for them after
death. This is why these two animals are especially revered in this
culture. Traditionally, the carcasses of cows and cobras are never left
just like that; they are either cremated or buried. Even if you find one
lying around, you are supposed to bury it or cremate it. Now, for those
of you who have been initiated by me, it is true that there is no need
to go through any death rituals. However, what if you were a 'missed
case'---someone who went through the initiation process, but missed it?
For those of you who have been initiated by me, I would like you to
finish your process when you are alive, when life is still alive and
kicking in you, so that you don't burden me when you are dead. I am
willing to attend to you when you are alive. If you are incompetent, I
am also willing to attend to you after you are dead. But why don't you
make yourself competent in such a way that here and after, you will be
fine? You should live in such a way that there should be no need for any
afterdeath rituals for you. You should promise me that you will not
trouble me even after you are dead! Please make yourself in such a way
that you

will not need any ritual from me or anybody else when you are dead.
Hereafter, things should happen the way they need to happen for you.

Training People for Death Rituals If some things are not there in our
lives, we can manage without them most of the times. But after-death
rituals are something that no society can live without. They are
absolutely necessary because you cannot do it to yourself. So is it
possible that we can train people to do these afterdeath rituals? Very
much so. In India, people who handled the dead and those processes were
called chandala s. In pre-Aryan times, theirs was considered one of the
top professions in society. Over the next few thousand years, a stigma
became associated with this and it became the lowest profession in the
social hierarchy. In ancient times, untouchability was very much
prevalent in India. People of certain castes were considered
untouchables and others would not touch them. But even the untouchables
would not touch a chandala because he was considered the lowest of the
lowest. On the other hand, Adiyogi Shiva himself always kept himself in
the company of chandalas because he thought they were the highest. He
saw that their understanding of life and knowing was far better than
that of all the other people who were conducting other things. So if you
get into this service we will have to give it a new look, we will have
to dress you up differently. We have to make you deliver this whole
thing in a completely different way than the way it was traditionally
done. Otherwise, shaking off the stigma and being able to be useful to
people will be very difficult. It would be best to do this without
rituals, but to train people to conduct a ritual is so much easier than
training people to do the same thing without a ritual. The main problem
with rituals is that when the level of integrity drops in the social
fabric, all rituals will turn corrupt. These rituals were created when
the sense of integrity and commitment for each other was so strong that
there was no room for any kind of misuse. But when the general fabric of
integrity has gone down in the social structure, then, all rituals will
be under suspicion because there is room for misuse.

Right now, if I teach someone how to handle the dead, they might want to
display to their friends how they can make the dead dance or do
something fanciful. Or they may want to become a 'medium'! Moreover,
even if you are clear that you do not want to do any such thing, people
will try to influence your judgement when someone is dead. They will
come and fall at your feet and say, 'Do something, I just want to say
one thing to my father, I wanted to say this for the last ten years, but
I did not. I want to say it now.' Because they cried and begged you, if
you start setting up a conference call, then it is all finished. That
amounts to misuse. If we teach you rituals, you will not be able to do
all that. You have to just do the ritual and go home. Only if we
generate people who are responsible enough to not do even one thing more
than what is necessary, these things can be done. But rituals may not
fit into today's world.

In some cultures, women have been traditionally prohibited from entering
the cremation grounds or performing these rituals because they could be
susceptible to certain undesirable influences. But if what you are doing
is just a ritual in name, then women can also do it. If it is a process
where genuinely something is happening where you are handling a
disembodied life, then involving women in it is a little bit of an
issue. There are various reasons for this. One reason was in those times
a woman would be pregnant at least eight to twelve times in her
lifespan. So most of the time, she would be either pregnant or
breastfeeding. At such times, she should not be in such situations.
Particularly when she is pregnant. Even today, this is followed---if
death rituals are being performed, they don't allow pregnant women to be
present there. Even if a woman is free from pregnancy and breastfeeding,
she may still have her menstrual cycles, which again makes her
vulnerable. This is the reason why women were kept away from cremation
grounds. But if she is free from all of these situations, then there is
no issue in her doing these rituals. A woman will need to take much more
care in doing such things than a man. A man's biological structure is
stable in a certain way; a woman's biological structure goes through
certain phases, so she has to take much more care about these things.
There are different kinds of biological responsibilities for male and
female bodies. Instead of understanding and appreciating this, we have
imbibed a mentality in the world where we make every small difference
into a discrimination. As a result, this whole gender discrimination has
come up. Otherwise, these two aspects are complementary to each other
and that is how it should be. If a certain discipline has to be
maintained, you should not compromise that discipline for anything. Then
even women can do it and in fact it is well known that it is far easier
to help women to organize and discipline themselves than men. Women have
a natural capacity to absorb order due to the deeper sense of survival
instinct that is needed to fulfil their reproductive responsibilities.
We had the means to do all these things in this country, but now we are
all English-educated, so we are ashamed of these things. At Isha, we
hope to build a group of people to whom we

can impart certain things. We are also nurturing and educating some
children, hoping that they will grow in the right tradition so we can
teach them some simple things about life which are very vital. Maybe
they will not become engineers and doctors but we hope that they will
grow into these things. We are also in the process of training some
meditators in doing this kind of services. If you are willing to offer
this, then we can train you to do these things properly. But you should
never make it your profession; it should be done only as a service. When
someone has lost their body, they are completely helpless; they need
help and they can be helped, but not with corrupt, contaminated hands.
It needs someone who cares and someone who has the necessary sense about
it.

The Death of Infants Is the death of infants any different from the
death of adults? In a certain context, yes, because the way life
manifests in a child is different from the way life manifests in an
adult. If the child dies when the mother is still breastfeeding it or is
under forty months of age, its life is not yet a fully established life
in a sense. So it is not the same as the death of an adult. Actually, it
is strange, but you will see the parents also generally recover very
quickly from the child's death in such cases. If a child above four
years of age dies, their pain and suffering will be much more. If you
say this, people will get very upset; that is different. But if you just
observe them, you will see the impact is much less, because even in the
parent's consciousness, it is not fully established as a life. It is
still in the process of taking shape. When your child is an infant, that
is when your contact with the child is big-time. By the time he or she
is four, they start running around. You cannot hold them, they want to
be all over the place. They want to see the world. But before they are
four years, they are so much with you; but in spite of being physically
connected to them, your connection to them is not so strong because they
are not physically connected to their own body very strongly. So the
same has not happened within you very strongly. If you observe life very
carefully, you will know this. These days there is a lot of medical
intervention to help, but until recently a lot of children would die
before they were four years of age, without any

ailment. They used to simply die because life was still not fully
established. When this happens, there is a sense of loss but not much
pain involved for the parents. In children, until about forty to
forty-eight months, the quantum of Prarabdha Karma for this life is
still not decided. Life is still trying to make a judgement. This is why
there is so much emphasis in the Indian tradition on what should be done
during this time. There is an entire system of rituals during
preconception, conception, birth and thereafter. This is just to ensure
that this becomes a life which will take on the maximum Prarabdha Karma.
Taking on the maximum is significant not because you want it to take on
more suffering; it is to make it a bigger bubble, with more
possibilities. But more possibilities also means possibly more
challenges, which may in turn mean more suffering. When something comes
with more possibilities, there is a possibility of more things going
wrong---that is the risk. So if this life becomes sure-footed, it takes
on more things. If it is not so sure-footed, then it takes on fewer
things. You will keep it as simple and limited as possible. This is the
nature of life. This is so even internally. So if life becomes stable
enough and capable enough by the time it is forty-eight months, it will
choose a much bigger Prarabdha Karma. Once in a way, it happens by
itself in nature, but, generally, you want to create such situations
where you can blow a big bubble so that the new life takes on a big
possibility. In today's world, people think possibility means how much
money you will make. Bigger possibility need not necessarily mean one is
going to do well in the eyes of the society. In some way, it becomes a
life that you cannot ignore. Most lives are ignored. No one may notice
whether they existed or not. But once the bubble is big, whether one is
in a desert or a forest, a village or a city or wherever they are, they
will be noticed because they are a bigger bubble in some way. Is it big
enough for the entire world to notice? We don't know, but if one becomes
a little larger bubble, it is a bigger possibility. Generally, most
people will not remember anything below four years of age because
infancy is a time when life has not yet decided how it wants to shape
itself. It is still exploring whether to expand or contract and what to
do and how much. If there is a very threatening and difficult

kind of situation, it may contract so that it feels safer with less
Prarabdha Karma and more robust surface. It does not want to stretch
itself. This is why, irrespective of which culture you come from, they
all insist that if you come across a child, whatever your troubles are,
you must smile at the child, you must interact lovingly with the child.
Even in the most remote tribal cultures, this awareness is there because
you must create that comfort so that it expands as much as possible. If
you create a bit of un-conduciveness, it may choose to contract. We do
not want that to happen. These are not decisions anyone decides
consciously. This is the life's own intelligence making these decisions.
Sometimes another kind of death happens in slightly older children. In
some children, sometimes the quantity of Prarabdha Karma for this
lifetime is not decided properly, so they die unexpectedly. Healthy
children will just fall dead. Children of extraordinary intelligence who
do things absolutely beyond people's perception tend to die before they
are six because their Prarabdha Karma was not properly fixed. Too many
lifetimes of information begin to burst forth in them. Generally, one
needs a different level of awareness and a certain dispassion to handle
that but when it happens in a child, the body cannot sustain it and it
just collapses. These are some reasons why the death of an infant is
slightly different from the death of an adult.

The Parent--Offspring Connection in the Afterlife In India, when people
die, they want to have their children around them. People particularly
want sons to be around. This is the reason why, in India, people
desperately want to have a son. This is because there is a certain 'life
connection' between the children and the parents, and if you make use of
it in doing rituals for parents, they can be much more effective.
Daughters too are effective for this purpose, but people depended more
on the sons for this role mostly because, in the past, it was only
possible for the son to be around when they were dying. When the
daughter came of age, she got married and went to someone else's house.
When the parent died, she may not have been able to come

immediately because of the distance. She need not be in another
continent, even if she were just 200 kilometres away, by the time she
came, the cremation would have been over. Moreover, she would have her
own children, husband and family. She could not just drop them and come
away. She would have to make arrangements for her absence. And she could
not travel alone because everything would be forested, so someone would
have to escort her. Making all these arrangements would take
considerable time and she would not be able to reach in time. But the
son lived with the parents, so he would be available. So, they said, the
son must be present for the rituals and it is sufficient for the
daughters to come by the twelfth day. So what is the nature of this
connection between the parent and the child that could be made use of at
that time? Generally, people's interaction with each other is physical,
mental or emotional. It never goes beyond that. But when a person dies
or when a person sheds his or her body, all that is gone. The mental
structure is gone, the emotions are gone, the body is for sure gone. So
everything that you knew as yours is gone. So for all practical
purposes, the children are as much a stranger to you as anyone. But once
you bear a child, a certain space of who you are is occupied by that
being whom you refer to as your child because you provided a body for
this being. It is because of this connection that the parent has with
the child that we can do certain things, which can help parents after
they die. If the child does the right things after the death of the
parent, he can even liberate the parent through this connection. People
who lived completely unaware and did not do anything about themselves,
depended on their children to liberate them. And that became a whole
tradition by itself. However, the reverse is not true. You cannot use
the parents to liberate their dead offspring. We already saw in the
previous section that when children die before they are four, the death
is not the same as an adult's because that life is still establishing
itself. After the child crosses somewhere between forty to forty-eight
months, physiologically, your connection with the child increases
dramatically and it happens in your body. Most people don't decipher
this. They experience something happening within them before four years
of age. But after four years,

they are involved with so many child-related issues---where he is going,
where he is, his school admission, this and that. Because of these
things, they miss this experience. Otherwise, at that time, they would
notice that something clicks in them because something in that body has
clicked in. When that clicks in, you come to a certain ease because it
becomes a part of you, you don't have to consciously hold it, a natural
holding happens. You must understand that you are only a provider of the
body for your child, you cannot create a being. It is not in human hands
to create a being. When that being really clicks on to the body that you
provided, something clicks on within you and occupies a certain space
within your own system. This is how, if we just check someone's energy,
we know whether they have had children or not. This is how, sometimes,
an astrologer in India is able to tell you how many children you have,
whether they are surviving or not. They will give you a brief synopsis
of your children, their characteristics, their names and everything,
because your children occupy a certain space within you. If you are
willing to observe, it is very much there in that person. Now, this
physiological connection is very strong until the child is twenty-one
years old. After that, it starts dissipating once again. It is because
of this, as a child grows up and becomes close to twenty-one, if you
look at them, they look like absolute strangers. You cannot believe you
bore them. You will wonder, are these my children? Is this the same
little baby that I brought up? You cannot recognize what they are doing
because you don't have an abode in them, but they have an abode in you.
This is a beautiful natural system of caring for the offspring, bringing
it up and also being capable of releasing it when you have to. If
someone comes up to me and says, 'Bless my children,' I ask, 'How old
are they?' If they are below twenty-one years, we really bless them
because if they are below that age, you can bless a mother or a father
and have a deep impact on the children. But if the children are over
twentyone years of age, we just banter with the parents, joke with them
and send them because it is no use blessing them for their children. The
children will have to come themselves. This is why, if your parents die,
we can do something for them through you. But if your children die, we
cannot use you to do something

more for them because they don't have that little space within them that
is occupied by you. It is always so that the future generation occupies
a little space in the past but the past generation will not and cannot
occupy any space in the future generation. This is the very nature of
things. So once your children are gone, all you can do is perform
Kalabhairava Karma for the child within the stipulated time. It will
definitely do something significant. Beyond that, don't try to do too
many things to influence them. However, though your thoughts, your
emotions and your actions have no influence over your child who is no
more, if you turn inward, if your way of being becomes pleasant, that
being will experience pleasantness. This also is only until that life
finds another body. If I say these things, people will get confused, but
if you are a little observant, you can sense when this departed being
has found another body. You may have seen this happening with many
people who have lost children: until a certain point they cannot believe
that they will ever recover from the death of their children, but
suddenly one day it does not seem to matter any more. Everything seems
to be normal and fine. If the parent observes the way their body
behaves, how the breath behaves, the nature of their hair, their
fingernails, the texture of their skin, they will know when this being
has found another body. It will show. A close observation of the breath
will reveal that the pattern of breath has moved from being tense and
short to a distinct level of ease. This will also reflect in various
other ways. The natural hydration process of the skin will change from
dryness to softness due to the respiratory action of the epithelial.
There are many more indicators; I will not go into them because people
will start looking and start imagining all kinds of things. Now, once
that life finds another body, then it is gone for good. You have nothing
to do with it. Now, someone else claims them---'This is my child'---and
a whole new drama begins again.

The Importance of Death Anniversaries Recognizing the needs of human
beings during their lifetimes, ancient sages created a set of
samskaras---rituals to purify and refine a person in order to assist
one's passage through life. There are about sixty-four

samskaras, but the most important of these are sixteen in number and are
known as sodasa-samskaras . These samskaras start from the time of one's
conception, which is to be performed by one's parents and end with
post-death rites to be performed by one's descendants. The post-death
rites are known as antyeshti and are to be performed by the son of the
deceased. It ensures the future welfare of the dead and frees the living
from the debt or obligations they owe the parent. Some of the post-death
rituals extend throughout the lifetime of the descendants, though on a
progressively smaller scale. These rituals are typically performed as
shraadha , on each anniversary of the last deceased ancestor and days of
special significance like the new moon days, eclipse days, etc. Today,
these rituals are commonly misunderstood as remembrances, but they are
mainly to assist in dissolving one's runa s, or debts, to the ancestors.
Some of these rituals are purely for sentimental reasons, to remember
the dead, acknowledge their contribution to our lives, and so on. Let us
say, someone died. Maybe the person's children or grandchildren were
very young at that time. They have no memory of him or her. So the
parents want to bring back that memory to them so that the children can
relate to that because you want children to be rooted in something.
Whatever that person was, this occasion is to say a few wonderful things
about them so that the children connect to that. It is a kind of legacy
for them. That is one aspect of it. The other is to genetically distance
yourself from the ancestors or to dissolve your runanubandha with them.
One important aspect of spiritual development is that you must distance
yourself from your Genetic Memory and Evolutionary Memory. If you do not
distance yourself, the same things will repeat themselves. What happened
in your grandfather's life may recur in your life. Maybe you are in a
different time, so you look different but actually the exact same things
may be happening. Maybe there is a difference in the environment they
lived in and you live in. The activity they pursued and you now pursue
may be different. So, on the surface, people think everything is
different. But, experientially, the same thing may be happening because
it will repeat itself. You will become a cyclical process. You will not
be a fresh life. When you are not a fresh life, there

is no question of release. There is no question of going beyond, there
is no question of exploring something else. So the most important reason
these anniversary rituals are done in India is not for remembrance but
to distance yourself from your ancestors. You want to distance yourself
from the dead. The annual kriyas are created in such a way that you try
to curtail your Genetic Memory as much as possible. The brahmachari
initiation 4 is also similar. In India, if you want to take sanyasa , 5
the first thing is that even if your parents are living, you do all the
kriyas and karmas for them. It is not about them falling dead, that is
not the intent. It is just that you create a distance between you and
your Genetic Memory. Now, you are one step closer to being released.

Ancestor Worship Our debt to our ancestors is huge. But for the
successive layers of knowledge and effort, human civilization would
still be very primitive. So it is customary in most cultures to express
one's gratitude to the ancestors. In some cultures, this ancestor
veneration takes on a different proportion and turns to worship.
Ancestors are granted demigod status and are looked up to for guidance
and protection. They are therefore worshipped. The Native Americans are
big on ancestor worship and perhaps even Australian aborigines and
African tribes. However, in India, the rites and rituals for the
ancestors are for a different reason. In India, we distance ourselves
from our ancestors; we don't worship them. Here, people either think of
taking care of their ancestors or they distance themselves from them.
But ancestors taking care of you is not so prevalent in India. In other
cultures, this worship may have come because there has been so much
occult practice in those cultures. Their rites and rituals were largely
occult, not spiritual processes. There must have been situations where
the dead ancestors assisted them in battles and some other critical
situations. They probably knew how to access and make use of that. There
definitely would have been such situations. Because of that, the general
belief that all ancestors will support you might have come. That is true
here also.

Well, I myself have said that after I am physically gone, for eighty
years, I will be here in a presence bigger than the way I am right now
and see that everyone who is here is seen through in some way. 6 There
have been certain other beings who guided the subsequent generations. So
similar things must have happened there. Based on that, there must have
been a general belief that every ancestor was capable of doing it. Some
might have done this for sure, but generally speaking, every ancestor is
not capable of this. The collective knowledge of past generations
definitely benefits us in a million ways. If a strict code of how we
intermarry is carefully managed, as it was in ancient India, our ability
to access and benefit from the cumulative knowledge of past generations
will be greatly enhanced. This is not in terms of the rigid caste system
but on the basis of genetic compatibility. Many business families have
exhibited this in phenomenal ways. Some of them also created deities
that support this accumulation of knowledge in energy forms and managed
genetic intermingling with great gusto. In many ways, this was more
stringent than their religion. In many places, the land, rocks and the
very space was managed with care. In certain cultures, they do not want
to disturb even the soil and rocks that were witness to their ancestral
glory because these were tools of retaining their knowledge. However, in
this age of machines and unbridled travel and intermingling, it may not
be very practical. Today, your children trust Google more than what you
or your forefathers have to say. It is unfortunate that we have moved
from intuition to information.

Of Heaven and Hell Those who have made a hell out of themselves are
always aspiring to go to heaven. When life feels like hell, we hope that
when we go up there, everything will be fantastic. Now, what is in
heaven? According to Hindu lore, the food is very good in heaven. If you
are a foodie, you must go to the Hindu heaven. Nala, the greatest chef,
will himself cook for you, and no matter how much you eat, the vessels
will always be full with food. If you go to another place, white-gowned
ladies float around

the clouds playing the harp for you all the time. If you like that kind
of ambience, you must go there. And elsewhere, you will encounter virgin
problems. If that is what you are looking for, you must go there. But
how to get to heaven? This happened in Alabama. At a Sunday school, the
teacher was going full fire, but the audience was not like you; they
were tiny tots, part of their 'catch them young' policy. The teacher was
going all out and the children were sitting shell-shocked. Suddenly, he
stopped, for dramatic impact, and asked: 'What do you have to do to go
to heaven?' Little Mary in the front bench stood up and said, 'If I mop
the church floor every Sunday morning, I will go to heaven.'
'Absolutely!' he said. Another little girl said, 'If I share my pocket
money with my less privileged friend, I will go to heaven.' 'Correct!'
he said. Another boy said, 'If I help people who are in need, I will go
to heaven.' 'Correct!' he said. Little Tommy in the back bench stood up
and said, 'You gotta die first.' Well, that is a qualification. If you
want to go to heaven, you must die first. When you die, depending on
your culture, you will be buried, cremated or offered to the birds or
animals. So you left your body here and went to heaven. Without a body,
what are you going to do with good food and virgins? You know they
talked about that special patra , 7 where how much ever we eat, it
doesn't get empty---you must understand that is because nobody who had a
body went there! Whatever bodiless people eat, it will stay right there,
so naturally the vessel was always full. And that is also why they
remained virgins forever. We have been dealt these kinds of stories for
a very long time. For thousands of years, you can't be telling the same
story. At least come up with a better story---a heaven where Wi-Fi is
free! There is nothing wrong in enjoying a story, but believing a story
is stupidity. How long will you tell yourself fairy tales? It is time as
human beings we show some evolution. You must stop the bloody stories
and start looking at the truth about your existence. Right now, some
people want you to believe that the moment you die, you go to heaven and
there will be a party organized there; all your relatives and friends
are waiting for you and you will have a great time.

You must understand that when you die, you lose your body, but still you
are here. You do not go anywhere. It is just that the dimensional shift
has happened from being embodied to disembodied, or from physicality to
a subtler physicality. It is not a geographical shift from here to
heaven or here to hell or wherever it is. And the most important thing
is, what happens after is not based on God's retribution or that he is
angry with you and that he must hang you or burn you in fire or fry you
in oil. The large-scale marketing of heaven and hell as destinations for
the afterlife was done by the religions of the world to bring control in
society. When they did not know how to control individuals or groups of
people, they came up with an idea, 'Okay, if we cannot punish you now,
we will get you there. And for all the goodness that you show, if we are
not able to reward you here, we will reward you there.' Or if you were
miserable, they said, 'Aiyyo, don't worry, when you go there, everything
will be okay.' They provided solace. If someone is in a deep state of
suffering, you say, 'Don't worry, when you go and sit in God's lap,
everything will be okay.' It is a psychological tool. It is fine when
people are in extreme states. But don't brand it and sell it everywhere,
because it is not going to work like that. If it is a psychologist
saying these things, it is okay. But if you really make them believe
everything is going to be better somewhere, you will only mess up life
here. Now, slowly, heavens are collapsing in people's minds because if
you just ask three questions about it, it will collapse. The human race
has come to a point in time where human intellect is firing like never
before. More people can think for themselves today than ever before in
the history of humanity. Once human intellect becomes active,
inevitably, it will ask questions. I think in the next twenty-five
years, in a maximum of forty years, the scriptures and heavens will
collapse completely. It is already collapsing in many ways in individual
minds. Still, people don't have the courage to voice it or it is not
articulated in their mind yet, but it is collapsing. Today, the grip of
heaven and hell upon people has all but worn out. Compared to the number
of people who believed that they would go to heaven in the previous
generation, the number of people who believe they could go to heaven in
this generation has fallen very drastically. Everywhere in the world,
that hope is collapsing, and in the

coming few decades it will collapse even more rapidly. This has many
consequences for the world. Human beings seek heaven basically because
they seek pleasantness. If right from your childhood you were told that
God lives in heaven but it is a horrendous place, you would not want to
go there. You would say, 'No, I will pray from here itself, but I don't
want to go there.' So, essentially, a human being seeks pleasantness in
their experience--- physically, mentally and emotionally. He or she
wants the very life process and surroundings to be pleasant. If these
things happen, are we fulfilled? No, it is just that if you have learned
to be pleasant, only then you can explore the different dimensions of
life. If you are in different states of unpleasantness, your whole life
will go in just seeking happiness. People are just wasting their whole
life to achieve something called happiness. Actually, it is not even
happiness; they have given up that too. They just want peace of mind
today. This is the highest goal in their life. So once heaven collapses
in people's minds, people will try to maximize their life here. The
initial maximization happens with greed and desire. But when people get
frustrated and realize that having more does not make life more in any
sense, they want to have the alternatives right here in a big way. They
are getting drunk and drugged right here. This is not about looking at
it morally. It is about the kind of damage it causes to human
intelligence and human consciousness. Health, of course, is a concern,
but if someone does not mind dying a few years younger, I have no
problems. But the damage these chemicals cause to human possibility is
our problem. When this happens to 90 per cent of the human population,
the next generation that we produce will be of much lesser quality than
what we are. That is a crime against humanity because the whole movement
of life is such that it should get better and better. Once the real
damage has happened, at that point, trying to turn people around is not
going to work. You cannot advise someone who is on chemicals. Try
counselling a drunkard or a drug addict or someone who is on continuous
prescription medication---you will understand what I am saying. You
cannot turn them around just like that, because that is the

nature of chemicals. It makes you feel enhanced either in terms of
health, peace, joy, ecstasy or whatever. Because it makes you feel
enhanced artificially, there is no way people will come off that. So
before everyone becomes a drunkard or a drug addict, it is important
that the raising of consciousness happens and we are able to teach them
how to sit here, totally blissed out and stoned by themselves, without
any substance. Otherwise, in the next fifty years, you will see 90 per
cent of the human population will be on some kind of chemical.
Existentially, there is a little bit of a basis for the notions of
heaven and hell. It is because your life does not end with death; it
only takes on many other forms after that. It can take on pleasant forms
or it can take on very unpleasant forms depending on many factors. It is
these pleasant forms that we refer to as heaven, or Swarga , and the
unpleasant forms as Naraka , or hell. As we already saw earlier, 8 these
are not geographic locations---they are forms taken by the being after
the body is dropped. If you go beyond all forms, then we say it is
mukti, or Liberation. A spiritual seeker is not interested in going to
heaven. They neither want to go to hell nor heaven. They want to go
beyond this duality of both hell and heaven. The first thing that Yoga
attacks is heaven and hell. As long as there is heaven and hell, the
technology for inner well-being is meaningless. The process of moving
towards one's Liberation is meaningless, since, now, there are two
places to go---either you end up in a bad place or a good place. Your
whole life becomes focused upon somehow earning a ticket to the good
place. You don't have to bother about how you live. Humanity has lived
as grossly as it has, mainly because of the assistance of religion. They
preach, 'It does not matter what you do, if you just believe this, this
and this, your ticket to the good place is set.' So if you do not
destroy the heaven and hell that is functioning within you right now,
there is really no movement towards truth. There is a beautiful story in
Yogic lore: There was a yogi who was over eighty-four years old and he
started going about declaring to other yogis around him, 'You know, I am
going to die and go to heaven shortly.' This whole thing amused the
other yogis. One day, they stopped him and asked, 'How do you know that
you are going to heaven? Do you

know what is on God's mind?' So the yogi replied, 'I don't care what is
on God's mind; I know what is on my mind.' Yoga gives you the technology
to make yourself pleasant whatever the ambience may be. That is all he
was trying to say. Both hell and heaven are still part of the duality.
What we refer to as Liberation is total dissolution. You neither go here
nor there. You don't go anywhere because you just dissolve. This is why,
for a spiritual seeker, neither God nor heaven is the goal---mukti or
Liberation is.

CHAPTER 9

Of Grief and Mourning

I want you to understand that your grief is not because someone has
died. One life going away does not mean anything to you. Thousands of
people in the world die in a day. But it does not leave a vacuum in you.
You are still partying. The problem is, this particular life going away
leaves a hole in your life.

The Essential Nature of Grief Overcoming one's grief after the death of
a loved one is becoming a big thing in today's world. But you must
understand that your grief is not because someone died. One life going
away does not mean anything to you. Every day, thousands of people go
away. Why the world, even in your own city so many people are dying, so
many people are attending funerals, so many people are in grief. And yet
that does not affect you. It does not leave a vacuum in you. You are
still partying in the same city. The problem is, this particular life
going away leaves a vacuum in your life. Essentially, you grieve because
someone who in many ways was a part of your life is gone. So one part of
your life has become empty and you are not able to handle that
emptiness. It is like this: a group of you were playing a game, and now
suddenly one person has dropped out. There is a gap in the game because
of that and you are not able to handle it. Your problem is that this
particular death leaves you incomplete. You built your life around
someone, you made plans in your mind---I am going to get married to this
person, I am going to have two children, I am going to make these
children do this and that,' and so on. But now, when this person
vanished from your life, suddenly, all those dreams are shattered. You
don't know what to do with yourself. You are disillusioned. If you are
disillusioned, that means your illusions have been destroyed. When your
illusions are destroyed, the Maya 1 is gone---

this is the time to arrive at reality. Unfortunately, most people make
this into a very painful and destructive process within themselves.
Grief is just about your incompleteness. This is a very cruel thing to
say, but it is true that most people will suffer more if they lose all
their money or sustenance than if they lose their spouse, parent or
child. It may sound brutal but it is a fact. This is why grief can
happen to you even without anyone's death. People can be in grief simply
because they are not successful. People can be in grief because they are
not able to get what they want. People can be in grief if their house is
burned down. People can be in grief if their car is lost. A child can be
in grief if his teddy bear is gone. A child may miss that teddy bear
more than his parent. He may grieve for his dog much more than the
grandfather. I have seen this happen and people were shocked. But it is
very human. The boy's connection with the dog is deeper than with the
grandfather. What to do? You must examine why it is that you feel
incomplete if you lose someone. This life has come as a whole. If you
know this life the way it is, there is no question of incompleteness.
This is a complete life. If this is an incomplete life, that means the
Creator has done a bad job. No, it is a great job---far greater than
most people realize. It is too fantastic a job. If you had experienced
this life the way it is, then nothing would leave a hole in you because
this is a complete life. Then you would not fill this up with your
profession or your car or your house or your family or something. This
life can interact, relate to, be with and include so many things. But
still, by itself, it is a complete life. This is the way it is. If this
is the experience and state you are in, then whether you lose your job,
your money or someone who is dear to you, you will not grieve. Does it
mean you will have no feeling for the departed ones at all? No, you will
have immense love for them. Right now, when they are here, a little bit
of a problem always exists between two people. However dear and close
they are to you, if you stay too close to them for more than four to six
hours, you want to get away for a bit. You just make an excuse and go
and sit in the bathroom at least! You need some excuse to get away from
them, however close and wonderful they are. When people are embodied,
two bodies cannot be close all the time. After some

time, the bodies have to get apart. But when they are disembodied,
immense love will come forth because this barrier of the body is gone.
You have known many things together, done many intimate things--- many
wonderful things have happened between two people. But as long as they
were alive, you hold some small point or the other against them and
resist. Now, those small points of resistance have evaporated with
death. Now, there is no problem; they will not speak, they will not
argue with you, they will not disagree with you. You must see only the
wonderful side of who they were. They had problems all right; they had a
nasty side to them. But all those things are only because they had a
mind and body. So if someone passes away, you should be completely
overwhelmed with love. But, unfortunately, you become filled with grief.
Grief is a crippling force because it leaves a big hole in you. Then you
don't know what to do next because you have not experienced life the way
it is. Grief can also have an existential basis to it. But this is only
in those cases where a parent has lost a child. This is more so with the
mother than the father. If the mother loses an offspring below
twenty-one years of age, then there is an existential basis to it.
Beyond that, it is just purely psychological. The loss of a child is
suffered most if the child is between four and twenty-one years of age.
Till four years of age, this memory is not too well imprinted. Post
twenty-one years of age, this memory begins to delink. If the death of a
child happens in between, then the physiological memory in the parent
goes through a withdrawal syndrome and the suffering that one goes
through is very physical. Of course, this varies from one individual to
another based on emotional and psychological connection and dependence.
The physical manifestation of grief is also possible between two spouses
who were very deeply connected. When one of them dies, then a certain
withdrawal happens in the body of the other which they may suffer. Such
people may exit within six months of the death of their spouse. This is
not necessarily out of psychological trauma but because of the
intertwining of lives. But that is not always true. Very few people get
that close. Most of the time, grief is more psychological than
existential. But the psychological is not any less important. Human

emotion is a powerful part of one's life. The psychological and
emotional parts are not any less significant than the physiological
part. It is equally powerful or more powerful, I would say.

Going beyond Grief We don't wish for it, but if it so happens that our
children or siblings or someone who we deeply love dies before us, how
do we go beyond the grief? When we talk about going beyond something, it
is not about forgetting about it. You cannot forget your child. You
cannot tell yourself, 'It is all right, it is all natural.' You cannot.
It is true that something that is very precious to you, something that
means a lot to you is gone. But the fact of life is that when something
slips beyond the realm of what you call as life right now, once it
crosses that boundary, it is not yours any more. I want you to
understand that when your parent, child or friend is dead, you can
neither care for them nor can you be uncaring towards them. Both these
things are only for the living. In other words, they have crossed a
boundary line, beyond which it is not your realm or business. You must
understand that your connection with people is very physical. Some
connections are not physical, but for almost 99.99 per cent of the
people, their connections with other people are all physical. Someone is
your mother, someone is your father, someone is your husband, someone is
your brother, or someone is your wife---all because of the physical. You
may have emotions attached to it, but emotions don't mean anything on an
existential plane. If I just wipe your memory out, your emotions will be
forgotten. You give it enormous importance but it is very much on the
surface. Even your deepest connection is physical. Now, your brother or
friend or child or parent or whoever died, when they were alive, what
are the things that you knew about them? Their body was familiar to you.
They may have revealed some parts of their mind to you. Even that they
would not have revealed completely to you ---don't have such illusions.
They would have revealed some aspects of their emotions to you. They did
not reveal anything else to you. Now, when they died, they did not carry
their body and go. So one major part

of familiarity is finished. Whatever the content of their mind, the
memory of who you are and who they are was also left behind. Once
someone leaves their body, whether you like it or not, they have nothing
to do with you any more. You can sit here alive and still think someone
is your brother. But for the one who has left the body, there is no
brother, sister, father, mother---he or she has gone beyond that. Only
when you are embodied, you have a mother, you have a father, you have a
brother, you have a sister. After that, there is no such thing. When
someone dies, people think they must forsake their enmity with that
person and their friendship should be nurtured. That is stupid. Someone
who is dead is neither your friend nor your enemy. It is over. The
business is over. You are unwilling to come to terms with it, so grief
sets in. As you slowly come to terms with it, grief recedes, isn't it?
Anyway, after ten years you will forget them. Usually, it does not take
ten years but even if it takes ten years, after ten years you will eat
well, you will laugh, you will make merry, you will do everything. I am
saying maintain eleven days of mourning and after that, you do all that,
what is the problem? Somewhere people feel guilty that they are still
alive when someone has died. But you will also die. You just have to
wait. This seems like a very brutal approach, but that is the fact of
life. We must decide in our lives whether we want truth that is
liberating or we want fancy lies which give solace. If you tell me you
want solace, I will tell you a different story. If you tell me that you
want the truth, you want liberation from this, then it is a completely
different thing. It is not with any insensitivity that I am saying this,
but it is time to accept it the way it is. When death happens, it is
time to look back and cherish what has been, and it is time to accept it
and look at what you can do with the life that is here. Right now, let
us say, your son or daughter or grandson or someone who was very dear to
you passed away. Instead of sitting and making a wreck of yourself, why
don't you look around you? There are so many other sons and daughters
and grandsons who have no one to care for them. There is enough
opportunity for you to express this love and care in a million different
ways. There is so much life around you which needs this care and you
have a need to find expression to this love and

care in you, so please do that. If you don't do that, your grief will be
forever. It will remain bottled and torture you for all your life. For
one son that you lost, you can take up ten as your own and find full
expression to your love and parenthood. You will find that it will
become a foundation to make your life much more beautiful than it would
be with just one son. You could make it like that. You have to take that
step. Otherwise, you will simply go on with something that you cannot
change. I want you to remember that what is happening within us---it
does not matter for what reason it is happening---is being created by
us. If we are willing, we can change that too. As long as you are alive,
it is important that you see how to contribute to the living because
other than doing a few rituals within the stipulated time, there is
nothing that you can do about the dead. Moreover, if you believe that
the person you are grieving for has enriched your life, show that
enrichment in how you live. If you are going to cry for the rest of your
life, then it means this person is now the biggest problem in your life,
isn't it? Someone entered your life and left---if they have enriched
your life, you must live joyfully. Acknowledge them for whatever they
have done to you, don't make it look like they poisoned your life and
left. I want you to understand: however big one is in the world,
tomorrow morning if I fall dead or you fall dead, the world will go on
just fine--- maybe better---without us! It is good that people die.
Should we bring back the dead? Right now, your emotions are such that
you will naturally say, 'Please bring back my brother who has died.' But
why only your brother, shall I also bring back your grandfather and his
father and his father and everyone? Can you imagine what would happen to
the world if all those people wake up and start walking? It is good they
are dead, isn't it? It is not right to think that someone should not
die. People should die. We want them to complete their whole course and
die. We don't want them to have an untimely death, that is the only
concern. But that understanding is not there today as people are so
terribly attached to their physical bodies. This is why even if you are
ninety or hundred you still don't want them to die.

You must understand that whatever situations happen to you in your life,
you can come out of it with greater strength or you can be left broken
by it. This is a choice that you have. This is a choice every human
being has. We do not have a choice all the time about whether this
situation should happen or not. We can influence it only to some extent
but many situations will happen beyond us. But each time, we have the
choice whether to go through these situations gracefully or go through
these situations in a broken way. This is a choice we always have. Now,
is it possible to do some rituals to overcome grief? Yes, we can. There
are things you can do, but is it worth doing it is the question. You
must understand creating rituals for everything is taking steps
backwards. Doing a ritual means you are not willing to do anything, you
just want someone else or something else to handle your grief. When
there is a way, where with a certain attitude of mind and awareness, you
can come out of it, why do you need to go into rituals? It is okay to
use rituals for certain aspects of life, but not for every aspect of
life. If someone dear to you dies, you must learn to handle it rather
than expecting a ritual or some other intervention to release you. If
someone is in such a hopeless state, yes, we will do something but that
should not be the mode for a society. It will become very entangling
after some time. One of the tools you could use to overcome grief is to
perform Kalabhairava Karma. Kalabhairava Karma will distance you from
your Genetic Memory. If it is done properly, there is a clear distance
that is created. Suddenly, it is okay, because there is a distance
between you and the dead relative. This is why many people who come to
do Kalabhairava Karma experience that afterwards suddenly they feel
light, as if a huge burden has been taken off them. Kalabhairava Karma
is not a ritual to handle your grief, but because of what it does, it
can handle grief also.

Articles of the Dead Once a woman whose grandmother had passed away a
few months earlier narrated an incident that kept bothering her. One
day, she wore

her grandmother's clothes while cleaning her closet. She was also
wearing her grandmother's ring that she had inherited. She felt that her
grandmother was communicating her disapproval of this and she had been
experiencing her grandmother's presence around her. Moreover, she had
taken up some of her grandmother's habits too. For example, she had
taken to smoking, even though she was not a smoker until then. Her
grandmother was. There were a few other things like this and she was
bothered by it. She wanted me to help her become free from this.
Generally, a lot of such things are people's imagination going wild, but
sometimes there could be a basis for it. If you want to be free of such
things, the first thing you should do is to stop relating to the dead.
You need to understand this: however dear they were to you, however
intimate they might have been with you, the moment they shed their body,
their general sense of mind, intellect and emotion, which was the basis
of your business with them, is finished. All the things that you knew
about them are finished. Some other sap is still on, but you never had
any relationship with that sap. Your relationship is with the other
aspects. All those aspects were shed when that person died. So the only
thing that you do when someone dies is you cherish the beautiful moments
that you had with them---that is all. If there was something beautiful,
you cherish that, otherwise, forget about them. Don't try to work your
guilt and your problems through the dead. It can become very
complicated. You must leave the dead to the dead. You have no business
with them unless you have a certain level of mastery over your own life.
You should not even look in that direction because you could completely
mess up your life by trying to do something silly. And anyway, it does
not matter how attached your grandmother was to her clothes and whatever
else, she could only wear it as long as she had a body and you know
clearly that she has lost that. So she has no use for it. Someone who
does not have a body does not have any business with food or clothes or
anything. Only if you have a body must you go towards food and clothes.
Once you lose your body, what business do you have with food and
clothes? Even when you have a body, you should not go too much towards
it, but at least you have a good enough excuse to do so!

You have to cover it at least, so you want to cover it nicely, that is
all right. But when you have lost the body, what are you going to wear
clothes upon and walk around in? Generally, when a lot of emotion is
mixed up in the situation, there will be so many things which will
happen within you and outside of you. When you go to your grandmother's
place, just do whatever work needs to be done, do your sadhana, be with
your grandfather who is still alive and stop trying to be with the dead.
See how to enrich your life and your grandfather's life for those few
moments that you are there, rather than doing all kinds of fanciful
things with your grandmother. It is possible that there is a certain
residual element of your grandmother that is left behind in her clothes.
And they may cause some things. But there is no need to play into it.
All these things were taken care of in India by various customs that
were built incorporated into the culture. People accepted these things
as a normal happening. When a person died, all the clothes that were
closely in touch with that person's body were burned. They were never
kept. The clothes that the person occasionally wore were given only to a
blood relative, no one else. And even in such an instance, the clothes
were not worn for the first year. These things were done because a
certain amount of our energy gets into whatever we are in touch with. If
you give it a certain kind of opportunity, these clothes will start
behaving funnily. Your grandmother need not come, these clothes will
start acting funny by themselves. You are familiar with static where
clothes gather electric charges by being in contact with certain
substances. Similarly, whatever is in close association with your body
will get a certain amount of your quality. The first preference of
people who want to do some occult practices on you is to get hold of
your hair or nails. These are actually parts of the body that are
discarded periodically, so it is easy to get direct access to you
through them. If they cannot get that, the next thing they seek is some
clothing which is in close contact with your body. Of these, the first
target is underwear. This is why people used to take enormous care to
ensure that their underwear was never left accessible to others. These
days it is all going to the washerman, otherwise, traditionally, in our
homes, it was all put in a covered basket.

It must be washed inside the house---never be taken out because with
this clothing itself, people can do things to you. It is because of this
quality that these clothes carry that even when a person dies their
clothes can crackle up a little bit if a certain kind of energy is on.
There have been instances where things actually moved around. Especially
the things that they intimately used---they start moving around here and
there by themselves. It is not that this person has come and moved
things. It is just that the energy that was associated with those
objects is sort of withdrawing. In the process of withdrawal, there will
be a little bit of extra movement. It is like when you switch off your
car engine, when it is just dying down, it makes a little extra shake in
the car. It is stopping, so actually it should recede, but that is not
what happens. Similarly, when life shifts from one mode to another,
there will be a little extra reverberation. That extra shake is mistaken
to be ghosts walking all over the place. If you do something like the
Kalabhairava Karma for this person, it will ensure that no residue of
that person remains. Now, the dead can be packed and sent and the living
can continue their life. If the living get involved with the dead, they
will lose their lives in so many ways. All this spooky stuff is sort of
intriguing, but it can consume your life in so many different ways that
will not be very pleasant. This does not mean some dead person is trying
to suck your life out. No. Just your involvement with the dead can do
that. Unless you are sufficiently established and possess a certain
level of capability, you should not look in that direction. It is not
necessary.

Empathetic Death This happens with some birds, it also happens with
animals and human beings: if they were a couple or were very close, when
one of them dies, within three to six months, the other will also die.
One reason why this happened is because in India, when people were
married, their energies were bound together in a certain way. This was
at a time in this country when tradition did not allow separation. At
that time, people took the liberty of tying them up at the level of the
energy because anyway the couple would not separate. These things are
not to be done just like that.

You may know this: in India, traditionally, women were required to wear
toe rings after marriage. In Tamil Nadu, it is called metti . This is
because marriage was supposed to be such a huge experience for the woman
that there was a possibility that she would leave the body. Usually,
they were married off at the age of eight or ten. The husband and wife
would live separately and would not see each other till they were
fourteen or fifteen. During this period, while the boy was
physiologically and psychologically trained and conditioned to protect
this person who is dedicated to him, the girl (being more emotionally
competent) was emotionally and psychologically conditioned to believe
that her husband was her God. This possibility was built up in her mind.
Only when she was physically mature, she was brought to the marital
home. So when she comes and meets her husband, it would be such a huge
experience for her that her life would explode within her. At that time,
it was possible that she could slip out of the body. To prevent this,
they put some metal on the girl's body, in the form of metti. Wearing
metal on the body always prevents such an accident. This is also done
when we put people through certain types of sadhana. They are given a
metal ring or bracelet or some ornament like that. They are not supposed
to remove it without the permission of the Guru. This is to prevent them
from accidentally slipping out of the body. In this culture, whether it
is business or marriage or having children or family---everything was
used as a tool towards your Liberation and mukti. Because of this, they
nurtured the newly married girl and boy in such a way that for four to
six years they would not have seen each other, but were made to believe
that when they met something very big was going to happen. So in the
child's mind, this grew into such a big possibility. It is not just two
bodies meeting, not just two minds and emotions meeting, they did a
certain process where the marriage was two lives being merged into one.
When a woman got married, she wore something called mangalsutra around
her neck. Mangal means auspicious, sutra means thread. The mangalsutra
is an energy thread which you are supposed to replace every year.
Someone who knows what it is gives you a live mangalsutra, which matches
the energies of the husband and wife in such a way that they are

not just bound in body, mind and emotion, they are bound as two lives as
well. It is like, if you have the right kind of sutra, your kite will
fly well. Similarly, the mangalsutra was to make your marriage more
purposeful and successful. But today people wear thick gold chains which
cannot be replaced in place of the mangalsutra. That sutra was to make
you fly in marriage, but this gold chain is a symbol of slavery.
Unfortunately, this is the shift that has happened. In those days,
people understood that in a marriage, how the bodies, minds and emotions
matched was not important. What was important was that two lives were
entwined so that there was a kind of bonding. For this, they employed
many tools. Many couples would have never spoken to each other before
the marriage, but when married in this manner, their marriage created a
bonding which was inexplicable because marriage was a scientific process
of binding two lives in such a way that there was no question of
incompatibility. It did not matter even if you married a devil. You
still bonded and felt ecstatic within you, simply because of the union
within yourself and not because of what the other person was doing. When
you are like this, what your husband or wife did was immaterial. Just
the way you were was an explosive experience. As human experience is 100
per cent from within, one could touch the peaks of life irrespective of
the quality of one's partner. Since marriage was done this way, when one
person left, many times, the other person also left in a short time
after that. Today there is statistical evidence of a disproportionate
number of spouses dying within six months of each other, but this is
more because of the disruption of life than any other reason. Let us
say, a couple lives to their old age. When one of them dies, because we
have all moved from living as large joint families to nuclear families,
often, there is no one left to care for the survivor. Now, because of
this disruption in their life, the wish to die becomes very strong in
them. While they were both alive, though both were ambling around, they
were there for each other. When one person dies, the other person just
wants to go because there is usually no other support, unless they are
living with the children who are very loving and taking care of them.
One life following another in death is not necessarily because of loss
of companionship or emotional debacle. Two

lives that lived in tandem, that were tied together energetically, tend
to dismantle in response. This does not happen at the level of thought;
it is deeper than that.

Large-scale Death and Its Consequences We saw that if a violent or
unnatural death happens, then the being hangs around and this in turn
impacts the place. Now, in case of wars, where a lot of people are
killed violently, are there any negative consequences in that place?
This has to be looked at in two parts: if you look at the ancient wars,
they were fought with swords and spears with men running full speed into
each other. I don't think there is much fear in such a situation. Death
and destruction happened rather quickly. This is often true even with
modern warfare. In that sense, there is not much of a residue of this
kind. It is only if you gave them an opportunity for fear---if they were
cornered or something, then they were terrorized. But this did not
happen on such a large scale in ancient wars. However, if you take World
War I or even World War II, most of it was fought in the trenches. Those
trenches were terrible places of fear. People were cold and hungry,
their fingers and toes were eaten up by frostbite, pain, and all that.
Their fear was because they were sitting there, waiting to die. Instead,
if you went out with your rifle, screaming, then either you died or the
enemy died. This would be a different thing. This is like a car
accident. If you are driving full speed and suddenly boom! ---either
they die or you die. But when they were sitting and waiting in those
trenches, only a small percentage of men would not have much
fear---these were people who had a larger vision that they were doing
this for their country and all that. However, there were many others who
did not have such a sense of sacrifice but just became pawns in the game
of war. They would have wondered why the hell were they born in this
country because they were now in the trenches and may get killed at any
moment. Such people would have been in extreme fear. Whether they died
or not, that fear would have left behind an enormous negative force. I
think Europe has seen that kind of long-term fear and suffering more
than any other land on the planet. So many lives

falling apart will have an impact anywhere. But when people die of fear
on a large scale, very morbid manifestations may happen. It can be
psychological and mixed up with what people go through in terms of life
or energetic turmoil. Most of all, one thing that will happen is that
they will not know joy, they will not know love. These two things will
become difficult when all these things happen around you. They may know
passion, they may know sexuality, they may know pleasures, but they
cannot know the simple joy and simple bond of loving someone. So
complicated expressions of the simple human traits of wanting to be
joyful or loving will manifest. Something like this is said in the
Mahabharata after Kurukshetra. 2 The Kurukshetra war was a terrible war.
It is said that more than 100,000 people died in the war. For the
population of those days, 100,000 people is a huge number to die, that
too just by swords and arrows. If you have to kill 100,000 people with
no bombs, no gunpowder, just with swords and arrows, then the amount of
fighting that happened must have been enormous. The strange thing is
that we know so much about the war and there are detailed accounts of
every little thing that happened there. After the war, the Pandavas
ruled the kingdom for thirty-six years---but we don't hear a single word
about it. In the entire story, the real story should have been after the
war because that is why they fought the war---to decide who should rule
and how---but not a word is heard about it because nothing significant
happened in their lives. They did not live a joyful life. They simply
lived and ruled. They must have done something for the
kingdom---expanded perhaps, but nothing significant. Nothing significant
happened in the human experience because there was a certain barrenness
in their life. This would not be just for those five people and their
family but for the entire population as well. This was not because they
were affected psychologically from having lost someone. Yes, that impact
would also have been there, but above all, it was just the effect of the
gore of death all around. Today, they say, because the place was so
soaked in blood, it is good to die in Kurukshetra. People go there to
die because they believe it is a good place to die. Maybe someone made
this up or maybe it is good, I don't know. But at that time, definitely,
the next few generations after

that would have this gore of death in their samskara. 3 So they could
never have really known the joy of bonding with people, nor the simple
joy of living. They would have slogged, they would have built and they
would have done things. Here and there, they would have laughed, they
would have lived, they would know everything, but there would have been
no real sense of joy. This I feel is the case with European nations,
except in the southern part. So can this be undone? Yes, it can.
Creating many consecrated spaces would be one way of doing it. If you
create really powerful consecrated spaces that are strategically
located, it could definitely undo a lot. But there is nothing like
Gnanam , Dhyanam , Anandam! 4 Gnanam is awareness about the truth.
Dhyanam is meditativeness. Anandam is blissfulness, which is a
consequence of the two. Really, these things are not simply slogans.
They can change the world!

Mourning Period In many cultures, there were stipulations as to what
people who were closely related to the dead should and should not do for
a certain period of time after the death. This was mainly to create a
karmic distance between the living and the departed so that both could
continue their respective journeys without much encumbrance. In a
previous section 5 we saw how we create runanubandha with everybody and
everything we interact with in our lives. But runanubandha is not at the
same level for all relationships. So, depending upon the strength of the
runanubandha, to that extent, the death of a person affects another
individual. For example, sometimes, without knowing why, someone wakes
up in the morning feeling a pit in the stomach. This could be due to
various reasons but it is also possible that someone who has strong
runanubandha with you is in some distress or has died or whatever. You
may not know this person, you may have never met him or her, but just
like that, your system is reacting to what is happening to that person.
It is very much possible. The problem of speaking about these things is
people will start imagining all kinds of things. Tomorrow, if someone is
not feeling well, instead of seeing a

doctor or examining what they did not do right the previous day, they
will start imagining that someone they love must have died somewhere and
all kinds of confusion will start. In India, there is a peculiar
tradition of mourning that depends on being genealogically related to
the dead person in a particular way. Such people are supposed to avoid
going to temples or participating in social events or celebrations for
forty days. This is because, in ancient India, they followed the system
of kula , which is like a clan, but with a much more genetic basis to
it. Kulas were created mainly to maintain a clear genetic pathway
through generations. Through this connection, they created runanubandha
on the physical and genetic level as well. Kulas were maintained and
sustained primarily by creating Kula Devata s, or the deity for the
kula. Each kula had a deity with specific rituals related to that deity.
In ancient times, not everyone went to every temple. There were some
temples that were for general well-being, which everyone visited. But
for specific purposes, people went only to their Kula Devata. Not only
that, if a certain kind of genetic pathway is maintained, you can create
certain energy which travels through the track, impacting the entire
clan. Even now, this is happening to some extent, where medical science
is coming up with medication that is specific to certain kinds of DNA
make-up. In the future, probably by just spraying a medicine in the air,
all the people who have that type of DNA will benefit instantly.
Similarly, it is possible to do spiritually beneficial things to the
entire clan, across generations, by just doing it in one place. For
example, when kulas were maintained, everyone in the kula did not need
to go to the temple. If one person went and prayed, or one big ritual
was done, everyone could benefit, whether they were physically present
in that space or not, because all of them were connected and the energy
moved through that connection. For thousands of years, people maintained
the genetic track in their own way. Never mixing it up, never doing
anything that would disturb the track, so that the progeny was well
maintained. They had whole systems of how to marry, intermarry and not
marry among their own clan. All these things created a very strong
runanubandha, which ensured the survival and well-being of that clan.
Today, kula is understood as

caste and we just react to some atrocities that have been committed in
that name. We think everything must be dismantled. In any case, it is
all broken and gone now. Today, the genetic material of people is all
mixed up. Society has changed. Today, your son may fall in love with the
girl next door and she could be from any caste, religion or race. So it
will not work the same way. Today, your choices have become more
important than maintaining those kinds of things. So those things have
become irrelevant. You cannot revive that but there was a deep science
with immense benefits in it. It worked phenomenally for some societies
that kept it. When things were maintained like that, not visiting
temples at a certain time was a very relevant thing. It was a wonderful
understanding of life, a fabulous understanding of genetics and how it
functions. When the kula system was still relevant, if there was a death
in the kula, all the members of the kula who were related to the dead
person in a certain way were asked not to go to the temple for forty
days after the death. This makes sense only for the Kula Devata temple.
This is because they wanted to avoid the possibility that the deity
would confuse the person with the dead person because of the close
resemblance of the genetic material with that person. The deity may
recognize you and the dead person's energy as the same and it could
disturb your system; it could cause destabilization of your body. In
extreme cases, it could even cause death. So when that energy is hanging
around you, you don't go to your Kula Devata, but you can go to a Shiva
temple or a Kalabhairava temple.

Memorials, Samadhis and Pyramids Building memorials for people who are
dear to us or those who were of certain significance or prominence,
after their death, is common in all cultures of the world. The famous
Taj Mahal of India, for example, is a memorial built by a king in memory
of one of his wives. This is also one way of handling one's grief. These
memorials also have social and political significance where they help in
building our identities. However, beyond these reasons, is there

any need or existential significance to it? That depends upon many
factors. Once it happened: a five-year-old boy accompanied his mother to
the cemetery. He had never been to a cemetery in his life. While his
mother was paying her respects at one particular grave, the boy went
about everywhere reading all the inscriptions on the tombstones. He then
came back to his mother and asked her, 'Mom, where do they bury all the
horrible people?' Every tombstone declared this was the most wonderful
man, so he wanted to know where the horrible ones were buried!
Generally, people want to have good memories of people who have died, so
their memorials also say good things about them. But in India people
created another kind of memorials called samadhis. There is some
spiritual significance to such samadhis and people go to a samadhi not
just to remember the dead or pay their respects but also to be in its
presence and meditate. In India, if someone died in a certain way,
people recognized that there was a benefit in preserving that place and
wanted to make the energies they left behind available to people. For
example, there is Vijji's samadhi at the Yoga Center. If you simply sit
there, you will see that the samadhi has its own aura and energy about
itself because of the way in which she left her body. It is like a
solvent. It is a kind of dissolving energy. Generally, for certain
people, I tell them not to sit there for too long because it is a very
body-taking kind of energy. It can slowly dissolve you. It was set up
with the intention that there is one corner in the Yoga Center which
nurtures a very different type of energy altogether. It is mild and
subtle. It is also very beautiful and pleasant. If you simply sit there
without aspiring for anything or relating to anything or trying to
imagine things, it can give you a bodiless kind of feeling. For one who
is doing sadhana, it is good to be in such spaces. That space is
fundamentally of the Anahata Chakra. A lot of people go there probably
out of curiosity, but if you look at people who go there regularly, they
are a certain type of people. They are Anahata-oriented people who are
naturally drawn to that. They prefer to sit in the samadhi rather than
in the Dhyanalinga simply because they are of a certain type.

There are many places like that in India. One such place is Kumara
Parvata, near the Kukke Subramanya temple in the Western Ghats,
Karnataka. It is believed that Shiva's younger son, Kartikeya, or
Subramanya, as he is known outside Tamil Nadu, left his body on top of
this mountain. He was a fierce warrior yogi who unleashed destruction
wherever he perceived injustice. It is said that one day he realized the
futility of his deeds and decided to put an end to it. He washed his
bloodied sword one last time in the river at the foothills of Kumara
Parvata and climbed the hill. He never came down---they say he shed his
body at the top of the mountain. It is said that he was such an
accomplished yogi that he shed his body in the standing position. His
energies are very much intact there even today. About twenty years ago,
we went there with a group of residents from the Yoga Center. Halfway up
the mountain, there is a house that belongs to two brothers who live
there. People going up the mountain usually camp there on their way up
and down. Once we reached that place, I knew I would not be able to make
it to the top. The energies there were so intense that I knew my body
would not be able to withstand this sort of energy during that phase of
my life. That entire night, I could not lie down and sleep. Every time I
tried to sit or lie down, my body would just spring up. I was in a tent
and my body would stand erect, dismantling the tent itself. So I ended
up standing the whole night. Another such experience happened when I was
in a small village in Tamil Nadu called Velayuthapalayam. I was
conducting a programme there and stayed in a home opposite a small hill.
In Tamil Nadu, there is bound to be a temple on top of every hill. Very
few hilltops are unoccupied. So there was a temple on top of this hill
too and every day I would see people going up and coming down. I went to
this village a few times, but I never went up that hill. Then they told
me there was a cave up there and some Jain monks had stayed there some
2400 years ago and that a local king had beds carved for them on the
rock. I thought about this---2400 years ago meant they could be direct
disciples of Mahavir 6 or just after that. So now I was interested.

One day, I went up the hill. It was like a bird's nest, precariously
positioned on top of the hill, in the midst of some big boulders. The
place was not well kept, it was being used for all kinds of things.
There were empty alcohol bottles and things like that. The walls were
all defaced by those ugly love proclamations you commonly find in India:
'PKT loves SKP' and rubbish like that. In a corner, I saw the carved
beds on the rock. There were small 2-inch protrusions for pillows too. I
just sat on one of these beds and my body was literally jumping up and
down. I said, 'This is a loaded place. Clean it up, we will come and
sleep here in the night.' That night, about nine of us went up with
mattresses to sleep in that cave. No one slept for a moment because the
energy was bursting there in strange ways. And I could clearly see that
the person who used to lie on the bed that I happened to sleep upon had
no leg below his left knee. What had happened, we don't know but there
was no left leg. They

must have been that kind of intense people that their energies were
distinctly bouncing there, even after over 2000 years. There are many
more such places in India. Some are maintained with some reverence, but
most are anonymous and unkempt. If you want to experience such an energy
on a much larger scale, more multidimensional, you must go up to the
Seventh Hill of the Velliangiri Mountains. Sadhguru Sri Brahma left his
body there through all the seven chakras. So the place is explosive in
terms of energy even today. It is something one must experience. It is a
tremendous dimension and possibility. However, for people who led an
ordinary life and died, if you want to remember and honour them, that is
up to you. But you must know it is a lot of real estate. It is a certain
emotion and you are making an investment of your emotion. It may not
have any existential significance. Take the Taj Mahal, for example. At
least Shah Jahan built something beautiful. Is it reverberating with the
energy of his wife, Mumtaz? Nothing like that. It is a beautiful piece
of craft that he built. It is a jewel. No one goes there to grieve for
her. People just go there to enjoy the craft. Her name may be written
somewhere, but existentially the monument has got nothing to do with him
or her right now. It has got something to do with the people who worked
on it, though. Ancient Egyptians took this whole memorial business to
another level altogether. The pyramids of Egypt are perhaps physically
the largest and most spectacular attempt ever at connecting the here
with the hereafter. A tremendous amount of thought, engineering and
effort have gone into building them. In terms of physicality, perhaps no
other human effort to ensure the well-being of the dead is so desperate.
So what would be the spiritual value of these pyramids? How far do they
go in ensuring the well-being of the departed? Is this effort worthy of
emulation in the present times? Egyptians started building pyramids
because they were very deathoriented. It comes from their obsession with
pleasure. Death and pleasure are very directly connected. People always
think life and pleasure are connected. No, death and pleasure are very
directly connected. Pyramids are just one aspect of what they built.
They built some very fabulous

temples also, but the pyramids have become very popular because of some
modern death-oriented people who wrote books on them. The basic quality
of the pyramid is preservation. Some people are promoting the pyramid as
a meditative process. A pyramid has nothing to do with meditation.
Sitting inside a pyramid and meditating is just ignorance. If you are
doing it for health purposes, it is okay. It definitely supports health,
but if people think that sitting inside a pyramid and meditating will
take them to higher levels of consciousness, it is a very wrong notion.
With the pyramid, you can create health, organic unity, and maybe you
can increase your lifespan to some extent, but it is not a spiritual
process. It does not help the dead in any way, except assisting in the
preservation of the physical. Pyramids work because of their geometry.
Even if you make a paper pyramid whose angles are exactly 51.5 degrees
on all the four sides and on the top, it will work. You can place a
vegetable inside it and you will see that what would normally rot in
about three days will still not have rotted even after three weeks. It
would have shrunk, shrivelled out, but not rotted. This is because if
you create a pyramidal form, Vyana Vayu gets trapped there naturally.
Vyana Vayu is in charge of the preservative function of the body. So
something can be preserved for a long time, if you can hold it. This is
how mummies were preserved for thousands of years. In India, preserving
the dead body is the last thing we want to do. The rule is if someone
dies, within four to six hours after death, you must cremate the body.
Traditionally, they said, once death has occurred---by the next dusk or
dawn, whichever occurs first---the body must be cremated. Destroying the
body immediately is very good for both the dead and the living.
Preserving the body is only a torture for the person who has departed.

PART III Life after Death The Dark One When I first heard the sounds of
Darkness and silence meeting within me The little mind argues for light
The virtue, the power, the beauty Light a brief happening could hold me
not All encompassing darkness drew me in Darkness the infinite eternity
Dwarfs the happened, the happening and yet to happen Choosing the
eternal Darkness I became The dark one that I am The Divine and the
devil are but a small part The divine I dispense with ease If you meet
the devil you better cease

C H A P T E R 10

The Life of a Ghost

In a way, everyone is a ghost. Whether you are a ghost with the body or
without a body is the only question.

What Are Ghosts Ghosts are a part of the folklore of every culture in
the world. Perhaps no child in the world grows up without hearing a big
dose of ghost stories--- about their lives, deeds and idiosyncrasies. So
what are these ghosts? How did they come into existence? What is the
basis of their existence? Why are they even around? This lack of
understanding is because, right now, you understand only embodiment as
life. Not because you are opinionated but simply because that is your
experience of life. But life extends beyond the body as well. That is
why you have what are generally known as ghosts. It once happened: there
was a very shy man. He got admitted to a hospital for a medical
check-up. A very pretty nurse attended to him. So she checked his blood
pressure, did a blood test, urine test, enema, and everything. She went
out for some time and, in the meantime, before he could get up from the
bed, his bowels revolted against all the atrocities committed upon them,
and things happened on the bed. He could not control himself. Being a
very shy man, he was too embarrassed. He did not want the pretty nurse
to see this mess. When he heard the footsteps of the nurse coming in, he
just grabbed all the sheets on the bed and threw them from the fifth
floor window. Down below, a man was returning home from a party. It is
such an unfair world, you know, a man is expected to walk straight on a
round planet while the damn thing is spinning! With great difficulty, he
was walking sideways and the sheets fell on him and covered him. He
screamed and fought these sheets. It took him a few minutes to get them

off. By then, the security came rushing and asked, 'What was all the
commotion about?' He was dazed and, looking down at the sheets, said,
'It looks like I have beaten the shit out of a ghost.' What are ghosts,
actually? All beings are a combination of time, memory and energy. Of
the three, time is not in your hands, but how you live your life will
determine how much memory and energy you gather or dissipate. Let us
say, with lots of activity and a certain focus you use up a lot of
memory---the Prarabdha Karma part of it---very quickly. Now, if you are
unable to open the warehouse of Sanchita Karma, then you may have an
untimely death, because the energy is still intense but you have run out
of memory. Once you run out of memory, you can either die or become
vegetative. But generally you will die, because if memory collapses,
there are many things which cannot function. However, if your energy
runs out and memory is still there, then too you will die, but you will
continue to exist as what we call a ghost. A ghost has a manifestation
but because there is not enough energy to keep the physical body
integrated and keep it going, the body is gone. But its memory body is
still strong, strong enough to be felt by other people. In a way, you
can say, everyone is a ghost. Whether you are a ghost with a body or
without a body---whether you are an embodied ghost or disembodied
ghost---is the only question. And all beings, embodied or disembodied,
are playing out their lives only as per their karmic structures. The
only difference is that when you are embodied, there is more possibility
of using your will. That is all. What you call ghosts are those beings
who left their body, usually, in an unnatural way. They had strong
Prarabdha Karma left unfinished, but they died either because of an
accident, a disease, a suicide or murder. Somehow, the body broke so
much that it could not sustain life any more. Such beings will have a
denser presence and their tendencies are very strong. They are active in
a certain way so you can feel them or even see them more easily.
Existence in the form of a ghost or the life of a ghost---if you want to
call it that---is considered undesirable because it can unnecessarily
extend for a long time. Let us say, this person who has died had some
amount of unfinished Prarabdha Karma when they died. If they were in the
physical body, maybe their Prarabdha Karma would

have lasted for another twenty years. Now that there is no physical
body, the dissolution of karma is only by tendency, not by conscious
action. As a result, the lifespan may last for 200 or 2000 years instead
of lasting for twenty years. A ghost generally cannot have conscious
intention because the intellect is gone. But they can function by
tendency. Let us say, when the person was alive, his tendency was
pinching people. Even after his body is gone, he will still want to
pinch. It does not matter who, he will just want to pinch. Let us say,
there was someone who giggled all his life. His ghost will also giggle.
This action happens by tendency, not by conscious intention. If you
happen to see ghosts, because of your own inhibitions and limitations,
you may get really paranoid. Mostly, it is your psychological response.
It has nothing to do with that being. Suppose you see a person floating
and not walking around you, you will go through all kinds of weird
emotions. This is not necessary and has nothing to do with these beings.
Unfortunately, they get a lot of bad press for all this. The English
word 'ghost' is a crude and generic term that bundles all disembodied
beings in the same category. But they are very varied in terms of where
they came from, what they are capable of and where they are going. There
are some who lost their bodies before they ran down their Prarabdha
Karma and are hanging around. Then there are yogis without bodies who
are wandering, always looking for a possibility for their dissolution.
Then there are celestial beings who are on a vacation. Some others are
of a completely different dimension and have no relevance to your life.
Then there are certain forces which people generally refer to as Divine
Forces, which can take on almost any form they wish. So there are
actually a variety of things and you cannot bundle them all together.
Just to be able to classify these things, to be able to recognize one
from the other is a serious amount of work. Traditionally, different
levels of bodiless existence are referred to as bhoota, preta, pisachi,
chaudi , yaksha s, kinnara , gandharva , deva , and so on. They are at
different evolutionary levels, or we can say they are on different types
of vacations. Someone is in the first class, someone is in the second
class,

someone is in another class, while someone else is in a bad condition,
which you call hell. Essentially, they are all on some type of vacation,
but their vacation will end sometime and they will take on another
physical body. No one remains a bhoota or a preta or a yaksha or a
gandharva or even a deva forever. He or she enjoys or suffers it for a
certain time and then takes on a physical form again. For simplicity, we
can loosely call those beings who are aware and have refused to take a
body and are looking for ways of dissolution as celestial beings. They
still have some choice and discretion because they lived and died in a
certain sense of awareness. The others are disembodied beings just
functioning by compulsion, the same way you are. These are the ones you
are most likely to come in contact with. Again, to make it simple, we
can just classify them simply as intense, mild and meek types. Those
which are intense have a more active presence and people may feel it.
They may even have a form which at least in other people's experience is
nearly physical. Mild types are not like that, but they could cause
certain things to happen to people. If you interact head-on with an
intense one, spooky things will definitely happen. Their tendencies will
be very strong so they will behave in a certain way. It will be a very
strong reaction. Some may be intense and calm, but generally they will
be compulsive in some way. If you meet the mild ones, unknowingly,
people will go through some disturbances, like maybe someone will run a
temperature or someone will be disturbed for no reason at all. It is not
like a ghost is sitting on your head---that energy could have disturbed
your system because they are everywhere in some way. Many of them may
not be intense enough to maintain an individual form but they are there.
Meek ones have almost no impact on your system unless you are super
susceptible, which some people are. This is the reason why all these
klesha nashanas are done---to clear out all such influences. The problem
here is to decipher what is just a psychological phenomenon and what is
real. It is a serious challenge because every nutcase thinks they saw a
ghost or a ghost possessed them. To completely deny it would be stupid.
Though these beings are incapable

of having intent, they may do something compulsively. And there is a
tendency to seek their own Genetic Memory. They may not feel comfortable
somewhere else. They want to seek their own Genetic Memory. So they may
hang around places where these memories are. But are they out to harm
you? Not at all. These beings have no tendency to interact with human
beings, as such. They don't have a discriminatory intellect to choose,
'I want to interact with this person or that person.' That is from your
own psychological processes. I think this entire problem is because
people have been projecting that these ghosts are waiting and they will
pounce on you or harm you in some way. This is all made up by people
wanting to profit from it---you can call them commercial ghosts. It is
because of all these movies that have been made where the person who
died is waiting on a cloud, wanting to talk to you or hear what you say.
All these things have deeply influenced the human psyche in such a way
that they cannot draw a line between what is reality and what is made up
in their mind. People's psychological realities are so true for them
that they think that is a truth by itself. These things have given much
currency to all those ghost stories that you hear. Native Americans
maintain a strict code about places where they rest the dead. Once they
create a place for the dead where they leave the bodies for the birds or
whatever, no one enters that place. One reason is for your own safety.
Another reason is you don't want to disturb them. You want them to be
comfortable and work their time out. This is also the reason why,
traditionally, the crematoriums and burial grounds are usually outside
human habitations---the dead should be given some space. This is a very
wise thing to do. Now, people ask, are all the disembodied beings human
forms or are there any non-human disembodied beings too? Well, there is
no such thing as non-human disembodied beings. For example, does a
grasshopper go about hopping without a body? Not really. There are some
exceptions to this---cobras are one. We already saw that cobras and cows
are capable of having a subtle body. 1 It is not completely logically
correct to say this, but it is like saying that just as with human
beings

there are human ghosts, there are also some snake ghosts which can also
possess a human being. In Indian culture, it is common knowledge that
there is something called Naga Dosha . 2 Naga Dosha happens when a
disembodied cobra has touched you somehow. Once again, we must
understand that a disembodied being has no intention of its own. It is
incapable of intentions but it has tendencies. So when you come in
contact with it, it can impact you. When people have Naga Dosha, it can
particularly affect certain layers of your skin. Usually, in such
people, the skin breaks into rashes. It looks like psoriasis but is not
exactly psoriasis. The skin begins to peel away in scales. It can also
create a very strange sense of stillness and movement, where if not
handled properly can lead to psychological distress. Otherwise, it can
cause people to have serious hearing impediments. I have seen people who
have recovered totally from those things by just doing Naga Pooja and
things like that. When a disembodied cobra impacts someone, the period
of impact is not very long because its own structural integrity is in
question. It will dismantle itself because it does not have the
necessary integrity to hold itself for too long. The duration is usually
between twenty-seven days to fifty-four days. That is about it. But Naga
Dosha, the ailment caused by the impact, can last long. This is if the
impact has affected you negatively. It can also impact you positively.
If it impacts you positively, you will see that the strength of your
spine, how it functions and your perception will be enhanced. It is
because the disembodied cobra lingers about for some time after its
death. In India, if people find a dead cobra, they perform a complete
funeral for the naga. Speaking of cobras and their impact, I have
experienced both positive and negative ones. Once it killed me, 3 but at
once it made my life in so many ways. After the consecration of the
Dhyanalinga, my health situation was quite bad. We did many energy
processes to recover and a few people really dedicated their lives to
making me well again, but certain parts of my body---especially the
right side, just next to my navel ---were like a vacuum, creating
problems. Tumours had started forming there. They used to form one day,
and disappear after a few days. Doctors said my RBC count was
excessively high because my liver

function was starting to fail. We could have fixed it, but I needed
time--- at least a month or two for myself---but because of my schedule,
I never got it. So this condition kept getting worse. Off and on, we did
small patch-up jobs here and there, but we never really paid proper
attention to the system. One night, in December 2001, I was lying down
in my bedroom in the Isha Yoga Center. It was about 4.45 a.m. and when I
opened my eyes I saw a huge disembodied cobra next to me. It was larger
than normal proportions. Its hood was raised. I have always kept a
little brass cobra next to my bed; they were the ones who said good
morning to me every day, and now there was a big one with a giant hood
right there. I was looking at it and then it came towards me and bit me,
next to the navel. I closed my eyes. It remained there for some time and
then it left, not to be seen again. The bite caused wounds to my
belly---four fang marks, with blood oozing out. I even showed it to some
people. However, from that day, the space or the vacuum was gone; this
encounter with the mystical or celestial cobra took it away from me.

Ghost Troubles Though most claims about ghost hearing and seeing and the
ill effects that they can cause are largely psychological projections of
individual people, there is a reality beyond physical body. Most
disembodied beings are incapable of holding any intentions of their own.
So they cannot harm a person. However, you may get harmed because of
them. They cannot kill you by direct action, but mostly by possessing
someone or by just creating certain fearful situations that they can be
fatal. When one is possessed by such beings, usually, death will happen
soon, because they will create a situation where the person will walk
into a well or walk off a mountain, or something like that. This being
will possess everything, your intelligence, emotions and your body. One
part of you may still be struggling but they can just walk off the
mountain and fall straight down. It is not their body, it does not hurt
them, but you die in the process. It is like when someone else drives
your car, they don't care. They bang it through everything and go.

It is not that they can do this to anyone they wish. There needs to be
some sense of vulnerability in that person. If a person is well
established, all these things will not have any power over them. If a
person is a meditator, if some quality of meditativeness has come in
them, then they cannot be possessed by anything. It is not possible, but
these beings may create terror in you by just appearing in very
distorted forms. Let us say, you walk outside and you see a distorted
being. It need not do anything. If it just stands there, it is enough.
If someone is standing there, carrying his own head in his hands, it is
enough to freak you out, isn't it? If you are very balanced, you may
just look at him and go. Then there is nothing he can do. A headless
person should be the easiest to manage--- ask the wives! But if you are
the kind to get frightened, then, by appearing here and there, it can
kill a person psychologically. Just fear or terror can kill. Disembodied
beings cannot even see you as a physical being. They see you as an
energy form. You may have heard that someone was possessed or tormented
by some other being. Maybe you have even witnessed situations like that.
This usually happens only if there is some kind of relationship to the
energy. They could be of the same blood and the same karmic substance.
In some way, those beings are drawn to this particular person who
carries that kind of thing. Let us say, someone died in your family
halfway through their Prarabdha Karma. If you happen to be wearing their
clothes, unknowingly, they will come at you. It is not that they are
seeking you. It is just that these clothes carry, in some way, a part of
their body and energy, so they tend to gravitate in that direction. This
is why, traditionally, it was said that when a person dies, you should
never wear their rings. If someone with strong Prarabdha Karma has died
and you wear their rings on your ring finger, it becomes very easy for
that being to enter you. You become very accessible. They are not trying
to torment you. They are not trying to do anything. They have no such
intentions. They will just function according to their tendencies, which
will be a torture for you in some way. Otherwise, the situation of some
disembodied being coming and tormenting you or even becoming visible to
you does not arise.

If you have raised yourself to that level of awareness where you can
feel these beings, you will have no problem with them. So there is no
need for you to do anything to protect yourself, unless you are involved
in some kind of work which involves these beings and you are trying to
draw them and do certain things with them. Only then, the question of
protecting yourself arises. Otherwise, you don't have to bother about
it. If you become meditative, there is nothing that they can do to you.
In fact, they become good company. If you are not, you can wear the
Rudraksha 4 or a Linga Bhairavi pendant on your body. These are some
simple things that can protect you. One of the things not to do is to
wear metal rings on your thumb. Unknowingly, these days, particularly
all these New Age people have started to wear rings on their thumbs.
This is a recent phenomenon. I don't know how they got inspired to do
it, or if it is just by chance and they are just fixing things upon
wherever they can fix anything. Nowhere, in no culture, did people wear
rings on their thumbs. If you wear a ring on the thumb, you will attract
certain forces which you may not be able to handle. These forces that
will be drawn towards you need not necessarily be pleasant. They are
beyond your understanding and capability to handle, so they could easily
bring illness, accidents or just a severe disturbance to one's life. So
no metal should be worn on the thumb. Never ever. Only those actively
engaged in sorcery or black arts wear metal on their thumbs.

Ghost Solutions Disembodied beings can be trapped. A tantrik, or one who
is wellaccomplished in the occult sciences, can do this. It is like how
even a great sage like Sadhguru Sri Brahma was put behind bars during
the British era by an immature social system. Similarly, on a different
level, you can trap these beings too. If I have a being with me who does
not have a body and who does not need transport to go from here to
there, can you imagine how many things I can get done through them? But
I will never use them in any way. My only interest is in their
emancipation; my involvement with them is only on that level. But there

are people who use them. They will put the disembodied being into some
person out of whom they want to extract something. Now, that person will
do whatever they want. Trapping anything has its limitations also. You
cannot keep something trapped forever. At least when the occult person
dies, the being is going to be released. But for most people who are
into such occult practices, their power does not last until their death;
it goes before that. At some point, they lose their hold on it. When
that happens, these things depart by themselves. Generally, these things
will not hover around where that kind of a person is. They can easily
sense it. An unaware or ignorant being may get easily trapped, but those
who are a little aware will not get trapped so easily. They know what's
what. They can feel the energy around them and are very cautious. It is
a very negative karma to trap and use such beings, because these beings
are, in a way, very helpless creatures. It is as treacherous as
molesting a child. Moreover, it can backfire on you at any moment. But,
usually, such people have their own protection systems. They take care
of themselves in a certain way and do it. This is not something that a
spiritual person will ever do. But there are people who find a lot of
pleasure in terrorizing someone. It can become a means to wealth for
them. However, usually, people who use such beings die a very horrible
death; it catches up with them over time. Do disembodied beings need
help? Can they be dissolved? Yes. The difference between embodied beings
and disembodied beings is just this: when you are embodied, you have
more discretion. As you become more aware, you gain more discretion.
When your awareness diminishes, you have less discretion. Once you are
embodied and are here as a human being, you can either evolve or
regress. Both are possible for you. That is the beauty of having an
intellect which can discriminate and choose. As a human being, if you
don't make use of your awareness and discretion, if you waste human
life, your goose is cooked! However, these disembodied beings can exist
only in the level of awareness in which they left. They cannot gain or
lose awareness. They are in a kind of a limbo. It is a stagnant
state---like a light bulb; it has a certain lifespan, after which it
will burn out. The bulb cannot choose how long to burn or

when to go out. It burns for so many hours and then it goes out. These
beings are just like that. They can neither evolve nor regress. What you
have, you just experience, that is all. So even the disembodied beings
who are a little aware can do with some help to progress. The only
reason why they are able to retain their form as a separate entity from
the rest of the Existence is because there is a karmic structure. The
physical body has been shed, but the karmic body is still intact. Only
because the karmic body is intact, there is a form and there is an
individuality about it. They too have individual likes, dislikes,
compulsions and desires. But those disembodied beings that we call as
celestial beings longed for something higher and they got there. But
they too can do with some help. It is like this. Someone longed to be a
rich person and they became rich. But only the rich person knows his
struggles, his problems. The poor man on the street never understands
that a man who is driving a Mercedes could also be struggling, but the
rich person has his own problems and he knows his riches are not getting
him anywhere. They are not adding to his happiness. Now, it is easier
for him to understand the need to turn inward. It is a similar case with
these celestial beings. Now, in terms of dissolving that being, what we
do is just break the karma. How do you break someone's karma? Karma is
stored on the level of your mind, physical body, sensations and energy.
Once someone has shed their physical body, sensations don't exist. The
mind is there, but it has lost its logical nature. So, fundamentally,
for a disembodied being, the karma is in the energy body. In ancient
times, courtesans used to wear elaborate jewellery. With that, they
played an elaborate game with the men who came to them. Their whole body
would be covered with jewellery. The man would come to this woman, full
of desire, but he would be unable to get this jewellery off. It would
take hours to get it off. Whichever way he would try, it would not come
off. But the woman would know the trick. There was just one pin and,
when she had teased him sufficiently, she would just pull that pin and
all the jewellery would just fall off. Both the mental and energy bodies
are like this. All your karma is held by certain pins. These pins are in
certain points of your body. In a way,

we can say they are chakras. Not necessarily only the seven chakras;
there are other points too. So all we do is pull those plugs and the
karmic body just collapses. All kinds of jokers are talking about
activating chakras and doing irresponsible things with them. That is
very dangerous. If you meddle with these things unknowingly, it can be
disastrous. The chakras are like pins. If I just pull them, I can
release you right now, but you will not retain your physical body. You
will be liberated, but you will be dead as far as the world is
concerned. The same can be done for disembodied beings also. All beings
seek dissolution, whether they are aware of it or not. Out of their
limitations, fears and misunderstandings, they may think they are not
seeking it but every being seeks dissolution. Always. If your body would
not fall on our hands, it would be so easy to dissolve you. That is why
a Guru always waits until your body becomes ripe enough. When the moment
of death comes naturally, he will interfere and do what he has to do.
Maybe he will make you leave a few days earlier, but he will pull the
pin and dissolve you completely.

Dissolving Frozen Beings There have been many disembodied beings that I
have come across and interacted with. One peculiar situation was with a
Native American being. Native Americans are always portrayed as very
proud, fit and strong people. They were good warriors, had great pride
in their culture and were very straight. He would fight a battle with
you today, and tomorrow, if you so much as called him a brother, he
would be willing to give his life for you. That is how they were. For
them, killing and dying in battle was an honour. They never knew that
someone could come and usurp their land or take it away. They just did
not understand. They saw the Earth as a live force that sustained them.
This is one of the few cultures in the world that did not look up when
you said God . They looked to the Earth as the force that created and
nurtured them. If you know American history, just south of Tennessee,
there is this trail called the 'Trail of Tears', because in the
mid-nineteenth century, whole tribal nations were forcibly moved
westwards to free up land for European settlers. So entire tribes
walked. Their weapons were taken

away, because with weapons they could be dangerous. Without weapons,
they could not hunt for food, so they starved and walked. The old and
feeble died. The Native American way was such that if they buried their
dead somewhere, they had to take care of that place. Now, because they
were travelling, they could not bury their dead. So they carried their
dead. The bodies rotted and fell apart, and they cried and cried and
they walked on. By the time they reached their destinations, nearly 70
per cent of them were dead. So this is called the Trail of Tears. These
were very earthy people---they have a certain Earth sense. For them,
their religion, their occult, their practices, were all about the Earth.
They have a very deep connection with the Earth. When these people
suffer, they leave puddles of suffering all over the place, and it
stays. A few years ago, when I happened to be walking in a certain part
of the Appalachian Mountains in Tennessee, I saw a man standing still,
frozen in a certain position of despair and shame. I saw that he was
just standing there in the full regalia of the ancient native tribes,
completely frozen--- frozen in time. Whenever I see someone in extreme
movement or when they are intensely still, I put myself into it because
both of these situations are possibilities for me to do something.
People in extreme movement, they are a possibility. People who are
utterly still, they too are a possibility. I cannot keep myself away
from these two kinds of people. The in-between, medium movement does not
mean much. So then I saw that for almost 200 to 300 years, this man was
standing there frozen. I saw that the situation behind this was that
this person had the responsibility and the privilege of protecting his
elder brother, who was a certain kind of a leader or chief of the
community. He was like a right-hand man, protecting him in every way.
Now, in that tradition, a brother need not necessarily mean that he was
born from the same father or mother. You can take up brothers in the
same way that you take up friends. This man held this elder brother in
great esteem and he deemed it a great privilege to walk by his side and
protect him. A situation happened where he had set up a meeting for the
chief with some military people, the white men. Somehow, this chief was
deceived and killed by the white men. This man felt so responsible that
he just stood there in absolute despair, failure, distress and shame.
Such extreme

emotions were within him that he had been just standing there for a few
centuries. When I saw him, he was still standing right there. Not in a
physical body---obviously, the earth fell back to the Earth---but the
rest of him stood there, just as he had been in that moment. So I
thought, it was time he moved on. Too much time in shame, too much time
in defeat is not good. I helped him to move on from that situation. This
is a poem I wrote just after that incident.

America The brooding darkness of these woods Fed upon the native blood
In the twisted tangle of the fallen wood The spirit of the fallen Indian
stood O brothers your identity a mistake Those who oceans crossed did
make The greed for gold and land Laid waste the spirit of wisdom and
grace The children of those, who by murder did take Are taintless of
their forefathers' mistake But those who lived, fed upon the milk of
courage and pride Stand as spirits of defeat and shame O the murdered
and the murderous Embrace me, let me set your spirits to rest

Probably that moment---the encounter with this being---is the most
painful moment of my life. And it was then that I started noticing how
there is such a deep sense of pain in many parts of that region, which
will play out in human lives whether we are conscious of it or not. If a
rock can suffer, a human being for sure will not be spared. Untold
suffering will simply happen without any reason. When there are puddles
of pain like this imprinted in the Earth on which you live upon, you
will never know what true well-being is in your life. You may build a
big house, you may carry a shotgun and shoot whatever you like, 5 but
you will not know a moment of rest in your life. When the Earth that you
walk upon is in such a state, if you don't know how to take care of the
material

which makes you, you will never know even one moment of well-being in
your life. There was another situation that lingered for a long time.
During the Dhyanalinga consecration, there was a disembodied woman who
used to frequent the roof of my house. Before the consecration, we have
done many things with such beings and dissolved them, but this
particular one hung around for more than a year and a half, maybe two.
After the consecration, my body was in a certain state of instability
and I did not want to deal with her. Such beings have no sense of
judgement. They just have a longing. It is like someone who is in a deep
state of desire has no judgement about life. Someone wants to drink,
someone wants to rape, that is all. It is not because they are good or
bad that they do it. They have no judgement about life, they only have
longings. According to their karma, they have certain vasana s, or
tendencies, and they simply go by that. There are other kinds of
creatures, which have gone totally out of shape. They have not been able
to retain their human form. They have become subtle. But this was a
woman who had retained a heightened sense of femininity in her form. No
woman in the world would be like that. She was extremely beautiful and
in a much larger proportion than normal. She also created an illusion of
wearing beautiful dresses and presenting herself well. Her vasana was
femininity, which was always in counter to masculinity. So if you tried
to meddle with her, naturally, she would come as a woman. She would not
know any other way to approach. This could have led to so many
unnecessary situations, but she would not do anything on her own. If I
had invited her into the shrine in the house to dissolve her, in a
moment, it would have been over. However, as I have mentioned earlier,
those days, my body was in a state of fragility and instability after
the consecration, so I did not want to risk it with her. In the night,
she would be walking in the inner corridor of my house, her anklets
making the sound: jing, jing, jing, jing. It was not just me who heard
her. Whoever stayed in the house would hear her walking throughout the
night. If you opened the door and came into the corridor, she would be
sitting up on the roof with a forlorn look on her face. She sat up there
for almost two years. She would not enter

the shrine. She did not dare to, but she kept walking and waiting. I did
not do anything with her. I just left her there. There was a bit of
concern because my daughter was eight years old then and even she heard
the anklet sounds. These kinds of disembodied beings can harm female
children, so I had to take precautionary measures for the girl's room.
However, the woman never showed any signs of interest or violence at any
time---just forlornness. I did not try to ward her off because she was
so forlorn and longing, seeking something. Once my body became more
stable, I decided to dissolve her. Since her body had become so subtle,
it was much easier to pull her pins than that of embodied human beings.
I wanted her to leave in a very conducive atmosphere and did not want
her to get into a state of fear or disturbance. So I just brought her
inside and asked her to bow down to the shrine. When she did, I just
pulled the plug and dissolved her. It was finished. She is no more.
Dissolving people in their disembodied state is a much easier thing to
do, if the necessary conditions are in place. For example, if all the
women on the planet decided that for the next one year there shall be no
conception on the planet, then all those beings whose time has matured
and who need a womb would be floating around in a limbo. Their
unconscious desire would be to find a womb, but there would be none
available---this would be an ideal situation for me to crack them before
they find one more cycle. When they have just died and are floating
around, you cannot fix them because they are too unconscious. But when
their Prarabdha Karma is compelling them to find a womb, and none of the
women are cooperating, it is an ideal situation for dissolving them.
There are so many young women with us who have not gotten pregnant and
they will not get pregnant, because they have chosen to live a life of
intense involvement that their biological urges have become
insignificant. But if all the women on the planet decide not to get
pregnant for the next one year, that would mean there would be at least
130 million beings waiting for a womb. It is easy to do this with those
who have bodies also, but until the final moment comes, people will not
give up their personality. It once happened: Matilda and Agatha were
sisters. For thirty-seven years they

had not spoken with each other because of a feud. Then one day Matilda
became seriously ill. So she wrote a note to her sister. It started,
Agatha , --- not Dear Agatha , because she was still angry---Now that I
am dying, I forgive you for all the nasty things you have done to me.
Matilda. Then she thought for some time and added: PS: In case I
recover, everything stands the way it is right now. When death knocks on
your door, your life will be focused and naturally, you turn inward,
because the outward is of no use any more. When people are approaching
death, their personality drops and the pretensions that they carry on
with the external will become unimportant.

Nirmanakaya In spiritual circles there have always been talks about
yogis who lived on the planet long ago but now make rare appearances by
materializing and dematerializing their bodies at will. These days there
is a lot of interest in people being able to materialize and
dematerialize at will because there is too much talk about Babaji 6
everywhere. The popular stories doing the rounds about him in India is
that there is one man who lives forever and appears at will, again and
again. It is not so. It has become fanciful for people to talk about
such things because people like legends. They don't like the living
because with legends you have the freedom to twist and turn them or blow
them out of proportion or whatever. If you exaggerate something about
me, for example, I will knock you on your head and tell you that it
isn't so. Some confusion regarding this is because there are yogis who
are nirmanakaya s. Nirman means 'to create', kaya means 'a body'. It is
very rare that this would happen, but there have been some beings who
have done that. These yogis are of the highest calibre and are able to
materialize their body at will. Essentially, they build a conscious
energy body, which is all made by them but is not for serving the
physiological purposes of the physical body. You know, at least 20 per
cent of your energy body is serving physiological functions. So these
yogis create a large energy body which has no physiological association
but is just stationed in the physiology. So he has two energy
bodies---one that he

was born with and another to transmit what he wants to transmit, which
is of another dimension. He cannot transmit without the second one. Both
are the same as far as other people's perception is concerned. Without
this kind of an arrangement, with just regular physiology, it is
impossible to run a programme like Samyama, for example. It cannot
withstand the sheer intensity and complexity of what is being done
there. It will die right there. Now, even after the physical body is
dead, the subtle body is preserved and he makes it visible now and then.
It need not necessarily be full flesh and bone, it just becomes visible.
That is all. Usually, these are yogis who have taken on this role where
they will reappear once in so many years. That does not mean they are
living somewhere. They keep the subtler aspect of the body intact, but
the physical body is gone. They recreate it now and then. They are not
reborn, nor is this forever. When you are born through a womb, you too
are creating a body. Your own energy is doing it. You take nutrients
from your mother, but you create the body. It is not the mother who is
creating it. After you are born, you are still creating this body, isn't
it? You are creating it in the same way---taking nutrients through food,
through the air that you breathe, the water that you drink. Before you
are born, that mechanism is not established yet. So you use the mother's
mechanisms of eating, drinking and breathing to structure the body, but
it is your own energies which are doing it. Now, one can acquire the
capability to create a body without the help of a mother's womb. You can
create it by yourself. It need not be a small body. The small body is
created because only that can fit in a mother's womb. But when you sit
and create it, you can create an average-sized body or one that is 20
feet tall. Generally, people choose to create their youthful form. So,
these nirmanakayas are in subtle states and use elaborate processes.
They have chosen to be in that state. They live in a very minimal way.
They choose to be in that state, either out of their compassion, or they
have been ordained by their Masters, who told them, 'Don't worry about
your mukti, just do this.' Once in a while, they may create a gross body
to come back and do certain things. They can only do a minimal amount of
work, because each time they create their bodies,

they have a certain span and a limitation on activity. Most of the time,
it is just an appearance that they can manage. The period of time in
which they do this may be very long in normal human terms. It could be a
couple of thousand years to even 10,000 years, but even that has a
certain span to it. Eventually, they will dissolve completely. Most of
the time, they do this because they want to protect their lineage. They
want to appear, so that minute corrections can be made in their lineage.
They cannot do much with the general population. Now, for example, Isha
is a certain type of Yoga, it is a lineage. Because people can go off
track over time, some distortions will creep in. Now, I will not do such
things, so you don't have to fear that I may come back again. I will
not. But let us say, we want to make sure that every 100 years
corrections happen. So every 100 years, I could reappear and make some
corrections and go back. There is a very short period for which you can
appear and do such things. You must know, not everyone who creates a
nirmanakaya uses it the same way with the world. Not everyone uses it to
make it appear and disappear in the world. It is like you have a great
car, but how you use it is up to you. You may want to go to the office
in it or race it or just drive it for fun---it is left to you. It is
your vehicle. Even if you did not want to do anything with it, you could
still own one. Maybe there are collectors who just keep the car parked
in their garage! It is similar for nirmanakayas. It is very rare that
these things happen, but there have been some beings who have done
things like that. Without them, I would not be so knowledgeable. But the
phenomenon has been too exaggerated and presented in many distorted
ways.

Downloading Beings About 35,000 years ago, there was a yogi called
Sunira. This yogi floated a certain being. The idea was to create an
ideal being who can transform the whole world in one shot. This being
has been around for quite some time. Many other yogis have put their
inputs into this being. Even Gautama the Buddha talks about this, and he
also has put his inputs into this. Krishna himself did something about
this being. Gautama predicted that somewhere around 2500 to 3000 years
from his time, this

being will mature and find a body in the world and he will be the
ultimate teacher in the Creation. We were not going for anything like
that. It is just that there are so many exalted beings who are
constantly after us to do something for them. For a time, we even
accommodated a few of them in our own body. At one point, when we were
in certain types of sadhana and certain states, without our permission,
some of these beings got into us and stayed with us for a period of
time. We carried them for quite some time, and physically it was not
easy, because they were so desperate to find expression in some way. At
that time, there were times when it was absolutely confusing for people
who lived around us. There were many times when this would just drive
Vijji to insanity because we would be just sitting in a chair and when
she looked elsewhere and turned back, we would have become totally
someone else. She would be terrified--- terrified and petrified! We
allowed those things for a certain time because we were working on the
consecration of the Dhyanalinga. So for some time we thought about
downloading a few of these beings. These are beings who are highly
evolved and are reluctant to take on a new body. They have that much
choice---they cannot be compulsively drawn into a womb. They have become
aware enough where it is a question of choice, so they are looking for a
suitable vehicle through which they can fulfil the final phase of their
lives. So if you make your body available---that is only if you have
done sufficient work and preparation and are absolutely willing---they
can be downloaded into your body. It will need lots of preparation and
sadhana to make people receptive enough for something like that. They
must be strong enough but not too strong. They must be vulnerable enough
but not too vulnerable. It is a different level of sadhana altogether.
If one has to put that being in the same body as another being, that
person also must be of the same quality. Otherwise, they will be bad
company for them! They are choosy---so choosy that they find no
worthwhile womb in the world to get into. When they are that choosy, you
are going to have a hard time with them, isn't it? Living with such a
person is difficult. So what happens to you, where do you go? You don't
go anywhere. You cease to exist. Would you call this a takeover? No,
this

is obliteration. I could use a more positive word---mukti. This is
called Moksha. Call it Nirvana, if you want to use negative terminology.

If such things are done, the existing being has to work to a certain
point of willingness, where the life process could be untied completely
and one can be unplugged so that this being is over for good. Now, if
the physical body is still intact, if it is kept in a certain space and
if the other being has been wooed close enough, they could be put into
it. It is a complex process and one will not be successful every time
with something like that. It is much more complex than people coming out
of spaceships and doing some fix job and going back inside. I would say
this is much more complex because keeping the body in a live condition
but evacuating a person can be very difficult. Just getting people out
of a rented home---getting a tenant out of the house is so difficult. So
getting a person out of their body when the body is still fit and well
is not that simple at all. It takes a lot of wooing. You can woo a man
out of many

things, but trying to woo him out of his body is the most difficult
thing to do. But with the necessary preparation, it can be done. We are
talking about getting a life to evacuate its physical structure without
damaging it, so that it is still in good form to stage life. I think we
live in a society which is too logical and too immature for other
aspects of life. So we are trying to do what makes the most sense to
them---planting trees, running hospitals, schools. People are even
beginning to call me a 'tree planter'! This downloading is not just for
entertainment. It will be a phenomenal boon to society. But after having
been here for this long, if we could not produce sufficient beings here
of such a level of evolution, then we have to import them from
somewhere. I hope such a need will not come to us, we are doing good
work. The work here is very intense and there are lots of dynamic and
static volcano-like people with us. When all this is there, I am hoping
we should not have any need for importing beings. So let us work with
the people who have already slipped out of the womb. All of you are
here! It does not matter how you came, let us see what we can do with
you.

C H A P T E R 11

The Riddle of Reincarnation

Right now, most people are not even able to handle what is happening in
this life, so why do they want to dig into their previous lives? They
don't know how to handle the thoughts, emotions and relationships of
this life. How will they handle the thoughts, emotions and relationships
of many lives?

Taking on a New Body Immediately after conception, the physical body
slowly starts developing within a woman's womb. But it is only like a
nest. In Nature, there are some birds who build the nests but some other
birds come and lay their eggs in them and make a life there. This is
like that. Two people came together and started creating a body. Someone
else who is ripe for that and is looking for a body comes and occupies
it. Before that, the foetus was not a being, not because of the
smallness of the body but because it was not occupied. It was just a
bundle of cells. After this, the other life occupies the womb and this
bundle of cells becomes a being. Maybe not yet a full person, but in
many ways a person. Generally, the physical body in the womb is ready to
be occupied after forty days. Most of the time, I would say 99.9 per
cent of the time, life enters the womb and takes on a physical body
between forty to fortyeight days after conception. Sometimes, in rare
cases, it may take a little longer. Certain beings who have become
conscious beyond a certain point wait for the body to grow a little more
in the womb. But they will not let any other life enter that womb
either. When such things happen, it is very easy to know. I will not go
into the details, because then people will start looking at every
pregnant woman and check to see if she has an aware child or an unaware
child! During pregnancy, there are many signs which clearly indicate
whether life has entered the womb or not. A mother can easily feel this
if

we train her a little bit. If life has not entered the womb after
forty-eight days of conception, then something a little extraordinary is
going to happen with that child, for sure. There is no question about
it. You must have heard that someone saw Gautama's mother and said, 'You
are going to deliver a phenomenal being.' Such things can be foretold
simply because someone may notice that life has not entered the womb
after forty-eight days of conception but a little later than that. That
is the sign of a phenomenal being arriving. It is because of certain
qualities that it guards the womb but does not enter it. It will wait
for the body to develop a little more and only then enter. This sort of
situation can leave a mother in a certain state of distress or a
fundamental level of discomfort. This is not a physical lack of comfort
but a sort of existential anxiety. Between forty-five to sixty-five days
into the pregnancy, if you notice tears welling up for no particular
reason beyond normal maternal emotions or see flashes of bright-blue
colour off and on or dreams of snakes in a very benign way, this means a
sage or a sorcerer or a great conqueror is on the way. When such signs
are noticed, various processes to transform the yet-to-be-born are done.
A sage or sorcerer or conqueror means a certain level of competence or
capability. The difference is only of intent. Towards what purpose one
will use their competence makes all the difference. This is why many
efforts are made to establish an all-inclusive intent the moment
pregnancy has occurred, as it is definitely our responsibility as to
what sort of life we bring into the world and what level of
consciousness we release when that life departs this world. Only after
this, somewhere between eighty-four to ninety days, the engagement with
the body for this life truly begins. Till then the life is just
foraging, it checks if this womb is the right place for it. This is not
a conscious choice. It is an unconscious choice. Tendency-wise, it is
checking out the womb to see if it matches it. Traditionally, we call
these tendencies vasanas. Depending upon your vasana, you look for an
appropriate body. During this time, depending on how conscious the being
is, there is a little bit of choice as to what kind of body he or she
chooses.

When I say choice, it is not like you go into a shop and buy this shirt
or that. There is a karmic choice. There is a natural tendency for the
person to go in a certain direction, towards a certain womb, towards a
certain body. Even when you are within the physical body, you have a
natural tendency to seek out certain people, because that is how your
karmas are. Similarly, when you don't have a physical body, you do the
same. It is much more unconscious, but still the karmic substance that
you carry with you seeks out a certain type of body. It is just like
this: if we let in a whole group of people into a hall for the first
time, everyone settles down in their own place. The choice is not
entirely random. It is based on your karma to a large extent. You may
have the karma of back pain, then you will settle down near the wall.
You may have the karma of always hiding and looking. You want to be
there in the situation, but you don't want to be visible. So you will
find a big person and sit behind him. Your karma may be that you always
want to be in the front row, so you just come and sit there. It may be
unconscious, but that is how you do it. It is your karma that makes you
settle down in a place. Similarly, there are millions of wombs and
millions of beings looking for a body. They will settle down according
to their attributes and tendencies. Once it has found that body, it is
the vibrancy of the prana of that being which enhances the quality of
the physical body. From this point onwards, it is not just the mother
who is making the baby. This is why, there are millions of instances
where probably the mother is weak, undernourished, on the street and yet
she delivers a very healthy baby. But there may be someone else who is
in a family where everything is taken care of and everyone is very
well-fed, but the mother may give birth to a very fragile child. This is
the pranic substance, the pranic vibrancy of the being acting upon that
particular body. Accordingly, the new life takes a new physical body.
The chakras also start developing gradually in the womb. Somewhere
around the twelfth week, only one chakra is formed, which is the
Muladhara Chakra . Within the first twenty-eight to thirty weeks,
depending upon the developmental quality of the foetus, the first five
chakras up to Vishuddhi Chakra are fully established. The other two---

Agna Chakra and Sahasrara Chakra---do not establish to the same extent
in every human being. I would say, in nearly 30--35 per cent of newborn
infants, the Agna Chakra may not be developed. If you observe the way
their eyeballs move, you will know whether an infant's Agna Chakra is
established or not. This is why the moment a child is born, the first
thing they do in this culture after washing the baby is to put a little
bit of vibhuti between the eyebrows. In Tamil Nadu, they make a large
coinsized spot by applying the resin of a particular tree in between the
eyebrows. As it dries, this resin draws the skin around it and creates a
strong sensation towards the spot in the middle of the eyebrows. This is
just in case the Agna Chakra is not yet developed, we want the child to
start focusing in that direction. Traditionally, by just looking at the
eyeball movement, people could say if the infant would become a sage. A
sage need not necessarily mean someone who will go and sit in the jungle
or a cave. A sage or a seer is someone who sees things that others do
not see. It could also be a visionary business person or a visionary
leader---someone who sees things more clearly than others. This does not
mean that those whose Agna Chakra is not developed at birth cannot
develop it in their lifetime ---they can if they work on it. But they
will need to do a little more work than others. The Sahasrara Chakra
generally is not developed for most at the time of birth. That slowly
evolves thereafter. As mentioned before, on the top of the head, there
is a spot known as brahmarandhra. Randhra is a Sanskrit word; it means a
passage, like a small hole or a tunnel. This is the space in the body
through which life descends into the foetus. When a child is born, there
is a tender spot where the bone does not form until the child grows to a
certain age. This is because the life process has the awareness to keep
its options open about whether this body is capable of sustaining it or
not. So it keeps that trapdoor open for a certain period, so that just
in case it finds the body unsuitable for its existence, it can leave. It
does not want to leave from any other passage in the body; it wants to
leave the way it came, just as a good guest always arrives through the
front door and goes out of the front door. Even when you leave one day,
if you leave consciously through whichever part of the body, it is fine.

But if you can leave through the brahmarandhra, it is the best way to
leave.

The Arithmetic of Reincarnation One of the first questions people have
about reincarnation is that if the world population is increasing, are
more animals becoming human? Is this the reason that animal populations
in the world have come down in the recent past? Is the population of the
world---animal and human put together---a fixed number? These questions
come from the ignorance of believing and thinking of Existence
numerically. When you talk about life energy, it is not in terms of
numbers. You cannot think in terms of, 'Okay, only one person died, but
how are ten people born today?' It is not in terms of numbers like that.
Numbers are only for bodies. Life does not happen in numbers. When you
talk about the unbounded, there is no such arithmetic. When you are
talking of life, you are probably thinking there is a being. But what if
there is no being? That is why Gautama went on saying you are anatma .
This was total sacrilege for the Hindus. He said this because if it is
atma, there could be any number of them. But if it is anatma, how many
can there be? How many non-beings can you create? How many 'emptinesses'
can you create? The question now sounds absurd. You always think in
terms of numbers because it comes from the dimension of your experience,
which is very limited. In reality, if you go on producing bodies, they
will get occupied anyway. Life will happen. So where will the karma come
from for them? Where is the karmic substance for them? There is plenty
of this substance in the Existence. In reality, if you want, this person
who is sitting here right now as one person can take on a million bodies
with the same karmic content that he or she has now. It is possible.
There are many situations where yogis have taken up two bodies. With the
same karmic substance, they took on two bodies. So the question about
numbers is not a relevant question. It is a logical, mathematical,
arithmetic question. But life does not happen like that. Life is just
one. Numbers are only in your mind. There is no such thing in Existence.
Let us say, there is a pond full of water and you dip

your bucket and take out water in it. Can you say that I have taken this
particular water? It is just some water. Once again if you dip the
bucket into the pond, you will get some more water. But there is no such
thing as this water or that water. It is similar, with life. The
fundamental life force is not in terms of numbers. Just one is enough.
One can populate the whole population. What we are referring to as the
being is beyond the physical. Once there is no physical, there is no
boundary. For that which has no boundary, there is no one or two or ten
or million. So that is not the way to think at all. Science has been
successful in cloning plant life for several decades now. It has, in
recent years, been able to clone animals like sheep and dogs. Of late,
multiple streams of research are afoot to clone the human being as well
and the widespread belief is that it is just a matter of time before
they succeed. How does cloning relate to the theory of karma? Where will
the software for the cloned life come from? You must understand that by
cloning, all that you are doing is just producing a human body. If it is
hospitable enough, if all the ingredients are there, life will occupy
it. It does not matter how you produced it. But when there are so many
women who are perfectly able to bear children, I don't see why billions
of dollars are being wasted to do it in a laboratory. When there is a
pleasurable way of creating children, you don't have to make it so
obscene and ugly with all those test tubes and other things from which
the baby comes out. Above all, a woman does not just give body to the
child; she moulds the child when it is in her womb. Depending on how she
is during the pregnancy, a whole lot of things develop for the child
when it is still in the womb. Elaborate care used to be taken in this
country about this, once a woman conceived. Every step of what she
should do, what she should not do, how she should do it, whose face she
should see, whose face she should not see---all this was regulated
because everything has an influence upon the unborn child. This is
because she is not only giving it a body but also moulding the
consciousness of the person who is to be born. You must understand that
you are manufacturing the next generation of people. How the world will
be tomorrow is determined right now in your body. It is a tremendous
responsibility. It needs to be handled that way.

Now, just because with technology we know how to do a few fanciful
things with the outside world, we don't have to do everything we can do.
This is very juvenile. This is the source of destruction on this planet.
As a race, we humans have not matured mentally. We must be able to take
a decision as to what to do and what not to do, based on what is needed,
not on what we can do. Now, is it possible that a woman can prepare
herself for the possibility of a being with a higher consciousness
coming to her as a child? Definitely. But if a woman has such
aspirations, it is best that she works upon herself well before the
pregnancy happens, because during the pregnancy, usually, their
situations becomes such that they are unable to attend to these
subtleties So, at that time, her being able to maintain a certain level
of consciousness could be rare, but not impossible. There are certain
other things that can be done, but she may not be able to do them by
herself. If she seeks assistance from the right kind of source, it could
be done for her. But in general, what she can do by herself is to become
generally meditative. If she brings that quality into her before such a
situation arises in her body, then the results will be good. To be
meditative, to be very loving, could ensure a pleasant being. This is
not necessarily so because there are various other aspects. But by and
large, this will ensure a pleasant being. Now, if you are thinking of
producing an ideal being, yes, there are ways to do this. You can do
things so that the best possible being will inhabit the small crucible
of life that has begun to happen in your womb. For this, you have to go
beyond the karmic substance or the karmic software that you carry within
you and attract something that is of a different nature from who you
are. This would take a completely different kind of work. Generally, the
mother will not be able to do it by herself and will need help from
someone else who can set up the situation for her. At one time, we
thought we would roll out a whole set of processes that such people
could undergo at the Dhyanalinga. Even otherwise, from the day of
conception, if she remains in that kind of atmosphere every day,
definitely she would attract a certain type of being. But that

would make the Dhyanalinga purpose-specific. Otherwise, being in a
consecrated atmosphere like that would attract a certain type of being.
If we do something more, we could also bring down those kinds of beings
who are unwilling to come down and be reborn but are not fit enough to
dissolve completely. These are beings who have transcended certain
limitations in the disembodied state, where they are aware enough not to
be driven by tendencies, yet are not free enough to burst the bubble and
go. They have not attained to their Ultimate Liberation but they have
reached a certain point of freedom. Such beings can be brought down.
There have also been situations where beings who don't belong to this
realm have been brought down into human wombs. There are many conditions
for this, if all those things are fulfilled, we can definitely ensure
that certain kinds of beings get attracted.

Past-life Recollection in Children There have been many recorded
instances of children having clearly recollected their past lives. The
descriptions and details provided by these children have even been
verified by researchers in the past few decades. But the phenomenon is
even more widespread than what these studies suggest. I would say at
least 70--80 per cent of the children below three to six months of age
remember their past life because the memory screens between lifetimes
are not set up yet. Life is yet to decide how much to take on; it is
still fluid. In that stage, it is the survival instinct which draws the
child towards the mother. Otherwise, the child does not care a hoot who
is who. If you observe them, you will see they will go with whoever is
nice to them. It looks like he or she loves the mother. No, they do not
care a hoot for anyone because their personality has not been
established yet. Only the survival instinct is keeping them oriented
towards the mother's breast. They know that they have to go there.
During this time, the memories of many lifetimes are playing within them
in so many ways. Slowly, it consolidates. Breastfeeding is an important
part of this. With breastfeeding, Nature is trying to establish the
child's memory cycle that this is where your life is. If a scientific
study is conducted, it is possible that they find a correlation between
breastfeeding and past-life recollections in these infants. The screens

may not be set up as rigidly for a child who is not breastfed, as it is
set up for a breastfed child. The screens may be a little more porous,
and that could translate into unexplained levels of confusion in all
matters of life. In this culture, among royalty, particularly, they
believed that when a child was born to a king, if he had to become a
good king, he must be breastfed by three women. When the queen got
pregnant, they would identify two other women who were in the same stage
of pregnancy as her. When the prince was born, they would also ask those
ladies to come and live in the palace. They would rotate the
breastfeeding of the prince between the three of them. One reason was to
ensure that he got the best nourishment, another was to confuse him of
his origins. A king should not have any attachment, even towards his
mother or father, because, otherwise, he will not make a good king. So
they always said a king's son must be breastfed by three women. People
often ask me if a person will be born the same gender as in their
previous life. It is not necessary. I have a very immediate experience
of this in many different ways with quite a few people. There are people
around me who are of a different gender now than what they were in an
earlier life. What gender or form you take is determined by the type of
longing that you create. This is determined by your tendencies. If
someone's karmic tendency is extremely feminine, they will tend to
become masculine in the body. If someone's tendency is extremely
masculine, they will tend to become feminine in the body, because the
meeting of the dualities has to happen. If the karmic tendencies are
highly masculine, too masculine, and if it happens to find a masculine
body, this will be a skewed person.

Exploring Past Lives In the spiritual communities, these past-life
connections are a big-time hallucination. I am sure even at the Yoga
Center many people go about talking like this, 'I was with Sadhguru in
his past life and the life before that and before that,' and so on. I
keep saying that those who are here after their past life with me are
failed candidates so that they do not carry that as a badge. You were
there then and you missed the opportunity and

wasted my life and effort, now you are again here to trouble me! This is
not a good state to be in. So will this knowledge of past lives not help
me resolve the difficulties in my present relationships? Now, the only
way you relate to anything from the past is through thoughts, emotions,
experiences and relationships. Whether it is in another body or this
body, it does not matter---this is the way you remember. Let us say, you
and I are constantly bickering about something right now. We can look
back and see how in my past life you were bothering me, so now I am
trying to bother you. Let us say, we found this out. What will we do?
Probably, we will extend the bickering to another life! Really! Suppose
it sheds light on all the horrible things you did to me in my last life,
will I become free from it, or will I become more resolved about
bothering you in this life? People say life is also complicated. What is
it that is complicated? Life by itself is not complicated. Only if you
want to push the world in a certain direction, it could be a little
complicated. But if you are not trying to push the world in any way, if
you are just fine with whatever you are eating and drinking, where is it
complicated? It is only your memory which complicates everything. Just
see, there are people who are so stressed, distressed and freaked out
and everything. But let us say, they get Alzheimer's disease. Now, you
will see suddenly they become so simple and sweet. Life is just
happening by itself. Now, if three lifetimes or ten lifetimes of memory
descend upon you, most probably, the firmament of your mind will not be
able to hold, it will crack up and collapse. Even with me, the level of
memory that came to me almost threw me off completely. It is that hard
to handle. It is not within the capacity of the mind to absorb that kind
of experiential memory. If I did not have the necessary mental
fortitude, it would have broken me. So unless you have prepared for it
in a certain way, you handling it is out of the question. This why we
say sadhana, sadhana and sadhana. Sadhana is not to download memories
but to be able to hold the memory of this life at least in such a way
that you can pick what you want and the rest of the time it does not
touch you. Data is useful only when you are able to pick what you want.
If it is all the time blowing in your face, how is it useful?

Right now, most people are not even able to handle what is happening in
this life and the memories of this life, so why do they want to dig into
their previous lives? Let us say, you realized that your neighbour's dog
was your husband in your previous life, then I don't know whether you
will go and kiss him or throw stones at him! Both ways, it is dangerous
because he does not remember. Moreover, by throwing stones at him, you
will get into trouble with your neighbour. If you kiss him, you will get
into trouble with the dog. So, both ways, it is not safe for you. If the
past opens up, so many emotions of love, hate, resentment and affection
may happen. When you are in a condition where you suffer even what
happened ten years ago, if you remember everything that happened in the
past ten lifetimes, it will drive you nuts! Why only the past ten
lifetimes, if you remember everything just from this lifetime---your
thoughts, emotions, experiences, what someone said when you were ten,
what your friend did, what your teacher did---if all this plays in your
head right now, you cannot live a normal life. If all the love, hate,
resentment, affection from those lives pour into your present life, you
will go insane. Moreover, of these four things I just mentioned---love,
hate, resentment, affection---you are counting two things---love and
affection ---as positive. Actually, all of them are negative, because
all of them are happening compulsively. If I have a deep sense of
resentment towards you---'I hate you, I hate you, I hate you'---you
understand this is not good. But if I unnecessarily have affection
towards you---'I love you, I love you, I love you'---this also is not
good. Suppose we are just two people walking on the street. You don't
know me, I don't know you, but I have enormous affection for you, will
you like it? If I have a lot of resentment for you, you don't care.
'Okay, man, you burn with your resentment. What is my problem?' But if I
have too much affection for you, you will not like it. So it is not the
question of affection or resentment. This love or hate is compulsive and
that is the problem. This compulsive sense of love, affection,
resentment, hatred are all equally bothersome and equally entangling in
nature. You should learn to respond consciously, to bring yourself to a
level where your response is unbridled and seamless. You

should be such that in any direction you can respond. You have no such
thing as, 'to this I can respond, to that I cannot respond.' You can
respond to anything. Until it becomes like that, the past is a problem
and the future is a problem. Both should not open up. If they open up,
it will only become troublesome. What you find in the past may look like
some kind of explanation for what is happening right now. But it will
only entangle you deeper in terms of moving towards mukti or your
Liberation. Let us understand this. This mukti that we are talking of is
not an invention of the Hindus. Mukti is the aspiration of this
creature. This creature wants to become the Creation. This is mukti.
Instead of being a creature of the Creation, it wants to become Creation
itself. It wants to merge. This is not a Hindu idea or an Indian idea.
This is the way life is. We want life to progress with a very minimal
number of impediments; in that context, both compulsive love and
compulsive hate are problems. There is another way to look at it.
Instead of calling it past lives and present life, look at it as
different compartments of memory. That is all they are. Only because it
is in your memory, it is coming out. It is not hanging out there in the
sky. It is all there in the system. Suppose these compartments are
breached and suddenly your Evolutionary Memory opened up---it would
create havoc in your life. No need to go that far. Suppose you woke up
in the morning and, let us say, the memory of the last three lifetimes
opened up in you and it all become one. Right now, what happened ten
years ago is in one compartment, what happened yesterday is in another
compartment. So you have a short-term memory, long-term memory and all
this stuff. In normal life, what happened a lifetime ago is screened.
Suppose the screen broke, what happened a lifetime ago feels like it
happened yesterday. Now, let us say, in your last life you were
something else. Let us say, you were a woman then and now you are a man.
Then when you wake up in the morning, you go to the wrong bathroom, to
start with! Trouble, isn't it? Many things like this will open up and it
will lead to huge levels of confusion and struggle within the human
being because it is too much to handle. What is the purpose of all this
pursuit of past lives? The question is whether you want to find the
cause of it, or you want to find a solution.

All my lamentations are because you are looking for solutions in past
lives when we are teaching you a simple process called Inner
Engineering. The solution is in this. If you pay enough attention to it,
it handles all of it. Let this one thing sink into you---just seeing
that I am 100 per cent, absolutely, absolutely responsible---it will
handle your past, present and future. Once your ability to respond is
seamless, you will know how to respond to any situation, whatever may be
the cause. In fact, both the past and the future will open up in your
experience. Now, if you are in such a seamless state of response, even
if the past opens up, even if ten lifetimes open up, it is no problem.
Even if the future opens up, it is no problem. But if you are in a
selective state of response or a discriminatory state of response, then
if the past opens up, it will cause one kind of problem, and if the
future opens up, another kind of problem. I know a lot of absolutely
bizarre things are going on in the world about exploring one's past
lives. They are just ridiculous psychological exercises. If you really
want to see something of the past, you must be able to raise yourself
into very heightened levels of awareness where it will cut through the
memory lines. Whatever you call 'past life' is just unconscious layers
of the mind in terms of memory. If you bring yourself to heightened
levels of awareness, these unconscious layers of the mind, which are
ruling you from within, could be broken down, could be dissolved. We
were doing something like this in Samyama. Let us say, you are sitting
and meditating, after some time you are fully conscious but suddenly you
find your body is beginning to slither around like a snake. You know it
is happening, you want to stop it, but the body is just slithering like
a snake. When you come out of meditation, you are perfectly normal. You
sit for meditation, once again the body crawls. Then maybe it hops
around like a bird, maybe it goes around like a dog, or a tiger or
something---it may take many forms. These days we have put a nail on its
head largely; only once in a way someone breaks through and goes into
such firewall breach. These things happen because we open up the
Evolutionary Memory. It was all working out in the form of the body.
Some of the people became conscious of this memory and we had to do
things to take it off from them. Suppose someone became

conscious that they were a chimpanzee somewhere or a fox or a hyena; if
this memory comes unknowingly, you will wake up in the morning and start
making all kinds of noises! Can you deal with that? Why this is
happening is because, in the unconscious layers of the mind, there are
so many dimensions which you are unable to access, but which are
influencing everything that you do. So if you go through a process
where, with heightened levels of awareness, you bring unconscious layers
of the mind into conscious states---not in terms of memory but in terms
of energy and experience---you can work these things out and leave
yourself completely free in a big way within yourself. In that context,
it is relevant, but remembering something memory-wise is not of any
consequence. It will only complicate and mess up your life. You will
have the capability to handle it only if your ability to respond is
non-discriminatory and seamless. If your response is selective, then you
will only multiply the karma. Suppose you realize that ten lifetimes ago
I was very dear to you, then you will respond to me in one way. Suppose
you realize that lifetimes ago I was your enemy, you will start
responding differently to me. You cannot just take it away, because your
ability to respond is limited. Once your ability to respond is limited,
your memory is a bother and the more you open up, the more troublesome
it gets. Now, if you have no such things and you will respond as is
necessary right now, then even if you remember that ten lifetimes ago
you knew me, it will not matter, because you will be the same way
anyway. Otherwise, you will only multiply your karma if the past opens
up for you.

Baby Hitler Sometimes people also ask me, 'Hitler was such a horrible
man, he was responsible for the horrors of World War II and the death of
millions of people, what would he be reborn as? Would he be reborn as an
animal? What would Gandhi be reborn as? Would he be someone rich, famous
and popular?' They want to use this reference to know how reincarnation
works.

First of all, whoever said everyone has to reincarnate? Moreover, you
may think you know a lot about their lives, but how the world knows them
is not necessarily how they were within themselves. How they were within
themselves existentially is what counts. Life does not care whether you
were adored as a saint or despised as a tyrant. So what happens after is
also not dependent on that. In your society, a tyrant may be evil and a
saint may be great, but existentially it could be the reverse. I am not
saying it is so, but it is possible. It could be the reverse because we
don't know how tortured they were within themselves. It is very much
possible that a man who tortured everyone else lived well within
himself, and a man who tried to do good to everyone tortured himself.
But it shows how different life could be existentially from what you or
the society perceives. Reincarnation does not depend upon that. Now, is
it possible that someone who is a human could be reborn as an animal?
People have certain urges and desires. It is desire that becomes the
karma. It is the volition, attitude towards life. Fundamentally, you can
say it is desire. Right now, let us say, you have certain desires which
are not fulfilled. Let us say, your desire was to collect a billion
dollars. But you neither have the brains to earn it nor the courage or
capability to rob a bank to get it. You are not made like that. So if
you get ten dollars, you will save five. You will starve yourself, you
will go through all kinds of difficulties to save, save and save. With
this process of collecting, let us say, by the time you die, you have
saved only a few million. Now, there is a big urge within you to collect
more, but you die before that with the same lust of wanting to collect.
Your karma does not know what you want to collect, whether it is money
or stones. What rubbish it wants to collect, it does not matter. It only
knows it has to collect. It does not have the discriminatory power. It
is almost like your genes. It is a subtler gene, not a physical gene. It
only knows that you like to collect. So the next time, this gene may
decide, 'Oh! All my Master wants is to collect. Which will be the right
form for me to collect? Maybe I will become an ant or maybe I will
become a bee.' You may become that, we don't know. You collect the
honey, someone else eats it.

If a particular quality is very dominant in you, your karma will seek
whatever kind of body and physical situation is best for you to fulfil
that quality. Suppose your whole thing is to eat---you want to eat, eat
and eat. Suppose you die without eating, unfulfilled, thinking of food
even on your deathbed. The next time, you may come back as someone's pet
pig and be really well-fed. People think it is a punishment to come back
as a pig. This is not a punishment for you. Nature is not thinking in
terms of punishment or reward. Depending on your tendencies, whatever is
unfulfilled within you, you get the kind of body that is best suited to
fulfil those tendencies. It need not necessarily be an animal form; it
may choose that kind of human form in that kind of situation and in that
kind of surroundings where it can be fulfilled. But it could be any
which way. This is like a game of snakes and ladders. You go step by
step, sometimes jumping, sometimes leaping, sometimes falling back. You
climb one ladder, but as long as the snakes are there, it can swallow
you and bring you back to square one. You climb up for a few days and
again go back down. It just goes on. When you are on an active spiritual
path, we give you a device with which you can strip off all the snakes.
If you just take the responsibility, there will be no more snakes on
your board. Then you cannot build any more karma; it is over. The moment
you focus your whole attention on yourself, you will see you are the
source of everything that is happening here. The moment this awareness
comes into you, you cannot build any more karma; it is finished. Now,
you have to handle only what is stored up. It is very simple. Otherwise,
you will go on emptying from one side and filling from the other side.
There is no end to it. So to maintain focus on your goal and create that
longing which is beyond all these limitations is the best way to ensure
that Nature does not know what to do with you. When Nature does not know
what to do with you, it is good for you because you can work your things
out very effortlessly. When Nature knows what to do with you, you will
get put in this chamber or that chamber---the male chamber or the female
chamber or the pig chamber or the cockroach chamber or some other
chamber. A body is just a chamber. So if you maintain that longing which
is not for this or that, Nature will not know what to do with you. It
cannot push you this way or

that way. It cannot make a decision on you. It gives you an advantage.
That is the significance of equanimity.

Couples for Lifetimes A husband and wife spend most of their lives
together. They probably share more things between them than in any other
relationship. For most people, the relationship between the husband and
the wife is one of the deepest human relationships. So if anything lasts
beyond death and is carried over to the next phase of life, then people
expect this one relationship to be the best qualified to do so. This is
also, to some extent, the basis of the adage that marriages are made in
heaven. But in reality, is this true? Do husband and wife come together
in the next lifetime too? These days, in the West, people are constantly
on the lookout for who their soulmate is. They keep searching even after
getting married several times! But in India, people want to know if they
were married to their spouse in their previous life also. But what they
are really asking is, 'How did I ever marry you?!' If such a question
comes to you, then you must look at yourself as to what is happening
with you. After many years of marriage if you are still wondering, 'How
did I ever marry you?' you really need to look not at previous lives,
but the life that you are now living. I think this was promoted hugely
by the Indian cinema of the 1970s and 1980s with all those songs about
'janam janam ka sathi ' (companion of many lifetimes) and all that. This
is not so much a problem of today's generation. In today's movies, they
are all thinking of relationships, their expiry date, and all that. If
your pursuit for truth is guided by commercial cinema, then these things
happen to you. This belief or hope may have come about because
somewhere, someone said that husband and wife come together for seven
lifetimes. If I say this is true, probably most people will not want to
get married at all! But it is not right to deny this possibility
entirely. Couples coming together again is possible if they were married
in a certain way. If the person who was conducting the marriage married
them in such a powerful way that they tied those two lives together in a
union to lead to an ultimate union, then it is possible. But this is
extremely rare.

Today, people want to know this because they want some special reason to
hold on to. If the only way you can hold on to someone is by believing
that you have been stuck together for many lifetimes, it is a horrible
way to live. Don't create such horrors in your life. I am with you now
because I want to be with you---this is a beautiful way to be with
someone. Moreover, if you have been together for three lifetimes, maybe
it is time to part! People keep putting me through these works all the
time. They ask, 'Sadhguru, was I with you in the last lifetime?'
Whatever makes you think that if I had seen you in the last lifetime, I
would ever come in front of you once again? What happened yesterday is
of no consequence, but now you are trying to create a consequence for
what might have happened. This memory is crippling you. It is not
allowing you to use your mind as an instrument of penetration, as an
instrument to open up dimensions of life. If that is the only way you
can relate to your husband or wife, what a pathetic way to relate to
people! You should find value in the human being who is sitting in front
of you for what he or she is now, not for what they were somewhere. One
accomplishment of modern society is that we don't value you for who your
father was; we value you for who you are. What you have made out of
yourself now is important, not who your father was. This is the big
shift we have made from a feudalistic way of living to modernday
societies. If you came to India fifty to a hundred years ago, no one
would look at your face and ask who you were. They would only ask who
your father was. That has significantly changed. A little chaotic we
are, but it is still quite a significant step. Now, asking what were you
in your previous life is worse than asking who your father is. What you
are right now, what you have made out of your life right now is the most
significant thing. So don't waste your time and life digging into the
past. Unless needed for spiritual reasons or to perform a task that
would not be possible without the involvement of certain people with
past associations, this dimension should not be opened up at all. Most
people are unable to handle the memories, thoughts and emotions of one
lifetime. So opening many will not bring well-being.

The Only Enduring Relationship In spiritual lore, it is often said that
if you have a Guru in your life, then if you are born again, you will
become the disciple of the same Guru. So, in general, if other
relationships do not continue across lifetimes, how is this an exception
to the rule? First of all, you need to understand what a relationship is
and why there are human relationships. Now, you may have formed various
types of relationships in your life for different purposes. Some are for
your emotional needs, some for physical needs, some for financial needs,
some for social needs, some for psychological needs, some for comfort,
etc. In so many ways, you have formed relationships. Whatever kind of
relationship you form, whether it is emotional, psychological, social,
financial or physical, fundamentally, it is concerned with the body.
When the relationship is based in the body, when the body drops, the
relationship just evaporates. That is the end of it. Only if a
relationship transcends the physical limitations, then there is a
possibility of this relationship extending beyond the limitations of the
physical body. Such a relationship can extend beyond lifetimes or extend
across lifetimes. Only when you in some way transcend the physical
limitations, it can extend across lifetimes. When I say physical, I am
referring to the mental structure also as physical and the emotional
structure also as physical. There have been husbands, wives and lovers
who have come together again for lifetimes because their love was so
strong that it transcended the foundation of a need-based relationship.
There could be a few examples of other relationships going beyond the
physical limitations, but all these are very rare. Generally, it is only
the Master--disciple relationship which gets carried for lifetimes. All
the other relationships come together for the convenience of the
physical; once it is over, it just breaks apart. Even if the disciple
has no idea of the Master's being, the Master's business is only with
the disciple's being. This relationship is always energy-based. It is
not emotion-based, it is not mind-based, nor is it body-based. An
energy-based relationship does not even realize whether the bodies have
changed or not over lifetimes. It continues until the

energy reaches dissolution. For the energy, there is no rebirth. It is
only the body which is reborn. The energy just continues as one flow and
accordingly carries the relationship. There are many people here with us
at Isha who were connected with us in the past. But not all of them are
connected in the Master--disciple manner. Some are connected in some
karmic way from close to 400 years ago too. It is not only those who
supported us but even those who persecuted us, who tormented us, they
are also somehow mostly in Coimbatore today. All of them are not our
meditators, but they are with us. It is like that. That is the way life
functions. Now, why do all these people land up in one place? Do you
know why the breeze is blowing in a particular direction and not the
other way? The whole momentum of the wind in the world is just this: it
moves from high-pressure and high-density spots to low-pressure and
low-density spots. During the day, when the land gets heated up, the
density becomes low. Wherever the density is low, the wind rushes in
there. Then it cools or sometimes even rains and then that becomes
high-density and the wind moves backwards. In Nature, wherever there is
emptiness, everything rushes there. This is so with karma also. When
someone's karmic bag is empty, all those other bags of karma which have
been one way or the other connected to that for so many lifetimes tend
to move towards that direction, knowingly or unknowingly---mostly
unknowingly---because for all of them there is a possibility now. When
one bag empties, every bag that is connected has the opportunity to
become empty. But unless there is some spiritual significance to these
things, we do not pay attention to the past connections. Most of them
coming towards me is due to their past karma of another lifetime, not by
conscious choice. Many times, their present mindset and arrangements of
life that they have made are in confrontation with their helpless
longing to be here. Many, after they fulfil their karmic role, are
bewildered as to why they are here. Those who have earned something of
the beyond here in this life will continue, those who are here because
of their old stock of food may, unfortunately, have to go. My

commitment is only to fulfil the spiritual obligation but I cannot
always fulfil the emotional and social aspects of these enduring
relationships.

Life beyond a Thousand Moons People who die after the age of eighty-four
years or, in other words, those who have witnessed more than 1008 full
moons will die a death that is very different from other kinds of
deaths. Even if such a person has lived a stupid life, even if they
never looked up to the sky when they were alive, such a person will not
be reborn. Once we were visiting one of our neighbours in the United
States. We had gone unannounced, so when we entered the gate, the
neighbour came out with a shotgun to see who had come. He was a very
elderly man, and it was a little strange to see him come out with a
shotgun. So I asked him, 'Why do you bring a shotgun to check who has
come? Do you have a lot of enemies?' He just shrugged and said, 'No, all
the buggers are dead.' So if you just live long enough, you can even
score over your enemies! This is like that. When one crosses 1008 full
moons of time, which amounts to nearly eighty-two years of age,
something wonderful starts happening within a person. Somewhere between
eighty-two to eighty-six years of age, suddenly, a certain loosening
happens within people who live that long. You will notice that many of
them suddenly become very sweet. Their grumpiness is gone, they are not
complaining, they are quite fine because the karmic grip on their life
will loosen up. This process reaches a substantial level of maturity
when one crosses eighty-four years of age. Organically, eighty-four
years of age is related to the basic integrity of the elemental and
pranic organization of the physical structure. Crossing these
milestones, healthfully and consciously, always leads to an unusual
sense of wisdom and balance in an individual, which is essentially the
consequence of obliterating the illusion of life and death. The
physicality of our birth is a conspiracy hatched between the moon and
the Earth. Our very birth is rooted in the menstrual cycles of our
mother, and that cycle is linked to the lunar cycles. The sun then
provides the basic energy and ambient atmosphere that is needed to hatch
life. The cycles of the feminine and the cycles of the moon have come to
such a concurrence in the human system that we cannot aspire

for further physical evolution. So this has naturally resulted in
evolution in terms of consciousness or attempts to evolve in ways other
than physical. Of the many things that we do as life upon this planet,
there are three most vital aspects---one is that of self-transformation
that one transcends all identities, the second is to ensure the quality
of the yet-to-be-born and the third is to evolve or find an absolute
release for the life that has departed. In fulfilling all these three
most vital aspects, the cycles of the moon have a significant role. If
we utilize the full moon and new moon situations with some
understanding, we need not be swimming against the current. Even during
our life cycle, the moon's cycles play a significant role in many
aspects of our physical and psychological status, but the impact of the
moon cycles is really huge in conception. A couple who are conscious
will make efforts to conceive twelve to sixteen days ahead of the full
moon so that the being that enters the womb can do so on the next full
moon day. There are many more aspects to factor in. If one is willing to
approach facilitating the life process as a sacred duty, not just a
consequence of one's passions for each other and longing and the
fulfilment of pleasure, we can go into a lot more details about timing
and the nature of conception. It also has a similar impact on the
process of death. When the body has seen 1008 full moons, the energy
body comes to a certain level of instability. When I say instability, I
am talking in a positive way. It is not able to retain that structure
very clearly. The bubble's walls are thinning because it has gone
through its full cycle. So when the person dies, he or she cannot seek
another womb because they do not have the necessary karmic fire in them.
So they hang around. Now, it is very easy to liberate them. Even if it
takes a body, it will definitely be a much larger bubble than the way it
was. But it is possible it will just hang around for a while and burst.
This is true for a whole lot of them. But some may hang around and take
a body as a much bigger bubble, more significant life. If people hang on
till they are eighty-four years old, regardless of how they lived their
lives, it is possible---I am not saying it is guaranteed---it is

possible that they attain Mahasamadhi. The possibility is much higher
now, simply because the fools endured long enough! Many times, people
lose the natural advantage of crossing 1008 full moons because, by then,
they become completely unconscious in terms of memory or access to the
Karmic Memory bank. If you are beyond eighty-four, but you have lost
connection with the substance that makes you, you will become like a
ghost or the living dead, because it is the karmic mass that is making
you this kind of a person. The Prarabdha Karma, 1 or the one bowl of
memory that was taken out for this life, is over, but you don't know how
to dip into the bucket, or the Sanchita Karma, and take another bowl for
you to keep going. If you knew how to take another bowl and another bowl
of karma or if you could open up the entire bucket and use it, then you
can live for 200 years, there is no problem. Now, when you have
exhausted everything, you will attain to mukti, and you will go. But if
you are unable to take out the next bowl and you still keep the body
going, then you will become ghostlike. This is why the pursuit of
immortality and longevity through unnatural means is fraught with too
many dangers.

Birth: Always a Beginning If Enlightened people are reborn, are they
born Enlightened? Does Enlightenment also get carried on to the next
birth? And specifically, in my case, people ask if I had two Enlightened
lives behind me, why did the experience on Chamundi Hills have to wait
until I was twenty-five years of age? We already saw that for most
people, their moment of Enlightenment and their moment of leaving the
body is the same. When their energies reach a certain pitch, they leave
the body. That moment of leaving the body is also Enlightenment for
them. So unless they have a certain mastery over the mechanics of the
body, and they manage to retain their body because they have some
specific work to do, the question of coming back does not arise. If your
objective is just Liberation, then Enlightenment and leaving the body
will always be together. If you have

other objectives of wanting to do something else with what freedom you
have found within yourself, then there is something more to be done. It
is just like this: let us say, you release a prisoner from the prison;
he is liberated. He goes away. He never again wants to get back to the
prison. But there are some who are ambitious enough or stupid enough to
want to not only become free from the prison but also run the prison. He
is a prisoner, but now he wants to become a prison officer. Only when
you have this kind of a problem, you retain your body. Otherwise, the
normal prisoner's aspiration is to somehow get out. He will not seek
employment in the prison. It takes an idiot like me to do that! So will
a person who is Enlightened be born Enlightened? If you take a mango
sapling, it has all the qualities of a mango tree---it is capable of
producing mangoes. But it does not spring out mangoes the moment it
sprouts out of the ground. It takes its time. Nature allows this time
for the mango sapling to grow to a certain sturdiness, strength,
maturity, balance and capability to hold its ground. Only then it
flowers and fruits. The moment two leaves sprout, if the mangoes appear,
the tree could die. So it will wait for it to come up to a certain
height and sturdiness, only then the mangoes will come out. Similarly,
an Enlightened being has certain qualities which are enshrined in him or
her, which cannot be taken away. But when he is born, he is born like
anyone. The qualities are still there, inherent in him. It will wait for
a certain time and space where it can find expression. This is the
intelligence of Nature. It knows exactly when it should flower to find
maximum fruit. If it flowers too early, it will not find its full fruit.
So it will wait. Depending on what type of work he intends to take up,
accordingly, he will develop. We have seen this in India for a long
time: many bala yogis 2 become Enlightened by the age of six or seven.
Most of them never cross the age of twenty-five or thirty. Before that,
they will go because they cannot sustain the body at that intensity of
existence. So if Nature gives sufficient space that the mind, body and
emotions develop and mature in a certain way before the dimension
becomes alive in that person, they can hold it much better.

This is true of me also. Although there was an experience of living an
Enlightened life for two lifetimes, I still had to wait until the age of
twenty-five before the reminder hit me. This is because the very reason
why this body was taken this time was fundamentally for the consecration
of the Dhyanalinga. For this, it is not just Enlightenment--- you need a
perfect body in many ways. When I say perfect, I am not referring to
athletic perfection, but a perfect body in terms of management of your
energies and what you can do with it. This is not possible in a child.
When I look back at those twenty-five years, the way activity happened
in my life, the kind of activity that happened, it all occurred in
perfect progression for my purpose. Everything happened in such a way
that everything that was necessary for the development of this body and
this mind and stabilizing my emotions naturally happened as a process of
living. For example, at the age of twelve, though I was someone who was
wild, playing, climbing trees, trekking and doing things like this, the
best Yoga teacher that was available in southern India came to me and
somehow inspired me to learn Yogic practices. 3 And without a single
word or thought, I just took it on. Some twelve years later, big things
happened to me. So this process of when it should happen is Nature's
intelligence. You never question Nature's intelligence, because your
intelligence is too small to question the intelligence of Nature.
Whatever happens naturally is always right, there is no question about
it. It is just that your short-term goals and objectives may not be in
tune with what is happening, so you struggle with it. But in the real
sense, it cannot be wrong. It always moves in the right direction
because Nature does not decide things with thoughts and emotion. It just
decides things as per your tendencies. This is not a thought. With
thought, you can always make a mistake, but with tendencies, there can
be no mistake. See, today you may think something is the right thing to
do. But tomorrow if you just start thinking in the opposite direction,
at the end of that day, you can clearly come to a conclusion that this
is not the best thing to do. This is the nature of thought. With
thought, you can always make a mistake as it functions with very limited
data. And most of the thoughts are just a mistake. But Nature operates
out of tendencies. A

mango tree does not think how to produce a mango. Its tendency is like
that. It just moves in that direction and just does what it has to do
and everything happens at the right moment. In my youth, I was not a
person who was drawn towards spirituality. But at that time in my life,
simply, accidentally, here and there, I just began to meet people on the
spiritual path. At that time, just like that, things fell into place
because the tendencies were slowly coming to the surface and the
necessary support to manifest that also came. So for an Enlightened
being who is reborn, it depends on what type of work that person has as
an objective for his life. Accordingly, at the right time, things will
happen. Enlightenment is about going beyond individuality and becoming
available to Universality.

The Rebirth of Lamas One group of people who give a lot of importance to
the reincarnation of Masters is the Tibetans. You must understand that
Tibetan lamas are basically tantriks in the upper Himalayan regions who
converted to Buddhism. Theirs is a Tantric culture. Nepal is a country
full of Tantra. 4 It has five temples to do Tantric rituals and
processes. The Buddhist monks from India went out to Tibet like
aggressive missionaries at that time and converted large populations.
The underlying Tantric culture remained, but they became Buddhists. They
replaced their idols, but the basic Tantric culture remained. So Tibetan
culture became a mixture of Buddhism and the Tantric way of life.
Actually, the two are diametrically opposite. Tantra is full of rituals,
but Gautama and rituals just cannot go together. Gautama's main work was
to destroy all rituals and make life meditative. Today, Tibetan
Buddhists are ritualistic Buddhists. They practise rituals that are more
elaborate than Hindu rituals. Some people in that culture were
definitely capable of consciously determining their reincarnation and
such things, and some Masters chose to come back over and over again.
Apparently, in some cases, there are records where the same person came
back for up to thirty lifetimes. Generally, before such a person died,
he would say, 'In my next life, I will be born here with these signs.
You please come and recognize me.'

So they would go in search of him wherever in the world he may be and
get the child back into the monastery. But not all Masters do this. Many
of them simply dissolve and disappear. But over time, this prediction of
reincarnation and identifying the reincarnation all became a compulsive
culture. Let us say, it happened in a particular monastery that a Master
died, and on the eleventh day after his death, he happened to
communicate in some way about his reincarnation. Now, slowly, over time,
they made it a tradition that whenever a Master or a senior monk died,
he would also reincarnate in a particular way. If nothing like that
happened, you either had to admit that the Master was not an evolved
being or you just had to create a miracle and carry on the legend.
Usually, people chose to create a miracle because they could not let the
reputation of the monastery run into the ground. So it became a
tradition. It is unfortunate that the world is sold on these miracles.
The tragedy of a living spiritual process turning into a dead tradition
is not isolated to any one geography or group. This has been the
unfortunate reality in too many cultures. The effort to keep it as a
live process and not a lifeless tradition is the challenge that all
spiritual processes need to strive for. Tibetan Buddhism has produced
many wonderful Masters and the value of that is immense. Padmasambhava
who in many ways is the key to that tradition walked around with a
trident and two wives. People refer to him as Tibetan Shiva, definitely
not a Buddhist monk of a tradition.

My Past Lifetimes There are any number of my lifetimes which are there
in my memory but I don't pay attention to any of that. I have a piece of
life in Zambia, for example, but I pay attention only to that which has
been spiritually significant in some way. The rest of it is of no
consequence. There are many things around me today which are a legacy of
my past. But I have carried only those things which are of spiritual
significance. Who my mother was, who my father was, who my brothers
were, who my sisters were, who my children were in all those past lives,
I can pursue them very easily---but I will not. I have not even paid any
attention to them.

Only those who were with me in spirit---not in flesh or blood---I
nurture them. Those who were with me in flesh and blood, I leave them to
the Earth, because it is to the Earth that they belong. In that sense, I
consider only my last four lifetimes significant.

Bilva In the early 1600s, there lived a young man in a small village
(the present-day city of Raigarh) in the central Indian state of
Chhattisgarh. His name was Bilva. He was a tribesman who lived a wild
and intense life. There is a certain tradition in India where some
people called the budubuduku s just walk through the streets, usually
very early in the morning, when it is still dark. They wake you up with
their drumbeats. Intuitively, if they see something, they will tell you.
They may say, for example, that death will occur in such and such house
in two weeks' time, or someone will fall ill somewhere, and so on.
Generally, people paid attention to these spontaneous utterances because
they were known to come true. If nothing came to them that day, they
would simply sing songs in praise of Shiva. After this, they would go
and sit in a temple for some time, where people would go and make some
offerings to them. This was a tradition within the Shaiva culture, where
this particular tribe of people is also involved in snake charming.
Snakes and Shiva are deeply connected. Bilva belonged to a tribe like
that. Bilva was deeply in love with what he was doing. These were people
who lived totally, loving life for what it is. They were not the kind to
accumulate anything. They had no sense of money, property or
possessions. They simply lived and Shiva was the most important aspect
of their lives. Bilva loved snakes. Mind you, snakes are generally
poisonous creatures. If you are the kind who loves poisonous creatures,
you have to be a different kind of person. To kiss a snake, you must be
very courageous. He was a person for whom love meant everything; the
rest was secondary. Being alive itself was secondary. That is the kind
of person he was. He was someone who could not fit into the social
structure and was looked upon as a rebel. For one of the many rebellious
acts he did---not respecting the prevalent caste distinction---he was
put to death at a very young age by a cobra's bite, while he was tied to
a tree.

At that time, you could not really call him a spiritual person; he was a
devotee of Shiva. But during those last few moments of his life, he
watched his breath. There was nothing else he could do and breath
watching just happened. The cobra's venom entered his body and his
breathing became very laboured. Death was just a few minutes away.
During this time, he watched his breath. It was more of a consequence
than a conscious awareness. Bitten by a cobra and left to die, he was
lying face down, almost dead. Yet he managed to be aware of those last
few minutes of life. This was more out of Grace rather than any sadhana.
From those few minutes of breath watching, a new spiritual process began
which changed that person's future in so many ways.

Shivayogi In his next two lifetimes, he was a very intense seeker of the
Ultimate Nature. Shiva was his way. Both the times he was known as
Shivayogi. In the first life of sadhana, he died at the age of
thirty-seven. He had no disease, just hunger and the intensity of his
sadhana did him in. He did not die Enlightened, but he died in full
dignity. He died not screaming, yelling or crying, but just trying to do
sadhana, to be meditative and die. The second time over, he fared
better. He lived up to fifty-five years of age. He went through
heartbreaking sadhana, but still final Realization had not happened. At
this point, he was bestowed the Ultimate Grace. Usually, I don't talk
about my Guru. He was called Sri Palani Swami and was a being beyond
proportions. That was not his real name, but he was so called because he
had attained to a certain samadhi state near the town of Palani in Tamil
Nadu. He remained in this state for about twoand-a-half years. After
that, he wandered all over the country, enlightening many people. He
came to Shivayogi, in the second lifetime, and bestowed his Grace upon
him, a forlorn sadhaka. When this Shivayogi saw him, he recognized that
this was the Guru. Until then, he would not accept any human being as
his Guru. For him, Shiva was the only Guru. He wanted Shiva to come and
initiate him, but when he saw Sri Palani Swami, he recognized that this
being was at the very peak of consciousness and he offered himself. But
somewhere there was still a little resistance because he could not offer
himself to another

man. He would only offer himself totally to Shiva. So the Guru, out of
compassion, took the form of Shiva himself. Shivayogi surrendered. Sri
Palani Swami did not even touch him with his hand or foot; he just took
his staff and tapped on Shivayogi's Agna Chakra, or forehead. At that
moment, Shivayogi attained to his Ultimate Nature. This contact with the
Guru lasted only a few hours. After that, they never met again, but they
were constantly in touch. Sri Palani Swami attained Mahasamadhi in the
Velliangiri Mountains. Somehow, he identified Shivayogi as a person
suitable for establishing the Dhyanalinga and entrusted this work to
him. Not in speech, not in words, but wordlessly he communicated the
immense technology needed to consecrate the Dhyanalinga. So Shivayogi
began working towards establishing the Dhyanalinga. He was not able to
fulfil his Guru's vision in that lifetime because of limited resources
and lack of support. So the rest of his time in that lifetime he spent
mostly with his eyes closed.

Sadhguru Sri Brahma To continue the work of creating the Dhyanalinga,
Shivayogi came back as Sadhguru Sri Brahma. He started the work towards
this in Tamil Nadu. He travelled extensively in the state and
established several small institutions but his work on the Dhyanalinga
was centred around Coimbatore. Here he faced a lot of social resistance
from people. As the Dhyanalinga is the highest manifestation of the
Divine, it includes all aspects and manifestations of life. So
consecrating it involved men and women in very intense processes. If a
man and woman sit together, people can only think of one thing. So a lot
of resistance came up and he was literally hounded out of the place. He
became very angry that he could not fulfil his Guru's will and left
Coimbatore in great fury, as if on fire. Those were the worst times in
Sadhguru Sri Brahma's life. But in many ways, the best came out at that
time. After lifetimes of sadhana and then fired by a phenomenal Grace of
the Guru, he was quite sure that what he set out to do would happen. But
he burned with fury when it was robbed away from him by very ordinary
and mediocre people, whom he had underestimated. He realized

that the power of ignorance is never to be underestimated. It is very
powerful and the world is ruled by it most of the time. You think your
knowledge, your fire, your Enlightenment will do things, but the
Enlightened are always an individual, the ignorant are in masses. There
is a huge power to that. He did not do the cold calculations necessary
to work in the world, not because he was incapable of it. He did not do
it simply because he thought his fire and his knowing would carry. But
that is not how the world always works. The material aspect of the
world, the human beings of different kinds, need to be handled as it is
fit. Otherwise, it will not work. And this is a wonderful lesson for
everyone---a lesson I have not forgotten even for a moment in my
life---even if you carry the Divine Light within you, there will still
be darkness behind you. So unless you have created a lot of small lights
behind you, you need to constantly turn back and check what is
happening. Sadhguru Sri Brahma was alone. There were people here and
there that he had lit up, but he did not like anyone following him, so
he was alone. Because he was alone, behind him there was darkness, and
it followed him and did not allow him to fulfil the purpose of his life.
This is a good lesson for anyone: even such a magnificent human being as
Sadhguru Sri Brahma, who could do things which are not considered human
or humanly possible, could not fulfil what he came for. And it does not
matter how many things you do, if you cannot fulfil the purpose that you
have stood up for, that is considered failure. Sadhguru Sri Brahma
failed and he did not like it; he did not like it one bit. So knowing
the only emotion that he knew---he got angry. He was always angry---not
about anything or anyone, but anger was his vehicle for intense
existence. In that anger, he started to walk in no particular direction.
Seeing his fierceness, no one was able to go near him, except for one
disciple by the name of Vibhuti who followed him. Sadhguru Sri Brahma
walked without stopping to eat, sleep or even sit for three or four
days. During this time, the disciple would follow him, try to gauge in
which direction the Master was going, cook food and run to reach his
Master and place

the food in front of him, step aside and wait in the hope that he would
eat. Where would he walk? He eventually began walking in the direction
where the scent of Grace for him was. So he walked towards the town of
Kadapa, in the state of Andhra Pradesh. Initially, when he set out, he
did not even think where he was going. He was just walking blindly to
cool his head a bit. But invariably he went in that direction because
there is this temple in Kadapa 5 where Sri Palani Swami himself had
spent a lot of time. Probably, it was re-consecrated by him. So Sadhguru
Sri Brahma went in that direction. When he finally reached the temple in
Kadapa, his anger had still not subsided. Even after four or five
months, he was still angry. No one could go near Sadhguru Sri Brahma and
his disciple. It is not that they did anything or harmed anyone, but
they were so fierce---fiercer than wild animals---even if they were only
sitting, no one wanted to go near them. Within a few days, all the
priests in the temple left, as they could not stay there because of the
intensity of that being. Sadhguru Sri Brahma knew that he did not have
much time. He knew that because of certain karmic limitations, he would
have to leave his body within the next two years. When his head got a
little cooler and when he was able to put down the shame and resentment
of failure a little bit, he settled down to make some very cold
calculations. From being a fiery, exuberant, don't-care-adevil kind of
yogi, he came down to being a cold calculation, a highly pragmatic,
controlled fire. He sat with his disciple and plotted how to make the
Dhyanalinga happen in the next life. Many things were decided
there---who should be involved in the consecration process, where they
should be born, in which womb, how and at what time. He plotted every
aspect that would be needed and determined solutions for many issues
that could impede. Sadhguru Sri Brahma even decided what kind of a
person he should be born as, how his physical body and state of mind
should be. Everything was created right there. The fundamental blueprint
for the Dhyanalinga was made in that Kadapa temple. Sadhguru Sri Brahma
then came back to Coimbatore for the last time. He was heading up the
Velliangiri Mountains, which also contained his

Guru's samadhi. There were many people gathered at the foothills that
day. To them, he declared, 'This one will be back.' He ascended the
mountain for the last time. Now, Sadhguru Sri Brahma was supercharged
with failure and, having been unable to fulfil his Guru's will, he
executed an extremely rare feat---of exiting through the seven chakras
all at once. He was one of the very few Masters who had mastery over all
the seven chakras and was referred to as Chakreshwara. He was only
forty-two years old at the time. He did this phenomenally rare thing as
a preparation for the consecration of the Dhyanalinga. Though he knew
his failure was that of mismanagement of social situations, he was
ascertaining for himself that it was not a lapse of his own ability.
Exiting the body through all the seven chakras meant this person had
complete mastery over all the 114 chakras. It is because of that mastery
that now we can have people blowing up everywhere with intense
experiences like explosions. He chose the peaks of Velliangiri Mountains
for this incredible feat, as his Guru's samadhi was in these
mountains---it was the lap of his Master. Thus, he assured himself that
the next time around there would be no failure or mishit. Even today,
the place where he attained samadhi and shed his body exists. It is very
vibrant; it pulsates with energy. People who go there can feel it and
experience it. The quality of this place at the top of the Seventh
Hill---just at the edge of the mountain where chilly, wild winds blow
constantly---says everything about this man. That is where he felt most
comfortable. It is a very powerful spot. If you are a meditator, if you
are a little sensitive, when you go there, you will go crazy. It is like
that because he left with a certain purpose. He has a certain purpose to
fulfil, so he left in a particular way. It is not just about Liberation
and dissolution. He used his energies and even his death for the future
establishment or manifestation of how he wanted to be. Before Sadhguru
Sri Brahma shed the body, he made one more futile attempt to achieve the
work he had started. A certain yogi in central India had left his body
at the age of twenty-six. He was a bala yogi who had attained
Self-Realization at the age of eleven. This yogi spent about
three-and-a-half years in samadhi. When he came out, he was eager to
share his experience, but he only found five or six disciples to impart
it

to. Even they were not sincere enough. So he got angry and he left his
body. Sadhguru Sri Brahma immediately took hold of this bala yogi's body
and tried to fulfil his purpose through it. He did this because he had
no patience to be born again and go through the process of life all over
again. For a few months, Sadhguru Sri Brahma was in two different
physical bodies at the same time. In this attempt to create the
Dhyanalinga, he gathered a few disciples around him and tried working
with them with tremendous intensity, because the time span available was
very limited. When people did not meet his expectations, he chose to
shelve the effort and depart with a declaration, 'This one will be
back.'

Will I Come Back People ask me: 'Many spiritual Masters in the Buddhist
tradition have come back again and again for the sake of their
followers. You yourself took two more births after Enlightenment to
fulfil your Guru's dream. So will you be coming back again, just for one
last time, in case we do not make it this time?' Let me confirm this to
you once again: I am not coming back for sure, because my expiry date is
long over. Some people who are a little more perceptive clearly see that
I don't even exist. This actually happened: every year we take a large
group of Isha meditators to the Himalayas, and Tapovan is one of the
places they visit. That year, for some reason, I stayed back at Gomukh.
I did not accompany them to Tapovan. In Tapovan there is a lady called
Bengali Maa. She has been living there for many years. She asked our
meditators, 'Who are you people? Where are you coming from?' They said,
'We are Isha meditators and we have come with our Guru.' She said, 'Can
I see his picture?' So they pulled out a picture of mine and showed it
to her. She looked at it and said, 'Oh, he is wonderful but he is gone,
long time ago.' They said, 'No, no, he has come with us, he is walking
with us.' She said, 'No way! He is gone.' So these people came back to
Gomukh. They thought that during the time they went up, I was gone. They
were a little terrified when they saw me, and then they told me what
happened. I thought I had covered myself pretty well, but if she was
able to see it, obviously, it was not well

enough. I am real or I have made myself more real than most people are.
But from the account books of humanity, I am gone a long time ago. This
gives me much freedom, though. But stretching it one more time is not a
proper thing to do. Even this time it happened only because I got
tangled up with the project of the consecration of the Dhyanalinga.
Otherwise, this one would not be. As it is, all the basic infrastructure
that is needed for life to continue has been dismantled, but I am still
on. This is not good. Existentially, it is not considered good. Once the
basic infrastructure that is necessary to keep this life going is gone,
that person has no business here; they should be gone. In our longing
for Liberation, we dismantled all the infrastructure. Then, since we
landed up with an impossible project, we tried to continue on and on.
Now that is also done, and no one knows why the hell we are continuing
any more. Just to see some more full moons maybe! Not really, because I
remember too many of them and the damn moon is not changing. Once you
have deciphered the fundamentals of how it happens, tomorrow, even if a
totally new Creation happens, it would still not be interesting enough
to go there. It is like this: let us say, there is a super hotel which
has a million rooms. If you go there as a customer, they give you a key
card which opens only your room. You are just entering one room, so you
are very excited when you enter it. Now, if the hotel manager tells you
there is another room with a better view and asks if you would like to
take it, you say, 'Yes, yes. I am excited.' But there is a cleaning
person there---she has one simple key which opens every room. But she is
not excited about the new room with the view because she has seen plenty
of rooms. She has seen all the superficial small decor changes from room
to room and all that.

I am sure even she has not opened all the million rooms, but because she
has seen so many and she even cleans them every day, she is not excited
about entering one more new room. This is so with SelfRealization also.
Once you have this key, you can open any number of rooms. Have you
opened everything? No. If you have the time and the inclination, it is
possible to open every room, but one room is not so different from the
other. Similarly, if you enter a new Universe, everything may look
different but it is not so different. The fundamentals are all the same.
So when you have seen enough, you start dismantling the fundamental
infrastructure that is necessary to sustain life. There is a certain
span a life can run. Even now, without the support that I take from a
few people around me, I would not be able to keep my body intact. I am
doing fine, but without a little bit of support around me, it would not
be possible to maintain the integrity of my body at all, because it is
well past its expiry date. Besides, technology-wise, me

coming back is crude technology. We are establishing a slightly better
way of doing things. Moreover, it is very wrong to think that if this
person is not there, what will happen? This happened when Kamaraj 6 was
the chief minister of Tamil Nadu. You should know that most of the
infrastructure that you see in the state were all done during his time.
We are still enjoying what he did. Once Kamaraj was touring the state
when he was the chief minister. He was somewhere near Madurai. It was
some village and they had just transferred a police sub-inspector from
there. That officer had been there for a few years and he had bonded
well with the people and done many things for them. So he was a very
popular sub-inspector and the people were very agitated by his transfer.
In India, it is very rare that people love a policeman. But this
policeman had earned the people's love and they all protested. So when
the chief minister came visiting, they said, 'We don't want this
sub-inspector to be transferred.' Kamaraj replied, 'It is wonderful that
there is such a wonderful sub-inspector here. But I want you to know, we
are capable of producing many more wonderful subinspectors. You will see
the next one will be even better.' Even a political leader had such
wisdom. Fortunately, we had wonderful people in the country, but
unfortunately, they never had enough power in their hands to do
anything. So don't get into this mode, 'Please come back, Sadhguru! Come
back, Sadhguru!' No. It is not necessary. The next generation we produce
should be far better than us. Whenever I leave---whenever that is---for
eighty years after that, my presence will be stronger, much stronger
than the way it is right now. This is to ensure that all of you are dead
before I go! Yes. This is because once you start people on a certain
process, there is a certain responsibility that you finish it. So I want
to ensure that everyone who was in some way touched by me is cleaned up
from the planet before I leave completely. Since they taught you all
those tricks in Inner Engineering with which you may live 160 years, I
am keeping it for eighty years after the body is gone---just in case you
survive to become 160! That is why these eighty years. Eighty years is
almost like another lifetime, but there will be no physical presence.
For physical presence, we will establish enough systems but the presence
will be much, much

stronger than the way it is right now because the burden of carrying a
physical body will not be there. So am I going to be a disembodied
being? Obviously, if my body is buried or burned, I will be disembodied,
if you want to call it that. But the body is on many different layers.
What you pick up from the planet you have to put back. The rest of the
body---to put it in modern terminology---is more like a software. The
software still stays on a minimal platform. Right now, it is on a solid,
physical platform. If this platform goes away, it will stay in a very
minimal platform. It will not take another physical platform. This will
be far more efficient than being in a physical platform because of
various things. So why not stay forever? There is no such thing as
forever, long or short. If it is needed, one can hang on and do that
kind of thing. But it is not needed because we have set up a more
sophisticated arrangement for that purpose. We will come out with many
more spiritual processes which can be transmitted to the masses without
much preparation. It is still a pure method, not some fake stuff. Right
now, I thought it is not relevant to do that because I am still around;
I can do the mass processes more intricately. I adjust a very intricate
process to a particular mass that is there and make things happen. It is
still very much possible for us to do it that way, but mass processes
will slowly roll out of this after some time because that will be
long-term insurance. Above all, there is the Dhyanalinga. So there is
really no need to hang on forever. Why do you care? You will be dead and
gone, anyway.

C H A P T E R 12

Final Round

We can make this life the last one for you but we cannot make this the
most wonderful one. That only you have to do. For that, you must do
sadhana. You must promise me that.

One Drop Spirituality When I was twenty-five, suddenly, this big
spiritual experience burst upon me. 1 After that, I thought I would
teach the whole world how to live ecstatically---truly in ecstasy. I
thought this is it, what is the problem in teaching it? Everyone can get
it. But now as age is catching up and my hair is turning grey, I have
matured. Now, I am thinking if we are not able to teach them to live
well, at least let us see if we can teach them how to die well. I am
very concerned about this because I see most people on the planet die
badly. Those who learn how to live well, wonderful for them. But at
least if other people learn how to die well, it would be great. Teaching
people how to live well takes a little more work; we may not be able to
do it to everyone. But at least they must die well. This is important
because the period of life in a disembodied state is much, much bigger
than that in an embodied state. When a being is disembodied, whether
their experience of life becomes heavenly or hellish largely depends on
how they die. Not entirely, but largely. 2 So even if we cannot teach
the whole population a way where they can live beautifully every moment
of their life, if we can at least teach them to manage the last moment
of their life sensibly, then this will see them through disembodiment
very beautifully. People may believe they are living well, but they are
not. They live in good homes, drive good cars, wear good clothes, but
they think they are

living well because they look at other people who don't have the same
things and feel happy about it. This is not living well. This is a sick
life. They feel happy by comparing themselves with someone who is not
doing as well as them. This is all the joy most people have in their
life. So I don't call that as living well. For me, living well is if you
are able to sit here in such a way that nothing matters; whether you
have something or not, even whether there is food to eat or not, it does
not matter to you. You are just fine. It is not that you are incapable
of earning your food and other things, but that does not decide who you
are right now. What kind of garment you are wearing does not decide who
you are right now. What kind of house you are living in does not decide
who you are right now. How someone else treats you does not decide who
you are right now. What someone says to you does not decide who you are
right now. How you are looked up to or looked down upon does not decide
who are right now. If you are like this, you are living well for sure.
Wherever you sit, your experience of life will be beautiful. I have been
particularly concerned about this because in the recent past, I have
seen some people who were dear to me going in a very bad way. These were
not people who had failed, but people who believed that they had lived
very well. Everything that they wanted in life happened for them. They
got educated, got a job, got married, had children, their children grew
up, they got married and settled abroad and had grandchildren. For most
people, this is their dream life. Their lives worked out according to
their dreams, and when they came to the final phase of their life, the
last mile of their life, they were completely out of sorts. They were
completely broken people and died in a bad way. About 90 per cent of
even those who believe that they are successful and are living well also
die badly because modern societies are neither aware nor have they taken
care of this important aspect as to how to die well. So I felt we should
impart at least a simple spiritual process which can be imparted in a
few minutes so that people can handle at least one moment of their life
sensibly, wonderfully. My dream is still that people should live
blissfully---it is possible. But, you know, many of them have given up,
many of them are diehard miserable people. Do what you

want, they are determined; they want to invest in their miseries. So now
I am beginning to think, 'Okay, if we cannot teach everyone how to live
blissfully, at least they must be able to die well.' It is a horrible
compromise, but you know there are seven billion people. You can never
get seven billion people for seven days, three hours a day, to sit,
learn and do these practices in their life. It is not going to happen.
We still hope that people will go for it. But in case they are diehard
miserable people, at least let them have the dignity of dying well---not
dying confused, not dying bewildered, not dying miserably. At least this
must happen. I thought I would never do this in my life, but you know I
am getting practical. I am coming to terms with this reality because
between possibility and reality there is a distance that not everyone is
willing to walk. And unless someone is willing, there is no way you are
going to do this. You can coax them, you can cajole them, you can, you
know, push them around a bit; beyond that, you cannot do much. If you go
beyond that, they will leave. I have no illusions about that. Almost
anyone, if you push people beyond a certain point, they will all leave,
I know that. If we had them in an airtight can, then I would not give up
that possibility of making them live well, but we don't have the whole
world's population in a can. Even at the Isha Yoga Center, it is not so.
At the most, we can have a handful of people in the airtight can, whom
we can push all the way. But I am sure we can teach everyone how to die
well because it does not take so much time. It is simple, it is easy and
I am finding ways where, whether they are willing or not, we can teach
them. We can put something into them which will come into play when that
moment approaches. The spiritual process is about helping people to die
well, not only to help people to live well. Helping people to die well
does not mean assisting them to die as euthanasia supporters advocate.
Helping people to die means helping people to manage the moment of
passing from physicality to beyond, from being embodied to being
disembodied, in utmost awareness and grace. If one wants to exercise
this choice by oneself, a certain amount of preparation is needed. There
are many methods to cultivate this awareness in life so that when the
moment of

death comes, it will carry you through in grace. But otherwise we can
create that moment for every human being if that human being is willing
to cooperate and willing to pay some attention to themselves now. This
is how most of the initiations were done in the past. A yogi would sit
in one place and initiate people like this. What happened? Nothing.
Someone may argue, 'Nothing happened in my life.' It does not matter.
When that moment of passing approached, it would come into play. It is
not that we have also not done this. We have, but not actively so. Now
we want to do it actively on a massive scale so that there will be
something in everyone's life. If it does not play up right now, at least
when that moment approaches, it will play up, for sure. Many times,
people who are very old and ailing ask me to visit them. Or sometimes
there are people who find that their parents have reached a very ripe
age and are suffering, who send me a picture of them. If I see there is
enough maturity in them and they are asking me not to make them well but
to release them, or if their Prarabdha Karma is nearly finished, then,
if I visit that person, or if I look at the person's picture, within
seven to eight days they will be gone, as without software that life is
anyway on the very edge. However, it works both ways too because
sometimes it is good to stretch someone's life and sometimes it is good
to curtail their life. It is like this: let us say, you are travelling
in a boat. Once you reach the other bank, you must get off the boat. If
you still don't get off the boat for some reason, then drifting will
happen unnecessarily. So both may have to be done. Sometimes you stretch
their life because this person has not reached where they should reach
but has run out of steam, and sometimes they have reached but still have
steam, so you have to release it. Both are needed in life. Is it
possible that they will be liberated? Someone being liberated for good
is possible only when someone has run the full course of prarabdha. Now
when everything is over, they are in a certain space where there is a
karmic break. There are many people who die of old age; they may have
lived as utter fools, but in the final few days, suddenly, there is a
new sense of wisdom within them, a new sense of awareness about them
because their karma allotment has finished. 3 Just

the minor things are left and the next quota of karma has not come in
yet, so that is a blessed period. Even for a person who lived an
ignorant life, you will see that suddenly they know, 'In the next three
days I will die.' Such people can be dissolved very easily because they
have come to that blessed state where there is no karmic burden. There
is a stock somewhere else, but here there is a little space of no karma.
We can help them die consciously rather than in an unconscious state. If
there is a conducive atmosphere, dissolution is possible. They can be
liberated. But when they die of disease before the Prarabdha Karma is
complete, if one tries to dissolve them, it is not going to work. Nor
will I do such a thing. All we can do for them is help them to die with
awareness; then they will have a little enhanced life somewhere else. Is
it possible to do this even if this person does not know me? See, when I
am talking on this level, I am not talking about myself as a person, as
some bundle of habits and patterns and things. As a person, you may know
me or not, but at this level, there is no one who does not know me,
because here, that which I call 'myself' is you also. In that dimension,
there is no individual person. So it does not make any difference
whether as a person you know me or not. I have often said that I have
initiated more people that I have not met than those I have met. This is
also like that.

Once You Made a Mistake of . . . The moment of death is a tremendous
possibility for someone to intervene. I could help you die well, but I
could help you to live well too! It is better you live well, not just
aim towards dying well. If you are planning on coming back a hundred
times over, you can live a stupid life. But if you want this to be your
last life, especially then you should learn to live well. The last lap
must be the best lap, isn't it? When things have come to a head, when
the situation has matured to such an extent that it has become life and
death and nothing else matters, then it is just one moment's work for
me. But how long you are going to take to get there is up to you. You
could make it happen this evening, or you could wait for a few
lifetimes. Once you have come to me, I will not give you the option of a
few lifetimes. But you can wait until the end of

your life. If you keep postponing it till then, when death comes
knocking, you will be hopeless. When death comes knocking, all of a
sudden, you will find this body does not mean anything. All your
qualifications will not mean anything. Your husband, wife and children
will not mean anything. Your fancy clothes will not mean anything. You
will be hopeless. Like a vulture, I will wait for that moment, because,
then, you will become willing. But if you are intelligent, if you have
any sense in you, you will create that willingness right now. If you do
not create that willingness within you, you will resist what needs to
happen. When you have a discretionary mind, if you come here with walls
of resistance, we will try to wear it down. It may not be completely
gone, but we will wear it down. This is a long and tedious process. One
who is dead does not have a discretionary mind, so it is very easy to
influence him, compared to you. It is like this: you are a hardcore
ghost with a body. A ghost without a body is easy to handle in
comparison because he has no discretionary mind. He will receive
whatever you say. The only thing is that you cannot speak in English
with him because he will have lost his ears along with his body! So you
need to speak to him in a different language, but he is willing to
listen. He is absolutely willing because he has no discretionary mind.
He cannot set up a resistance. So we say something sweet to him and he
will become sweet immediately and we can do what needs to be done with
him. But if you are willing, you need not wait till then. Those who have
given themselves totally to me, even for a single moment, they do not
have to worry about their Liberation. Liberation is assured. To live
gracefully or not, that is not assured. That is something that you have
to earn, but Liberation is assured. So how does this work? One common
word which has always been prevalent in the spiritual arena of the East
is the word Maya. We don't use it, but it is a fantastic word. It says
exactly what we want to say, but it has been so horribly abused over
time that we generally refuse to use it. Maya means that the way you are
existing right now, your perception and understanding of life, is
illusory. The most essential part of this illusion is your idea of you
as a being or an individual. It is illusory. Now, if I asked you, 'Are
you connected to the Earth?' you say, 'Yes.' It is not true. It is true,
but not

true in your experience. It is true, not because you are plugged into
the Earth, but because you are a piece of the Earth. But because of your
inability to drop the illusory idea that you are only connected to the
Earth and not a piece of the Earth itself---you exist as an individual.
At the Isha Yoga Center, the reason why all the brahmacharis are with
heads shaved, all wearing the same clothes is because if they turn
around, they should not know whether this is them or that is them. But
even in the little things, like the way they apply the vibhuti on their
foreheads, they want to do it in their own style, even though everything
else is the same. In the process of living in the world, everyone is
constantly trying to strengthen their fences, strengthen their
boundaries. Brahmacharya means you are on the path of the Divine. What
is the way of the Divine? The way of the Divine is that there is no
individuality. It is a universal process. So if you sit here even for a
moment, without strengthening your boundaries, it would be fantastic.
You cannot do that with a tree. But you could easily do that with me,
for various reasons. Nothing is wrong with a tree, but because neither
the tree nor you are conscious, and two unconscious entities cannot come
together, they will always remain two separate bubbles of their own,
even though the atmospheric transfer between the two is happening. So
this illusion that you are a separate entity is a big problem. The idea
of sitting with a Guru is that you sit without boundaries. If you simply
sit, it will happen. So I said if you sit with me for even one moment,
if you can be with me totally, then it is done. It could have happened
in the form of an initiation or it could have just happened because of a
look. It can happen even when they have never ever seen me but they just
heard about me. There are many people like that. They have not even seen
me physically. By just seeing a picture, they opened up. Any number of
people have experienced this. The whole process of being with something
means just this, that you did not fix your boundaries for a moment. If
you can do it for a day--- that you did not fix any boundaries, you are
simply here---we will worship you because that which does not have
boundaries is Divine. So not a whole day, if you have experienced this
state without boundaries for even one moment, there will be no more
rebirth for you.

I avoid saying certain things because I am afraid that you may turn lazy
tomorrow morning. But if you have for one moment---not for hours and
days---just for one moment if you have really been with me, this is your
last life. But with this assurance, I don't want you to turn lazy. Your
last life should also be the most wonderful one. We can make this life
the last one for you, but we cannot make this the most wonderful one.
That only you have to do. For that, you must do sadhana. You must
promise me that. Once we were trekking to Mt Kailash. During the day we
were trekking and in the evenings there were satsangs. 4 This was a
small group of people, so the atmosphere was quite informal and we were
talking about many things---life, the afterlife, alien life, and all
that. So an American meditator asked, 'Sadhguru, it has been great for
us to be your disciples. How does it feel for you to be our Guru?' Only
an American can ask this! I said, 'See, it is fantastic to be a yogi, I
wouldn't be any other way. But being a Guru is frustrating because what
can be done in a moment, people make it a lifetime.' If you give
yourself to me for a moment, I can ensure that you are really dead. You
know if someone shoots you with a gun, you will pop up again somewhere.
But if you give me permission, I will shoot you in such a way that you
can never pop up in another womb again. Just one moment---not lifetimes!
Once you made the mistake of sitting with me, in some ways you are
already fixed, unless you really want to fall off and want to really go
against it within yourself. Otherwise, in many ways, you are sorted. I
don't want to interfere with your life. But your death, I usually hold
it in my hands . . .

1 Spiritual practices. 2 Some of the various programmes offered by
Sadhguru under the banner

Isha Yoga. 3 One of the spots on the banks of the river Ganga, known for
its round-

the-clock cremation of dead bodies. 4 The name Sadhguru was known by in
his childhood. 5 Referring to the spiritual programme taught by
Sadhguru.

1 Common southern Indian cry of distress. 2 The first yogi, one of the
many epithets of Shiva. 3 A fierce form of Shiva, where he has mastery
over time. 4 A powerful energy form consecrated by Sadhguru at the Isha
Yoga

Center in Coimbatore. 5 The word 'memory' in this discussion is used not
just in a neurological sense. Any trace of influence from the past that
is retained is being referred to as memory. 6 The incarnations taken by
the Divine, according to Hindu scriptures. 7 Referring to life energy
that has taken on a certain form, i.e. human or rock. 8 A solar cycle in
the human system is 4356 days or approximately twelve years. This cycle
has a strong bearing upon what happens in one's life during that time. 9
See Chapter 8: Assistance for the Disembodied. 10 The seven main energy
centres in the body, according to the Yogic sciences.

1 Literally, worshipping the feet of someone. Traditionally, this is the

highest kind of worship for a person you revere. 2 A great warrior and
grandfather figure in the epic Mahabharata. 3 The six-month period from
the winter solstice in December to the

summer solstice in June. 4 Another name for Varanasi---one of the oldest
and most sacred

pilgrimage towns in India, where people traditionally went to attain a
good death. 5 Practices taught by Sadhguru. 6 See the section 'The
Sequence of Death' in Chapter 2. 7 Referring to a particular practice
taught to brahmacharis, where the eyeballs are focused between the
eyebrows. 8 Refers to the five fundamental fires in the body according
to Yogic tradition. 9 The four most sacred Hindu scriptures. 10
Cleansing of the five elements in the system. A fundamental form of
Yoga. 11 A form of the Divine Feminine, consecrated by Sadhguru near the
Isha Yoga Center. 12 An energy form especially consecrated by Sadhguru
to foster health, prosperity and spiritual growth. 13 A spiritual
practice taught to brahmacharis. 14 An aura-cleansing ritual conducted
at Linga Bhairavi, near the Isha Yoga Center. 15 Consecrated bodies of
water at the Isha Yoga Center. 16 Referring to Sadhguru's own peculiar
predicament, where, having already dismantled his karmic structure, he
has to strive to keep his body. 17 A part of an ancient Sanskrit
invocation that means 'Let us move from untruth to Truth.' 18 See the
section 'My Past Lifetimes' in Chapter 11. 19 A spiritual practice
taught by Sadhguru that involves gazing at something for long durations
of time.

1 More on this in the section 'Samadhi and Death' in Chapter 5. 2
Referring to certain energy supports that Sadhguru draws from outside

to keep his physical body intact. 3 The teacher whose death was
discussed in the section 'Predictions of

Death' in Chapter 3. 4 One of the ascetic sects of the Shaivites. Their
practices are often grisly

and contradictory to that of orthodox Hinduism. 5 More about this in the
section 'My Past Lifetimes' in Chapter 11.

1 His experience at Chamundi Hills. See the section 'Exploring Death' in

Chapter 1. 2 One who is sick with disease. 3 A spiritual tomb. 4 One of
the names of Shiva, also a powerful mantra. 5 An adept in the path of
Gnana Yoga---one of the four paths of Yoga. 6 Referring to the legend
where Kamadeva disturbs Shiva's meditation

by shooting an arrow of flowers at him.

1 A non-physical force generated by spiritual practices. 2 A
fifteen-minute meditation offered by Sadhguru. 3 A simple eleven-minute
daily meditative process designed by Sadhguru

to help people gracefully pass through the process of disembodiment,
when it is time. 4 The original Tamil word from which the word
'catamaran' was derived. 5 A certain Yogic practice that involves
forceful breathing. 6 An advanced Yogic practice taught to brahmacharis,
which involves holding the breath for long durations. 7 Universal soul,
according to Hindu tradition. 8 Refers to the Bhagavad Gita and six
other holy Hindu scriptures. 9 Ida and Pingala nadi s are the two main
pranic channels of the body and also represent the feminine and
masculine dimensions of pranic energy. Sushumna nadi is the third and
central pranic channel, whose opening has always denoted spiritual
awakening. 10 Linga Bhairavi, consecrated by Sadhguru, near the Isha
Yoga Center. 11 Famous Indian emperor who ruled India from 268--232 BCE
.

1 Cries of distress. 2 Names of major Hindu deities. 3 The last war in
the Mahabharata. 4 Crematoriums run by Isha. 5 A type of incense. 6 A
cleansing ritual performed by people from the abode of Linga

Bhairavi near the Isha Yoga Center, to cleanse a space. 7 In the Indian
culture it is considered good fortune to be able to give alms to holy
men.

1 See the section 'The Sequence of Death' in Chapter 2. 2 Another ritual
offered at the Linga Bhairavi, near the Isha Yoga Center. 3 See the
section 'A Bubble of Life and Death' in Chapter 2. 4 Referring to the
initiation process of the brahmacharis at the Isha Yoga

Center. 5 Formal renunciation. 6 Refer to the section 'Will I Come Back'
in Chapter 11. 7 A vessel. Here it refers to the Akshaya Patra, a vessel
in Hindu lore that is said to provide an endless supply of food. 8 Refer
to the section 'The Importance of the Last Moments of Life' in Chapter
7.

1 Literally, 'illusion'. Refers to the illusionary perception of the
world. 2 The place where the final battle of Mahabharata took place.
Often, the

war is also known by the same name. 3 The residual tendencies of a
being. 4 A slogan that was once used to popularize Isha Yoga in Tamil
Nadu. 5 See the section 'Runanubandha---The Web of Debt' in Chapter 8. 6
The founder of the Jain religion, a contemporary of Gautama Buddha.

1 Refer to the section 'The Scope of Kalabhairava Karma' in Chapter 8. 2
A certain kind of negative energy influence. 3 See the section 'My Past
Lifetimes' in Chapter 11. 4 Sacred beads worn by spiritual seekers in
India. 5 Referring to the gun culture in those areas. 6 Mahavatar Babaji
was a legendary Indian spiritual guru, believed to

have lived in the 2nd century AD .

1 See the section 'What Makes Us Tick' in Chapter 2. 2 Child yogis who
are adept from a very young age. 3 Referring to his first encounter with
Malladihalli Swamiji, who started

him on Hatha Yoga at the age of eleven years. 4 An esoteric Indian
spiritual tradition. 5 Someshwara temple, Devuni Kadapa, in the state of
Andhra Pradesh. 6 Kumaraswami Kamaraj (1903--75), a popular politician
from southern

India.

1 Refers to Sadhguru's experience of Enlightenment at Chamundi Hills in

1982. 2 See the section 'Does Death Need Preparation' in Chapter 6. 3
      See Chapter 3: 'The Quality of Death'. 4 Spiritual gatherings in
      the presence of a Guru.

Glossary

Abhishekam

Sprinkling or pouring of water, milk, etc. Often used in religious,
Yogic or ceremonial contexts, particularly in Tantrism. A ritual of
empowerment also used to denote initiation in general.

Adiyogi

The first yogi, one of the many epithets of Shiva.

Aghoris

One of the ascetic sects of Shaivites. Their practices are often severe
and grisly and contradictory to that of orthodox Hinduism.

Agna Chakra

The centre of knowledge and Enlightenment, the Agna is one of the seven
major energy centres of the human body. Physically located between the
eyebrows, it is also known as the 'third eye'.

Agnis

Refers to the five fires of the body.

Akaal Mrutyu

Untimely death.

Aakash

Refers to the sky or ether. One of the five elements of Nature.

Amma

Mother. A reverential way of addressing a woman.

Anahata Chakra

The heart centre, one of the seven energy centres of the body.

Ananda

Bliss, unconditional joy.

Anandamaya Kosha

The innermost body or the bliss body.

Anatma

Literally, 'the soulless one'.

Annamaya Kosha

Food-formed sheath, or the physical body, made up of the five gross
elements or bhoota s---earth, wind, water, fire, ether---which are
restored again into their initial states after death.

Antyeshti

The final ritual to be done for the deceased.

Apana Prana/Vayu

One of the five pranas in the human body.

Arjuna

A hero of the great epic Mahabharata to whom Krishna imparted the Divine
message of the Bhagavad Gita.

Atharvana Veda

The last of the four Vedas that expounds the technology of using
physical energy to one's advantage.

Atma

Individual being, the supreme soul, or Brahman.

Aum

The primordial sound made by chanting the sounds A-U-M.

Avighna Yantra

A spiritual energy form to remove obstacles, available at the Isha Yoga
Center.

Aiyyo

Cries of desperation in southern Indian languages.

Babaji

Mahavatar Babaji, Indian saint and yogi, believed to have lived in the
2nd century AD .

Bala Yogi

Child yogi. Refers to someone who attains Enlightenment at an early age
and usually does not retain the body for long after that.

Bhishma

The grand old patriarch of the Mahabharata.

Bhoota

A ghoul or ghost. Also refers to the five primary elements of Nature
---earth, wind, fire, water and ether.

Bhrumadhya

A Yogic practice where the eyeballs are focused between the eyebrows.

Brahmachari

Brahman means Divine and charya means path, so, one who is on the path
of the Divine. Usually refers to one who has formally been initiated
into monkhood through a certain energy process.

Brahmacharya

The path of the Divine. A life of celibacy and studentship on the path
of spirituality moving towards the highest modifications of the senses.
One of the stages of life as per the Varnashrama Dharma.

Buddhi

The faculty of discrimination, analysis, logical and rational thought;
the intellect.

Budubuduku

A traditional gypsy soothsayer.

Chakreshwara

One who has attained mastery over all the chakras.

Chamundi Hills

A hillock in Mysore, where Sadhguru had a deep spiritual experience.

Chandala

Someone who deals with the disposal of corpses. Also a Hindu lower
caste, traditionally considered to be 'untouchable'.

Chaudi

A kind of disembodied being.

Dhritarashtra

The Kaurava king under whose rule the Mahabharata war took place. Also
the father of Duryodhana.

Dhyana/Dhyanam

Sanskrit for meditation.

Dhyanalinga

A powerful energy form at the Isha Yoga Center in India, it was
consecrated by Sadhguru exclusively for the purpose of meditation.

Dosha

Defect or blemish. Specifically refers to defects in the physical,
mental or energy bodies.

Gandhari

A prominent character in the Mahabharata. She was a princess of Gandhara
and the wife of Dhritarashtra, the blind king of Hastinapura, and the
mother of a hundred sons---the Kauravas.

Gandharva

A class of celestial beings who are usually gifted with extraordinary
talents such as music and dance.

Ghat

The bank of a river, where people usually come to bathe, wash and swim.

Gita

Literally, 'song'. Here it refers to the seven holy books, of which
Bhagavad Gita is the most famous one.

Gnana Yoga

Knowledge, perception, discrimination; one of the four kinds of Yogas.

Gomukh

Literally, 'cow's mouth'; a place in the upper Himalayas, the location
where the glacier forms the river Ganga. The glacial form has melted in
a way that it resembles the face of a cow.

Gyan/Gnana/Gnanam Knowledge, perception, discrimination Homa

A Hindu ritual in which oblations or offerings are made into fire.

Jeevasamadhi

A Yogic practice where one ends one's life by burying oneself or
immersing oneself in water.

Kalabhairava

One who has mastery over time; a fierce form of Shiva.

Kapalabhati

A Yogic practice that involves forceful exhalation.

Kavacha

A shield.

Kinnara

A kind of a celestial being.

Klesha Nashana Kriya

A cleansing ritual performed at the Isha Yoga Center to cleanse the
aura.

Kriya

Literally, 'act, rite'; refers to a certain class of Yogic practices;
inward action as opposed to karma, external action.

Kumbhaka

Breath retention during Yogic practice, especially in the practice of
pranayama.

Kurukshetra

An extensive plain near Delhi, scene of the great war between the
Kauravas and the Pandavas, as it took place in the Mahabharata.

Linga Bhairavi Yantra

A spiritual energy form for the well-being of the family, available at
the Isha Yoga Center.

Maha

An adjective or prefix meaning great, mighty, powerful, lofty, noble.

Mahabharata

A historic Indian epic that took place almost 5000 years ago.

Mahamrutyunjaya Mantra

A sacred Sanskrit chant that is supposed to ward off death.

Mahasamadhi

The highest form of equanimity that entails the complete dissolution or
neutralization of the personal in the universal, whereby all traits of
individual nature are transcended. Also known as Nirvana and
Mahaparinibbana in other Eastern spiritual traditions.

Maya

Delusion, the veil of illusion which conceals one's true nature, or
conceals reality. It is used in contrast with the absolute reality.

Metti

Tamil word for toe ring worn by married women in India.

Mrutyu

Sanskrit for death.

Mrutyunjaya

Victory over death.

Mukti

Release, Liberation, the final absolution of the Self from the chain of
death and rebirth. The highest goal of all spiritual seekers.

Muladhara

Located at the perineum, the Muladhara is the foundation of the energy
body.

Mumtaz

One of the wives of the medieval Indian emperor Shah Jahan, in whose
memory the famous Taj Mahal was built.

Naga

Literally, 'serpent'; a symbol of the Kundalini coiled at the base of
the spine; one of the secondary types of life forces (prana).

Namaskaram

Traditional southern Indian greeting.

Nirmanakaya

Literally, 'one who has manufactured one's body'; refers to accomplished
yogis who materialize and dematerialize at will.

Nirvikalpa

Literally, 'without qualities'. A type of samadhi, or equanimity, beyond
all qualities or attributes, where a person's contact with their body is
minimal.

Ojas

Subtle energy.

Palani

A southern Indian town that is famous for its Murugan temple.

Pandavas

The protagonists of the Mahabharata.

Pisachi

A kind of disembodied being.

Prana

The fundamental life force.

Pranamaya Kosha

One of the five sheaths of the human body.

Prana Vayu

One of the five pranas of the body.

Prarabdha Karma

The portion of karma that is allocated for a particular lifetime.

Preta

A kind of ghost or being.

Rudraksha

Sacred beads; the seeds of a tree (Elaeocarpus ganitrus roxb ) found
mostly in the Himalayan region. According to the legend, a tear from
Lord Shiva fell to the Earth and from it grew the Rudraksha tree. Known
to have many medicinal and transcendental qualities, a Rudraksha mala is
one of the few possessions of an Indian spiritual seeker.

Runa

Literally, 'debt'; in this context, it refers to the debt of
relationship.

Runanubandha

The bondage caused or the debt accrued due to the debt of relationships.

Sadhaka

A spiritual seeker who has undertaken spiritual disciplines, usually
under the guidance of a Master.

Sadhana

Literally, 'tool or device'. Spiritual practices which are used as a
means to Self-Realization.

Sahasrara Chakra

The chakra, or energy centre, of the human system located at the
fontanelle, or crown, of the head.

Samadhi

Deep state of equanimity, one of the eight limbs of Yoga. Greatly
celebrated in the Indian spiritual tradition, the experience of samadhi
is therapeutic and deeply transformative in nature.

Samat Prana/Samana Vayu

One of the five pranas of the body.

Samskara

Ritual, in the general sense. Denotes rites such as the birth ceremony,
tonsuring, marriage, cremation, etc. In Yoga, it stands for the
indelible imprints in the subconscious left behind by daily experiences.

Samyama

A confluence of the states of dharana , dhyana and samadhi. Here, it
refers to the eight-day meditation programme conducted by Sadhguru,
where one is transported into explosive states of meditativeness. This
programme is a possibility to shed lifetimes of karma and experience
deep states of meditativeness and samadhi.

Sanchita Karma

The whole volume of karma of a person.

Santara

An ancient Jain practice of progressively fasting to death.

Sanyasa

On the path of spirituality, a stage of life as per the Varnashrama
Dharma. The withdrawal from the world in search for SelfRealization.

Satsang

Literally, 'in communion with Truth'; a congregation of seekers.

Savikalpa

Literally, 'with qualities'. Used to refer to a type of samadhi, or
equanimity, with qualities or attributes.

Shakti Chalana

A kind of Yogic practice taught at the Isha Yoga Center.

Shambhavi Mahamudra

A Yogic practice taught by Sadhguru.

Sharira

Literally, 'body'.

Shivayogi

A name borne by Sadhguru in two of his previous lifetimes.

Shoonya

Literally, 'emptiness'. An effortless process of conscious non-doing,
Shoonya meditation is an extremely powerful and unique form of
meditation taught by Sadhguru in a 'live form' at the Isha Yoga
programmes.

Shraadha

Annual death ritual of the Hindus for one's ancestors.

Siddhasana

A dynamic Yogic posture or practice. The mainstay sadhana of
brahmacharis at the Isha Yoga Center.

Smashana

Hindu cremation ground.

Tantra

Literally, 'technology'; in this context it refers to the technology of
spiritual transformation. Commonly refers to a spiritual path in India.

Tantrik

A practitioner of Tantra.

Tapovan

A place above Gomukh, on the banks of the Gangotri, the glacial origin
of the river Ganga.

Taraka Mantra

A secret and powerful mantra for Liberation that is whispered by
Kalabhairava into the ears of those who die in Kashi.

Teerthakund

A consecrated body of water at the Isha Yoga Center.

Udana Prana/Vayu

One of the five pranas of the body.

Uttarayana

The period of the year from the winter solstice in December to the
summer solstice in June.

Vanaprastha Ashrama

One of the stages of life according to the Varnashrama Dharma. People
usually live away from their families during this stage, mostly in the
forests.

Vasanas

Tendencies or inclinations; subliminal traits in a human being, the
residue of desires and actions.

Veda

Refers to the oldest portion of the Hindu scriptures.

Velliangiri Mountains

The sacred mountain ranges in Tamil Nadu, in the foothills of which the
Isha Yoga Center is located.

Vibhuti

Sacred ash that is made by burning cow dung; this is usually consecrated
with the energies of a powerful deity before it is used. It is often
smeared over certain parts of the body, especially the forehead and over
the chakras.

Vignana

Science or special knowledge, in traditional terms.

Vignanamaya Kosha

One of the five sheaths of the human body.

Vishesh

Special or extraordinary.

Vishuddhi

One of the seven major chakras, Vishuddhi is the centre of power and
vision. It is located at the pit of the throat.

Vyana Prana/Vayu

One of the five pranas of the body.

Yaksha

Celestial disembodied beings who are believed to inhabit secluded
places.

Yamadoota

Agents of Yama, the Hindu God of death.

Yantra

Literally, a 'tool or a device'; in this context it refers to an energy
form, which can be designed and consecrated in different ways to bring
prosperity and well-being to one's life.

Yatana

Suffering.

Yatra

Travel, journey, pilgrimage.

Yudhishthira

The eldest of the Pandava princes, known for his virtues.

Isha Foundation

Founded by Sadhguru, Isha Foundation is a non-profit human-service
organization, supported by over nine million volunteers in over 300
centres worldwide. Recognizing the possibility of each person to empower
another, Isha Foundation has created a massive movement that is
dedicated to address all aspects of human wellbeing, without subscribing
to any particular ideology, religion or race. Isha is involved in
several path-breaking outreach initiatives: Action for Rural
Rejuvenation (ARR) enhances the quality of rural life through healthcare
and disease prevention, community revitalization, women empowerment, the
creation of sustainable livelihoods, and Yoga programmes. Isha Vidhya
empowers rural children with quality education. Project GreenHands (PGH)
initiates mass tree planting and creates a culture of care for the
environment to keep this planet liveable for future generations. Rally
for Rivers is a campaign to revitalize the rivers of India, which are in
a serious level of depletion, and addresses one of the gravest crises
facing our generation. Isha's unique approach in cultivating human
potential has gained worldwide recognition and reflects in Isha
Foundation's special consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations. The Foundation is headquartered
at the Isha Yoga Center, at the base of the Velliangiri Mountains in
southern India, and at the Isha Institute of Inner-sciences on the
spectacular Cumberland Plateau in central Tennessee, USA.
isha.sadhguru.org ishaoutreach.org facebook.com/ishafoundation
twitter.com/ishafoundation youtube.com/ishafoundation

Isha Yoga Center

Isha Yoga Center, founded under the aegis of Isha Foundation, is located
at the foothills of the Velliangiri Mountains. Envisioned and created by
Sadhguru as a powerful sthana (a centre for inner growth), this popular
destination attracts people from all parts of the world. It is unique in
its offering of all aspects of Yoga---gnana (knowledge), karma (action),
kriya (energy), and bhakti (devotion) and revives the Guru-shishya
paramparya (the traditional method of knowledge transfer from Master to
disciple). Isha Yoga Center provides a supportive environment for people
to shift to healthier lifestyles, improve interpersonal relationships,
seek a higher level of self-fulfilment, and realize their full
potential. The Center is located 30 km west of Coimbatore, a major
industrial city in southern India which is well connected by air, rail,
and road. All major national airlines operate regular flights into
Coimbatore from Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai, and Bengaluru. Train services
are available from all major cities in India. Regular bus and taxi
services are also available from Coimbatore to the Center. Visitors are
advised to contact the Yoga Center for availability and reservation of
accommodation well in advance, as it is generally heavily booked. Learn
more at isha.sadhguru.org/center/isha-yoga-center-coimbatore.

Dhyanalinga The Dhyanalinga is a powerful and unique energy form created
by Sadhguru from the essence of yogic sciences. Situated at the Isha
Yoga Center, it is the first of its kind to be completed in over 2000
years. The Dhyanalinga is a meditative space that does not subscribe to
any particular faith or belief system nor does it require any ritual,
prayer, or worship.

The Dhyanalinga was consecrated by Sadhguru after three years of an
intense process of prana pratishtha . Housed within an architecturally
striking pillarless dome structure, the Dhyanalinga's energies allow
even those unaware of meditation to experience a deep state of
meditativeness, revealing the essential nature of life. A special
feature of the Dhyanalinga complex are the Teerthakunds, consecrated
subterranean water bodies, energized by rasalinga s. A dip in these
vibrant pools significantly enhances one's spiritual receptivity and is
a good preparation to receive the Grace of the Dhyanalinga. The waters
of the Teerthakunds also rejuvenate the body, and bring health and
wellbeing. The Dhyanalinga draws many thousands of people every week,
who converge to experience a deep sense of inner peace. Learn more at
dhyanalinga.org.

Linga Bhairavi Adjacent to the Dhyanalinga, near the Isha Yoga Center,
is the Linga Bhairavi. Consecrated by Sadhguru, Linga Bhairavi is an
exuberant expression of the Divine Feminine---fierce and compassionate
at once. Representing the creative and nurturing aspects of the
universe, the Devi allows devotees to go through life effortlessly; all
physical aspects of their lives---health, success, and prosperity---will
find nourishment. A variety of rituals and offerings are available for
one to connect with the Devi's outpouring Grace. Learn more at
lingabhairavi.org.

Inner Engineering Inner Engineering, designed by Sadhguru, is offered as
an intensive programme for personal growth. The programme and its
environment establish the possibility to explore the higher dimensions
of life and offer tools to re-engineer one's self through the inner
science of Yoga. Once given the tools to rejuvenate, people can optimize
all aspects of health, inner growth and success. For those seeking
professional and personal excellence, this programme offers keys for
meaningful and fulfilling

relationships at work, home, community, and most importantly, within
one's self. Inner Engineering can be thought of as a synthesis of
holistic sciences to help participants establish an inner foundation and
vision for all dimensions of life and find the necessary balance between
the challenges of a hectic career and the inner longing for peace and
wellbeing. The approach is a modern antidote to stress, and presents
simple but powerful processes from the yogic science to purify the
system and increase health and inner wellbeing. Programme components
include guided meditations and transmission of the sacred Shambhavi
Mahamudra. When practiced on a regular basis, these tools have the
potential to enhance one's experience of life on many levels. Learn more
at isha.sadhguru.org/IEO.

Isha Kriya Isha Kriya™ is a simple yet potent practice created by
Sadhguru, which is drawn from the wisdom of Indian spirituality. The
word kriya literally means 'internal action,' while 'Isha' refers to
that which is the source of creation. The purpose of Isha Kriya is to
help an individual get in touch with the source of one's existence, in
order to create life according to one's wish and vision. Provided as a
free guided meditation online and available with written instructions as
well, Isha Kriya offers the possibility to experience the boundless
energy within. Daily practice of Isha Kriya brings health, dynamism,
peace and wellbeing. It offers tools to cope with the hectic pace of
modern life. Learn more at ishakriya.com.

More from Sadhguru

INNER ENGINEERING: A YOGI'S GUIDE TO JOY

'Inner Engineering is a fascinating read, rich with Sadhguru's insights
and his teachings. If you are ready, it is a tool to help awaken your
own inner intelligence, the ultimate and supreme genius that mirrors the
wisdom of the cosmos'---Deepak Chopra In his revolutionary new book,
visionary, mystic and yogi Sadhguru distils his own experiences with
spirituality and yoga and introduces the transformational concept of
Inner Engineering. Developed by him over several years, this powerful
practice serves to align the mind and the body with energies around and
within, creating a world of limitless power and possibilities. Inner
Engineering is your own software for joy and well-being. Now available
in Hindi.

More from Sadhguru

FLOWERS ON THE PATH

A pragmatic mind may deem flowers unworthy of notice -- devoid as they
are of the nourishment and utility of fruit, leaf, bark and root. Yet
these fragile and ephemeral blooms dare to flaunt the wonders of Nature.
From heady fragrance to miraculous colours and intricate design, it is
this spirited extravagance which draws, touches and inspires us in
remarkable ways. A motley bouquet, the articles that comprise Flowers on
the Path offer insights from Sadhguru that spark you with their incisive
clarity, delight you with humour, or even render you in profound
stillness within. Whether the subject covers social issues and worldly
affairs, individual challenges, or dimensions of the beyond, Sadhguru's
ability to delve to the root and look at life in all its totality is
evident. As a flower can confound you with its brilliance and beauty, so
too does each article hold the possibility to confuse you out of your
conclusions, and pave the way towards true knowing.

More from Sadhguru

SADHGURU: MORE THAN A LIFE, ARUNDHATHI SUBRAMANIAM

'He is living proof of an afterlife'---Deepak Chopra This is the
extraordinary story of Jaggi Vasudev or Sadhguru---a young agnostic who
turned yogi, a wild motorcyclist who turned mystic, a sceptic who turned
spiritual guide. It seeks to recreate the life journey of a man who
combines rationality with mysticism, irreverence with compassion and
deep self-knowledge with a contagious love of life. Pulsating with his
razor-sharp intelligence and modern-day vocabulary, the book empowers
you to explore your spiritual self and could well change your life.

THE BEGINNING Let the conversation begin... Follow the Penguin
Twitter.com@penguinbooks Keep up-to-date with all our stories
YouTube.com/penguinbooks Pin 'Penguin Books' to your Pinterest Like
'Penguin Books' on Facebook.com/penguinbooks Find out more about the
author and discover more stories like this at Penguin.co.in

PENGUIN ANANDA USA \| Canada \| UK \| Ireland \| Australia New Zealand
\| India \| South Africa \| China Penguin Ananda is part of the Penguin
Random House group of companies whose addresses can be found at
global.penguinrandomhouse.com .

This collection published 2020 Copyright © Sadhguru 2020 The moral right
of the author has been asserted Jacket images © Isha Foundation This
digital edition published in 2020. e-ISBN: 978-9-353-05772-5 For sale in
the Indian Subcontinent only This book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired
out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed
on the subsequent purchaser.


