ASSESMENT REPORT Course Name

Emotional Intelligence & Personal Mastery

Learner Name and Surname

Calvin Kassel

Learner ID No.

9408235044084

Contact details for clarity or assistance on this report: Should you not
receive a response to your email within 24 hours, please contact our
office telephonically. Learner Support Tel No.

011 678 2443 Janice Garson-Naidoo

Learner Support Email

assessment@imsimbi.co.za

Note to the Assessor:

•

When assessing a 2nd submission, differentiate between feedback given
during the 1st and 2nd submission. Precede feedback by writing next to
the feedback given for the 1 st submission, 1st Sub. Feedback for the
2nd submission should then state 2nd Sub. Feedback against the 2nd
submission should always be at the top, to be read first.

•

Provide feedback against Unit Standard.

JUDGEMENT and SUMMARISED FEEDBACK Unit Standard

1ST Assessment Date C / NYC

252031 (NQF Level 5; 4 Credits): Apply the principles and concepts of
emotional 27/01/2023 intelligence to the management of self and others
Feedback Your assignment is well done. Thank you (1ST Submission)
Feedback (2ND Submission)

2ND Assessment Date C / NYC

C

FOR NOT YET COMPETENT (NYC) RESULTS RESUBMISSIONS MUST BE SENT TO:
submissions@imsimbi.co.za Yes No EVIDENCE EVALUATION Does the evidence
submitted cover all Specific Outcomes and Assessment Criteria? VALID

Assessor Comments:

X

The unit standards has not expired and the summative assessment tool has
been revised recently to confirm compliance with the unit standard
requirements and the latest best practice and is therefore valid

Is it evident that the evidence submitted is the learner's own work?
AUTHENTIC

Assessor Comments:

X

A signed declaration of own work has been included in the PoE A copy of
the learner's ID has been certified / verified and included in the PoE

Is the evidence submitted dated to show that evidence is not older than
three years? CURRENT

Assessor Comments: PoE's are compiled and submitted within 3 months of
date of training. Extenuating circumstances may lead to extensions which
are recorded. PoE reflects date of completion and date of receipt by
Imsimbi Training.

X

Has enough evidence been submitted to know that the learner will be able
to repeat his / her performance? Assessor Comments: SUFFICIENT

1\|Page

All activities (in workbook and assignment) is designed to cover all the
outcomes and assessment criteria of the unit standard(s) - including the
levels of competence (e.g. knowledge, application, reflexive); which
been completed sufficiently by the candidate. Through both practising in
the workbook (formative) and then repeating it on their own in the
summative assessment deems it sufficient.

X

Assignment Task 1

Remarks and recommendations per task You have described the Emotional
Intelligence principles well

Task 2

2.1

2.2 Task 3

Personality type and the influence in the team role identified You've
shown how you would work cooperatively with people in your organisation

3.1 You've shown how you would better your listening skills. 3.2

You've shown how an attitude of gratitude would help you focus on the
good in your life.

3.3

Techniques used to manage your stress better has been described.

3.4

You've shown what appreciating people can shift you to focus on positive
traits

Task 4 You've shown the results of minimising a negative emotion Task 5

5.1 Own level of emotional intelligence evaluated. 5.2 Personal Mastery
technique for improving your motivation and energy levels described

Workbook Assessment

Workbook activities are sufficiently although several blank spaces were
found.

FYI

General Comments Good work submitted. Assessor Name and Surname

2\|Page

Thanyani Tshamano

Assessor Registration No.

8606130396084

Review: Completed by Learner Emotional Intelligence & Personal Mastery

Course name

Please read the questions below and indicate with a yes or a no if
Imsimbi Training met your expectations. We would appreciate any comments
you would like to add. Questions

Agree?

1

I have been informed of the assessment judgement (i.e. I am Competent /
Not Yet Competent).

2

I accept the assessment decisions and have no further questions relating
to this particular assessment process.

3

I am aware that I have one opportunity to resubmit if declared Not Yet
Competent.

Please provide comments

I am satisfied with the feedback given to me by the Assessor: 4

• Feedback was relevant. • Feedback was detailed enough to assist me in
understanding my developmental needs. • Feedback was done in a
constructive manner. • I received feedback within a month of submitting
my assignment. The assessment process was transparent:

5

• The assessment process was clearly explained to me. • I understood the
evidence requirements (what evidence I had to present). • I knew what
criteria I would be assessed against.

6

I had an opportunity to inform the assessor of my special needs
(question included in preparation checklist).

7

I understood the questions asked.

8

The Facilitator / Assessor responded to all my queries in a timeous
manner.

9

I was aware that evidence had to be authentic (my own work).

10

I am aware of the process to follow should I wish to appeal.

Further Comments and Suggestions

Learner Signature Learner Name and Surname

3\|Page

Date Calvin Kassel

Learner ID No.

9408235044084


