PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

INDEX OF CONTENTS Introduction

Page 02

PNI Therapy Ethics

Page 03

Session 1: PNI Principles 1.1 Explain how PNI works 1.2 Establish
Rapport 1.3 Assess Coping Styles Life Scripts The Cube 1.4 Client
Profile & History

Page 05 Page 05 Page 16 Page 22 Page 31 Page 48 Page 53

Session 2: Script Review

Page 59

Session 3: Build Resources & Deal with Fear Page 63 Hardiness Page 63
Dealing with Fears Page 69 Session 4: Expressing Emotions & Unfinished
Business Page 71 Session 5: Transforming your Life Path

Page 73

Session 6: Passion for Life

Page 78

Session 7: Dialogues for change Core Transformation Dialogue with the
Disease

Page 81 Page 81 Page 85

Additional Techniques Pain & Genetic Memory Regression Repairing Loss

Page 86 Page 86 Page 88

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 1

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

PNI PRACTITIONER CERTIFICATION TRAINING Introduction
PsychoNeuroImmunology (PNI) therapy differs markedly from conventional
psychotherapy in several regards, the most important being the fact that
any mental-emotional processing is measured in tangible form, namely
immune functioning. In other words, PNI Therapy does not rely on
conscious statements of well-being - "I feel much better"; Rather it
acknowledges these statements, and follows this up by checking to see
whether the body also reflects this conscious feeling of well-being, in
terms of how the immune system is doing. If the immune system reflects
no change, and the person says that they feel better, the PNI
Practitioner trusts the body. PNI recognises that there is a vast
difference between what a person is conscious of, and what is actually
happening at the unconscious and physical level. Therefore, the
following 'Golden Rule' applies:

"The Body Never Lies" For the Practitioner, this has several
implications, the first being that success or failure is measured
physically, not psychologically or intuitively. This in turn changes the
nature of the practitioner's approach to psychological issues - the
emphasis shifts from "What does that mean ?" towards "Does the technique
work ? Are there physical changes as a result ?" Therefore, the
practitioner is forced to redefine their identity from "S/he who
understands" towards "S/he who has access to technical skills which can
be applied whenever appropriate". When this new identity and the
body-measurement approach are taken together as the basis for PNI
practice, it will be found that PNI is a deeply rewarding field, simply
because the practitioner continually learns as s/he goes, and also can
see the results of the work at a tangible level.

In this training, the technical aspects of PNI and the immune system
have been severely simplified, as the complex nature of the immune
system and how psychological factors interact with the various
biological pathways may overwhelm those who are not familiar with these
terms and concepts. Our objective is to train you, the practitioner, in
the basic understandings of the immune system; but more importantly, how
to modify the immune system using specific psychological techniques. For
those delegates who wish to gain a greater knowledge of the immune
system, and detailed explanations of the PNI pathways, the following
references may be consulted: \* Ader, Robert. (1981).
Psychoneuroimmunology. Orlando, Fl.: Academic Press. \* Ader, R.,
Felten, D.L., & Cohen, N. (Eds.). (1991). Psychoneuroimmunology (2nd
Edit.). San Diego, Ca.: Academic Press. \* Black, P.H. (1995).
Psychoneuroimmunology: Brain and Immunity. Scientific American: Science
& Medicine, Nov/Dec 1995, pp.16-25. \* Daruna, J.H., & Morgan, J.E.
(1990). Psychosocial Effects on Immune Function: Neuroendocrine
Pathways. Psychosomatics, Vol. 31, Issue 1. \* Kiecolt-Glaser, J.K., &
Glaser, R. (1992). Psychoneuroimmunology: Can Psychological
interventions Modulate Immunity ? Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology. Vol.60, Issue 4, pp 569-575. \* Kuby, J. (1991). Immunology
(2nd Edit.). New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. \* Roit, I. (1988).
Essential Immunology (6th Edit.). Oxford: Blackwell Scientific
Publications. \* Vollhardt, L.T. (1991). Psychoneuroimmunology: A
literature Review. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 61(1), pp.35-47.

Apart from the above technical and academic references, there are also a
few excellent books on the subject, accessible to the lay person: \*
Pearsall, P. (1987). Super Immunity. Toronto: Ballantine Books. \*
Martin, P. (1997). The Sickening Mind: Brain, Behaviour, Immunity &
Disease. London: Harper Collins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 2

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

PNI THERAPY ETHICS 1. CONFIDENTIALITY During this training you will be
working in small 'therapy groups'. Each person in that group will have a
'personal file' which contains personal and confidential information for
the use of that group only, and for the trainer(s) information, if
necessary. Do not leave your file lying around during breaks, nor after
each day's session. Hand them in, and collect them personally. You will
not read or handle the personal file of someone who is not in your
group. You will not discuss the content of discussions or the personal
file with ANYONE except the therapy group itself, or the trainer(s).
Violation of this therapy confidentiality will result in the expulsion
of the offender from the group and the training, and immediate handing
in of all printed and written notes, and no refund of course fees will
be made. The reason is simple: There is nothing more destructive in a
therapist-client relationship than the breaking of confidentiality. If
you do not know what to do, consult with your fellow group members
first, and if the issue can not be resolved, consult the trainer(s). The
training involves 'real' people, with 'real' issues. Therapistclient
confidentiality is vital to ensure that all delegates achieve their
objectives, whether to be trained, or to receive therapy intervention.
In normal therapy environments, this level of trust and respect of
confidentiality remains. It is sometimes necessary to consult with your
peers on certain 'cases'. In such situations, you do not ever mention
the client's name. If the gender or age of the client is not pertinent
to the issue you are consulting about, then you either disguise these,
or do not mention these at all. If asked by client's friend,
acquaintance or family member whether a specific person is a client of
yours, simply state that you are bound by confidentiality to neither
confirm nor deny who is and who is not a client of yours. Do not assume
that your client wants other people - no matter how 'close' - to know
that (a) they have a specific illness, or (b) that they are seeking
assistance in dealing with this illness. It is the client's prerogative
to decide whom to tell what to.

2.  FAMILY / FRIENDS With the exception of situations where no other
    resources are available, it is strongly advised that you do not do
    therapy with your family or intimate friends as clients. When
    intimacy is strong, the client and therapist are prone to personal
    biases, and it is almost impossible to fully enter into a unbiased
    therapist mode. Convenience is not expedience. Situational example:
    If a family member has a serious disease, do you honestly believe
    that they would tell you that they want to die, and that they have
    no reason to live ? It is impossible for them to answer that
    question honestly, as you are directly affected by the answer, which
    they are fully and emotionally aware of.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

3.  AGREEMENTS When making appointments with clients, ensure that they
    understand that being late is not acceptable. Also, that arriving
    early will mean that they will have to wait outside (eg., in their
    car) until the correct time of the appointment. Also ensure that the
    client and therapist form an explicit agreement in the first session
    regarding how many sessions will be required, the duration of these
    sessions, and how much notice is required for cancellations. Ensure
    that the client understands and agrees to the conditions of therapy,
    such as the need to complete all homework before the next session,
    and that if this is not complete, that the session will not
    commence, and that they will be charged for the session regardless.
    Clarify and agree on terms of confidentiality.

4.  FEES Clearly state and formulate your fee structure. If you are
    registered with the South African Medical & Dental Council with a
    practice number, you are probably entitled to inform your client
    that your fees are covered by medical aid. Check this first.
    However, if you are not registered by the SAMDC with a practice
    number, clearly state this to the client, and that medical aid will
    not cover your fees. It is now possible for lay counsellors to
    register as such (in Gauteng only, at present - other provinces are
    still in the process of forming such councils). Presently, this is
    only applicable in the area of AIDS. This structure has only been
    recently formed, and further information will be provided as we
    receive it. What is a reasonable fee ? It is important to understand
    that charging a fee for your service is nothing more than an energy
    exchange. If a client is not invested in the process, there are
    several ramifications, including resentment of time used, feelings
    of obligation, of being 'rescued' (and thus being a 'victim'), and
    so on. In cases where finances are indeed difficult, formulate an
    exchange of some kind, even a bartering of services. Particularly if
    you are only beginning your path as a therapist, with no other
    qualifications, a fee of R50 per hour is appropriate as a base-line.
    Depending upon other experience and qualifications, your fees can be
    adjusted upwards. Always state your fees, and discuss finances
    BEFORE starting the first session. (continued on next page ...)

Page 3

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 5. BOUNDARIES For your own sake, and for the sake of
protecting the sanctity of the client-therapist roles and relationship,
clear and definite boundaries are required, which distinguish the
relationship from, for example, friendships.

As a rule, do not advise client's regarding their medication, medical
treatment, or other therapy interventions which they are undergoing. PNI
is an adjunctive intervention - not 'instead-of' kind of intervention.
Ideally, PNI intervention should only occur in conjunction with medical
surveillance and treatment, as this allows the PNI Practitioner to have
tangible measurements for the intervention.

For example, make it clear that 'just popping in' is not acceptable. An
appointment is necessary, and the time of such appointments is
determined by your time and schedule. Ensure that you are clear on which
times of the day and week are 'yours' - and that these times are not
available for clients. Maintain these boundaries, even if you have no
plans to do anything in such times. Ensure that the client understands
that you are acting in the role of a therapist, and not as a friend.
Therefore, it is inappropriate to be invited to their birthday party,
for example. Also, ensure that they understand that, if you encounter a
client in a social setting, you will act as if you do not know them, nor
will you discuss therapy issues during such encounters. A good example
of this is when it becomes known that someone is a doctor, and everyone
wants 'free advise' during a social event. This is not fair, as social
events fall outside the therapist-role boundaries. If someone does
approach you at a social gathering for therapy reasons, make it clear
that you do not discuss such issues in a social setting, and that they
need to make an appointment if they wish to discuss their issues. It is
advisable to decide clearly and firmly - with yourself and your
clients - that you do not attend funerals of clients, as a general rule.
This is at the discretion of the therapist.

6.  QUALIFICATIONS Strictly speaking, unless you are indeed a qualified
    psychotherapist, it is advisable to refer to yourself as a PNI
    practitioner, counsellor or advisor, not as a therapist.

7.  PROMISES & GUARANTEES There is a clear and definite limit to what a
    PNI Practitioner can and can not claim to do. You can not claim to
    cure disease - you can only claim to have knowledge and techniques
    which can assist someone in supporting their intention to heal, slow
    down, or stabilise the immune system. PNI does not cure cancer or
    AIDS, for example. PNI technique is focused on the immune system,
    and as such, can facilitate changes in disease progression. However,
    it is important to acknowledge limitations in terms of time, the
    techniques themselves, and deterioration of physical structure. You
    do not have control over a client's intention to live, die, or heal.
    Technique and knowledge is only one small component of the recipe
    for healing. The most important, and crucial component, is the
    client's intention, commitment, and freedom of choice, which needs
    to be respected and honoured.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 4

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

SESSION 1: PNI PRINCIPLES FOUR OBJECTIVES: 1.1

EXPLAIN HOW PNI WORKS

1.2

ESTABLISH RAPPORT

1.3

ASSESS COPING STYLES

1.4

PLOT LIFE HISTORY

1.1 HOW PNI WORKS The word "Psycho-Neuro-Immunology" means "Mind" -
"Brain" "Immune System". It is the field of study which examines how
certain thoughts, emotions and coping styles cause changes in the brain,
which in turn causes changes in the body, including the immune system.
Psychoneuroimmunology was formally started in 1981, with the publication
of the first comprehensive textbook on the area, called
"Psychoneuroimmunology" by Robert Ader. This has subsequently been
upgraded in the light of an enormous amount of new research, in the book
"Psychoneuroimmunology (Second Edition)", by Ader, Felten, and Cohen, in
1991. However, before we can discuss how the mind can directly or
indirectly affect the immune system, we first have to understand what
the immune system is, and how it influences health and disease.

Generally speaking, there are certain 'kinds' of break-down in the
immune system: (a) The immune system is UNDER-ACTIVE, and thus does not
do anything about the 'Non-Self' viruses, bacteria and abnormal cells.
This can be understood as FAILURE TO ATTACK NONSELF. For example, in
cancer, the immune system has all the cells it needs to fight the cancer
(abnormal) cells, but it simply does not do it, or does not do it
properly. In the same way, it is often found that the body's weapons
against viruses and bacteria are present, but simply not activated. When
the immune system does not do it's job, we refer to this as a SUPPRESSED
IMMUNE SYSTEM. In terms of "self' and 'Non-Self', a suppressed immune
system can be compared to an identity crisis, where the immune system
fails to tell the difference between Self and Non-Self, and thus
mistakenly thinks that there is nothing wrong, and thus does nothing.
(b) The opposite of a suppressed immune system is an OVERACTIVE immune
system, where the immune system's reaction to Non-Self is exaggerated
and excessive. Examples of this are severe ALLERGIES (e.g. bee stings),
where the immune system attacks Non-Self, but goes over the top, and
often causes more damage than it solves. (c) MISTAKING SELF AS NON-SELF:
Typically, this results in the immune system attacking normal (Self)
cells, which results in conditions such as arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, and lupus. This are called AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES. In terms of
Self versus Non-Self, this can be compared to Self attacking another
part of Self. Basically, all the above are variations of an IMMUNE
SYSTEM IDENTITY CRISIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to some researchers, the immune system can be understood as
follows:

The immune system is ... The body's ability tell the difference between
Self and Non-Self. Where... 'Self'.............

refers to your body's healthy and normal cells.

'Non-Self' ....

refers to abnormal cells and viruses, bacteria, parasites.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 5

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

HOW DOES THE IMMUNE SYSTEM WORK ? (BASICALLY) The immune system is a
complicated system of cells, chemicals, and systems in which these parts
communicate with each other. Basically, the immune system consists of:

(1) Non-Specific Mechanisms: Processes: Coughing, sneezing, hair-like
    filaments (cilia) in the throat and upper lungs. All these natural
    processes try to 'catch' the incoming bacteria and viruses, and then
    tries to throw them out of the body. Secretions: Certain natural
    substances secreted by the body ear wax, chemicals in the tears, and
    acid in the stomach actually destroy bacteria and other non-self
    substances. Cells: Certain cells roam around the body to locate and
    destroy non-self bacteria and viruses as soon as they enter the
    body. Examples are tissue macrophages and neutrophils, both of which
    are white blood cells. Circulating substances: Certain chemicals,
    such as interferon and complement, also roam around the body, and
    then attach and destroy foreign substances. Barriers: The skin is a
    powerful barrier to incoming bacteria and viruses.

(2) Specific Immune Systems: If the virus or bacteria actually gets past
    any of the non-specific systems, then the immune system becomes more
    focused and specific. Then two systems kick in, depending on the
    situation:

<!-- -->

(a) B-CELLS & ANTIBODIES (HUMORAL SYSTEM) This system concerns WHITE
    BLOOD CELLS (WBS), which are a major part of your blood. When a
    B-CELL comes into contact with some non-Self cell or particle (e.g.,
    bacteria or virus), then it sets off a fascinating process:

Any and all non-Self particles, whether bacteria or virus, are called
ANTIGENS. First, it creates an 'identikit' of the ANTIGEN. Then it
manufactures a chemical called an ANTIBODY, (also called
immunoglobulins) which is designed to lock onto the antigen, which then
makes it possible for other cells to recognise the ANTIGEN-ANTIBODY
combination, and destroy it. Basically, an ANTIBODY acts as a neon sign
that says: "Hey ! Come over here ! Come clean this up!"

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

During this process 'factory' cells ('Activated B-cells now called
Plasma cells) produce huge amounts of the antibody. Also, a small number
of Memory Cells are created, which store the 'identikit' and 'antibody
recipe' for future use. Many of the cells which attack and destroy
viruses and bacteria (e.g., eosiphils, phagocytes, neutrophils, and
macrophages) will only attack when it has been 'shown' the virus or
bacteria, by the antibody- antigen complex. The danger of this system is
that the WBC's can mistakenly produce antibodies to normal healthy
cells, which results in the other attack-cells believing that they have
to attack and destroy normal cells. Examples of this are the AUTOIMMUNE
diseases, such as Rheumatoid arthritis where cells mistakenly attack the
tissue of the joints - or multiple sclerosis, where the attack cells
destroy the lining of the nerves (myelin sheathing). Most people have
been exposed to the workings of the Humoral System in terms of
vaccinations: When you receive a vaccination, you are actually being
injected with a specific ANTIGEN, which will cause an immune response
and result in the production of antibodies and memory cells. Antibodies
can also be introduced into the body resulting in what we call Passive
immunity. Also, during pregnancy, a mother transfers her range of
antibodies to the unborn child, and breast-feeding also does the same.
When you have an allergic reaction there is often a swelling which
occurs, which is nothing more than all the various attackcells rushing
to the scene of exposure to something (e.g., grass pollen, bee sting),
because the WBC's have recognised that pollen or bee sting as 'not
self', and have produced antibodies to it. The attack cells then 'see'
the antibodies in that area, and converge on that area.

(b) T- CELLS (CELL-MEDIATED SYSTEM) This system is the immune system's
    most powerful component, but it is only activated once all the other
    systems have not worked, or have not totally succeeded in
    eliminating the virus, bacteria or abnormal cells. It's main
    cell-type is the T-CELL (also called T-lymphocyte, or CD cells).
    They form another important part of your blood. We will focus on
    three main kinds of cells in this system:

Helper T-cells

(CD4 cell)

Cytotoxic T-cells

(CD 8 cell)

Supressor T-cells

(CD8 cell)

Natural Killer T-cells

(NK Cell)

Page 6

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

These cells 'talk' to each other by means of various chemicals
(cytokines & lymphokines):

Interferon

Gamma Interferon Alpha Interferon

Interleukins

(IL 2, IL6, IL10, etc.)

Other

(e.g., TNF Tumour Necrosis Factor)

For example: In cancer, the Helper T-cells at the site of the cancerous
cells send a message (e.g., TNF) into the system to alert the Natural
Killer cells and Cytotoxic T-cells. When they receive the message, these
'attack' cells then move towards the cancerous cells, and destroy them.
When this is done, the Helper T-cells stop sending out the chemical
alarm message, and the cells return to normal activities. However, if
the Helper T-cells fail to send out the chemical signal, nothing much
happens. In all infections it is the T - Helper cell which sounds the
alarm (by secreting Interleuken) and calls the attack cells to the area
needed. The T --Helper cell also calls B cells to the area and has now
been found to play a vital role in the ability of B cells to react
quickly and effectively to produce antibodies. In HIV/AIDS, the ability
of the Helper T-cells to send alarm signals is the very basis of the
disease itself, as the HIV destroys or immobilises the Helper T-cell
itself, or it tricks the Helper T-cell into believing that the virus is
not 'non-Self'. However, even if the Helper T-cells are not sending out
messages, the Natural Killer Cells are still capable of independently
finding and destroying virally-infected or cancerous cells. They can be
viewed as the body's "independent covert operations force", as their
activity is not dependent upon the 'generals', namely the Helper
T-cells.

ACTIVITY AND STRUCTURE OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM Often, people mistakenly
believe that the presence of a serious disease is an indication that
'the immune system has been destroyed'. In other words, they believe
that the cells which are supposed to protect the body from the disease
are all dead. The reality of the situation is that this is rare, and
that the main problem is usually that the cells responsible for taking
care of the body are simply NOT DOING ANYTHING ! Example: In cancer, the
problem is not so much that the immune system is destroyed, but rather
that the signals that are supposed to be flying around to alert the
attack cells, are simply not being sent out. The same applies to AIDS.
Therefore, simply because you have low white blood cell counts, or low
Tcell counts, is not nearly as important as how ACTIVE these cells are.
Similarly, with Autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and
multiple sclerosis, the question is not so much that the immune system
is 'broken', but rather why it is out of control. If you have an immune
system that has all the right number of various cells, but they do not
communicate or act, then the virus or cancer will simply spread with no
opposition. If a disease involves attacking the T-cells themselves, then
the number of T-cells will decline, and no new ones will replace them.
Replacement of T-cells usually depends upon being alerted to the need
for more, so an under-active immune system gradually leads to less and
less T-cells. Under normal circumstances, with a normally-active immune
system, cancer, viruses, bacteria, allergens, and all other antigens,
will be mopped up and kept in check. The thrust of PNI is to locate
those psychological factors which are contributing towards an inactive
or overactive immune system. This in turn will result in a return to
normal levels of activity and cell numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 7

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 THE CORTISOL MIND-IMMUNE CONNECTION Hormones are chemicals
secreted by various glands in your body, such as the thyroid gland, the
adrenal glands, pituitary, pineal, and pancreas. Hormones regulate many
different body functions, such as energy levels, secretion of milk,
growth of cells, hair growth, sexual fluids, development of eggs in the
ovaries, production of sperm cells, and so on.

In the following pages, two main mind-body systems are explained - the
SAM and HPAC system. \*\*\*

As shall be discussed in later sections, one of the foundations of PNI
concerns how levels of various hormones are regulated and affected by
mental-emotional states. It is important to remember that the key to
understanding hormones centres around BALANCED levels - The Goldilocks
Principle - not too much, not too little - just right. When you get a
fright, your body 'shifts gears' in order to run or fight. For example,
when driving a car on the highway when you are semi-asleep, and a car
cuts in front of you, and your immediate rapid 'awakening' as you slam
on brakes, is the result of a hormone called Adrenaline. Adrenaline
causes increased heart rate, increases the levels of sugar in your body
for immediate use as energy by the muscles, and a range of other
effects. Another important hormone is Human Growth Hormone (HGH), which
is responsible for maintaining the level of growth of muscle tissue,
bone cells, and most other cells. If the level of this hormone is low,
you get wasting of muscles, such as 'Slims Disease' (Wasting Syndrome)
in AIDS. Another crucial hormone is called cortisol. It is secreted by
one section of the adrenal glands (adrenal cortex), which are located at
the top of both kidneys. (Adrenaline is secreted by another part of
these glands, the adrenal medulla). The reason why we focus on cortisol
is because of it's powerful effect on the immune system. Specifically,
too much cortisol suppresses the immune system, which can directly allow
cancerous cells to multiply, and also results in attack cells not
cleaning up virally-infected cells, such as in HIV. Also, too little
cortisol can result in an over-active immune system, where the immune
system starts to attack it's own cells and tissues, such as in
rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. This is why people with
arthritis get cortisone injections to reduce the inflammation. This
focus on cortisol does not mean that this hormone is solely the cause
for any disease, or that PNI is based exclusively upon it's effects. On
the contrary, there are many chemicals and cells which PNI studies,
including neurotransmitters (chemicals released by the brain), and many
others. We are fully aware that this presentation is grossly
oversimplified in terms of immunology and endocrinology. However, the
focus is upon presenting a basic understanding, and not a comprehensive
overview. Therefore, in order to keep the explanation of PNI simple
enough so that we can move on to intervention methods, we will largely
ignore the other highly complex aspects, which are covered by the
articles and books listed in the introduction. The sole purpose of these
introductory notes is to demonstrate that mind-body effects are not a
matter of "mind over matter" or "faith healing", but rather based upon
solidly researched and logical biological mechanisms.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 8

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 System 1

FIGHT-OR-FLIGHT (S.A.M. SYSTEM)

(a) Trog PERCEIVES the situation as controllable.
(b) This activates the HYPOTHALAMUS, which
(c) Activates the SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM, which then...
(d) Activates the ADRENAL MEDULLA to secrete ADRENALINE, and other
    catecholamine hormones, including dopamine & noradrenaline. EFFECTS
    ON THE IMMUNE SYSTEM: Normally, the surge in adrenaline has only a
    temporary suppressive effect on the immune system.

FIGHT: This is Trog. Trog is hungry. Trog sees tiger ! Trog attacks.

However, if this fight-or-flight situation or perception is maintained,
it can have long-term effects, such as: · Decreased NK cell activity ·
Decreased T-cell proliferation It is important to remember that the SAM
system was designed for real-life threats and challenges from outside of
the Self. However, when you PERCEIVE a challenge or threat exists,
regardless of whether it actually exists or not, the SAM system is
activated. Also, the SAM system is based upon the PERCEPTION OF CONTROL
over the threat or challenge: "I can ..." or "I must ..."

FLIGHT: Five minutes later ... BIG Tiger ! See Trog run ! For Trog to
survive as a person (and species), it is important that his body
supports him when he needs to fight or run away. That is what the SAM
system is designed to do: FIGHT AND FLIGHT: · Increases heart rate ·
Breathing rate increases · Blood pressure increases · Glucose (sugar)
levels increase in order to make more energy available to the muscles ·
Pupils of the eyes dilate · Sweating increases · Decreases stomach
digestion · Blood coagulation increases AFTER THE FIGHT OR FLIGHT ·
Pupils constrict · Secretion of mucous · Sweating stops · Heart rate &
breathing rate slow · Stomach activities increase

This SAM system activity is highly appropriate for short term
situations. However, when it becomes long term, physical problems start
to emerge: · High blood pressure · Over-active Heart rate · Burn-out ·
Stressed-Power Syndrome ("I must") The absence of challenge can have the
reverse effect, such as low blood pressure. In the distant past,
external threats necessitated adrenaline increases. However, today the
threats are internal - "I must", impatience, etc., which causes
chronically elevated adrenaline levels.

How does this happen ? Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 9

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 System 2

HELPLESS-HOPELESS (WOUNDED) (H.P.A.C. SYSTEM)

· · · · · · · ·

Decreases T-cell & antibody production Suppresses T-cell activity
Reduces macrophage movement Decreases the ability of various cells to
destroy cancerous and virally-infected cells Reduces RNA formation in
muscles, causing muscle weakness Reduces fever Blocks allergic reactions
Reduces immunity to all foreign invaders

If cortisol levels remain high for quite a while: · All the above
immune-suppressive effects become chronic · Lymph gland structure
deteriorates · Cognitive damage can occur, such as anxiety and
depression. The tiger bit poor old Trog. There is nothing he can do
about it, except withdraw and lick his wounds. To do this, he needs
other people, like his wife Trig, to give him sympathy and attention,
because he can't hunt or find food while he is wounded. The HPAC system
was designed to help in the healing of wounds. Often, when someone is
wounded, the swelling (response by the immune system) can be too great,
and can cause damage to the tissue. An example is an allergy, where you
swell up and breathing can be blocked. The active ingredient in the HPAC
system is CORTISOL, which SUPPRESSES THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, to ensure that
the wound heals without too much swelling. Cortisol thus keeps the
immune system in check. How does this happen ? (a) The actual or
PERCEIVED LOSS OF CONTROL (WOUNDED-NESS) causes the Hypothalamus to
secrete a chemical called CRF (Corticotropic Releasing Factor). (b) CRF
then stimulates the PITUITARY GLAND to secrete another hormone, called
ACTH (AdrenoCortico-Tropic Hormone), which then travels to the... (c)
ADRENAL CORTEX, which then secretes CORTISOL into the blood.

It is important to realise that PERCEIVED LOSS OF CONTROL, EMOTIONAL
DEPENDENCY, or 'WOUNDED-NESS' produces the exact same effects as actual
wounded-ness and loss of control. Originally, the HPAC System evolved to
deal with actual wounds and actual external situations where control was
lost. However, nowadays, it is the INTERNAL PERCEPTION OF LOSS OF
CONTROL OR WOUNDED-NESS that produces the same effects. \*\*\* In the
course of human history, the major trigger for cortisol was being
wounded. However, nowadays the major cause of cortisol secretion is
emotional distress. Cortisol is the classic "Stress Hormone". Therefore,
chronic emotional distress - upset, fear, worry, anxiety, depression -
result directly in chronic increases in cortisol, which in turn lead to
long term suppression of the immune system.

The effects of cortisol are powerful:

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 10

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 H.P.A.C. SYSTEM

THE LESSON OF THE S.A.M. SYSTEM

HPAC WOUNDED-NESS HELPLESSNESS / HOPELESSNESS PERCEIVED LOSS OF CONTROL

S.A.M. ACTIVITY & CHALLENGE FIGHT & FLIGHT PERCEPTION OF CONTROL

(Cortisol)

(Adrenaline)

·

Too much activity and challenge, without any relaxation, leads to
chronic over-activity of the SAM system, which leads to suppression of
the immune system; chronic high blood pressure; chronic strain on the
heart muscles.

·

Too little activity and challenge leads to underactivity of the SAM
system, leading to low blood pressure, low energy levels.

·

Having challenges are important.

·

Research indicates that when perceived ability is greater than actual
ability, the "Stressed Power Syndrome" or the "I must" scenario, then
the SAM System is chronically over-activated, and the immune system is
suppressed. (Kasl, S.V., Evans, A.S., Niederman, J.C.,1979, Psychosocial
risk factors in the development of infectious mononucleosis,
Psychosomatic Medicine, 41(6), pp.445466).

·

Too much 'wounded-ness' can lead to chronic suppression of the immune
system.

·

This is manifested as slow reactions by the immune system to cancerous
cells, viruses, or any other antigen.

·

Too little cortisol, stemming from refusal to deal with feelings of
hurt - excessive control - , can lead to an over-active immune system,
such as autoimmune diseases, such as arthritis and multiple sclerosis.

·

When wounded - emotionally or physically - it is appropriate to 'lick
your wounds' for a while. Then get on with activities and challenges.
Vulnerability when hurt is appropriate and healthy.

·

General attitude of helplessness leads to a suppressed immune system.

Too little stimulation or excitement and goals leads to under-secretion
of Human Growth Hormone, and consequent muscle wasting. THEREFORE:

· · · · · ·

·

Have goals and challenges Know when to rest & relax Is the threat real
or imagined? Be realistic about your abilities When is the challenge
over /complete ? "Must" ? "Have to" ? Is that real ?

· · · ·

THEREFORE: Deal with hurts as they occur. Don't wallow in past hurts to
get attention and sympathy. Beliefs of inability and low self-worth
create a perception of absence of control, as control for feelings
depends on others. "Can't" ? Says who ?

THE LESSON OF THE Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 11

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 On the following page is a four-part Type-A, B and C
model, which connects these various personality 'types' and the S.A.M.
and H.P.A.C. systems, whether chronically over-active or underactive. It
should be understood that this is simply a model, partially based upon
research, and partially based upon clinical observations. Furthermore,
there is, in our opinion, no such thing as a rigid 'personality type'.
We prefer to view these categories as the product of habitual and
inflexible coping styles, based upon early learning experiences and
decisions. We respectfully request you to refrain from statements such
as "This is why you have cancer - you are a Type C #2 !" There is no-one
who perfectly slots into any specific coping style, 100 percent of the
time. We all have the ability to shift from one coping strategy to
another. However, the area of inflexibility is of concern when
discussing this model. The purpose of the diagram is to provoke
discussion, and to identify coping strategies. It is by nature
over-simplified in order to facilitate this discussion. \*\*\*

INFLEXIBILITY OF COPING STYLE We all walk the tight-rope of life,
sometimes swinging into one of the Type A's or C's, depending upon the
circumstances. This is natural and normal. Indeed, it would be a sign of
inflexibility if we did not shift our coping styles as situations
change. In fact, it is the rigidity - inflexibility - of coping that
leads to immunological problems, because this results in chronic over-
or under-stimulation of certain hormones, such as adrenaline and
cortisol. \* Suls, J. & Fletcher, B. (1985). The relative efficacy of
avoidant and nonavoidant coping strategies: A meta-analysis. Health
Psychology, 4(3), 249-288.

SHORT-TERM versus LONG-TERM EMOTIONAL DISTRESS

- Knapp, P.H., Levy, E.M., Giorgi, R.G., Black, P.H., Fox, B.H., &
  Heeren, T.C. (1992). Short-term immunological effects of induced
  emotion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 54, 133-148.
- Zakowski, S.G., McAllister, C.G., Deal, M., & Baum, A. (1992). Stress,
  reactivity, and immune function in healthy men. Health Psychology,
  11(4), 223-232.

THE TWO YEAR LOSS-TO-DISEASE PHENOMENA One of the most persistent
phenomena regarding disease onset, is that most serious illnesses are
preceded by some significant loss, in the period of 18 months to two
years prior to onset of symptoms. This has been found with cancer (K.R.
Pelletier, 1977, Mind as healer, Mind as slayer, London: Allen & Unwin
Ltd.), rheumatoid arthritis (G.H.B. Baker, 1982, Life events before the
onset of rheumatoid arthritis, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 38,
173-177), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (McClary, A.R., Meyer, E., &
Weitzman, 1955, Observations on the roles of the mechanism of depression
in some patients with disseminated lupus erythematosus, Psychosomatic
Medicine, 17, 311-321), Graves Disease (Weiner 1977 333-349), Diabetes
Type I (Juvenile onset) (Slawson, Flynn & Kollar, 1963), Inflammatory
Bowel Disease (Weiner, H., 1991, In Ader & Felten's
Psychoneuroimmunology Vol.2, p.996), multiple sclerosis (Grant, I.,
1987, Life events and onset and exacerbation of symptoms of multiple
sclerosis, abstract presented to the Symposium on Mental Disorders,
Cognitive Defects, and Their Treatment in Multiple Sclerosis, Nov 18-21,
Odense, Norway), and we would include AIDS, based on our personal
observations. The reason why there is this 18 to 24 month gap between
the loss and the symptoms developing, can be largely explained in terms
of LOW GRADE CHRONIC STRESS. This refers to low levels of persistent
distress, unresolved grief, and similar 'not too obvious' anxiety and
depression. This gradually suppressed the immune system, until symptoms
emerge at a visible level. When we focus upon coping styles and other
long-term psychological issues, we are focusing upon reducing or
eliminating the sources of this low-grade chronic stress.

Research indicates that day-to-day, or moment-to-moment emotional ups
and downs have an effect on the immune system. However, these short-term
ups and downs return to normal levels within minutes afterwards.
However, long-term emotional states have a more severe and lasting
effect, particularly if maintained for months at a time. Often, the
effect is slight, but if that slight effect is maintained for more than
six months, the immune system becomes suppressed or damaged. \* Moss,
R.B., Moss, H.B., & Peterson, R. (1989). Microstress, mood, and natural
killer-cell activity. Psychosomatics, 30(3), 279-283.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 12

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 SAM SPECTRUM Chronic Adrenaline Levels

HPAC SPECTRUM Chronic Cortisol Levels

TYPE A ... #1

TYPE A ... #2

Stressed Power Syndrome

Stressed Control Syndrome

Fear of failure precipitates

Power-Over "Must" "I Will" Fear of Failure - Try Harder

Fear of Loss of Control

Power-Over "I will ensure" "I won't allow" Fear loss of control =
Control More

Self-Worth = Success (internal) Never good enough. Impatience "I remove
pain by attacking it" Over-estimate resources & abilities Chronic
elevation of adrenaline Health problems (over-active SAM): · High blood
pressure · Heart problems · Immune system at risk of crashing resulting
in ME or CFIDS ( Chronic Fatigue Immune Dysfunction).

· · ·

Middle Ground (Type B #1) Balanced Action & Relaxation Has goals, but
self-worth not dependent on achievement of goals. "Where I am is OK. AND
I want (goal)".

Health problems (under-active SAM): · Loss of dream/goal precipitates ·
Low blood pressure · Wasting of muscle tissue · Low blood sugar levels ·
Fatigue and /or CFIDS Chronic under-active adrenaline, cortisol levels
begin to increase Under-estimate abilities & resources "I avoid pain by
not trying" Conformity & Apathy Self-Worth = Avoid Failure "No Use
Trying" (failure inevitable)

Fear of failure = Don't Risk "Can't" "Be Realistic" HOPELESS
OVER-POWERED Precipitated by significant Failure

TYPE C ... #1

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Stubborn refusal to deal with issues. Considers others as lacking
competence and responsibility thus takes control over them. Self-worth =
Extent of control over "I prevent pain by controlling everything"
Chronic suppression of cortisol Health problems (under-active HPAC): ·
Rheumatoid Arthritis · Multiple Sclerosis · Self attacks Self

· · · ·

Middle Ground (Type B #2 Allows Self to feel emotions as they occur
Takes responsibility for own emotions Knows when to control, when not.
Self-worth internalised, not co-dependent

Health problems (over-active HPAC) · Suppressed immune system disorders
· Cancer · AIDS symptom development Chronic excessive Cortisol
People-pleasing. Martyr. Nice person. Suppressed Anger & emotions "I
avoid pain by not hurting others" Self-Worth = Depends on others "If you
love me ... you wouldn't hurt me" Control others through Guilt

Fear of No Control = Don't try (Loss of control is inevitable) "You make
me feel ..." ... "I'll try" "What will people say?"

HELPLESS OVER-POWERED

Precipitated by significant Loss

TYPE C ... #2

Page 13

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

SUMMARY The basic premise of PNI is not that mental-emotional factors
'cause' disease. Rather, it places emphasis upon how certain
mental-emotional factors lead to a gradual or sudden suppression of the
body's natural defence mechanisms, which in turn may precipitate
disease, depending on genetic vulnerabilities and other physiological
factors. The following range of mental-emotional factors have been
clearly demonstrated to suppress the immune system: \* Anxiety \*
Depressioon \* Absence of Social Support \* Significant Loss \*
Unemployment \* Exam-related distress \* Loneliness \* Bereavement \*
Miscarriage \* Retirement \* Fear \* Suppressed anger \* Suppressed
emotions \* Denial coping \* Stressed Power ("I must") \* Living in a
hazardous location \* Taking care of someone with a serious disease \*
Low marriage quality \* Divorce & separation \* Insomnia \* Low
self-esteem

CAN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM BE ENHANCED THROUGH PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANS ? It is
all good and well discussing how psychological factors can suppress the
immune system, and thereby contribute towards disease. For those with a
serious disease, a more important question concerns how to boost the
immune system in order to alleviate or slow down the disease
progression. This question is also the central focus of this training.
The answer is unequivocally "Yes", and this statement is based upon a
large body of research.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Examples: Robert Ader and Nicholas Cohen clearly demonstrated that the
immune system can be behaviourally conditioned. It is clear that the
mind-immune connection works both ways. \* Ader, R., & Cohen, N., 1975,
Behaviorally conditioned immunosuppression, Psychosomatic Medicine,
37(4), pp.333-340.

Social contact and relaxation have been shown to increase Natural Killer
cell activity levels. \* Kiecolt-Glaser, J., et al, 1985, Psychosocial
enhancement of immunocompetence in a geriatric population, Health
Psych., 4(1), 25-41.

The same result can be achieved with visualisation.

- Zachariae, R., et al, 1990, Effect of psychological intervention in
  the form of relaxation and guided imagery on cellular immune function
  in normal healthy subjects, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 54,
  pp.32-39.

Viral conditions such as warts respond well to hypnosis. \* Spanos,
N.P., Williams, V., & Gwynn, M.I.,1990, Efects of hypnotic, placebo, and
salicyclic acid treatments on wart regression, Psychosomatic Medicine,
52, pp.109-114.

Visualisation reduces susceptibility to viral exposure such as
tuberculin \* Smith, G.R., & McDaniel, S.M., 1983, Psychologically
mediated effect on the delayed hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculin
in humans, Psychosomatic Medicine, 45(1), pp.65-70.

Imagery and music can increase antibody secretions, such as
immunoglobulin A. \* Rider, M.S., & Weldin, C., 1990, Imagery,
Improvisation, and Immunity, The Arts in Psychotherapy, 17, pp.211-216.

Watching pleasant movies can also increase antibodies and increase
T-cell activity.

- Green, M.L., Green, R.G., & Santoro, W., 1988, Daily relaxation
  modifies serum and salivary immunoglobulins and psychophysiologic
  symptom severity, Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, 13(3), pp.187-199.

Similar effects have been obtained with humour.

- Martin, R.A., & Dobbin, J.P., 1988, Sense of humor, hassles, and
  immunoglobulin A: Evidence for a stress-moderating effect of humor,
  International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 18(2), pp.93-105.
  Disclosing traumatic events also boosts the immune system.
  \*Pennebaker, J.W., & Beall, S.K., 1986, Confronting a traumatic
  event: Toward an understanding of inhibition and disease, Journal of
  Abnormal Psychology, 95(3), pp.274-281.
- Pennebaker, J.W., Hughes, C.F., & O'Heeron, R.C., 1987, The
  psychophysiology of confession: Linking inhibitory and psychosomatic
  processes, J. of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(4), pp.781-793.
- Pennebaker, J.W., & Susman, J.R., 1988, Disclosure of traumas and
  psychosomatic processes. Social Science & Medicine, 26(3), pp.327-332.
- Pennebaker, J.W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J.K.,& Glaser, R., 1988, Disclosure
  of traumas and immune function: Health implications for
  psychotherapy. J. of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 56(2),
  pp.239-245.

These are just a few of the many studies demonstrating that the immune
system can be enhanced through psychological intervention. There are
also many anecdotal (single case) reports concerning how patients
reversed their cancer, AIDS, and many other diseases, often dramatically
and rapidly. We encourage the PNI practitioner to retain copies of such
reports, in order to show to clients, simply because most people are
more ready to believe a 'real life' case than all the statistics and
details which explains how it works !

Page 14

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

ROLE-PLAY EXERCISE 1: During the following exercises, delegates are
requested to make notes of areas that they find difficult to explain to
someone else. Delegates form pairs, to role-play: (a) Person with Cancer
(b) PNI Practitioner PNI Practitioner's task: (i) Explain to client what
PNI is, and how it works, in no more than 15 minutes. (ii) Explain how
specific coping styles can be detrimental to cancer. REVERSE ROLES. (a)
Person with AIDS (b) PNI Practitioner PNI Practitioner's task: (i)
Explain to client what PNI is, and how it works, in no more than 15
minutes. (ii) Explain how specific coping styles can be detrimental in
AIDS.

ROLE-PLAY EXERCISE 2: Delegates pair off. One role-plays the client, and
the other roleplays the PNI Practitioner. Client: "Hello, my name is
Doris Brown. I have a question for you: I have been emotionally up and
down for the last few days, and I am worried that my immune system is
going to suffer as a result. Can you give me some information on this
please ?" PNI Practitioner: (Answers the question, concerning shortterm
and long-term immune changes due to emotional ups and downs). REVERSE
ROLES. Client: "Hello, my name is John Smith. I sometimes don't express
my feelings, and sometimes I do. Is this a problem in terms of my immune
system ?" PNI Practitioner: (Answers the question, concerning coping
styles - flexibility versus rigidity).

NEW PARTNER.

REVERSE ROLES. (a) Person with Arthritis (b) PNI Practitioner PNI
Practitioner's task: (i) Explain to client what PNI is, and how it
works, in no more than 15 minutes. (ii) Explain how specific coping
styles can be detrimental to Arthritis. REVERSE ROLES: (a) Person with
High blood pressure (b) PNI Practitioner PNI Practitioner's task: (i)
Explain to client what PNI is, and how it works, in no more than 15
minutes. (ii) Explain how specific coping styles can be detrimental to
high blood pressure.

Client: "Everyone says that I am a Type A Personality, and that I will
have a heart attack one day. Is this true?" PNI Practitioner: (Answers
the question, concerning coping styles - flexibility versus rigidity).
REVERSE ROLES: Client: "I have heard that there is this hormone called
Cortisol. Could tell me about it please ?" PNI Practitioner: (Answers
the question).

REVERSE ROLES: (a) Person with Low blood pressure (b) PNI Practitioner
PNI Practitioner's task: (i) Explain to client what PNI is, and how it
works, in no more than 15 minutes. (ii) Explain how specific coping
styles can be detrimental to low blood pressure.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 15

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

1.2 RAPPORT SKILLS In the following pages are descriptions of how to
obtain a client's physical and behavioural assessment. Although this
sounds like a routine task, there are fundamental skills that are
necessary in order to ensure that the client provides accurate and
useful information. For example: During the training of personnel from a
health clinic, an odd event was mentioned, namely that one staff member
asked the client whether they had ever injured their neck, and the
client replied "no". Fifteen minutes later, another staff member asked
the exact same question, and received a "Yes - about four years ago in a
car accident". Why would the client provide such different answers to a
relatively normal question ? Did they decide to lie the first time ?
When the client was asked about this, she stated that the first time she
was asked, she honestly could not remember ever injuring her neck.
However, when the second person asked her, "I suddenly remembered that I
hurt my neck a few years ago". When asked why she remembered the second
time, she replied "I don't know - it just came to mind when she asked
me." It was later ascertained that the first staff member had not been
in unconscious rapport with the client, while the second staff member
had unconsciously 'connected' with the client, making it unconsciously
'safe' for that memory to emerge. Although there are other explanations
for what happened, the following section on Rapport Skills will clearly
demonstrate that the 'not remember' and 'it just came into my mind'
occurrences are not unusual or unexpected when it comes to rapport
between client and practitioner. Fundamentally, unless the client
feels - at a deep and unconscious level - that they are 'safe' with the
practitioner, PNI interventions can be drawn out and difficult. It
should be clearly understood that the field of Rapport Skills is a large
and exciting area in and of itself. We will not be covering all the
various dimensions and aspects of rapport; Instead we will cover the
aspects which we consider to be the most important for the task at hand,
namely establishing non-verbal rapport, and the ability to shift the
client from associated to dissociated states, depending on the task
requirement.

Visual - Auditory - Kinaesthetic (Sight - Sound - Feeling) Communication
consists of many things, not only the words we use. We use facial
expressions, the tone of our voice, and also our body posture to express
what we want to say. According to Mehrabian and Ferris (1967; Inference
of Attitudes from Nonverbal Communication in Two Channels; Journal of
Counselling Psychology; vol.31, pp.248-252), 55 percent of your
communication is expressed

through body language, 38 percent by the tone of your voice, and only 7
percent by the actual word contents. Clearly, the words that a person
uses are only a fraction of their total communication.

When we talk about communication, it is important to recognise that each
person processes (represents) incoming and outgoing information in terms
of pictures, sounds, and feelings. This occurs at both the verbal and
non-verbal level: Visual (see), Auditory (hear/sounds), and Kinaesthetic
(feelings). This does not refer to the content of the communication, but
rather to the way the contents are understood and expressed. If I were
to explain something to you, and then asked you whether you understand
what I have said, you might say "Yes, I understand". The question is:
HOW do you understand ? Did you create an image/picture of the subject
(VISUAL), or do you have an internal voice inside, which sounds like me,
and when you think about the subject, you hear my voice explaining it
(AUDITORY), or do you recall the feelings you felt while I was
explaining it (KINAESTHETIC)? Common sense indicates that everyone uses
all three kinds of communications. However, each person has a preference
for one of those three senses. For example:

If you wish to explore Rapport Skills in greater depth, the following
references may assist you:

A visual person would be likely to say... "I can SEE what you mean" or
"SHOW me how to do that";

·

An Auditory person would rather say... "That SOUNDS right" or "TELL me
about it";

·

Alder, H. (1994). NLP (Neuro Linguistic Programming), pp.54-67. London:
Piatkus. O'Connor, J., & Seymour, J. (1990). Introducing NLP: Neuro
Linguistic Programming, pp.15-48. San Francisco: Aquarian Press.

While a Kinaesthetic person would say... "That FEELS right" or "I can't
get to GRIPS with this problem". The kinds of words - VAK - indicates
HOW THE PERSON PROCESSES INFORMATION - in PICTURES (VISUAL), VOICES OR
SOUNDS (AUDITORY), OR FEELINGS (KINAESTHETIC.

V.A.K. Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Therefore, if you (the PNI Practitioner) are presenting information in a
visual manner, and the client is a more kinaesthetic (feeling) person,
then your communication will break down at some point. It is therefore
important to identify the client's VAK preference, and adjust yourself
accordingly.

Page 16

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

V = Visual What is seen with the eyes. Also mentally remembered or
created pictures/images Visual people tend to talk fast, breathe fast,
usually from the top of their chest, and use a lot of words which refer
to pictures: "look here !", "get a perspective", "seeing is believing",
"picture this", "I see what you mean", and many more. A visual person is
likely to tell you that something "doesn't look right" when something
goes wrong. If you were to sell a car to a visual person, you would need
to focus on how wonderful the car LOOKS, and how other people will
admire them when they SEE them driving that car. Also, you will notice
that a visual person's eyes will often flick upwards to the left or
right (the visual area of the mind), or will look straight ahead (also a
visual area).

A = Auditory What is heard with the ears. Sounds. Also, mentally
remembered or created sounds. Auditory people tend to speak at medium
speed, do not breathe as fast as visual people, breathe from the middle
of their chest, and place a great deal of importance on voice tone -
they get irritated easily by a rough or whining voice, and soothed by a
gentle, calm voice. The words they use also reflect the importance they
place on sound: "This doesn't sound right"; "I just wanted to sound out
this idea"; "No one listens to me"; "I hear you"; "What are you trying
to say ?"; etc. If you were to sell a car to an auditory person, you
would focus upon the sound of the engine, how quietly it drives, the
wonderful stereo system in the car, and what people will say when they
hear that they have bought the car.

EYE-MOVEMENTS The following table shows the direction the person's eyes
go, for an average right-handed person. Some left-handed (even some
right-handed) people are different. The directions (eg., up-left) refer
to YOUR CLIENTS perspective as you look at the person (HIS/HER LEFT).
Up-Right

VISUAL

Constructed Right

AUDITORY Constructed

Down-Right (FEELINGS) KINAESTHETIC

Up

VISUAL Abstract

Up-Left

VISUAL Recalled

Straight Ahead

VISUAL Certain Down (FEELINGS) KINAESTHETIC

Left

AUDITORY Recalled

Down-Left

AUDITORY internal voice listening

This information is interesting, and there are many potential
applications. However, there are other equally important areas of
non-verbal rapport.

When a person is listening to something, they tend to look downwards to
their left (if they are right-handed). An auditory person will also
flick their eyes to the left or right..

K = Kinaesthetic (Feeling) Feelings felt in the body, such as heat,
cold, pressure, nausea, etc. Also, feelings remembered or created. A
kinaesthetic (feeling) person talks slowly, breathes slowly and from the
bottom of their chest or stomach. They almost always look downwards
(usually to their right if they are right-handed). They will tend to use
words which reflect touch and feelings, such as: "It doesn't feel
right"; "I can't get a grip on this"; "I can't hold on to this any
more", etc. If you were to sell a car to a kinaesthetic person, you
would emphasise the feeling of the seats, get them to touch the smooth
exterior, etc. There are other senses, such as Smell and Taste, but
these are not used very much in counselling.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 17

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

UNCONSCIOUS RAPPORT In order to enhance your ability to establish
rapport with someone else, we also need to examine more of the
non-verbal behaviour, such as: \* Breathing rate (speed) & position
(high in chest, whole chest, stomach) \* Body posture \* Speed of speech
\* Eye-blink rate \* Voice tone \* Head tilt \* Skin colour \* Small
movements (eg hands, feet, tapping)

VISUAL (Sight)

AUDITORY (Sound)

KINESTHETIC (Feeling)

Eye Movements Up & Left Up & Right Straight Ahead Head Position Tilted
Upwards

Breathing High in Chest Shallow Holding breath Voice Speed Quick Bursts
of words Voice Tone High Pitch Nasal Skin Tone Pale Muscle Tension Tight
High Shoulders Tense Abdomen

The excessive use of the following words also indicate a person who is
not in contact with their senses / body, and is largely dissociated
(disconnected).

become aware of change know nice remember think understand

believe consider learn notice respect

These words are all non-specific words, which do not reflect either
Visual, Auditory, or Kinaesthetic. The interaction between the dominant
VAK processing system (Representation System) of the recipient and the
communicator will largely determine whether the recipient will
"instinctively" feel safe, listened to, and understood by the
communicator. Almost all of this happens at a non-verbal level.

EXERCISE: VAK EXPLAINING Down & Left Level & Right Level & Left

Down & Right

Level Tilted Down Tilted to Left Tilted to Right Ear directed at speaker
Even breathing Whole Chest

Deep breathing Low in Stomach

Rhythmic Even, Regular

Slow Long pauses

Soothing

Low Deep tone Breathy

Even

Flushed

The predominantly Visual, Auditory & Kinaesthetic delegates are
identified. The object of this exercise is to communicate with verbal
rapport with someone from a different VAK modality. Pair off with
someone. Person A role-plays the client. Person B role-plays the
Practitioner. 1. Practitioner uses non-sense words to ask the client
about their life - work, interests, hobbies, family. \* Practitioner is
to listen and observe the client's eyemovements, breathing rate and
location, voice tone, speed of speech, and head tilt carefully - Is the
client Visual, Auditory, or Kinaesthetic ? 2. Reverse roles. 3. For
homework write out how you would explain to a client "What PNI is",
using V, A, and K language.

Even movements Relaxed muscles Even tension

Non-Sense Words The following words are non-sensory (i.e., can be
understood by the recipient in either a visual, auditory or feeling
manner. This can be useful when initially communicating with someone
whose dominant VAK mode is unknown.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 18

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 CALIBRATION The term "CALIBRATION" refers to the accurate
and detailed observation of a person's external behaviour (words,
eyemovements & body language).

(Match & Mismatch Exercise Conducted first).

RAPPORT: MATCHING & MISMATCHING In the previous exercise you experienced
the power of MATCHING someone's body language. MATCHING is the process
in which you consciously create RAPPORT with someone, while MISMATCHING
is where you consciously break RAPPORT. In the earlier exercises, you
learned how to use your senses to notice another person's body cues. Now
the objective is to use that information to establish rapport with
anyone. Sometimes, in order to establish rapport, all that is required
is to match the person's breathing and use the same VAK words as they
do. Other times, it can be more subtle, such as tapping your feet under
a table when you see them do the same. RAPPORT is a natural process,
which we all do every day, without realizing it. However, there are
times and people whom we find very difficult to 'connect with'. This is
where it becomes valuable to know how to consciously create RAPPORT. It
is important to know that, when you practice RAPPORT in the 'real
world' - the world outside of the training room - it is important not to
let the other person see what you are doing. When a person sees you
copying their body language, they feel somehow offended. RAPPORT
building needs to be subtle, not obvious or apparent.

Exercise: Establishing Rapport Split into pairs - A & B. Person A talks
about a dissappointing experience. Person B matches breathing rate and
location, body posture, and any other movements. Swap. Person A talks
about an exciting day in their life. Person B matches breathing rate and
location, body posture, and any other movements. Swap. Conversation. A
starts talking about their recent holiday. Person B replies, asks
questions in order to obtain more information. However, Person B matches
A's VAK language, body language, breathing rate and location, body
posture, etc. Swap. New partner Conversation: A talks about a person who
they do not like or with whom they are having a problem. Person B asks
questions and makes appropriate comments, using A's VAK language, body
language, breathing rate and location, posture, etc. Swap. New partner
Conversation: A talks about their childhood, and what it was like to
grow up there. Person B matches verbal and non-verbal. Swap. New partner
Conversation: Person A talks about "the happiest day of my life". Person
B matches verbal and non-verbal. Swap.

For example, if you stop what you are saying, and then adjust your body
to match theirs, it will be obvious what you are doing. However, if you
continue talking and adjust while you are talking, the adjustments tend
to go unnoticed.

THROUGHOUT THIS TRAINING YOU ARE REQUIRED TO ESTABLISH RAPPORT WITH YOUR
'CLIENT' !

Therefore, realize that the following exercises may be experienced as a
little artificial. That is the nature of learning in a training room -
everyone knows what the objective is.

YOU WILL NOTICE HOW THE TECHNIQUES CAN GET DIFFICULT WHEN YOU HAVE
STEPPED OUT OF RAPPORT.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 19

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

ASSOCIATION & DISSOCIATION When you look and listen at their body and
words, you will notice that when someone is talking about their "point
of view", different "points of view" have different physical postures
and language. There are two very useful "points of view" -associated and
dissociated - which are very useful to notice and utilise, depending on
the situation.

Postures for Association & Dissociation (1) Sitting in your chair, lean
back comfortably against the back of the chair, allow your shoulders to
move back, let your eyes relax and de-focus a little. Lift your chin a
little (above the horizontal) and let your head tilt a little backwards.
Let your body become still. How you do feel ? How does this state affect
how you process the world around you ? This is the physical posture for
DISSOCIATION. You will notice that this state enhances your ability to
think about things, listen without judging, be objective, and analyse,
because it facilitates you in "stepping out of the world", and being the
neutral observer. \*\* *(2) Now lean forward, with your lower back
touching the back of the chair. Adjust your posture as if you were
preparing to catch a ball, scanning and looking around you in all
directions. This is the physical state for ASSOCIATION. This physical
posture tends to get you to be "in the world" actively engaged in what
is happening around you. When communicating with someone, it is useful
to notice whether they are associated or dissociated, as this will
determine whether they are in neutral thinking or listening mode,
analysing things without feeling intensely, or alternatively, whether
they are "in" the experience, feeling it fully.* Acknowledgement:
Andreas & Faulkner, 1994 A woman goes to a party. For several hours, she
laughs, chats, dances, and generally has a wonderful time. A truly
delightful evening. As she goes to collect her coat and bag at the front
door, someone accidentally bumps into her and spills their drink on her
dress. It is a new and expensive dress, and it is stained. She is
terribly upset as she goes home five minutes later. Two months later she
meets a friend who was at the party. The friend says 'hello', and states
that it has been quite a while since they spent time together, in fact,
they haven't seen each other since the party. Immediately, the women
gets upset and angry, and says "Please - don't mention that night - it
was horrible ! I get upset every time I think about it !"

Fears, motivation, phobias, and many other phenomena can be understood
similarly, if you consider that, in the ASSOCIATED state, a person is
seeing, hearing and feeling things from "inside" their own body. For
example, a person recalling seeing something will see the picture 'as
if' they were looking our of their eyes. To recall the same image from a
dissociated perspective would mean that they see themselves as part of
the picture, looking at their own body, not from inside their body.
Whether you (or the recipient) is ASSOCIATED or DISSOCIATED makes a
profound difference when communicating, and also in how you are
experiencing something.

Exercise: Stepping in an out of an experience Pair off - A and B A is
the Recipient. B is the Communicator (1) A closes their eyes and recalls
a PLEASANT event. When A has selected the event (does not have to say
what the contents are), B asks A to step into the event, as if they were
seeing and hearing and feeling it happen from inside their body. When A
has done that, s/he says "OK". Then A maintains that for about 15
seconds. Person B then notes the non-verbal posture of A. Pay attention
to breathing. When that is done, B says "OK". (2) Now B asks A to step
out of the experience, and see-hear the same event, as if they were
looking at themselves experiencing the event. When A has done that, A
says "OK", and maintains that perspective from about 15 seconds, while B
once again notes the body cues and postures. Pay attention to breathing.
(3) After the 15 seconds have elapsed, B says "OK", and A opens their
eyes, stands up, walks around briefly, and sits down again. (4) B then
relates their observation. A relates how the two perspectives affected
their experience of the memory of the event. (5) A and B swap, and
repeat the process. \* The process is repeated, using the memory of a
mildly UNPLEASANT event. \* The process is repeated, using something
that is mildly FEARED. Examples: Fear of saying something to someone;
public speaking, etc.

Objectively speaking, the woman spent four hours having an absolutely
wonderful evening, followed by five minutes of upsetness. Yet, when she
thinks about that night, all she remembers is the ruined dress and the
upsetness that followed. Why ? The reason is simple: From her "point of
view", the pleasant memories (sights-sounds- feelings) were dime and far
away from her, while the unpleasant memory (sights-soundsfeelings) were
close and bright. In other words, she was strongly ASSOCIATED with the
unpleasant memory, and DISSOCIATED from the pleasant memories.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 20

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

'DIFFICULT CLIENTS'

Specifiers When you hear these words, it is useful to ask the person:

Why is association and dissociation important in terms of rapport ?
There are certain kinds of "difficult" recipients: One is the depressed
recipient. They tend to be fully and continually associated with
negative memories, images, sounds and feelings, and dissociated from
pleasant memories, images, sounds and feelings. It would not be
advisable to establish full rapport with such a person, as this would
necessitate matching the negativity. Instead, it would be more useful
and beneficial to ask them to lean back a little, pull their shoulders
back a little, and generally encourage them to assume a dissociated
state when discussing negative image, sounds or feelings. Conversely,
when discussing positive thoughts and feelings, encourage them to assume
a more associated state. Secondly, there is the "emotional roller
coaster" - the person who intensely feels everything, pleasant or
unpleasant. They seem to be permanently associated. Consequently, they
find it difficult to gain a wider, objective perspective on their
thoughts and feelings. Thus one would encourage the person towards a
dissociated state when discussing unpleasant memories, thoughts or
feelings. Finally, there is the "in the head" person, who does not seem
to associate with any experience, pleasant or unpleasant. They speak in
abstract terms, rarely using any VAK words. They think and analyse, but
do not feel. Consequently, they are not in a position to feel pleasure.
Such a person would be required to be guided towards a more associated
posture and state.

GETTING TO THE SPECIFICS OF AN ISSUE Certain kinds of questions lead to
long protracted inconclusive answers and discussions. For example: "Why
do you get jealous ?". The following guidelines may be useful to keep in
mind: WHY ... leads to values, not specifics WHAT .... WHERE .... WHEN
... HOW ... WHO... lead to specifics

"Always ? ... When last ...?" "Everyone ? ... Who specifically ?" or
"...Give me an example of someone who ..." "Never ? ... Are there
moments when ... ?" "Society/People say ... ? Can you think of someone
you know who says...?" "Everywhere ? ... Where, in your experience ...
?" "All Men/Women/Children ? Who do you know does that ?"

Standard Fall-back Specifiers "Give me an example" "When last did you
experienced that ?" In order to get more specific about an internal
process: "How do you do that ?" "How do you come to that conclusion ?"
"What reference do you have for that thought ?"

EXAMPLES I am uncomfortable About what ? About whom ? I don't understand
You don't understand what ? He's a better cook Better than whom ? She's
a worse driver Worse than whom ? They don't listen Who specifically does
not listen/talk to you ? It doesn't matter What specifically doesn't
matter ? He rejected me How did he reject you ? She left me Where did
she leave you ? I want respect How do you want to be respected ? I must
improve ... How do you want to ...? He never listens Never ? People
don't ... What would happen if they did ? I need to do that What would
happen if you didn't ? I can't go there What stops you ? You make me
sick How do I make you sick ? Her voice irritates me How does her voice
irritate you ? You don't like me How do you know that I don't like you ?
She should know... How should she know... ? It's bad to be lazy How do
you know it's bad ? This is right According to whom ?

Generalisations Often, people generalise: Everyone, Always, Never,
Society, One, People, Everywhere, Men, Women, Children, etc.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 21

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Exercise: Specifying

1.3 ASSESS COPING STYLES

Pair off - A and B.

In the field of psychology, there are many definitions and measurements
of coping. In PNI interventions, we focus upon specific coping styles
which have been demonstrated to suppress or enhance immune functioning.

A selects a statement from the following list. B asks a question that
leads to more specifics, using who, how, where, what, etc. A and B have
turns to make a statement, and to ask a questions. I love my job I hate
my job This exercise is boring People are dishonest I will win in the
end I always have to do all the work

There is no questionnaire that will tell you exactly who and who will
not get a specific disease. In other words, questionnaires are not
predictive. This is indeed unfortunate, as this would allow preventive
intervention to occur. Instead, we have to focus upon understanding what
coping style has contributed towards an existing condition. The
questionnaire is an adaptation of J Steven's Transforming your Dragons),
which identifies seven life-scripts. We have modified this
questionnaire, and developed an eighth script. The visualisation
assessment is sourced from The Cube (Gottlieb). \*\*\*

Doing the same thing over and over makes me angry You know what I mean
Learning rapport is fun The economy of the country is bad My work
prevents me from doing what I want I want success You make me angry Love
can hurt Going to the movies makes me sad They just hate me Injustice
makes me angry Violence makes me angry Life is not fair I understand
rapport My friends understand me

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 22

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 SCORING CONTROL DISTANT

NAME: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ AGE: \_\_\_\_\_\_ MALE /
FEMALE LOW STUBBORN IMPATIENC REFUSE WORTH E PLEASURE

08

01234

09

01234

10

01234

11

01234

12

01234

13

01234

14

01234

15

01234

16

01234

17

01234

18

01234

19

01234

20

01234

21

01234

22

01234

23

01234

24

01234

25

01234

26

01234

27

01234

28

01234

29

01234

30

01234

31

01234

32

01234

33

01234

34

01234

35

01234

36

01234

37

01234

38

01234

39

01234

40

01234

41

01234

42

01234

43

01234

44

01234

45

01234

46

01234

47

01234

48

01234

49

01234

50

01234

51

01234

52

01234

53

01234

54

01234

55

01234

56

01234

57

01234

58

01234

59

01234

60

01234

61

01234

62

01234

63

01234

64

01234

65

01234

66

01234

67

01234

68

01234

69

01234

70

01234

01234

72

01234

73

01234

74

01234

75

01234

76

01234

77

01234

71

CONTROL DISTANT TOTAL

LOW WORTH TOTAL

STUBBORN TOTAL

IMPATIENCE TOTAL

REFUSE PLEASURE TOTAL

DATE: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ NEVER SELFENOUGH DESTRUCT

NEVER ENOUGH TOTAL

NOTES NOTES:

SELF-DESTR TOTAL

GIVEN-UP TOTAL

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 24

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 PLEASE ANSWER ALL THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS. Do not skip any
questions. CIRCLE 'YES' OR 'NO' FOR THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: 01

YES

NO

I hate filling in questionnaires - I don't have the patience.

02

YES

NO

I would lie on a questionnaire like this, just to prove a point.

03

YES

NO

I have nothing to hide - I don't mind being asked personal questions.

04

YES

NO

I don't mind being asked personal questions, as long as it remains
strictly confidential.

05

YES

NO

I resist filling out questionnaires because I am afraid of what people
will think of me.

06

YES

NO

Being honest is important to me, even if the truth hurts a little.

07

YES

NO

I enjoy learning more about myself.

HOW TO ANSWER EACH OF THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS: Indicate how accurately
each statement describes you. Each person experiences certain feelings
or acts in certain ways depending on the circumstances or the people
involved. When deciding how accurate the various statements are in
describing you, try to include your thoughts, feelings and actions in
most circumstances, such as at work, with friends, and at home. 0 = Does
not describe me at all (Almost never)

1 = Describes me to a small degree (Not often, but it does occur every
now and again) 2 = Describes me fairly well

(Sometimes, but not a lot)

3 = Describes me quite well

(Often, but with the occasional exception)

4 = Describes me very well

(Very often or always)

Circle 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4, whichever is appropriate for that specific
question: 08

I find it quite difficult to admit that I am wrong.

0

1

2

3

4

09

When things go wrong around me, I feel that I am somehow responsible.

0

1

2

3

4

10

When I don't want to go somewhere, almost no one can change my mind.

0

1

2

3

4

11

Even when there is no reason, I tend to rush.

0

1

2

3

4

12

I feel that I do not have choice in what happens in my life.

0

1

2

3

4

13

I blame my partner for my feelings of dissatisfaction.

0

1

2

3

4

14

I have feelings of desperation.

0

1

2

3

4

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 25

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 0 = Does not describe me at all 1 = Describes me to a
small degree 2 = Describes me fairly well 3 = Describes me quite well 4
= Describes me very well

(Almost never). (Not often, but it does occur every now and again).
(Sometimes, but not a lot) (Often, but with the occasional exception)
(Very often or always)

15

It is not easy for me to apologise.

0

1

2

3

4

16

I tend to speak quietly, and people say that they can't hear me.

0

1

2

3

4

17

Once I have planned to do something, almost nothing 0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

withdrawn, and just observe.

0

1

2

3

4

23

I doubt myself, and feel inadequate regarding my abilities.

0

1

2

3

4

22

When I feel that someone is trying to push me around, I do the opposite
of what they tell me to do.

0

1

2

3

4

25

I have much to do, and there is no time to waste.

0

1

2

3

4

26

People don't know how much I have done for them. Instead, they take me
for granted.

0

1

2

3

4

27

When I crave something, it is difficult to control the feelings of
craving.

0

1

2

3

4

28

Even although I try to be in control of myself and situations, I find
that I 0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

from doing many things that I want to do.

0

1

2

3

4

31

Few people can stop me from doing something that I have planned.

0

1

2

3

4

32

I find it difficult to slow down, or relax and do nothing, even on
holidays

0

1

2

3

4

can stop me from doing it. 18

When people speak slowly, I tend to finish their sentences for them, and
interrupt them.

19

I feel that, if people knew what my life has been like, they would
understand that I have reason to complain.

20

I think about other places (towns, cities, countries) where my life
might be better.

21

I feel that I am out of control.

22

When I find myself with people I do not know, I become quiet and

0

somehow lose control.

29

People don't know the real me very well. If they really knew me, they'd
think that I am a nice person.

30

My fear of taking risks and my feelings of self-doubt stop me

0 = Does not describe me at all (Almost never). 1 = Describes me to a
small degree (Not often, but it does occur every now and again). 2 =
Describes me fairly well (Sometimes, but not a lot)

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 26

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 3 = Describes me quite well 4 = Describes me very well 33

(Often, but with the occasional exception) (Very often or always)

It is difficult to find someone who understands my special
circumstances, and who can help me.

0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

to gain more self-confidence.

0

1

2

3

4

38

I can be quite stubborn when I want to be.

0

1

2

3

4

39

I get frustrated with people around me because they move too slowly.

0

1

2

3

4

40

Things have been done to me that can never be made right by anyone.

0

1

2

3

4

41

The thought that I might end up with nothing, worries me.

0

1

2

3

4

42

I worry that I am capable of really hurting someone else, or myself, if
I lose control of myself.

0

1

2

3

4

43

It is important to me that I win.

0

1

2

3

4

44

I apologise several times when I think that I have made a mistake.

0

1

2

3

4

45

It is difficult for me to change or give in, even when I know that I am
wrong.

0

1

2

3

4

46

I feel a sense of urgency, because there is just 0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

are going wrong in my life.

0

1

2

3

4

I have thoughts that I will not live very long.

0

1

2

3

4

34

When I sell something, or place a value on my services, it upsets me to
reduce the price or value.

35

I have emotional (or physical) outbursts that are destructive, and scare
other people and myself.

0

36

I am quite critical of myself, and I can be secretly critical of others.

37

The people who know me well often tell me that I need

not enough time to get everything done. 47

I think I have bad luck because things just go wrong in my life - more
so than for the average person.

48 49

Buying things makes me feel much better when things

0 = Does not describe me at all 1 = Describes me to a small degree 2 =
Describes me fairly well 3 = Describes me quite well

Copyright 1998

(Almost never). (Not often, but it does occur every now and again).
(Sometimes, but not a lot) (Often, but with the occasional exception)

Knowledge in Action

Page 27

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 4 = Describes me very well 50

(Very often or always)

To be embarrassed in front of other people is one of the worst things I
can imagine.

0

1

2

3

4

I think that other people are more capable than I am. When I've made up
my mind about something, no one can change

0

1

2

3

4

my mind, only I can change my mind.

0

1

2

3

4

53

I feel tired and stressed.

0

1

2

3

4

54

I feel that my choices are limited because of circumstances.

0

1

2

3

4

55

When I have indulged and spoilt myself, I feel guilty afterwards.

0

1

2

3

4

56

I do risky things, such as driving fast, trusting people I know I
shouldn't, 0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

and get to appointments late.

0

1

2

3

4

61

When people ask me to do them a favour, I find it difficult to say 'no'
to them.

0

1

2

3

4

62

It worries me that I may never find the satisfaction that I am seeking.

0

1

2

3

4

63

I move to a different place so that I can get a new start to my life,
but it doesn't work for very long.

0

1

2

3

4

64

I feel that no-one really knows who I really am deep inside.

0

1

2

3

4

65

Even when things are going well, I feel anxious, and I don't know why.

0

1

2

3

4

66

I don't mind doing things. I just don't like being told that I must do
it.

0

1

2

3

4

67

I find myself thinking that people should get on with things, 0

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

so I end up with nothing.

0

1

2

3

4

I think about killing myself because I can't see the point of all the
pain.

0

1

2

3

4

51 52

and similar risky activities.

57

I like to look good -- when I walk past a mirror or window, I quickly
check to see that I look alright.

58

When something goes wrong, I automatically try to fix it, even when I am
not responsible.

59

If I do not want to do something, no one can make me do it.

60

Because I have so many commitments, I rush around

0

and stop wasting time. 68

I get annoyed when people tell me that I can just do what I want to,
because I feel that they are unrealistic.

69 70

0

I find it difficult to choose between a range of things that I want,

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 28

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 71

I struggle to talk about my feelings. I prefer to be objective and think
about things.

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

I stand firm, and will not budge.

0

1

2

3

4

74

When I get bored, I tap my fingers or feet.

0

1

2

3

4

75

I feel that people do not understand that I am doing the best I can,
considering the circumstances.

0

1

2

3

4

76

I think about how happy I will be if I had everything.

0

1

2

3

4

77

I like to challenge myself by doing dangerous things.

0

1

2

3

4

72

I find myself repeatedly checking myself, because I know I am likely to
make a mistake

73

4 4

When someone gets pushy and demanding with me,

END OF QUESTIONS

PRIMARY SCRIPT:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ SECOND
SCRIPT: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

NAME:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

THIRD SCRIPT:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

DATE OF ASSESSMENT: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ CD ST

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

= CONTROLLED & DISTANT = STUBBORN (HIGH)

Page 29

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 GU LW RP NE IM SD

= GIVEN UP (LOW STUBBORN) = LOW WORTH = REFUSE PLEASURE = NEVER ENOUGH =
IMPATIENCE = SELF-DESTRUCTIVE

NE (NEVER ENOUGH) COMPULSIVE BEHAVIOUR EG: EATING DISORDERS SD
(SELF-DESTRUCTIVE) DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIOUR EG: ACCIDENTS, DRUGS, ALCOHOL

SCORING PROCEDURE:

1.  The client will indicate an appropriate score for each question
2.  Add the number of circled numbers per columns. This will give you
    the TOTAL for that specific script..
3.  Calculate 'GIVEN-UP': GU = 40 minus ST score
4.  If ST score is 18,19, or 20 (and thus GU is either 22, 21, or 20),
    ignore these scripts when finding the highest scores. ST scores of
    18, 19, or 20 are 'healthy', and thus do not need to be focused upon
    for processing of scripts.
5.  Find the THREE HIGHEST SCRIPT TOTALS (note: refer point 4 for ST and
    GU). The highest scores (regardless of how high it is - as long it
    is higher than the others) is the 'Primary Script'. The second and
    third highest scores are the Second and Third Scripts, respectively.
6.  If two scripts scores the same, do not choose between them - include
    both. For example, if ST=31, NE=25 and CD=25, then ST is the
    Primary, and NE and CD are tied for Second and Third places. As long
    as you have identified the top three, their exact placement is not
    important. All three will be processed with equal attention,
    regardless of order.

INDICATORS TYPE A#1

IM IM+ST

IMPATIENCE IMPATIENCE & STUBBORN

TYPE A#2

CD CONTROL-DISTANT CD+ST CONTR-DIST & STUBBORN

TYPE C#1

RP REFUSE PLEASURE IM+GU IMPATIENT & GIVEN-UP

TYPE C#2

LW LOW WORTH CD+GU CONTR-DIST & GIVEN-UP

ST (STUBBORN) + THE ABOVE = RIGID COPING GU (GIVEN UP) = LOW STUBBORN
SCORES FEAR OF RISK & CARING DEFEATED ATTITUDE

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 30

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*CD* CONTROL-DISTANCE

6.  Identify with Critics, and judge themselves. "If I notice my flaws
    before anyone else does, I can hide it or fix it before they notice
    it. Therefore, I must criticise myself quickly and harshly, shame
    myself first, and shape up. This is better than someone else
    noticing, and being publicly shamed. I'll appear perfect.

Power-Over: I am better than you. (Make them feel inferior, inadequate).

7.  Turn the Tables - Try to be better than others. "I have succeeded in
    becoming a good critic of myself. As a result, I have become pretty
    good. I am so good, they aren't as good as me. I am now better than
    they are. I can now criticise others, and find their flaws. They
    will see - One day I will be respected and honoured, and they will
    be nothing - they will be sorry they ever criticised me - they will
    feel like fools they will want to know me and be close to me, so
    they can brag about knowing me, but I will walk past them as if they
    don't exist. That will teach them. I am now better than you who
    judged me. I now judge you negatively. Ha ha !"

Game: They'll be sorry they judged me. They will try to get close to me
(because I am special) so that they can say they know me, but I'll just
ignore them and then they will feel inferior (revenge through aloofness
and disdain).

Often fantasise about being special and respected one day. Then believe
others know they will be famous one day, and see this already. Can be
devastated when others do not behave accordingly, especially when
ignored.

Ultimate Outcome: Public humiliation. Slide into Low Worth Script.

Because they are usually shy and not very vocal, they believe they can
make up for this by working very hard, as they believe other people will
recognise their hard work and achievements, without them having to
verbally calling attention to it. They identify with their achievements.
"If I work harder than anyone else, they will notice me and love me".
However, harsh reality is that the more vocal person, who is often less
hard-working, gets all the attention, and the person is devastated. They
learn than they can not substitute hard work for personality, and expect
to be loved for it. Sometimes acquire possessions in order to noticed
and loved. "If I get that new car... If I stay in the right suburb ...
If I am seen in the 'in' club ... then I will be valued and noticed".
Often end up alone and lonely with all these fine possessions, feeling
sad and isolated, but safe in their aloneness (no criticism if you are
alone).

"I am special" (everyone is looking at me). Fear:

Being Ignored. Not being special.

Development & Decisions: 1. Child learns to turn against themselves, in
response to criticism or comparison to high standards or older brothers
or sisters: "I am not OK". 2. Try to be perfect people who are not
themselves. "I will strive to be perfect so they have nothing to
criticise me for anymore. I'll be perfect". Pretend criticisms don't
hurt. 3. Learn to hide their flaws, and pretend to be invulnerable.
Aloofness & distance develops. If people don't get too close, they can't
see the flaws or fears. "I am tired of getting hurt. I am not going to
show them any flaws anymore. They will never see my flaws ever again".
"I can successfully hide my feelings". 4. Learn to look for clues from
others about being acceptable. Become hyper-alert. "I will look
carefully to see what other people value. Then I will be that way". 5.
Learn to police (monitor) themselves. "They are always watching me. In
order to win their approval, I have to watch myself carefully - I have
to be one step ahead, and notice my mistakes before they do. I'll always
be watching myself". Become overly self-conscious, shy, easily
embarrassed. Want to hide. Feeling of always being watched leads to
feeling of false importance. Being ignored is thus devastating. Keep
people distant (in case they see any flaws). Do things to get noticed,
pretend no one is watching. Paradoxically, criticised because they are
perceived as aloof, snobbish, distant, hard to know, self- important.
Paradox: Secretly want to be noticed and loved, but fear negative
judgement, or even worse, being ignored or dismissed. Tension = Wanting
to be noticed, wanting to avoid being noticed. Only way out is to be
perfect - CONTROL OF SELF & OTHERS.

Often meet up with similar people, who are intent on avoiding intimacy
but looking for someone to hold them in high regard (notice them).
Appearances are everything. Although they are in each other's company,
each one feels undervalued and unnoticed by the other. Mutual
loneliness, but safety due to lack of intimacy. Another strategy: "If
only other people really knew me, they would love me. In fact, if they
really knew how great I was, they would love me more than anyone else".
This is attached to the fail-safe "But I won't let them know me - I am
in charge of that". Another strategy: Avoiding activities that require
testing or performance. "If I did the exam, I would probably do better
than anyone else. But I'm too busy ... I can't be bothered ... I'll let
someone else have the chance". Sophisticated form: Appears open, humble,
and vulnerable, a 'people's person'. However, there is a deep level
which is walled off and not available to others. Secret critical nature.
Judge others quietly and internally, never letting anyone else see this
less-than-perfect part of themselves. One half of them secretly and
harshly criticises the other (arrogant) half: "Why didn't you say hello
to them ? Even if they are a creep, do you think that you are better
than them ?!" Effects on Health:

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 31

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Inflated sense of toughness - I AM IN CONTROL.
Overestimate abilities. Refuse to accept limitations of your body. Don't
listen to your body. Effects on Creativity: Energy is bound up in
judging and checking for flaws. Afraid of taking risks. Stick with what
you know you are good at. Fear of making mistakes, trying new things.
Spontaneity and freedom of expression locked out. Effects on Presence:
Most of attention is locked into Near Future, as you survey for
potentially embarrassing situations. Trying to constantly anticipate and
avoid uncomfortable events. Worry about events which you can not control
or avoid. Remember embarrassing past events, to prevent similar event
again. Leaves very little energy for the present moment. When you are
not in present time, people are not interested in you. End up being
ignored - manifest your worst fear. Effects on Relationships: Creates
isolation and distance. Intimacy difficult when you are critical and
aloof. Appearance of competence more important than honesty. True,
vulnerable, intimate communication is difficult. Sexual performance more
important than intimacy. Seduction easy. Sexual intimacy difficult.
Partner feels the distance. Feels like an object. Impotency as final
humiliation, manifest worst fear. Effects on Spirituality: Defence of
ego prevents spiritual growth. Project quality of judgmentality onto
God. Try to be perfect in eyes of God. Must defend against, prove wrong,
or please God. May seek religious position to prove superiority. May
seek to prove how zealous, competent you are. Being special, you shift
focus onto sins of others. Above it all - spirituality is for
emotionally weak people

Seven Weapons to Tame the Control-Distance Script:

1.  Realise that You are not your Script - forgive all those who judged
    you.
2.  Admit that you are isolated & controlling.
3.  Show vulnerability - Be Imperfect - Be Human - Take a few social
    risks
4.  Pay attention to others - Most people are not paying attention to
    you - they have their own issues - they, like you, are vulnerable -
    Approach them instead of waiting for them to approach you - they are
    interested in your gift or service is, not your appearance - don't
    be concerned about whether they are judging you - just love them as
    they are, regardless.
5.  Let yourself be yourself
6.  Release judgements of yourself and others - find a sense of humour -
    the less you judge others, the closer they want to be to you - the
    less you judge yourself, the more you realise your unique value and
    worth.
7.  Be equal and different to others - respect differences - let go of
    trying to better than them - learn to appreciate diversity (yours
    and theirs) - differences do not make one more or less special.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 32

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*LW* LOW WORTH "I'm sorry" Fear: Being attacked (for failure;
rejection). (Failure - If fails, get criticised. Thus fears failure.
Believes will fail.) & (Success - If succeeds, raises expectations, will
eventually fail. Fear success) Power Over: Failure is Control over
others Game: By destroying your expectations of me, I prevent you
hurting me. Being wrong is the only way I can feel right. Self-esteem =
Being a constant loser "You see, I was right !" Ultimate Outcome:
Depression (internalised anger) - Losing out on all experience &
Hopelessness. Development & Decisions: 1. Child learns that love in the
home is conditional. Parental expectations are too high. I am not good
enough. "I am not loved for who I am". 2. Child fears being inadequate.
Can not find out how to please parents. Do not know how to reach or
achieve the goals/ expectations set for them. Fear that they will never
meet the requirements for being loved. If the child can not find a way
to please through succeeding, they give up. They identify with being
inadequate. "I am inadequate". 3. Begin to apologise for everything. An
apology is a strategy for preventing others from having high
expectations. The apology eliminates anticipation of successful
performances, which prevents the other person's disappointment from
developing, which prevents the hurt of being proved inadequate. Learns
to advertise & dramatise inadequacies. Tenaciously hold on to identity
of being a failure. "I always apologise before doing or saying
anything". 4. Learn how to make themselves small. Learn to hide in order
to avoid negative attention or criticism. Physically breathe shallowly;
Head shrinks down to shoulders; eyes look down; Shoulders curve forward
and down; Fold arms over solar plexus to protect themselves; Voice gets
small; Move quietly without being noticed. Become invisible. "If I am
small, no-one will expect anything from me". 5. Learn that they can be
right about being a loser. Learn that the only sense of integrity that
can claim - of feeling right - is that they are a loser. Be inadequate
before someone tells you that you are inadequate. I won't even try to
win. In fact, I predict I will lose or can't do it, and ensure that it
is so. Then at least I can say that I told you so all along. Internal
reward for failing and not trying. Avoid leadership, strive for
mediocrity, find ways to hide. "I can't do it, and I'll predict my
failure ahead of time, then at least I can be right about that".

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

6.  Learn to criticise themselves. Self-talk is a constant putdown: "I
    am stupid ..."I can't do anything right. I should never have been
    born". Internalised Critic. No longer need other people to criticise
    them - they do it themselves. "If I can't beat them, I'll join them
    in being critical of me. I despise me too".
7.  Avoid success at all costs. If I succeed, then other people will
    expect more, which I will fail at. I can't keep up with the success.
    I had better not start. Fear of Success. Let me ruin or prevent any
    expectations before they get any more. Then I have some control over
    the situation. "Don't succeed". This Script, depending on the age at
    which is was started, can result in downcast eyes, inaudible
    expression, slow shuffle, or doing anything to prove their
    inadequacy, including grovelling. Alternatively, getting involved
    with abusive or selfdestructive people because they do not believe
    they deserve any better. Another level is total obedience to
    authority figures, doing everything they are told to do without
    question, and accepting any unfairness to self or others, because
    "that is what they deserve". They may view unfair labour practices,
    such as lower wages for women, without question, simply because that
    is the way it is, or should be. Yet another level may readily accept
    abuse of their bodies, by others, or by themselves. They will also
    put themselves down, such as degrading themselves in front of others
    in terms of making jokes about their baldness, breast or penis size.
    They make a point of pointing out their imperfections so that other
    people do not point it out first. May be preoccupied with death and
    ageing, and trying to prevent ageing or death. At another level, the
    person may rush around seeking answers to the meaning of life from
    'experts', simply because they do not feel their own thoughts and
    feelings are worth anything. Finally, at another level, a person may
    allow other people to run the show, take leadership positions, even
    when they are not capable, simply because they do not feel that they
    can speak out or capable of leadership. Then they beat themselves up
    for being such cowards, for allowing this to happen. Even those with
    highly developed value system may allow maniacs to run the show,
    because they lack confidence in their leadership abilities. Effects
    on Health: Suppressed anger weakens the immune system. Saps
    vitality, reduces the will to live, reduces passion for life.
    Neglect of body and health - why bother ? Effects on Creativity:
    Energy wasted on depression and self-hatred leaves little energy for
    creativity. Effects on Presence: Drives you out of the present
    moment, into the future or the past. Spend time remembering pain of
    past failures. Will not hear compliments - Other person feels not
    heard. A compliment is experienced as fearful, not pleasure. Where's
    the catch ?

Page 33

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Effects on Relationships: Devastating effects on
relationships - passive, afraid of making a mistake. Prevents
relationships from starting. Fear of inadequacy leads to exhaustion of
partner trying to support your esteem. Loss of respect by partner.
Effects on Spiritual Life: Turns religion into a self-destroying weapon.
You are not worth saving, not worth attention, not worth listening to.
You are an absolute, hopeless sinner, who can not be saved despair.
Unlikely to ask for help, to pray. Confuses humility (all equally
worthy) with unworthiness (I am less than others).

Seven Weapons to Tame the Low Worth Script 1. Recognise that you are not
your Script. 2. Acknowledge that you are afraid of being inadequate. 3.
Be willing to be successful - try small successes first (the Script may
try to set you up for failure with attempts for a large goal). 4.
Ruthlessly eliminate apologies - do not beat yourself up for it, as this
is the Script's way of sabotaging your growth to self-esteem. 5. Expand
yourself at all opportunities - breathe deeply stretching exercise
-public speaking - beware thoughts of fear from the threatened Script,
as it will try convince you that these activities are selfish and
arrogant ! 6. Validate yourself at all times - locate the voice of
criticism inside you - silence it - Accept compliments with a "thank
you" (no denials), look in the mirror and acknowledge your strong
points - find them. 7. Give up the reward of being right about being a
failure have the courage to be wrong about being a failure - failure is
just incomplete success - persist - focus upon the successes - start
identifying with your adequacies - list your accomplishments - remember
that others fail and succeed as well - you are no better and no worse -
you are you - take action & make decisions

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 34

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*IM* IMPATIENCE "Hurry up - We don't have time to waste !" Fear: Loss of
Time. (Not enough time; Missing out on life; Fear death; Not going to
make it) Power-Over: Intolerant - faster than you - you are inadequate
Game: Power-over others by showing them how incompetent and slow they
are. Ultimate Outcome: Runs out of time. Development & Decisions:
Various paths: (a) RUSHED

Family move slowly, and are content with the way things are. Child gets
frustrated, desires action & stimulation. Constant planning; Feel
driven; Isolated; Fear missing out on life. Either too much or too
little time. Over-commit - try to cram too much in a short space of
time. Late for appointments. If I don't rush, I'll never complete my
goals in time. Accidents because of rushing. Talents lost because need
time to develop and practice. Blame time for their problems. Avoid
responsibility. No time enjoying the present: Anticipating, scheming,
planning, dreading. When betrayed by time, slips into Refuse Pleasure
Script (victim of time). Fear of too much time is a fear of not enough
time (somewhere else). Effects on Health: Vascular system - heart
attacks. Accelerates ageing. Suppresses immune system (chronically
elevated adrenaline) - Chronic Fatigue Syndrome; Epstein Barr Virus;
Gobble food - no time for proper digestion; Rush causes accidents.

Children constantly rushed. Family process based on fear of not enough
time. Family acts as if there is no time to lose. Hurried errands. "I
hate to wait". - "Rushing is how to be in this world".

Effects on Creativity: Not willing to go through the incubation and
evolution stages. Therefore, creativity is poor, unfinished, weak. May
never get around to making an idea real and physical. Start things,
don't finish.

Young child does not understand time. However, picks up fear that
something is wrong - learn that 'time' is valuable, and that awful
things will happen if they let it run out. Associates fear with time.

Effects on Presence: Presence requires that your attention is in the
present moment. Totally incompatible with impatient anticipation of the
future.

Can occur in womb - adrenaline plus fear of mother. "Rushing must be
important to my survival".

Effects on Relationships: Intolerance - ruins relationships quickly.
Interrupts others, finishes their sentences; Rushing in late, leaving
early. Alienated others. Tend to blame others for going away, when your
impatience has driven them away. Rush to sexual climax.

Strong sense of goal orientation - future goals can be attained by work
in the present. The abnormal aspect is the rush, because time is so
limited. Constantly rush through things - all enjoyment of the process,
of present time, is lost in favour of the anticipation of the final
outcome. When outcome is reached, it is immediately replaced by another
future goal. (b) DEPRIVED Child forbidden to take part in certain
activities. Activity restricted. Constantly told they are too young, too
much trouble, etc. Children see others participating in activities they
are not allowed to. Feeling of having lost time, missing out. "What if I
die before I get a chance to do all these things too ?" Strong fear of
death.

Effects on Spirituality: Impatience makes it impossible to reflect,
pray, meditate, be still. Rushes forwards towards (future) salvation.
Ignore the present - ready to save the world. Try to take short-cuts
towards enlightenment.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Impatience Script 1. Consciously Waste Time.
Do not plan the entire day. Leave time for doing nothing. 2. Learn
Silence. Silence the dialogue inside your head. The most powerful
weapon. 3. Eliminate intrusions - noise - tv - general noise. 4. Be
graceful. 5. Develop rhythm. 6. Be Mindful - pay attention to present
time reality. 7. Play with time. Spend the day without your watch.

(c) SLOWNESS

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 35

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*RP* REFUSE PLEASURE "Yes, but ..." Fear: Being Unlovable or Trapped.
Fear that people will discover their tremendous neediness, and thus
reject them. Power-Over: Revenge through making other person guilty.
Game: Cry instead of getting angry. Outlast everyone. I win through
suffering, and you feel guilty for my suffering. Ultimate Outcome:
People feel disgusted and guilty w.r.t. them. Suffering.

Feels that if someone really loves them, they would discover how to make
them happy. But won't tell what will make them happy, so other person
never finds out - fails to make them happy - so ensures the other person
knows it - "If you were good to me I would be happy. But you aren't good
to me, so I'm not happy". It is YOUR fault that I am unhappy. People
with the Refuse Pleasure Script defeat most therapists pretty quickly.
When therapist gives up, Refuse Pleasure feels victimised again.
Resentful for lack of help. Refuse Pleasures are very powerful in
trapping people. Get people to feel sorry for them because they suffer
so much. Avoid feeling worthless by blaming someone else for their
suffering. Complain to the wrong people as outlet. Get sympathy. Never
complain to the person who causes the suffering. Become so connected to
their abuser that they can not live without him/her/it. Refuse Pleasure
victims torture their abusers through spiteful glances, withholding fun,
destroying their reputation with other people. Refuse Pleasures often
become sadists. Every Refuse Pleasure has a sadist inside, and every
sadist has a Refuse Pleasure inside. That is why they stick together.

Development & Decisions: Various Paths: (a) CONDITIONAL LOVE: In first
three years: Parents insist child 'earns' love through good behaviour.
The exact nature of 'good behaviour' is a mystery to the child. Told
that having a child is hard work. "You owe me". Withhold love if child
has not paid his/her debt by 'being nice' to Mom and Dad. Being 'not
nice' can include being sick, refusing to eat when not hungry, holding
on to bowel movements - not performing when required.

The Core Lie: It is always someone else's fault that I am unhappy.

Child believes s/he is not loved for who s/he is. Feel trapped &
worthless. Can't meet requirements for love. "It's not fair. No matter
what you do, I am worthless. I am trapped. But I will make them pay - I
can make them feel guilty through my suffering. That will be my reward".

When pent-up anger builds up too much, Refuse Pleasures switch over into
Impatience. Angry tirades, then dissolve into tears. Return to Refuse
Pleasure-dom. High level of frustration leads to Impatient snap
decisions, without thinking it through, leading to a more trapped Refuse
Pleasure position.

(b) OVERPOWERING PARENTS: Child not able to respond to adult's rage and
    anger. Submit to adult's will. Surrender in the face of perceived
    threats to survival, and no longer assert their own will. Become
    obedient but resentful. Get revenge through the back door. Child not
    allowed to express anger, but adult is. No exploring of anger is
    allowed.
(c) ROLE MODELLING: E.g. Watch mother submit passively to father. Mother
    then whines about father when father is not there. Child sees that
    if mother asserts herself, she gets beaten. Child learns that
    mother's strategy is more powerful than the father's, because they
    get revenge quietly, slowly, and continually. Occasionally, child
    models father, if s/he forms alliance with father, and is also
    repulsed by mother. Will not forgive or forget. Feels s/he does not
    deserve pleasure or success in life, instead deserves punishment.
    Blames the other person - will not allow them to find forgiveness -
    punish them by depriving self: "See what you have done".

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Some truly believe this. Others feel that the reason they are Refuse
Pleasures is because they are truly undeserving and worthless, no matter
how much they complain or blame.

Refuse Pleasures are intensely needy because they need empathy and
sympathy to justify the wounding they have suffered. Problem: They find
it extremely difficult to admit their neediness. Fear: If people knew
how needy I was, they would reject me. Very difficult for them to tell
the truth about their needs and wants. Reason: They were crushed for
having needs as a child - they were found undeserving and forced to earn
love through complying. Example: You invite a Refuse Pleasure to a
picnic. They refuse, saying they have too much work to do. If you
persist, they give in "Oh ok, if you really want me to. I'll come, just
so that you don't feel angry with me". What they really want to say is:
"Thank you, thank you - I've desperately wanted you to ask me, and I am
so happy you did. Thank You, Thank You, Thank You !" Effects on Health:
Can use aches & pains as a means to obtain special attention. Refuse
Pleasuredom thrives on accidents. Make them pay - it's not my fault.
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome &

Page 36

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Allergies are the domain of Refuse Pleasures. Blame your
body. Effects on Creativity: Makes it impossible for you to see
alternatives. Trapped, no way out. Effects on Presence: Preoccupied with
injustice (Past) and restitution (Future). No time for the present.
Presence means being in the present, which is Power. Refuse Pleasures do
not believe they have power, despite their obvious power to create
suffering. Effects on Relationships: Abusive, bitchy, whining,
complaining. Selects victimisers to be in relationship with, in order to
fulfil belief in being a victim. Push away true support. Seek company of
other Refuse Pleasures. Feeds on sympathy - the illusion of support &
love. Sympathy perpetuates the identity of Refuse Pleasuredom. Effects
on Spirituality: Loves religion, as religious teachings are distorted to
provide support for belief in suffering and pain, for the sake of
salvation. Suffering necessary for redemption. E.g.: Buddhism: "All life
is suffering". However, Buddha actually said that craving causes
suffering. Judaism: "Suffering can teach you many things, such as moral
fibre and discipline". Unfortunately, this is distorted to mean that the
ONLY way to learn, is through suffering. Islam: Jihad or Holy war.
Excuse for Refuse Pleasuredom in war. Actually refers to internal war
against your own Scripts.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Refuse Pleasure Script 1. Tell the truth.
Admit you use guilt to manipulate people. 2. Draw boundaries & stick to
them. Say No. Even if you do not feel assertive, pretend - shoulders
back, head up, standing straight. Work on eliminating that whining tone
from your voice. 3. Admit your needs & ask for help. Become a team
player. 4. Give up the pleasure of sympathy from others. Stop
complaining. List all your complaints & reasons for not being happy, in
one session. Then burn them. Now choose. 5. Take responsibility &
choose. See & accept alternatives. Make a list of all the things you are
responsible for - body, emotions, job, marriage, relationships,
possessions, sun, moon, galaxy, trees, grass... List your options in
each situation, without using the words "Yes But" - will bring up rage.
6. Be willing to have fun. Let others see & enjoy your pleasure. 7. Give
up blaming & always being right. Admit your 'bad' thoughts - be human,
laugh at these 'bad' thoughts & actions. So what !

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 37

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*NE*

(object). I am desperate for it. It is out there somewhere. If I don't
have it, I am afraid I will die".

NEVER-ENOUGH

Because the child is always hungry for attention or food, they focus on
what is not there, as opposed to what is there. Also, they idealise what
is missing.

"Just one more, then I'll be happy" Fear: Dying unloved, uncared for,
unhappy, unfulfilled. Not enough to go around. If I can't have it, I'll
die. Power-Over: Substitute Object = Love. Game: Two faces: Want
everything (gluttonous) & deprive themselves (misers - hold on to
everything). Fixated on something - money, food, material goods,
knowledge. No matter how much they get, never enough, feel deprived &
craving. Ultimate Outcome: Abandoned by loved ones due to obsession with
accumulation of object. Die lonely & poor. Development & Decisions:
Foundation conditions are abandonment & loss (physical or emotional) be
due to death of parents, hospitalisation, travelling, always at work,
neglect by parents. Often, the mother is highly dependent, and involved
in a series of destructive relationships with men that may involve drugs
or alcohol.

Leads to envy - wanting what others have, they self does not have. May
lead to theft. Grass is always greener on the other side. The glass is
always half empty, not half full. May be a great fear of getting what
you really want - arrange events so that you never get it. What if it
isn't enough, does not satisfy ? The Big Lie: "Just one more will bring
satisfaction". Destroy what they have to get one more. End up with
nothing. Never-Enough leads to deprivation. Never-Enough leads to rash
decisions, slide into SelfDestruction. Never-Enough & Self-Destruction
work hand-inhand. Effects on Health: Consuming too much or Depriving
Yourself. Drugs, alcohol, weight. Anorexia: " I am undesirable at any
weight. I must not eat so I can lose weight and get what I want - love
and attention. There is no weight that is acceptable. Therefore I will
starve until I die and then I won't have a problem." Bulimia: "I hate
being deprived. I can't stand it. I'm going to have as much as I want of
anything"... then, after food binge, remorse & self-rejection, "I'll
lose love. I better lose weight. I am unacceptable". Then vomiting
purge. Cycle: Rebel & Purge.

Source feeling is that there is not enough to go around constant feeling
of deprivation. Obsessively accumulate, and lose relationships in the
process. Critical difference between development of Never-Enough versus
Self-Destruction patterns, is that, although both stem from abandonment,
the Never-Enough pattern involves the offer of SUBSTITUTES FOR LOVE -
BRIBERY BY PARENTS.

Effects on Creativity: The striving for getting (object) is more
important that the goal to express. Destroys creativity. E.g.: Try to
create the sequel to a successful movie, because it was so good.
Never-Enough - sequel never as good. Sexual creativity fixated -
e.g. fetishes.

Parents feel guilt for abandonment, and offer money, sweets, holidays,
gifts, etc., to compensate for the lack of nurturing, touch, and time
spent with the child. This is not occasional - it is routine.

Effects on Presence: If you get the attention of those you are with, you
then focus on getting the attention of other people, shifting you away
from present time, and away from those you are with. Attention is always
on 'next'.

Example: Parents does not have time to spend with child, so gives the
baby a bottle to drink, even when not hungry. Learns to accept
substitute - eat when feeling unloved, even when not hungry. Learn that
they will receive substitutes whenever they want something. Leads to
suspicion of everything they get, even the real thing. Turn down a good
job because there has to be catch somewhere, ignore loyal friends for
the possibility of more exciting and influential friends. They will turn
down or criticise things or people, and find fault with them. Whatever
is available, is never enough. End up with nothing. Never-Enough creates
the deprivation that is so feared. Child learns to rely on external
substitutes to build their sense of identity. "In order to be me, I must
have the

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Effects on Relationships: Classic taker - demand from other person, give
little back. Want a lot from partner, and resent any slip in their
attentiveness, understanding and sympathy. Desperately need partner, but
resent them for not giving you exactly what you want. Drives partner
away. You become unfaithful to punish partner for not being perfect, or
you may be unfaithful in order to find more attention. Spouse will have
affair to get away from you. Effects on Spirituality: Never-Enough for
teachers, gurus, knowledge. Never find the 'right' one that has all the
answers, fills all your needs. Search but never find. Never-Enoughy for
leader's attention.

Page 38

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 May lead to belief that the more you sacrifice or pay, the
more salvation you will get. Never-Enough may also revert into
self-deprivation - total rejection of material things, sex, pleasure.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Never Enough Script 1. Acknowledge that your
Never-Enough is a problem. 2. Identify the substitute object. 3. End the
search. When the craving hits, recognise that what you want is a
substitute for the real thing, and that the craved object will never
satisfy that want. Tell the truth at the moment of truth. The feelings
of despair & hopelessness are based on knowing that what you want was
denied a long time ago, and you have not accepted that deprivation. Stop
resisting it. 4. Recognise your true source of satisfaction. 5. Learn to
give to others. Give up blame. Take responsibility for your life. 6. Be
kind and generous with yourself. 7. Recognise what you already have.
Enjoy what you have.

"But if I don't desire something better, then I will never grow,
improve, learn !" Craving is not wanting. Craving hurts. Wanting to
grow, learn, improve is natural and filled with pleasure. If you
struggle with this Script, start with the self-destruction Script first.
They always work together.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 39

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*SD* SELF-DESTRUCTION "So what - we all die anyway !" "Only through
death can I survive" Fear: Losing Control. I am out of control
Power-Over: External control - abuse - defy death - destroy Self &
Others Game: I can not find meaning or control inside myself or through
love, therefore, maybe I can find meaning and control through outside
forces pain, destruction or death.

5.  The Child Fears Loss of Control. No-one in control. Survival at
    stake. Death is a real possibility. They feel helpless. See parents
    out of control most of the time, for no reason. Become terrified of
    loss of control. No model for controlled behaviour. Thus feel out of
    control as well. Only way to survive is to gain external control.
    Internal control not possible. "My parents are out of control. I am
    out of control. My life is threatened".
6.  Child learns that gaining control is vital to survival. By abusing
    themselves, they believe that they have greater control than if
    someone else abuses them. Become control addicts. Begin to try to
    prove that they have control over death. Have to keep on proving
    they have control, because they do not really believe it. Inevitably
    lose control at some point, and prove their worst fear - lost
    control. "I must be in control at all times. I must prove to myself
    that I have this control. I will control the abuse".

Development & Decisions:

7.  The Child No Longer Values Life. Death seems better. The belief that
    life is not worth living, combined with the need to have control at
    all times, leads the child or teenager to prove they can beat death.
    Later, the belief becomes that death is better than living. Suicide
    or other forms of destruction ensure. Suicide is the ultimate act of
    control: " I'll kill myself. Nobody else is going to do it for me".
    "Death is better than life. I'll kill myself".

Abandonment (emotional or physical) + Abuse (physical or emotional)

Shares addiction quality with Never-Enough. These two Scripts are
intimately connected.

a.  Abandonment at the early age. E.g.: alcoholic parents, parents
    travel, entertain, work long hours, etc.

E.g.: Self-destructors often can not control their urges for food,
alcohol, drugs, power, sex. These wild excesses are distractions from
the deep inner despair. Also, when a person emerges from a
self-destructive spree, and the feelings of despair life for a while,
they switch to the Never-Enough Script (craving) for life & life
activities. This is healthier, but may lead to loss of control again,
and another cycle of selfdestruction. (binge - despair cycle).

Body: Desperate, often bloodshot, eyes. Possible selfinflicted scars &
tattoos. Possible drug, alcohol or binging damage. Ultimate Outcome:
Death

b.  Emotional or physical abuse or punishment. The abuse or punishment
    does not relate to the misbehaviour of the child, is random,
    perceived as totally unfair, out of proportion to any misbehaviour.
    Abuse violates reason & sense of fairness. Understanding of
    cause-effect relationship destroyed. Child can make no sense of the
    world. This kind of life is not worth living. Addictions, Wild
    living, dangerous risk taking, antisocial violence, Anorexia,
    Bulimia, Attempted suicide.

The Lie: That external control is the answer to all problems. False. Can
not substitute for internal structure and control - a sense of meaning
and confidence.

1.  The child is abandoned. Absence of nurturing loving force. "I am all
    alone and the world is scary. I am too small to fix this".

Effects on Health: Disastrous on health. Excesses & addictions destroy
the body. Suicide.

2.  Abandonment leads to loss of structure no-one to clean their nappy,
    no-one comes when they cry, no-one takes care of their environment
    and body. No-one to show the child that their environment is under
    control. "No one is in control. No one is in charge. There is no
    structure. I am abandoned".

Effects on Creativity: The energy of destruction & creativity are two
sides of the same coin. To put the first brush-stroke on canvas, to
create something new, is also an act of destroying the white blankness
of the canvas.

3.  Emotional and Physical Abuse occurs. Inner sense of justice
    destroyed. "My caregivers are abusive & out of control. I am not in
    control because I can't stop them. The world is a hostile place."
4.  The child turns against themselves. The child adopts the behaviour
    of their caregivers. Become abusive either towards themselves or
    others, or both. "I am bad. I must be punished. I'll punish others
    too".

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Creative expression entails walking a fine line between destruction and
creation. Artistic expression requires emotional support from others, to
prevent self-destruction of the artist. Effects on Presence: When you
are fixated on maintaining control, you are not present. Alcohol, drugs,
suicide, destroy any sense of presence.

Page 40

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Effects on Relationships: You try to control your
relationships, in order to control yourself. No-one likes being
controlled, so they leave. Also, addictive behaviour destroys
relationships. The only people left are those that feed off of you -
taking what they can get before you die. Effects on Spirituality: Sees
religion as a set of rules that promise to control your out-of-control
behaviour. Either your self-destructiveness eventually leads to your
expulsion from this group, or you destroy yourself for the sake of
'salvation'. Selfdestructiveness disguised as spiritual purification.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Self-Destruction Script This Script has to be
tamed fast, before it destroys you. Must face feelings of abandon-ment,
and face childhood abuse. Must find meaning & value in life. 1. Realise
that life has meaning. Search for, and create, beauty. Connect with
people who value life. 2. Admit you are out of control, and seek help.
Get support. 3. Admit that being in control is the big issue. 4.
Establish and strive for realistic goals. Eliminate unrealistic goals,
which are nothing more than attempts to control what can not be
controlled. 5. Clean up the messes in your life. 6. Admit & face your
abuse of yourself & others. 7. Admit & face the issue of abandonment.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 41

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*ST* STUBBORNNESS "You can't make me." - "I won't." - "No." Fear: Being
pushed into Sudden Change that s/he feels s/he is not ready for, and
that freedom will be taken away Choice taken away - made to do something
don't want to Power-Over: Resistance; Refusal to Change. Game: Control
events and people by refusing. Body: Tension in jaws - can lead to
hearing loss; Tension in pelvis; Tension in lower back; Tension in feet
and ankles; Move stiffly; Fold arms across chest tightly. May say "No"
with body, even if verbally say otherwise. Ultimate Outcome: Lose
choice - forced to do something

Development & Decisions: One of Three Ways: 1. FEAR OF SUDDEN CHANGE:
Parents do not communicate impending events, child has no way to
prepare, becomes over-whelmed, feels loss and betrayal. E.g.: Drop child
off at baby-sitter - not told. Develops deep mistrust of new experiences
because they are associated with pain. Say "No" to everything, just to
buy time for inner consideration. 2. EXPLOITATION OF CHILD'S TALENTS:
Parents or teacher discover child has talent. Talent gives child
pleasure. Force child to practice & deny other pleasures. Child rebels -
"Never again will I let them take over my life". May close down special
talents. 3. CONTROLLING / BULLYING PARENTS: Child told s/he has no
choice. Just do as you are told. No choice allowed. Robbed of choices.
Child's integrity & feeling of competence threatened, frustrated. Learns
passive resistance; quiet defiance effective against bully. Learns deep
distrust of authority. As adult, may appear relaxed. But when confronted
with sudden change, or authority, will rebel, often inappropriately.
Summary: 1. Child is subjected to sudden change without warning. "Change
is frightening & a threat to my survival. I must resist it". 2. Child
not allowed to make personal choices. "I am robbed of my power over my
body by authority. I am not allowed to have my own self. Authority is
bad". 3. Child excluded from family choices.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

"I have no power. I have no influence over the environment. I'm always
being forced and controlled." 4. Child grows resentful & fears loss of
integrity. "Resist authority at all costs in order to preserve
integrity". 5. Child learns to resist all forms of external control. "I
can't back down, whatever happens. I can never give in or I'll die". 6.
Older child loses ability to distinguish between force & suggestion.
"Anything that remotely looks like I'm being told what to do is bad. I
must instantly rebel or say no". 7. Older child internalises resistance,
and resist themselves. Example: Person makes decision. Then finds out is
was a bad decision. Refuses to change, because 'I made my choice - I
must stick to my decision'. Another example: Gets ill, refuses to go to
bed, because the voice in his head telling him to go to bed is too much
like his mother's. "Now that I have made my decision, I'll have to stick
with it, right or wrong". Loses flexibility. Can justify stubbornness as
a good trait - I would never be as successful as I am if I were not so
stubborn. Stubbornness is based on fear. Perseverance and commitment are
not based on fear. Can not tell the difference between a suggestion, a
request, and an order. DO NOT CONFRONT SUCH A PERSON - THEY WILL RESIST.
STUBBORNNESS NEEDS TO BE 'MELTED', NOT CONFRONTED. The stubbornness
strategy is to slow down the action so that you have the time and chance
to change your mind. Fear of change. This Script can pair off with any
other Script: + Control-Distance - "I'm right. They're stupid and
wrong" + Low Worth - "I'm worthless, & no-one can tell me otherwise". +
Impatience - "Get out of my way. No-one is going to stop me". + Refuse
Pleasure - "I made my decision. Must stick to it. I've no choice". +
Never-Enough - "I'll take it all, and no-one can stop me". +
Self-Destructive - "You can't make me leave, fire or no fire". Big Lie:
Believe that by resisting authority & refusing to change, they are
powerful. Believe they are more powerful than others because they can
stop the action. However, their inflexibility leads to loss of goodwill,
and people turn away from them. End up in old age home, alone, because
no-one wants such a difficult person around them. Manifest their worst
fear - no freedom to choose. Effects on Health:

Page 42

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Back muscles, jaw, pelvis, feet. Chronic muscle tension.
Teeth grinding. Will entrench any other Script, and make it inflexible.

consequences ? Times when you did not trust your own inner voice & the
consequences.

Effects on Creativity: Creativity requires expansion & surrender.
Stubbornness is contraction. Effects on Presence: Fear of change = fear
of what is going to happen next. Not present. Reactions to authority
lock you into the past. Effects on Relationships: Very destructive of
relationships. Refuse to compromise; Refuse to participate; On alert for
threats; Inflexibility. Effects on Spirituality: Stubbornness is very
conducive to dogmatic approach - no change. Spirituality requires
expansion, flexibility.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Stubbornness Script Do not attack this Script
head-on. Needs to be melted. Kindness, compassion, gentle guidance
required. Releasing & Relaxing. 1. Learn to be flexible. Identify
rigidity in your body. Focus on the tense areas. See what images, faces
emerge as you do so. 2. Learn to say "Yes". For a half-day, or full day,
ask a friend to let you tag along with them. Ask them to break your
routine, such as asking you to do things you normally say "no" to. Say
"yes" to these activities. Notice how you feel as you do so. Stretch
yourself. However, be aware of your limitations & boundaries. Or, take a
day off to do things you normally never do. 3. Express yourself openly.
Instead of passive resistance, say "I don't want to". Tell the truth.
Then be willing to discuss and compromise if necessary. 4. Listen with
an open mind. Learn to listen. Ask someone to tell you something that
they are having difficulty with regarding you. Repeat everything they
say, including their feelings. Do not argue. Say "I understand that you
say ... feel ...". 5. Come to terms with authority. Identify people in
your life whom you resist taking instructions or suggestions from.
Identify whether these people make suggestions or use force. What would
be the actual consequences if you complied ? Who gets hurt when you
resist - you, or them ? 6. Embrace change. Identify worst nightmare
scenario. What if ? 7. Admit your mistakes & accept failure. Make a list
of all your big mistakes. Recall times when you did not take someone's
advise, and they were right. What were the

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 43

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

*GU* GIVEN-UP "I don't care" "One cannot get everything you want - be
reasonable" "Whatever you want" - "It's not going to work, so why bother
?" "Be realistic" - "Be reasonable" Fear: Caring. Risk and newness. Of
getting excited and caring about something. Excitement and caring leads
to loss. Loss is pain. Thus newness and caring leads to pain. Don't care
anymore. There is no point to challenge and risk. Power-Over: Refuse to
risk. Refuse to move. Refusal to Change. Refuse to cast a vote in life.
Therefore, hold other people hostage to their indecisiveness and lack of
committment. "I don't know ... what do you want to do ? Whatever you
want dear ... I don't care" Body: Muscle slackness. Pale. Low blood
pressure. Blood sugar problems. Low energy. Headaches. Depression.
Ultimate Outcome: Others choose for them. Loss of everything. No pain =
No joy either. Total loss of joy and pleasure in life. I don't deserve -
Therefore I get nothing. Sadness. Development: Can be activated at any
time, usually due to a significant loss of something or someone dearly
loved, which reinforces the inevitability of losing what you love and
care about, and what you freely choose. Contributing Development &
Decisions: One of various ways: 1. No choice in change: Parents do not
communicate impending events, child has no way to prepare, becomes
over-whelmed, feels loss and betrayal. E.g.: Drop child off at
baby-sitter - not told. Develops deep sense of distrust about change and
the inevitability of loss; mistrust of new experiences because they are
associated with pain. Stop saying "no" or "yes" (choice), because it
makes no difference. Rather go along with the tide of events. 2.
Exploitation of Child's Talents: Parents or teacher discover child has
talent. Talent gives child pleasure. Force child to practice & deny
other pleasures. Child rebels unsuccessfully, Pleasure and joy becomes
'must' and 'have to'. Passion and Joy shut down due to absence of
choice.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

3.  Controlling / Bullying Parents: Child told s/he has no choice. Just
    do as you are told. No choice allowed. Robbed of choices. Child's
    integrity & feeling of competence threatened, frustrated. Learns to
    be passive, reasonable, rational.
4.  Child desires, does not receive: Child expresses desires and dreams
    and passions. Told that these dreams, goals and passions are
    unreasonable and unattainable. Child learns that it can not get what
    it wants and desires, and that it must be reasonable and compromise.
    'Reasonable' belief develops that "I don't deserve - I can not get
    what I want".
5.  Learn the script from one/both parents. They gave up - in order for
    me to be loved, I become like them. Child sees the absence of risk
    and pain in reasonableness. Child sees that spontaneity and joy are
    not encouraged.
6.  Sympathy Valence: Child assumes (takes on) the goals and desires of
    someone else, such as a grandparent or mother. Sympathy - I love
    them - I will do what they wanted to do & give up myself. The child
    suppresses their desires and passions. Refrains from experiencing
    the pleasure and excitement of taking their dreams and following
    them through. After all, it will not happen. Substitutes reasonable
    goals, compromise, and the support of other people's passions for
    their own. Become afraid of choice - prefer to make reasoned
    decisions. Indecisiveness surfaces. Procrastination. Delays
    decisions. As adult, may appear effective and efficient. -
    particularly in enhancing someone else's life and career. But when
    confronted with sudden change, or authority, they will passively
    submit. I don't deserve. If I risk, I will fail. Rather support
    someone else's passion and goals - second-hand satisfaction. Always
    behind the scenes. Reason is the only authority. This Script remains
    largely quiet and latent for some time, until the person experiences
    the failure or loss of something or someone they secretly or openly
    care deeply about. This event reinforces the initial belief system
    of the impossibility of fulfilling and deserving passion and joy,
    and the person subsides into numbness and quiet desparation. Can
    justify Given Up as a good trait - If everybody just did what they
    wanted to, there would be chaos. There have to be people who are
    level-headed, reasonable, and objective. The Given Up strategy is to
    remove themselves from the arena of choice, risk and joy. Change is
    feared. Big Lie: Believe that by avoiding risk and choice, & thus
    refusing to change, they will avoid pain. Instead, numbness and the
    destruction of aliveness and joy occurs. By fearing loss, they lose
    everything worth living for. Effects on Health: Low energy. Low
    insulin or sugar levels. Headaches. Effects on Creativity:
    Creativity requires expansion & surrender to change. Given Up is
    stagnation.

Page 44

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Effects on Presence: Fear of change = fear of what is
going to happen next. No contact with the vitality of life. Creates
sense of heaviness. Perceived as boring and depressing by others.
Effects on Relationships: Very destructive of relationships. No
excitement. Partner seeks excitement elsewhere. Person becomes dependent
upon their partner for their joy and pleasure. Effects on Spirituality:
Given Up shuts off the vitality and spontaneity of Spirit. Spirituality
requires expansion, curiosity, passion.

Seven Weapons to Tame the Given Up Script Direct action and
shock-tactics are most effective, in order to rekindle the fire of
life. 1. Learn to unreasonable. Identify slackness in your body. Focus
on these slack areas. See what images, faces emerge as you do so. 2.
Learn to say "Yes" or "No", without giving a reason. Be unreasonable:
"Because that is what I want". 3. Express your choices openly. Ban the
following phrases from your life: "Whatever" - "If you think so" - "That
sounds reasonable" "Oh, anything will do". If you can not get what you
ask for, go somewhere else. Do not settle for just anything. 4. Every
week, do three unreasonable irrational activities. Laugh a lot. 5. Waste
some money on frivolous, impractical things. 6. Play with small
children. Do not tell them what to do. Do what they do. Find the child
inside of yourself, again. 7. Ask yourself - what would be the most
exciting and new way of doing this (activity) ? Change the route you
drive to work. Change the arrangement of furniture in your home.
Experience the difference between choice and decisions: Decisions are
"This is what is best and reasonable" and tend to remain in force even
when no longer appropriate; Choice is actively responding to the change
and flow of life - nothing is best - at each moment in time, a specific
response is what you want to do/say about that specific moment and
situation.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 45

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

EXPLANATION OF SCRIPTS

Your scripts reflect the development of your life until this point in
time, based upon childhood events and decisions. The scripts are
stereotypical - i.e., they describe the 'kind of' events and decisions
which lead to a specific Script. Therefore, when reading through the
script, instead of trying to find how you differ from the script, focus
instead upon how your life is reflected by what you are reading. Please
remember that the Scripts you have been given to work with are based
purely upon the scores from the questionnaire that you completed, and
simply indicate the top scores as a reflection of your dominant Scripts
at this point in your life. Also, please remember that everyone has an
element of all eight Scripts, to some varying degree. You are asked to
focus only on the specific Scripts the trainers presently indicated as
being dominant. As with all things, as you work with your Scripts, they
change, and the scores that you obtained on your questionnaire will
undoubtably be different in a week or month's time. It is important to
recognise the following fact: Your dominant Scripts are powerful and
deceptive. You will find a million reasons why they are 'good' and
'useful', and how they serve you well, and how you would not be where
you are today without it. However, the 'Big Lie' of the Script is that
it is useful, and that you 'need it'. For example, a person with the
Stubbornness Script may say that, if it was not for their stubbornness
they would not have persevered and achieved what they have. On the
surface, this makes sense. However, 'stubbornness' and 'determination'
are not the same thing, although stubbornness will disguise itself as
determination, in order to maintain it's grip on you. The Script is
based upon past decisions, formed in moments of pain. Today, they cause
destruction of relationships, health, presence, and spirituality. In
other words, they perpetuate the pain. Remember: The Script is
PASTBASED. The 'good' qualities that the Script disguises itself as, are
not past-based. For example, determination is based upon a vision of the
future, not a reaction to pain from the past. The following is a list of
the Scripts' 'disguises', which will assist you in breaking the "but it
has a positive side" mental belief:

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 46

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

SCRIPT'S DISGUISES & SCRIPT'S LESSON /GIFT

If nothing means anything, why not create something that you enjoy ?

STUBBORNNESS Disguise:

CONTROL-DISTANCE Disguise:

Objectivity

Lesson / Gift:: Vulnerability to feel & share emotions Life is not an
intellectual experience Joy is an irrational non-objective experience
Judgment of others & self destroys aliveness Vulnerability is strength.

LOW-WORTH: Disguise Humility Lesson / Gift: You have inherent
Self-worth. Your value does not depend on being perfect.

Determination

Lesson / Gift: Flexibility Make choices, not decisions. You are always
at choice. Inflexibility destroys choice.

GIVEN-UP Disguise:

Realistic, Easy-Going

Lesson / Gift: Determination to fulfill Purpose Some things are worth
fighting for Passion for Life Action, not understanding, is what counts

IMPATIENCE: Disguise:

Urgency

Lesson / Gift: Time can not be controlled. You are a human BEING, not a
human DOING.

REFUSE-PLEASURE: Disguise:

Every Script has a 'gift' which it holds. It will only relinquish the
gift when you confront the reality of the Script itself. Therefore, when
working with your Scripts, focus on: (1) Being Specific by describing
how, when, who was involved in the events that led to the formation of
your Script;

Reasonableness Unselfish

Lesson / Gift: Forgiveness of others, self and the past. YOU are
responsible for your happiness. YOU are responsible for your misery. Let
go of the past, create a future instead.

(2) Move beyond being analytical about the 'facts'. It is more important
    how you perceived and experienced the events. Your pain and
    perception in the event is the important part. Remember: You are NOT
    your Script - it just sometimes feels like it.

NEVER-ENOUGH: Disguise:

Deservingness

Lesson / Gift:: Gratitude for the love you already have. Distinguish
between 'need' and 'want' What I have is OK AND I would like more. The
love you seek is inside, not outside.

SELF-DESTRUCTIVE: Disguise:

Non-attachment

.

Lesson / Gift:: Meaning is created, not inherent to material things.
Create meaning that works for YOU.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 47

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

'THE CUBE' Visualisation Assessment VISUALISATION Close your eyes and
simply listen to the following, creating the image in your mind. Imagine
a desert landscape, which is very simple. It has a horizon. Sand. Sky.
In this desert landscape there is a cube - an object shaped like a box,
of whatever size, colour or nature you choose. See it. What size is it ?
Where is it? What is it made of ? There are no rules, no right or wrong
answer. Whatever you see is the right answer for you. In this landscape,
as well as the cube there is also a ladder. See it and notice it's size,
its position and what it is made of. In this desert there is also a
horse. See this horse. Notice what type of horse it is. Notice it's
size, its colour. Is it male or female, what is it doing and where is
the horse in relation to the ladder and the cube ?

The person is given a large piece of paper and a pack of pencils. Then
the person is instructed to draw the following:

DRAWING OF WHAT WAS VISUALISED Draw your desert landscape which must be
simple, with a horizon, sand and sky. \[Allow time\]. In the desert
there is your cube, which you must draw, writing next to it what it is
made of. \[Allow time\]. Now draw your ladder somewhere on the paper,
describing what it is made of. \[Allow time\]. Now draw your horse,
exactly the way you want it to be. Describe what kind of horse it is,
it's size and colour/s. \[Allow time\]. Somewhere in this landscape is
your storm, which must be drawn. \[Allow time\]. There are flowers in
this landscape, so draw them, noting what kind they are. \* An
alternative is to ask the person to describe the various components, and
for the Practitioner to write the answers down.

Somewhere in this landscape is a storm. See this storm. Where is the
storm in this landscape? What kind of storm is it ? Does it affect the
cube....the ladder....the horse? Also in this landscape are flowers. See
them. How many are there? What kind are they. What colour? Where are
they in relation to the cube, the ladder, the horse and the storm? Open
your eyes.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 48

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 EXPLANATION GIVEN

The storm reflects how you deal with life's challenges and therefore how
you deal with conflict.

THE CUBE The cube is you. A self portrait. It's size, shape, colour all
reflect your soul and how you feel and place yourself in your world.

THE FLOWERS The flowers are children. How you see children in your
world, whether or not you have any.

It also reflects your absolute individuality because no two cubes are
ever the same. Only you truly understand what your cube means to you.
It's message is from you to yourself.

Where they are placed indicates their importance to you.

What is this cube made of? This reflects how you feel inside. Is it
solid or open, dense or airy, dark or light, firm or yielding, familiar
or unknown?

THE DESERT

Can it melt, be scratched, shatter, bounce, absorb, stretch or leak? How
does this reflect you?

Is it pretty or bleak , harsh or unnourishing?

Where is the cube placed in the picture, relative to the sand and the
sky, the horizon and the foreground?

The desert is how you see your world.

Does it have an oasis in it? Or is it a bare stage with prickly
adversaries, mirages and alluring illusions?

THE LADDER The ladder is your friends. Your friends are even more
important than your lover. Is the ladder free standing, leaning up
against the cube, connected to the earth or the sky or both? How long is
your ladder, how many rungs does it have? Is the ladder taller than the
cube? Is it sturdy or shaky? What is it made of and what does it tell
you about how you view your friendships? THE HORSE The horse is the
lover you desire. The horse is the promise of sexual fulfilment and goes
deeper than simple sex. It reflects the qualities you wish to find in
your lover - Best friend, protector, dependent, work horse. They may
carry you to places you would never go alone or be docile or
disciplined, proud or wild, run away with you or away from you, hover
close or just pass by. The horse's gender is not about your sexual
preference but more about the qualities you seek in a lover. Where is
the horse in reference to you, the cube? Is it close by, on top of,
inside, running by, circling the cube, lying down, standing close or far
away ? THE STORM The storm is trouble. Where is the storm in the
landscape? Is it behind you, above you, around you or off in the
distance?

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 49

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998

CUBE NOTES TAKEN

- SIZE & COLOUR ?

THE CUBE \* WHAT KIND OF HORSE ?

- SIZE & COLOUR ?

- MOVING ?

- MOVING ?

- ABOVE/BELOW GROUND ?

- HARD/SOFT ? SOLID/OPEN ?

- MALE OR FEMALE ?

- WHERE W.R.T. HORIZON,CUBE, LADDER ?

- HOW DOES THE STORM AFFECT IT ?

- MADE OF ?

- WHERE W.R.T. HORIZON, HORSE, LADDER ?

- OTHER ASPECTS:

- HOW DOES THE STORM AFFECT IT ?

- OTHER ASPECTS: LADDER

- HOW FAR AWAY ?

STORM

- HOW TALL ? WHAT KIND OF LADDER ?
- HOW LONG DOES IT LAST ?
- STAND BY ITSELF ?
- WHAT KIND OF STORM ?
- HOW MANY STEPS ?
- HOW DOES IT AFFECT THE CUBE ?
- WHAT IS IT MADE OF ?
- HOW DOES IT AFFECT THE HORSE ?
- STURDY OR SHAKY ?
- HOW DOES IT AFFECT THE LADDER ?
- HOW CLOSE IS IT TO THE CUBE ?
- HOW DOES IT AFFECT THE FLOWERS ?
- HIGHER / LOWER THAN THE CUBE ?
- OTHER ASPECTS:
- HOW DOES THE STORM AFFECT IT ?
- OTHER ASPECTS: FLOWERS THE HORSE

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 50

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 \* HOW MANY ? \* WHAT COLOUR(S) ? \* WHERE ARE THEY W.R.T.
CUBE ? \* HOW DOES THE HORSE AFFECT THEM ? \* OTHER ASPECTS:

DESERT \* SIZE & COLOUR ?

- ANY PLANTS, DETAILS ?

- HOT, COLD, WET, DRY ?

- ANY OASIS (WATER) ?

- DANGEROUS ?

- OTHER ASPECTS:

CLUES TO THE PROCESS ANY OTHER NOTES

THE CUBE Above the horizon Airy

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

How you see yourself Idealistic, spiritual, dreamer Open, undefended,
subtle

Page 51

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Below the horizon Bisecting horizon Black

Practical, worldly, down to earth, sensual Visionary, ideas, practical,
ideal. Stylish, stark, guarded, self contained, drawn to dark side of
life Blue Serene, cool, loyal, distant, aloof, sad Brown Earthy, warm,
serious, studious Buried, partially Low profile, deep-rooted,
overwhelmed, ready to ambush Close Enjoy closeness, people person,
impulsive, here and now, family focused Cloud World of your own,
dreamer, imaginative, pure Crystal Visionary, pure, clear, spiritual
Diamond Rare, lucid, cutting, firm, multifaceted, indestructible Dice
Gambler in life, risk taker, lucky. Different sides Complex, versatile,
adaptable, self-aware Distant Protective of your space, independent,
abstract, see things in perspective Edge facing front Aggressive,
energetic, two-faced, action Edge, on the Undecided, dare-devil,
discriminating Fabric Pliable, domestic, cultured Floating Idealistic,
optimist, live in fantasy world, impractical, above it all. Food
Nurturing, giving, devoured by others. Formica Tidy, cheerful, upwardly
mobile Glass, clear Candid, clear minded, self revealing, realistic
Glass, coloured Imaginative, romantic, see what you want to see, poetic
Glass, shatterproof Tougher than you look Glass, stained Nostalgic,
artistic, religious. Greenhouse Cultivate and display inner life,
protective, possessive. Gold valuable, refined, loyal, desirable Grey
conservative, neutral, ambivalent, bored Green hopeful, nature loving,
pot smoker, optimistic Ground, cube in the deep, introvert,
nonconformist, depressed Hand sized intimate, affectionate, trusting,
practical. Hollow spacious, receptive, light hearted, protective
Hologram elusive, speculative, futuristic House practical, nurturing,
domestic Hovering tentative, uncommitted, realistic but open to ideas
and possibilities Huge confident, egotistic, grandiose, generous Ice
melting vulnerable, calm, in love, refreshing Ice non-melting
resourceful, rational Large capable, confident, healthy ego Metal framed
strong character Metal hollow self protective, cynical Metal solid
introvert, impenetrable, heavy Mirrored reflect others, realist, visual
Multicoloured multitalented, multi- ethic, versatile, moody Oasis
hospitable, nurturing, pleasure-loving Opaque private, self-protective
Original material unusual, solitary, different, self aware and self-made
Outlined clearly defined, clear on boundaries Paper vulnerable, playful,
bluffing (if large in size) Plastic blue collar mentality,
unpretentious, ordinary Plexiglas resilient, invisible shield Standing
on point special, unconventional, balanced Purple regal, luxury loving,
extravagant Pyramid interested in power, mysterious, more than meets the
eye Rainbow multitalented, tolerant, childlike Red warm hearted, hot
tempered, passionate, aggressive Reflecting ambitious, valence,
religious. Rolling uncommitted, changeable, rootless, searching Rubber
tough not hard, resilient, bounce back Rubik's cube complex, adaptable,
versatile, ingenious Sand, in the rooted, stubborn, conservative,
opinionated Sand, on the down to earth, practical, reality oriented

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Shiny bright, attention-getting, excelling Small modest, low profile,
extrovert Solid substantial, secure, honest, consistent Spinning
intense, busy, high energy, elusive Sponge curious, crave knowledge,
easy to influence Stone (blocks) multi-experienced, self made Stone
(solid) unchanging, firm, stubborn. Stone (polished) smooth, refined,
ambitious Stone (rough) natural, blunt, awkward, unrefined Tiny
concentrated, focused, hidden Translucent thoughtful, selective,
alluring Turning moody, active, multifaceted. Two cubes strong dual
personality, physical illness Water emotional, sensitive, full of
potential Yellow cheerful, upbeat, make others happy.

THE LADDER

How you see your friends

IN RELATION TO THE CUBE: Connects cube and ground Entrance of cube Far
from cube

Floats above cube Inside cube In & Outside cube Leans on cube Material
different to cube Material same as cube Part of cube Same height as cube
Smaller than cube Supporting cube Top of cube Taller than cube

earth you, ground your reality, anchors only let friends in, the way to
your heart not close to you, not often seen, not important in your day
to day life hover over you, protect you intimate, protective, confidants
some close, some distant friendships lean on you, support you, close to
you unlike you just like you like a bother/sister, closer than family
are your equals not your equals you are totally dependant on them, your
foundation, needed by you help you reach your potential need people to
look up to you

OTHER ASPECTS OF THE LADDER: Aluminium Balsa wood Branches Bread Broken
Cactus Descend from sky Descending into earth Extension Few rungs
Floating Folding Free-standing Free-standing, vertical Gold Iron Iron,
wrought Leather thongs Library ladder Lying down Paint-spattered Pool
ladder Rickety Rope Rungs, many Rungs, missing

practical help fair weathered, not reliable natural, outdoor, uprooted,
dead eating/drinking buddies, nourishing been betrayed, let down,
estranged from difficult and prickly higher power/God, influential
contacts, raise you up. undermine you, go deeply into life have long
reach, resourceful, always there when needed no matter what. just a few
close friends dreamers, drifters, artists, not practical. clever,
versatile, adaptable unique slant on things, nonconformist independent,
respect you, upstanding priceless to you, loyal strong, blunt, loyal,
uneducated, serious cultured, creative, worked on themselves natural,
western, casual, strong yet supple literary, knowledge-seeking, well
informed relaxed, not much use, deadbeats creative collaborators, varied
experiences. playmates, share fun and leisure, lead you to your feelings
unreliable, in bad shape, ill or ageing flexible, dependent, strong bond
many friends lost close friends

Page 52

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 Sand, in the Skyward reaching Spiral Steel Step, folded

overly loyal, take firm stands, strong support higher power/God,
spiritual, support you come and go, not reliable, fair weather friends
indestructible, straightforward, practical. come through for you, don't
live up to their potential Step, open stable, dependable, usually
couples, independent Wood, finished cultured, care about appearance,
wealthy, snobbish Wood, new fairly new friends Wood, old old friends,
comfortable, older than you.

THE HORSE

The lover

IN RELATION TO THE CUBE: Behind cube

back you up, background in your life, power behind you, hide behind you
Behind cube age/career, in the past, protected by you Beside the cube
equal, companion, loyal, close relationship Circling cube revolves
around you Far from cube another location, indifferent, independent, low
priority, leaving your life. Inside cube your protection, helps you find
yourself, jealous and possessive Licking the cube nourished by you,
demonstrative Near cube close to you, loyal, committed On top of cube
dominant, honoured, on pedestal, possessed by you. Standing over cube
dominant, framing your life Under cube dominated by you, in your shadow,
clinging

IN RELATION TO THE LADDER: Climbing up the ladder

Climbing down ladder Near ladder

rising in your estimation, ambitious, evolving spiritually. falling in
your esteem, no longer idealised your best friend, friend before
becoming lover, close to your friends

OTHER ASPECTS OF THE HORSE: Appaloosa Arabian Black Bridled, ornate
Bridled, plain Brown Camel coloured Clydesdale Dead Flying horse Head
down Hungry/thirsty Looking at storm Lost Lying down Mare Mustang
Saddle, none Nervous No horse Palomino

Copyright 1998

Western, casual high-strung, elegant, sensitive, proud, nervous
mysterious, romantic, moody, powerful, good lover, prefer brunette's
romantic, exotic, crusader, regal, wealthy, chivalrous married,
responsible, hard working, domesticated. warm, earthy, sensual,
ordinary, unpretentious enduring, reliable, handles problems well
workhorse, big, heavy, substantial deceased, no longer loved new love,
idealised, idealistic, admired, intellectual, taking you higher, magical
relaxed, fulfilling their needs, braced for trouble, depressed not
getting enough from you a worrier, vigilant, protective unsure of
direction in life, separated from you relaxed, secure, lazy, ill,
stubborn nurturing, gentle, patient, enduring, temperamental wild,
tough, rebellious, troublemaker. free, loved sexually sensitive, high
strung, temperamental, easily upset non-existent, gone, shut out of your
soul your pal, fair, constant in your life

Knowledge in Action

Pinto

friendly, versatile, moody, object of mixed feelings, artistic Pony
small, cute, childlike, affectionate Prancing proud, spirited, eager,
theatrical, affected Ridden, not by you rational, controlled,
goal-oriented, hard-working Ridden, by you relied on by you, takes you
where you want to go, close companion Running busy, active, preoccupied,
athletic Running away leaving you, unreliable, uncommitted Stallion
bold, assertive, dominant, protective, proud Standing calm, patient,
okay with who they are, not doing much with their lives Thoroughbred
well-bred, competitive, high achiever, good looking Tied up married, not
free Toy horse plaything, possession, toyed with and not taken seriously
Trojan pregnant, having an affair, treacherous, needs conquests,
infidelity Trotting determined, goal directed, mannerly Two or more
horses more than one lover, dual natured Unicorn unworldly, shy,
innocent, pure Walking calm, determined, casual White idealised, your
dream, high principles, good

THE STORM

The way you see trouble / problems

IN RELATION TO THE CUBE: Above the cube

Behind cube Blowing away cube Burying the cube

in your childhood, present time, affects only you in the past, ignored
by you devastating, serious disappointment, failure, loss, illness,
strong sense of mortality overwhelming, transforming, humbling, a
learning experience

IN RELATION TO THE LADDER: Blow away ladder

much worse for your friends

IN RELATION TO THE HORSE: Burying the horse Frightens horse

overwhelming your lover upsetting your lover

OTHER ASPECTS OF THE STORM: Acid rain Approaching Beautiful Black clouds
Departing Electrical Far away Horizon Localised Out of sight Past
Rainstorm Sand storm Thunder Tornado Wind

THE FLOWERS

nagging worries not yet here but coming, foreseeable future challenging,
inspiring, part of life's drama worries, threatening but not real over
for now shocking, give you a jolt, illuminating, enlightening minimal,
nothing to worry about distant future, other people's specific area of
your life, manageable absent from your life, strongly denied in your
past, the worst is over emotional crisis, bringing tears, depressing,
breaking the tension, needed for growth blinding, confusing, irritating,
life changing, material crisis quarrels, threatening, rumoured violent,
destructive, focused spiritual crisis, stressful, chaotic, energising,
renewing

Children

Page 53

PNI Technologies International PsychoNeuroImmunology Practitioner
Training 1998 IN RELATION TO THE CUBE: Behind cube Close to cube Far
from cube

Garden away from cube Garden near cube Inside cube

protected by you, already left home your own, young, protected other
peoples, not part of your life, living far away someone else's children
kept safe, cherished, cultivated wished for, in womb, young, dependent,
overprotected, cherished

IN RELATION TO THE LADDER: On or near ladder your best friends kids,
nieces, nephews IN RELATION TO THE HORSE: Around horse's neck lover's
pride and joy, triumph Behind horse coming once you find love, protected
by your lover. Under horse protected by your lover IN RELATION TO THE
STORM: Falling from storm blessing, worth the trouble OTHER ASPECTS OF
THE FLOWERS: Bouquet close to each other, close in age, seen as gifts
Bright coloured important to you, attention getting, source of pleasure
Cactus flower lots of trouble, worth the trouble Cut flowers adopted,
step-children, left home Daisies innocent, natural Dead flowers in
trouble, no interest to you, aborted or deceased Floating in air
unconceived, undecided on, future Foreground very important to you Many
flowers your life's work, many kids Oasis, in an protected from life,
sources of hope Roses passionately loved Small young, underfoot, pets,
not a big part of your life Tree, under or on growing in their own
direction, entrusted to life Vase your pride, on display, possessed
Water lilies close to their mother, pure Wild not your responsibility

THE DESERT

The World

There is no standard interpretation for the desert. The desert tends to
reflect how the person views the world.

Copyright 1998

Knowledge in Action

Page 54


