Â© 2020 by Caroline Leaf Published by Baker Books a division of Baker
Publishing Group PO Box 6287, Grand Rapids, MI 49516-6287
www.bakerbooks.com Ebook edition created 2020 All rights reserved. No
part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means---for example,
electronic, photocopy, recording---without the prior written permission
of the publisher. The only exception is brief quotations in printed
reviews. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file
at the Library of Congress, Washington, DC. ISBN 978-1-4934-2898-4 This
publication is intended to provide helpful and informative material on
the subjects addressed. Readers should consult their personal health
professionals before adopting any of the suggestions in this book or
drawing inferences from it. The author and publisher expressly disclaim
responsibility for any adverse effects arising from the use or
application of the information contained in this book.

Contents cover half title page title page copyright page introduction 1.
Set your intentions for the week 2. Be open and honest with your
intentions 3. Learn what your body needs and make it a priority 4. When
you are panicking about something, focus your attention on one thing 5.
Incorporate more "thinker moments" into your day 6. Avoid claiming panic
attacks as part of your identity 7. Take a warm bath or shower before
bed 8. Get creative 9. How to keep your brain young and healthy 10. Make
sure you are getting enough omegas 11. Be aware of your thoughts 12.
Practice deep breathing 13. Engage in conversation with people who have
different points of view 14. Practice "purposeful procrastination" 15.
Red light therapy can potentially help improve your mental and physical
health

16. Be careful of relying too much on "self-help" 17. Walk more 18. Give
yourself time to forgive 19. Sometimes it's better to focus on facts
rather than emotions 20. Don't suppress your anxiety 21. Improve your
nutrition and boost your mental health 22. Acceptance is important 23.
Work on your insecurities 24. Don't let your failures define you 25. Be
careful of basing your words and actions on assumptions 26. Watch how
you judge situations 27. Chase curiosity, not passion 28. Start each
morning by reminding yourself of three things 29. Recognize the
difference between reacting and responding 30. The most important
conversations you have are with yourself 31. What kind of advice do you
give to others? 32. Be vulnerable with those you love 33. Join a
community 34. Freak out in the "love zone" 35. Do you criticize others?
36. Argue well 37. Don't assume you know what someone is thinking or
feeling 38. Watch what you think and say about yourself 39. Don't
celebrate the workaholic 40. Start and end the day right 41. Don't
regret making mistakes in front of your children

42. Just because you think something, that doesn't mean it's true 43.
Learn how to manage stress 44. Define your own success 45. Don't just
wait for life to give you what you want 46. Make "gathering time" an
important part of your life 47. Use your free time to build your brain
48. Don't be afraid to argue 49. What kind of language do you use? 50.
Don't avoid hard tasks 51. Take measures against cognitive decline 52.
Reach out and help others when you are feeling down 53. Be proactive in
building human connections 54. Don't panic if you can't fall asleep 55.
Anticipating the worst moments creates the worst moments 56. Focus on
the "now" 57. Don't downgrade the seriousness of someone else's
struggles 58. When dealing with difficult people, sometimes it's best to
build trust first 59. Appreciate the journey of life 60. Don't judge a
book by its cover 61. Get your mind in order before you go to sleep 62.
Protect your own mental health when dealing with difficult people 63.
Make "mental autopsies" a regular part of your day 64. Make mental plans
of what you want to change or achieve 65. If someone you know is
struggling, listen to their story 66. Teach your children that feeling
sad or anxious isn't wrong

67. Recognize that material objects aren't everything 68. Think about
happiness differently 69. Learn to handle rejection 70. Watch what you
think 71. Practice doing nothing 72. Be a peacemaker, not a
people-pleaser 73. Adopt a curiosity mindset 74. Change the way you
value yourself 75. Listen to your body and stop overthinking 76. Ask for
clarification if you're overthinking a situation 77. Choose not to be
oversensitive 78. Make it a priority to spend at least an hour a day
reading 79. Take measures to prevent overeating 80. Change the way you
react to negative feedback 81. Keep an "unease" journal 82. Become aware
of the problems in your life 83. Don't be afraid to admit you are
jealous 84. Don't be discouraged if the journey is taking longer than
expected 85. Make gratitude a priority today and every day 86. Smile and
laugh often 87. Daydream often 88. Change the way you see a stressful
situation 89. Replace negative, toxic thoughts with an "attitude of
gratitude" 90. Don't spend too much time defining the problem 91. Don't
make decisions when you're tired 92. Have a "possibilities mindset"

93. Have a strong support system in place 94. Don't get stuck in a
victim mentality 95. Work on your self-confidence 96. Focus on healthy
habits, not quick-fix solutions 97. Step up to the challenge 98. Stop
comparing yourself to others 99. Set work boundaries 100. Focus on your
journey 101. Write a gratitude letter to someone in your life conclusion
about the author back ads back cover

introduction Although many of us spend time focusing on our physical
health, whether it's going to the gym, to a Pilates class, or for a
morning jog, we often forget to work on our mental health. Yet the mind
is the source of all our thoughts, words, and actions; when our thinking
is unhealthy, our life will be unhealthy---even if we work out seven
times a week and eat kale every day. It's very important to spend time
focusing on our mental self-care regimen and ways to be less stressed,
since mental toughness and resilience will get us through difficult
times and help us achieve success in every area of life, as I discuss in
my book Think, Learn, Succeed. When our mind is strong, we'll be able to
handle whatever life throws our way; we can go from surviving to
thriving. Of course, life can be very challenging. We're constantly
facing stressful situations at work, at home, at school, in the car . .
. you name it! In many cases, our reactions to these situations can make
things worse. If we let our thoughts and emotions get the best of us, we
can negatively impact both our mental and physical well-being.
Uncontrolled thoughts and emotions run rampant through our brain,
creating neurochemical chaos that can make us anxious, affecting our
ability to think clearly and process information. This is one of the
major roadblocks to success and can allow other toxic thinking habits
and mental health issues to take root. Here's the good news: our mind is
incredibly powerful and incredibly capable. Our brain can change as we
think (neuroplasticity) and grow new brain cells (neurogenesis). Using
the incredible power in our mind, we can persist and grow in response to
life's challenges. We can take our thoughts captive and change the way
we think, speak, and act. Our minds are more than prepared to stand up
to these trials and overcome them---all we have to do is think well.
Mentally healthy people can handle all of life's challenges. By changing
our thinking and living a life of mental self-care, we can improve the
way we think and how we live. This book was created as a guide to help
you understand the unique power of your mind, your choices, and your
impact. It is, essentially, a

beginner's how-to guide to mental self-care. It's a guide to 101 simple
selfcare strategies to boost your mind, mood, and mental health. As you
reflect on each tip, I recommend the following process: ask, answer, and
discuss. These three actions underscore the intentional and deliberate
process of learning that produces intelligent memory, which goes beyond
merely reading some information you will forget later (for more on
learning and memory formation, see my book Think, Learn, Succeed).
First, ask. In a journal, write down several questions about the tip
you've read. For example, you can ask yourself, Have I ever felt that I
wasn't good enough? That I couldn't cope with the circumstances of life?
How did I respond? What effect did this have in my life? Your questions
are meant to provide a starting point for an internal dialogue, much
like questions you and I would ask each other during a day-to-day
conversation. Next, answer. Here you apply the tip to your own life by
responding, in detail, to your questions in the ask section. It is
important to remember that there are no right or wrong answers in this
section. You answer your own questions, which are shaped by your
experiences and the unique way you think, feel, and choose (see my book
The Perfect You for more information). Finally, discuss. In your
journal, you further examine your own thoughts, words, and actions,
considering the mental self-care tip of the day, expanding your
observations, and thinking of practical ways you can change your mind
and change your life. So, are you interested in learning how to use the
incredible power of your mind to persist and grow in response to life's
challenges? No matter what life throws your way, when you master the art
of mental self-care, you will boost your mind, mood, and mental health
and achieve success in life.

1 Set your intentions for the week At the beginning of each week, set
your intentions for the week, including some time for fun and for
"thinker moments," when you switch off to the external and switch on to
the internal to just let your mind wander and meditate. This will help
you mentally prepare for the week ahead, help you build up stress
resilience, and give you time to organize your thinking. What are your
intentions for this week? When is the right time for you to set your
intentions for each week?

2 Be open and honest with your intentions The majority of arguments and
misunderstandings happen because you and I are not clear or honest about
how we feel or what we want, either because we expect others to just
know what we want or we're afraid to be open about how we feel. The
solution: practice being open, clear, and honest about your intentions
while being gentle and kind. What are some of your intentions that you
could communicate to those you love?

3 Learn what your body needs and make it a priority The gut
microbiome---the world of bacteria living in the digestive system---
doesn't just exist to help us break down food. There's a constant
conversation going on between the brain and the gut, which has its own
amazing neurons, just like the spinal cord. The relationship between the
gut and the brain is incredibly important when it comes to mental
health. So make your gut health a priority by listening to your body and
watching what you eat.

4 When you are panicking about something, focus your attention on one
thing When you're panicking, find a single object to focus all your
attention on. Pick one thing in clear sight and consciously and
deliberately note everything about it you possibly can: describe the
patterns, color, shape, and size of the object to yourself. Focus all
your energy on this object to help control the symptoms of panic.

5 Incorporate more "thinker moments" into your day When you take time to
switch off to the external and switch on to the internal and just let
your mind wander, you boost your brain health. These "thinker moments"
give your brain a rest and allow it to reboot and heal by letting your
mind wander and daydream, which increases clarity of mind and the
ability to problem-solve. So be intentional about creating daily
"thinker" breaks throughout your day, or when you're feeling stressed
out, to switch off and just focus on the internal by taking a few
minutes to sit and daydream or meditate. How will you start
incorporating more "thinker moments" in your schedule?

6 Avoid claiming panic attacks as part of your identity Never say "my
panic attacks," as claiming them as your identity can become a
self-fulfilling prophecy, since whatever you think about and believe in
grows stronger in your brain, affecting what you say and do. Just see
them as a reaction, like an allergy. Don't live into the identity of
associating yourself with panic attacks.

7 Take a warm bath or shower before bed If you battle falling asleep,
this tip is for you. Recent research has shown a warm shower or bath
before bed can improve both sleep quality and ease of falling asleep.

8 Get creative Feeling depressed, anxious, or just stuck in a rut? Force
yourself to do something creative. Creativity boosts confidence; allows
for more "thinker moments," which are vital for mental health; and
enhances imagination, which helps with problem-solving and
troubleshooting everyday life issues! So, try out new hobbies and
include more time in your schedule for creativity. Some easy ideas
include keeping a coloring book on your desk, doodling, writing,
composing, painting, cooking, baking, or building a puzzle.

9 How to keep your brain young and healthy 1. Detox your mind, brain,
and body daily. 2. Build your brain daily. 3. Get enough sleep.

10 Make sure you are getting enough omegas Omegas are vital for brain
health because they help build and strengthen our myelin sheath, which
enables us to think about and process information at much faster speeds
and with more efficiency. This, in turn, increases our cognitive
performance, boosting our mental and physical health by positively
impacting the way our brain and body function on a day-to-day basis. Try
to include more omega-rich foods in your diet, such as wild and
sustainable salmon, flaxseeds, chia seeds, walnuts, and so on.

11 Be aware of your thoughts When you're aware of a problem in your
life, you can strengthen or weaken that issue based on the choices you
make. You can choose to ruminate on the problem, allowing a toxic
thought structure to grow in your brain and impact your mental and
physical health and relationships. Or you can choose to deal with the
issue by acknowledging and embracing it, talking through it with
someone, finding triggers, and having an action plan in place to resolve
the issue. Don't ruminate on a problem; reconceptualize the issue. This
means looking at it as an opportunity to grow, learn, develop, and build
up your stress resilience.

12 Practice deep breathing As soon as you start feeling depressed,
anxious, worried, fearful, or panicked, practice deep breathing, which
helps reduce cortisol levels in the brain and body that are blocking
your cognition, allowing you to decompress. Hyperventilating can make
you feel worse, while deep, slow breathing calms you down, reducing
levels of adrenaline and cortisol and allowing your HPA axis (which
controls the stress reaction) to work for you and not against you,
preparing you for positive action. One technique to control your
breathing I highly recommend (and use often!) is to breathe in deeply
for four seconds, hold for four seconds, and breathe out for four
seconds. You can also breathe in one side of your nose and out the other
side, which also helps you decompress.

13 Engage in conversation with people who have different points of view
One great way to actively build your brain is to engage in conversation
with people who have different opinions and beliefs. You'll not only
learn more but your brain will have to work extra hard to process the
information. This mental stimulation is great for both your physical and
mental health. Just remember to always listen without judgment, pride,
arrogance, or condemnation. Listen and speak with the aim to learn and
grow.

14 Practice "purposeful procrastination" Practicing "purposeful
procrastination" may be one way to reduce unnecessary anxiety in your
life. It means learning to accept incompleteness: you can't always get
everything done at once, so you should clear a space in your mind and
compartmentalize, setting aside other tasks for later. Be okay with
saying no and not getting something done immediately. You may also need
to reevaluate the deadlines you place on yourself, as these may be
unrealistic and cause you more stress than necessary. Are there places
in your life where you feel you can do this?

15 Red light therapy can potentially help improve your mental and
physical health Numerous studies have shown that red light therapy is
one way we can help heal and improve our mental, cognitive, and physical
health. Of course, as I have said many times before, there is no "magic
bullet" when it comes to our mind and brain. Living a life of mental
self-care means paying attention to all aspects of our mental and
physical health, including what we think, what we eat, our sleeping
patterns, how much we exercise, and so on. And, as part of this
balanced, mind-centered approach to living well, red light therapy can
be a real plus. The spectrum of light associated with red light therapy
has the unique ability to stimulate our cells, in particular our
mitochondria (the powerhouses of our cells), which creates more energy
in the body through increased adenosine triphosphate production,
allowing it to function on a higher level. This enhanced mitochondrial
function and increased blood flow can potentially lead to reduced
inflammation, better sleeping patterns, healthier-looking skin, improved
muscle recovery, less joint pain, better moods, enhanced memory, and
much more.

16 Be careful of relying too much on "self-help" In many cases, the
self-help industry is problematic because it promotes the idea that to
be better we should focus only on ourselves. This goes against our
biology and the design of our brain: we need each other to be better,
and we need each other to heal. While it's of course important to work
on ourselves and our mental, physical, and emotional health, we should
also be intentional about our "social health." Think of ways you can be
intentional about building community: start a volunteer group or a book
club, go to talk therapy, or help someone you know who is hurting. The
opportunities are endless.

17 Walk more Looking for a quick stress release, an antidote to anxiety,
or a creativity boost? Go for a walk outside. Fresh air, nature, and
physical movement are some of the best antidepressants.

18 Give yourself time to forgive If you've been hurt by someone, don't
be too hard on yourself if you can't immediately forgive them and move
on. Don't try to "fake it till you make it" when it comes to
forgiveness, because you can't just get rid of, pray away, or suppress
feelings or emotions, which are physical structures in the brain that
will take time and effort to break down. Healing takes time. Be
compassionate and patient with yourself. Start by acknowledging your
feelings, recognizing you want them to go away, and then using mental
selfcare techniques like reconceptualization (reimagining your thoughts)
to detox your brain. It also helps to talk to someone about your
feelings and/or write them down---this will help you gain clarity and
perspective.

19 Sometimes it's better to focus on facts rather than emotions Learning
to embrace negative thoughts or emotions can be incredibly
uncomfortable, but it's necessary in order to overcome whatever is
causing them. To make this process a little easier, don't just focus on
how you feel; rather, focus on the facts or logic of the situation and
ask yourself questions. For example, maybe you got an email that caused
you to feel stressed and anxious. Instead of thinking about how you feel
and panicking, focus on the words of the email. What is this person
saying? Why did it make you feel stressed and anxious? What are the
facts of the situation? Could this person be right, and you are
overreacting? Is there something in this situation that you can learn
from? Are you basing your thinking on assumptions or on facts? If you
keep practicing this consistently, focusing on facts will become a habit
and help reduce anxiety in your life.

20 Don't suppress your anxiety Anxiety is often a symptom of unexplored
and suppressed emotions. When you feel something negative or something
you think is stupid or embarrassing, don't suppress or ignore it.
Embrace it, learn from it, and reconceptualize it.

21 Improve your nutrition and boost your mental health Here are three
simple nutrition tips to help boost your brain and mental health: 1. Eat
sitting down. 2. Work on improving the health of your gut microbiome,
such as by taking probiotics and eating low-sugar foods. 3. Reduce or
eliminate processed and refined sugars and carbs.

22 Acceptance is important Confidence often comes from accepting
external factors you can't control. Learning to accept your emotional
reactions and feedback, and to "metabolize" them, is key to increasing
your confidence. Some ways you can start to do this is by becoming aware
of and embracing situations where you can be vulnerable, seeking
feedback no matter what, and reconceptualizing all negative feedback or
emotions as opportunities to grow and learn. What can you start learning
to accept today?

23 Work on your insecurities If you struggle with jealousy, insecurity,
or envy (which the majority of us do), it may be helpful to remember: 1.
Life is not a zero-sum game. Just because someone is doing well does not
mean there is less of a chance you will do well; there is no "success
reservoir" that is being depleted. The more we all succeed, the more we
all benefit---the bigger the pie gets, the more people get a slice. 2.
Don't get stuck in the shame and guilt associated with these feelings.
Rather, acknowledge them (tell yourself it is great you are aware of
them) and then see what they are telling you. Maybe you need to improve
in a certain area of your life? Maybe you need to address something
deeper? It is always important to work through uncomfortable
emotions---never suppress them.

24 Don't let your failures define you Do you confuse failure as an
action with failure as an identity? Too often we cause ourselves mental
distress because we see failure as a part of us or a part of someone
else. Rather, we need to look at failure as an external action outside
of an identity, like stumbling: it happened to us, but we just get back
up again. When we make failure a part of our identity, we make it more
permanent. Be careful of saying that you're a failure or someone else is
a failure. It's far better to say, "I failed, but that is in the past"
and focus on what you learned from the situation. See failure as a verb,
not an adjective---an action, not a description.

25 Be careful of basing your words and actions on assumptions Constantly
check that what you think, say, and do are not just based on
assumptions. Do you have all the facts? If not, your assumptions are
essentially building structures into your brain and creating realities
made of half-truths, misinformation, and, in many cases, lies, which
will negatively impact your mental health.

26 Watch how you judge situations Often a situation itself does not
cause mental distress. Rather, it's our judgment of that situation that
causes us mental pain or pleasure. We need to constantly be aware of how
we're perceiving and judging situations. Before reacting, ask yourself
questions like Is this situation the worst thing that could happen? or
Am I making an assumption? You could also ask yourself why you're upset
by the situation. And remember, you may not be able to control the
situation, but you can control and manage your judgments and
perceptions, which is vital to reducing toxic structures in your brain
and thereby reducing mental distress in your life.

27 Chase curiosity, not passion It can be very stressful to focus just
on "passion," as if it's a single, fixed thing. By focusing on finding
the "one thing," you may miss out on so many other opportunities. It's
sometimes better to follow what makes you curious, which often leads to
passion. So, don't get stressed out if you don't have one thing you're
passionate about and instead enjoy many different things, and don't
judge others who keep trying new things and searching. Everyone's on a
different path. What are you curious about today?

28 Start each morning by reminding yourself of three things 1. 1 Life is
short and can end at any moment. How would you like to spend your last
moments? 2. Today will be a good day no matter what happens, because you
can control your reactions. You can turn negative moments into learning
opportunities. 3. One of the greatest human desires is to be relevant
and connected. How can you help make someone feel relevant, connected,
needed, and understood today?

29 Recognize the difference between reacting and responding There's a
major difference between reacting and responding. Reacting is often
reflexive and impulsive, whereas responding is based on deliberate
choice. Every day, we're given the opportunity either to react, where we
can end up creating toxic thought patterns, negatively impacting our
mental health, and damaging our relationships, or to learn to respond
and control our reactions. Responding requires gathering the facts
first, taking time to think before speaking, and realizing that every
thought or word creates a reality that will impact us and those around
us. This gives us control, while just reacting gives someone or
something else control over us. How can you start reacting less and
responding more?

30 The most important conversations you have are with yourself What do
you say to yourself when no one's around? What world are you creating
for yourself with your thoughts, words, and actions? Be honest with
yourself and spend time each day gaining insight into how you think
about and talk to yourself. You create your reality by the words you say
and what you think, so awareness is vital.

31 What kind of advice do you give to others? What advice do you give
out the most? Pay attention to this, as it may be an indication of
something you need to address in your own life.

32 Be vulnerable with those you love If you struggle to be open and find
it hard to talk to people about your feelings, I encourage you to be
brave and vulnerable. Take it one step at a time and embrace the
uncomfortableness and uncertainty. Remember, it's far braver to
acknowledge emotions than to suppress them. Only once you acknowledge
your feelings can you begin to heal.

33 Join a community Research shows that the more we're involved in a
social group, the less our risk of death is from all causes, while
relationships of any kind can potentially improve our chances of
survival by up to 50 percent. How can you become more involved in your
community? Think of ways you can join a group and build up your social
circle.

34 Freak out in the "love zone" When something frustrating or bad
happens and you need to vent, set a timer on your phone for five
minutes. In those five minutes, scream, cry, yell, shout, and do
whatever you need to do to get it all out. When those five minutes are
done, force yourself to stop and say, "I can't control the events and
circumstances of life, but I can control my reactions to them." This
will help you move on and not fixate on the issue.

35 Do you criticize others? Do you find yourself quick to judge and
criticize? Often, we criticize change in someone because it forces us to
confront something in our own life. Watch how you react to someone
else's life, because this may be a signal you need to address something
in your life.

36 Argue well It is incredibly important to remember that, in any
argument, it's not you against the other person. Rather, it's you and
the other person against the issue. Separate the human from the problem.

37 Don't assume you know what someone is thinking or feeling Assumptions
are the mother of all mess-ups. Often, we make assumptions about
someone's words or actions, and instead of asking for more information
and clarification, we just get stuck thinking about what we thought we
heard or saw. This thinking is often toxic and can cause mental
distress. Save yourself the trouble and pain by asking for clarity and
always questioning thoughts you have. Are they true? Do I have all the
facts? Am I misjudging or misreading this person or situation? Just
because you think something doesn't mean it's true.

38 Watch what you think and say about yourself Be careful what labels
you associate with your identity. Take a few moments today to look at
how you label yourself and how you see yourself. Are you taking on any
unnecessary titles? For example, instead of saying "my anxiety," you can
say, "I am struggling with anxiety at the moment." Don't let your issues
define who you are at your core, which can keep you locked in and
prevent healing.

39 Don't celebrate the workaholic We need to stop glorifying the person
who works all weekend and start praising the person who finds a good
work-life balance. Our culture of celebrating the workaholic is one of
the main reasons why we're seeing an increase in mental, emotional, and
physical burnout. Do you glorify work over relationships? Do you think
how long you work defines your selfworth? Consider your relationship
with work and how you can improve it.

40 Start and end the day right As you wake up, tell yourself today will
be a great day and discuss with yourself or a loved one why it will be
great. And before you go to sleep, think about and discuss why your day
was great. Doing this on a regular basis will train your brain to focus
more on the positive; our expectations change the structure of our brain
in a good way. How will you start your day off today?

41 Don't regret making mistakes in front of your children As parents, we
often feel guilty for making mistakes in front of our children. But we
shouldn't try to cover up our faults or let our shame and guilt control
us. Rather, we should reconceptualize our mistakes as invaluable
teaching opportunities that will help prepare our children to
successfully navigate the hard parts of life. We need to be brave enough
to admit we're wrong and strong enough to fix the mistake and move on.
We need to teach our children to be vulnerable, open, and honest, and
model for them how to turn a mistake into an opportunity for growth.

42 Just because you think something, that doesn't mean it's true When
you find you are overthinking, anxious, angry, or experiencing any kind
of toxic emotion, spend a few minutes examining your thoughts and see if
they are true and factual. Are you making assumptions? Are you
overexaggerating? Then check your thinking by talking to someone else to
get perspective and more information. From there, decide to replace the
untrue thought with the truth, which may not always be "nice." You may
be the one responsible or at fault in a situation. However, it's better
to face reality now than further build up toxic structures in your
brain, which will become realities in your life and affect your mental
health.

43 Learn how to manage stress It's so vital to learn how to correctly
react to and manage stress, as this will help develop mental toughness
and build up your stress resilience, which, in turn, will help you deal
with stressful situations in the future. Make a game plan so that you'll
know what to do when you're stressed about something. The more you
practice reacting to stressful situations in a good way, the more you
are strengthening healthy memories in your brain and building up your
mental immunity.

44 Define your own success When you don't define your own success, the
world will define it for you. When was the last time you really thought
long and hard about what success meant for you in your own life? Take a
few moments today to write down what success in your personal,
professional, spiritual, physical, mental, and emotional life looks
like, and really reflect on what you wrote. Be sure to revisit what you
wrote periodically to check if you're on track. Remember to be flexible
in the exact details and how you'll get there.

45 Don't just wait for life to give you what you want Don't live with
the mindset of just expecting things from life. Rather, have a mindset
that asks, What is life expecting from me? The first attitude removes
responsibility from the individual and is more likely to cause
disillusionment, anxiety from lack of control, and other mental health
issues. The second attitude gives control back to the individual, as
well as more responsibility. In my practice and research, I've seen that
those who feel like they have more control over their lives and
decisions struggle less with mental ill-health. So, make it a habit to
ask yourself, What is life expecting of me? Can I do better? How can I
be more responsible for my choices, actions, and thoughts?

46 Make "gathering time" an important part of your life Be intentional
about creating moments in your day or week when you can just sit,
reflect, and be by yourself. I call these moments "gathering time," and
they are vital for your mental health. Use this time to be
self-reflective, journal, learn something new, meditate, pray, or just
simply daydream. I highly recommend scheduling these moments into your
calendar so you don't forget to do them or give up that time. I've found
that these moments often show me where my thinking is toxic and what bad
habits I need to work on.

47 Use your free time to build your brain Make it a habit to use the
free moments in your day to build your brain and increase your
knowledge. Free moments can be when you're getting ready, driving,
walking, waiting for an appointment, and so on. Instead of getting on
social media, read a book or listen to a podcast, TED interview, or
audiobook. Be intentional every day about how you use free moments,
because these few moments add up to hours and hours a year.

48 Don't be afraid to argue One hour of arguing correctly can save years
of relationship problems. We need to stop fearing arguments and sweeping
things "under the rug" and start learning how to argue correctly. Only
when we get everything out can we begin to find the core issues and also
find healing---mentally, physically, and emotionally---in relationships.

49 What kind of language do you use? Does the language you use put
people on the defensive? It's so important to watch how you phrase
things and what words you choose. Avoid statements such as "You're
always \_\_\_\_" and "You never \_\_\_\_." Also avoid assigning blame.
Try looking inward and asking yourself if you're partly responsible for
the situation. Is there an underlying issue you're not addressing?
Arguing can be so good for relationships if done correctly. One key tip
is to learn to speak in ways that don't trigger or aggravate others.

50 Don't avoid hard tasks The longer you push aside an unpleasant task,
the more time you have to think about it, making it something even more
unpleasant and stressful. Make it a habit to get it done first thing so
it doesn't cause you mental distress. This will reduce the anxiety or
stress associated with this task and help improve your mental health.
What can you get done today that you have been putting off for a while?

51 Take measures against cognitive decline Do you worry about cognitive
decline? Or maybe you know someone who has it and want to know how to
help? One of the best ways to prevent the onset or worsening of
cognitive decline is to improve both short- and longterm memory. This
builds up the cognitive reserves in the brain, which are more and more
important as you age. To strengthen your short-term memory, practice
memorizing shopping lists, phone numbers, passwords, poems, songs, and
so on. To strengthen your long-term memory, spend at least an hour a day
building your brain through deep, intellectual thinking and learning:
read educational books, listen to a podcast on something new and
interesting, and reteach what you have learned to a friend or family
member.

52 Reach out and help others when you are feeling down Part of a good
mental self-care regimen is reaching out and helping others, even if
we're struggling with our own issues. Too often we get stuck trying to
deal with our own problems, which can make us self-absorbed and make our
issues worse: our problems get larger because they are all we see.
Helping others, on the other hand, not only boosts our own healing but
is a great way to gain perspective and gratitude and build up our mental
toughness. Sometimes the best remedy is getting out of our head and
helping others.

53 Be proactive in building human connections Don't expect people to
instantly connect with you. Don't put the responsibility on others. Take
the time to analyze the quality of your connections and how you can
improve your relationships. One great way to proactively build
meaningful connections with someone is to take interest in what they
like (even if it doesn't particularly appeal to you). Ask questions,
listen, do research, put aside judgment, and embrace curiosity. Human
connection is one of the best antidepressants.

54 Don't panic if you can't fall asleep Don't allow yourself to lie in
bed panicking about not sleeping. Instead, get excited and embrace the
fact you're awake. Tell yourself, This is going to be a nice, quiet time
when I'm not bugged by texts, emails, or people needing something. I'm
going to get that research done, finally read that book, watch that
program on the Discovery Channel, tidy that closet, or work
uninterrupted on that project! This excitement lowers cortisol levels,
balances the HPA axis (the "stress axis"), and makes stress work for you
and not against you, activating your resilience and changing your genes
in a good way. Develop a positive expectation that this is a special
time just for you, and you will use it wisely. This mindset will help
you get your panic under control and improve your health. A mindset of
negative expectation, however, is just going to damage your brain and
make you feel worse---it's not worth it!

55 Anticipating the worst moments creates the worst moments When we
anticipate or expect the worst to happen, we build that thinking into
our brain, which can affect our actions, attitudes, and words. Remember,
your expectations create realities. Remind yourself that bad days or
weeks won't last forever, and plan to celebrate when they're over. Let
the anticipation of a reward help you enjoy the process of facing the
day's or week's challenges.

56 Focus on the "now" When it comes to tough times, it is so important
to focus on the "now" moment (the present). Don't fear or dread the
future, and don't ruminate on the past, especially past failures and
mistakes. When we focus too much on future fears and worries, we lose
sight of what is happening now and how to make the "now" work for us and
not against us. Also, focusing on the past keeps us stuck there, unable
to deal with the now or even enjoy the present moment. By fearing the
future or regretting the past, we reinforce those neural networks in our
brain and can create mental chaos. In the midst of a bad day or week,
focus on the present: What can you do to make the situation work for you
right now, what can you learn, and what is your mindset?

57 Don't downgrade the seriousness of someone else's struggles How many
times have you heard someone say, "Oh, it's not that bad," or "So-and-so
is stressed, but they don't know what real stress is," or "You think
you're stressed? I'm so overwhelmed!"? These kinds of statements are
very dangerous; they demonstrate a sense of self-involvement and a lack
of compassion and understanding for others. You will never know the
degree of pain or stress someone else is in because you're not the one
feeling it. So, practice empathy and always do your best to hear what
someone's trying to tell you in a nonjudgmental way.

58 When dealing with difficult people, sometimes it's best to build
trust first When dealing with someone who is difficult and doesn't want
help or seems to not want to change, sometimes the best approach is to
first build trust and a stronger relationship by engaging with them on
topics they're interested in and listening to them without judgment.
Don't just try to solve their issues! This doesn't mean you ignore the
problem; rather, you go into a conversation or interaction wanting to
engage with that person on topics that interest them, building up trust,
which is the foundation for true change. Doing this will help facilitate
deep and meaningful conversations in the future and can make the person
more receptive to what you have to say (you don't want your words to
feel like a sudden intervention).

59 Appreciate the journey of life As you go about your day, don't just
focus on how much you can get done. Rather, focus on how much you can
learn. Life has so much to offer--- embrace it!

60 Don't judge a book by its cover It's always important to realize
there's a deeper message below someone's outward actions and words.
Focus on that rather than on "So-and-so did this," especially in
difficult situations. Keep in mind the bigger picture: Why do you care
about this person? Think about the love you have for your friend or
family member.

61 Get your mind in order before you go to sleep The secret to better
sleep isn't some pill. Rather, it's consistent mental selfcare and mind
management. If your mind's in chaos, no pill or sleeping trick will
work. It's important to remember that there is no quick fix for detoxing
your mind and brain; it's a lifestyle. This is basic mental self-care,
as necessary as bathing and cleaning your teeth. It keeps your brain
healthy and heals the damage from toxic thinking, which may be
contributing to keeping you awake at night.

62 Protect your own mental health when dealing with difficult people
Throughout the whole process of dealing with a difficult person, you
need to remember to protect your own mental health, because these kinds
of situations can be tough and draining. Make sure you have a designated
person you can talk to who can help you process difficult situations and
emotions. And, where applicable, use technology to your advantage: if a
difficult person calls but you need a rest, let it go to voicemail and
text them that you will call back later. Sometimes it's better to text
rather than call; it can help you think clearly before responding in a
reactive and emotional way. Indeed, always take the time to think before
you respond---never react impulsively! And when you do feel attacked,
imagine a shield of armor around your mind protecting you from the
"arrows" of their nasty words. This can help you divorce your own
emotions from the issue and give your mind a break by reminding yourself
it's just their pain speaking, not a direct attack on you. It's
important to set definitive boundaries!

63 Make "mental autopsies" a regular part of your day When you are
dealing with a difficult situation or person or just an overall bad day,
conduct a "mental autopsy." Look back at your past experiences, analyze
them, and examine why something went the way it did and how you can
improve, whether this is some kind of trauma, a fight, an issue at work,
or something similar. Mental autopsies are conducted after a mistake or
experience in order to see what went wrong (or right), just as a regular
autopsy looks at a dead body to see what went wrong. The key to a good
mental autopsy is understanding. When you start to understand your
experiences, you can reconceptualize them (or redesign them) and learn
from them, instead of overthinking and making the same mistakes
repeatedly. Ask, answer, and discuss with yourself why something
happened, how it happened, what the triggers were, and so on. This will
help you gain insight into the issue and see how it can be avoided in
the future or how you can improve the way you react the next time
something similar happens.

64 Make mental plans of what you want to change or achieve When it comes
to creating sustainable habits in your life, planning and writing down
your goals in a way that enables you to see the big picture and remind
yourself of it on a daily basis is incredibly important. Journaling and
using a calendar, habit tracker, or something similar can be helpful.
Writing things down helps organize your thinking, which, in turn, helps
you make better decisions because you can stand outside yourself and
observe your life from a more "neutral" and less emotional vantage
point. Have a clear vision of why and what you want to change.

65 If someone you know is struggling, listen to their story If you know
someone who is suffering from depression or anxiety, don't just reach
out to them to try "fix" them. Simply connect with them and listen and
tune in to their needs and their unique story. People want to be heard,
not corrected or "fixed."

66 Teach your children that feeling sad or anxious isn't wrong Parents
and guardians: teach your children that anxiety and depression are
normal parts of life and will come and go. These feelings don't mean
that your children are "broken" or that something is wrong with them.
Overprotecting your children won't prepare them for the toughness of
life. Teach them how to wrestle with the hard parts of life and how to
make it through tough times. Show them how to be resilient by
demonstrating your love for them through your words and actions, and be
open with them about your own struggles. Create an environment where
your children can talk to you without judgment.

67 Recognize that material objects aren't everything Our enjoyment from
material things will always decline over time. Keep this in mind the
next time you are tempted to think an object you desire will bring
lasting happiness.

68 Think about happiness differently Happiness isn't a fixed state or
something that's definable or quantifiable. Happiness isn't perpetual
feelings of joy or euphoria. It's not a consumer product. It's not found
or discovered. Happiness is generated by us through the way we frame and
manage the events of life and our expectations of these events. There's
no secret to happiness. Remember, you don't find happiness, you create
it.

69 Learn to handle rejection When faced with rejection, don't
immediately think there's something wrong with you. Rather, objectify
the situation, assuming the role of an inspector or detective, and
examine what happened from an impartial position. This will help take
the sting out of the situation and allow you to find clarity and turn
the situation into a learning experience.

70 Watch what you think Your mind controls your brain, and your brain
controls your body. If you want a healthy body, you need a healthy mind.
Physical change starts with a mental change. You are---and you
become---what you think.

71 Practice doing nothing Many of us feel guilty when we need to take a
break or holiday because we live in a society that constantly tells us
we are only valuable if we work all the time. We overvalue people who
work overtime, glorifying their hectic schedules, and undervalue the
power and beauty of rest and relaxation. We need to recognize that
although the mind is infinite, the brain is finite, and it needs rest to
function well. We can give our best only when we are rested, which is
why it is so important to learn how to be okay with doing nothing from
time to time, even if it is just for a few minutes. How can you practice
doing "nothing" today?

72 Be a peacemaker, not a peoplepleaser Are you a people-pleaser or
peacemaker? A peacemaker seeks to restore balance and find a
resolution---and is other-focused. A people-pleaser, on the other hand,
is self-focused, often wishing to avoid conflict and uncertainty to the
point of sacrificing their mental health and morals.

73 Adopt a curiosity mindset Try this the next time you're dealing with
someone who's being rude or angry: calmly ask for more details and an
explanation for why they're angry or why they're frustrated with you,
rather than just reacting. This mindset will change your body language
and tone of voice, which may help soothe the other person, forcing them
to pause and think before attacking you.

74 Change the way you value yourself Don't base your self-worth on the
number of tasks you can complete in a day. Base your self-worth on how
you have grown and what you have learned in a day.

75 Listen to your body and stop overthinking How do you know whether
you're overthinking or thinking deeply? Your body and mind will tell
you. When you're overthinking, you will step into toxic stress and your
body will respond---maybe you'll feel sick or get a headache. It's also
important to analyze your thinking and emotions so you can find out
what's making you overthink and deal with the cause. Ask yourself why
you feel stressed about something, what is actually happening, how you
can change the situation, and how your mindset is affecting your ability
to deal with it. Write down your thoughts; this can bring clarity to the
situation at hand. Turn overthinking into deep thinking.

76 Ask for clarification if you're overthinking a situation If you find
yourself overthinking a situation or problem, take the time to ask the
other person involved for more clarification before making assumptions
that will only lead to more overthinking. Ask them what they mean, why
they said what they said, or why they did what they did. Be sure to calm
down before angrily or reactively snapping back. Be patient. Asking for
more information will definitely help avoid misunderstandings that come
as a result of miscommunication.

77 Choose not to be oversensitive It's very important not to overthink
situations or assume that people have said or acted in a certain way
because they were trying to antagonize you. Do not victimize yourself.
Choose to stop and think about the situation in a rational way, and
don't let your emotions get the best of you. Examine how you see
yourself, write it down, and think of ways you can give people the
benefit of the doubt rather than just assuming you know their thoughts.

78 Make it a priority to spend at least an hour a day reading Not only
does reading build the brain in a healthy way but it also helps develop
our mirror neurons and people skills. It opens up the parts of the brain
responsible for our compassion, understanding, and empathy, making us
better leaders, teachers, parents, and siblings.

79 Take measures to prevent overeating Overeating can have a negative
impact on your physical and mental health. To prevent overeating, try to
wait twenty minutes before getting a second helping of food. Maybe have
a cup of coffee or tea or go for a walk. This will allow your brain to
"catch up" to your stomach and recognize how full you are. If you eat
too quickly and with too many distractions (TV, phone, eating on the
go), your brain can miss the signal from your stomach that you are full.

80 Change the way you react to negative feedback No one likes receiving
negative feedback---we feel attacked or embarrassed. Instead of lashing
out, however, take a few seconds to calm down. Think about what the
person said and measure your response. Say something like, "I appreciate
you taking the time and effort to tell me that. Thank you." This will
make you more open to feedback in the future, which can help you
improve, grow, and learn.

81 Keep an "unease" journal One way of identifying what is causing you
anxiety and mental distress is to keep a record of moments when you feel
uneasy. Write down the details of the situation, what your triggers
could be, how you felt, and who you were with. Much like a food journal
can be helpful when it comes to identifying allergies and intolerances,
an "unease" journal can help you identify issues you need to deal with.

82 Become aware of the problems in your life Awareness of a problem is
great. Although it may not feel great to be aware of something bad in
your life, it is an incredibly important part of the healing process.
Only once you're aware of an issue can you begin to change it. How often
have you brushed aside a feeling of sadness or loneliness without taking
a look at why you feel that way? Issues cannot be suppressed for long.
Celebrate being aware, then move on and take action to remedy the
situation. What problems can you become aware of and start changing in
your life?

83 Don't be afraid to admit you are jealous Jealousy is something no one
likes to admit, yet it is a dangerous emotion and needs to be dealt with
immediately. Jealousy causes damage in the brain and can contribute to
mental ill-health. So, what's the first step to dealing with jealousy?
Admit it. Embrace the ugliness. Only then can you begin to change. Spend
some time today and ask yourself if you have any jealousy in your life.

84 Don't be discouraged if the journey is taking longer than expected It
takes twenty-one days to build a new long-term memory and sixty-three
days to build a new habit. What's the moral of the story? Change takes
time, so don't get discouraged if you don't see results immediately.
Also, be wary of anyone who promises a quick fix to a problem---any
results will only be temporary. True and lasting change takes time.

85 Make gratitude a priority today and every day Always be grateful.
There are people who would love to have your bad day. Gratitude makes us
feel that life is worth living, which brings mental health benefits in a
positive feedback loop leading to more resilience---the ability to
bounce back more quickly during hard times. Gratitude is therefore
essential to overcoming difficult circumstances and achieving success in
all areas of your life.

86 Smile and laugh often Remember to smile often and fill your life with
moments of humor. Research shows that smiling and laughter can boost the
immune system, ease pain, relax the body, and even reduce the effects of
negative stress.

87 Daydream often You've probably had someone in your life tell you to
stop daydreaming. Well, I'm here to tell you daydreaming is actually
very good for you! Letting your mind wander gives your brain a physical
rest and allows the free flow of information, which helps combat
negative thinking patterns while boosting creativity and imagination.
So, take a few seconds each day to just let your thoughts drift!

88 Change the way you see a stressful situation Did you know stress can
be good for you? When you view a stressful situation as an unconquerable
mountain, you shift into toxic stress. However, if you change your
attitude about a stressful situation, you can also change the outcome. A
good reaction to stress keeps you alert and can increase cognitive
function and flexibility. Remember, the way you view a situation will
determine how you deal with that situation, so choose to be positive and
see challenges as opportunities to grow and learn.

89 Replace negative, toxic thoughts with an "attitude of gratitude"
Every time you find yourself feeling down, think about all the good
things in your life. This will change the brain and body for the better:
gratitude can increase your longevity, your ability to use your
imagination, and your ability to problem-solve. So, when you're at a low
point in life, write down what you're grateful for on a sticky note and
place it somewhere near you. Perhaps text or call a friend and tell them
how thankful you are to have them in your life. Remember, the more good
you see in your life in the now moments, the happier and more successful
you're likely to be at school, work, and life in the future.

90 Don't spend too much time defining the problem When it comes to any
situation we face, we often spend too much time focusing on the problem
and too little time focusing on the solution. Essentially, we can be
quite good at recognizing what we need to change but not the how or
when. In fact, if we spend too much time ruminating on the problem, we
can get caught up in the emotions associated with the toxic thinking
pattern, which can lead to emotional burnout, mental fatigue, and
increased anxiety. When dealing with a situation, or just life in
general, it's best to spend a limited amount of time defining what the
issue is and focus more time on a plan of action. So, the next time you
find yourself faced with a challenge, think of different ways a
situation can work to your benefit. I personally try to stick with a
"one-third plan" when it comes to dealing with a negative thinking
pattern or a stressful situation: I use onethird of my time to define
and talk about the issue, one-third to plan the solution, and one-third
to transform the solution into some kind of positive action.

91 Don't make decisions when you're tired The brain has limited energy
and needs recharging. We do this through lifestyle choices like good
nutrition and exercise, but, even more so, with good mind-management
techniques. Our mind is infinite and tireless; our brain is finite and
gets tired. When it's tired, chemicals don't flow like they should, and
the internal networks of the brain can get stuck or overfire. This is
akin to driving through a storm with broken windshield wipers---a recipe
for disaster. It is important to take regular mental health breaks
throughout the day, in the form of "thinker moments," to daydream for a
few moments; I recommend a minute or so every hour. These moments give
your brain a rest and allow it to reboot and heal, increasing your
clarity of thought and organizing the networks of your brain, which will
help you make wise decisions instead of "shooting from the hip."

92 Have a "possibilities mindset" We need to be realistic, of course,
but we also need to have what I call a "possibilities mindset." If we
just assume we've failed because things haven't gone our way, we can
block ourselves from moving forward, which can upset our mental
well-being because our brain gets stuck in a negative, stressful
reaction. However, when we learn to think that there's more than just
plan A or plan B, we tap into the optimism bias of the brain, which
helps us get up when we fail, and we don't get stressed out when things
don't go as planned. Being prepared to change our thoughts in this way,
especially when our circumstances change, helps develop mental
flexibility, resilience, creativity, and imagination, which gives us
hope because we just keep on trying until we achieve our goals! So,
practice seeing multiple possibilities in any given situation, maybe
even writing them down in your journal.

93 Have a strong support system in place Each time you feel yourself
teetering on the brink of toxic stress, speak with your friends or
family (even if it is just a phone call or text conversation) to help
get perspective and deal with your anxiety in a positive way. Finding
life difficult at times isn't something to be ashamed of, while
suppressing your emotions will throw your brain and body into toxic
stress, which can severely impact your mental and physical health. This
is why it's so important to develop a habit of reaching out when times
get tough. It helps strengthen your brain's immunity to stress by
activating positive genetic switches in the brain. Remember, the key to
dealing with stress is not pretending you're always okay; rather,
resilience to stress comes from being proactive in seeking help and
helping others.

94 Don't get stuck in a victim mentality It's very important to avoid a
victim mentality, which can keep us stuck in toxic stress reactions and
decrease our resilience to stressful situations. When we take
responsibility for our choices and our life, we can feel more in control
and recognize that although we can't control other people's thoughts or
reactions, we can control our own thoughts and actions. So, watch what
you say and think about what happens in your life. Do you always feel
like a victim? Do you take responsibility for your choices?

95 Work on your self-confidence Spend time discovering what you're good
at. What do you love? What makes you want to get out of bed in the
morning and take on the world? Read more books on all kinds of topics to
discover what interests you and think about times you were happiest or
at peace and re-create those times. This will help you be at peace with
who you are and who you want to be, regardless of what other people
think about you. In fact, thinking about your relationships with friends
or other loved ones with whom you're happy and can be yourself can help
you learn to see yourself in a positive light. Write this down! We all
have something great to give to the world. Learn to respect and harness
this greatness, which will help intrinsically motivate you to be the
best version of yourself you can be, and you will not be driven by
extrinsic factors such as what someone else thinks about you.

96 Focus on healthy habits, not quickfix solutions When it comes to your
health, you need to focus on long-term goals, not quick fixes or sudden
solutions. When we try to cheat our own biology with extreme diets or
programs, we may get to our goals in a short amount of time---but we
could also be doing untold damage to our brain and body. It's much more
beneficial to spend time building healthy habits. Focusing on this
process rather than some unrealistic goal builds a strong mental
foundation for true change by strengthening your character through
selfexamination and discipline. As you turn your attention toward
cultivating a mindset and attitude that enjoys the process of getting
healthy, you can actually build and develop good, long-term mental
habits. So, rather than going from one diet to the next, it's far better
to work at developing a healthy lifestyle that will allow you to succeed
in the long term, one which incorporates healthy thinking, eating,
sleeping, and exercise habits. When you adopt this big-picture approach
to your physical health, you can truly focus on improving every area of
your life and sustaining patterns of behavior that help you live your
best life.

97 Step up to the challenge Challenges can bring out the best in us.
Getting to the other side of a challenge brings a sense of happiness in
the achievement, toughening the mind and setting the stage for the next
challenge with the addition of the new skills we have gained. Mental
training via deep thinking and understanding to build memory and
learning increases the numbers of neurons that develop in the brain,
particularly when the training goals are challenging. This growth of
neurons with their dendrites (where memory is actually stored) means
long-term, useful, and meaningful memories are formed, thereby
toughening the mind and forming the basis for success. Choose to do
something every day that challenges your mind, whether it's reading a
book, learning a language, or studying something that interests you.
Plan ahead and choose something that will help you expand your knowledge
base and develop self-discipline and mental resilience.

98 Stop comparing yourself to others Comparison is a killer, plain and
simple. It will impact how you think about your own abilities and affect
your capacity to use your mind to succeed in school, the workplace, and
life. It's important to remind yourself that the law of the brain is
diversity: there's no "normal" human, and if you try be an Einstein or a
CÃ©line Dion, you will fail. You make a lousy someone else but a perfect
you, because you think in a completely unique and wonderful way. It's up
to you, therefore, to design your own blueprint for success. You can do
something no one else in the world can do---now that is something to
celebrate! Develop an expectancy mindset when you think about yourself:
expect great things. Perhaps write what you love to do and want to do in
a journal and read it when you feel low.

99 Set work boundaries Sometimes, we have to work hard on a deadline or
something urgent needs to get done while we are on holiday. If this is
the case, it is important to set work boundaries by budgeting an amount
of time during the day to work, and then stopping and resting when it is
done (using the timer or alarm on your phone can be helpful). Don't just
say, "Let me finish this quick," because you may end up working for
hours on things that really don't need to get done; schedule work like
you would schedule a lunch date, and then enjoy your time off!

100 Focus on your journey Compare yourself to how you were yesterday,
not to how someone else is today. Everyone's journey is unique. Don't
focus on what someone else is doing and envy that, because you'll never
be that person. Concentrate on improving each day, even if it's small
improvements. Maybe try working out a bit more each day or spend a bit
more time reading and learning a new skill each day. Focus on your
journey.

101 Write a gratitude letter to someone in your life When was the last
time you wrote a letter just thanking someone for being in your life?
This is one of the easiest things you can do to boost your mental
health. Studies have shown that this simple act will not only enhance
your own happiness and well-being but also strengthen meaningful
relationships in your life, since writing a letter shows you're willing
to invest time in your relationship with that person.

conclusion Everyone seems to be talking about mindfulness and taking the
time to invest in yourself. Well, you have gone beyond mindfulness in
using this book. You have started learning how to make your mind work
for you--- how to use your mind to shape your life. You're investing in
your mental self-care and creating a lifestyle that promotes brain and
body health. You've started learning how to go beyond being aware of
your thoughts, calming down, and acknowledging your feelings, thoughts,
and bodily sensations in the present moment. You've learned how to
manage your response in the moment and make sustainable, long-lasting
changes. You are the "captain of your soul." The thing you need to
always remember is that you have significant resources at your
fingertips: your mind is incredibly powerful. You can use your thoughts
to improve your overall intellect, cognitive performance, and mental and
physical well-being. Harnessing these natural resources will give you
power over your present, depth and context to your past, and
anticipation for the future.

Dr.Â Caroline Leaf is a communication pathologist and cognitive
neuroscientist whose passion is to help people see the power of the mind
to change the brain and find their purpose in life. She is the author of
Switch On Your Brain, Think and Eat Yourself Smart, The Perfect You, and
Think, Learn, Succeed, among many other books and journal articles, and
her videos, podcasts, and TV episodes have reached millions globally.
She currently teaches at various academic, medical, and neuroscience
conferences, as well as in churches around the world. Dr.Â Leaf and her
husband, Mac, live with their four children in Dallas and Los Angeles.

DrLeaf.com

Sign up for announcements about upcoming titles. Website:
www.bakerbooks.com Quantity Discounts: www.direct2church.com

Twitter: ReadBakerBooks Facebook: BakerBooks Instagram: ReadBakerBooks


