Praise for Overcoming Toxic Emotions "Leah Guy writes from experience.
She has been through the fire, and transformed that experience into
lights of truth. Read her, experience her, and be illumined by all she
has to share." ---Michael Fitzpatrick, recipient of The Prince Charles
Award for Musical Excellence conferred by HRH the Prince of Wales "Leah
is a gifted writer, healer, and teacher. This book is next level for
anyone who wants to grow in their personal and spiritual life. It's a
book we all need right now to elevate the consciousness and vibration of
ourselves and the world. Leah is a trusted resource and I applaud her
journey." ---Suleman Shah, owner of Namaste Bookshop "I want the reader
to know that this is one of the most remarkable books I've read in years
on selfhelp and awakening. My personal library contains over eight
thousand books, and I spent over eight years in my early career sharing
an office with a fabulous clinical psychologist, Dr. Harold Hansen. I
can tell you that Leah Guy's book is one of the finest, offering
substantial and meaningful self-help and guidance. She carries us
through in brilliantly written pages as to how we can change our energy,
and relate more effectively with others. I was impressed when she
communicated a value that has rarely been messaged today . . . and that
is, walking in someone else's shoes." ---The Amazing Kreskin,
world-renowned mentalist "Overcoming Toxic Emotions is a must-read for
anyone wanting to have healthier and happier relationships. The
three-step method Leah provides is a powerful tool that can be applied
to any aspect of your life. Once you master this simple and practical
method, you realize healing and transformation are possible. Take
yourself on this exciting journey!" ---Christy Whitman, New York Times
bestselling author of The Art of Having It All "In Overcoming Toxic
Emotions, author Leah Guy takes a deep dive into what toxic emotions
are, and how they hold us back from experiencing joy and fulfillment.
She provides a clear and wellarticulated road map to freedom from these
emotions, and to a more satisfying, self-directed life. This book can
help many." ---Chris Kilham, medicine hunter "Leah Guy is an authentic
mind/body/spirit healer par excellence. With a wide-open heart she leads
people, teaches people, heals people, and learns from people. Leah's
list of followers continues to

grow daily as people hear of her work. I am one of them." ---Cynthia D.
Chase, author of From Stressed to Blessed "Emotions are contagious, for
better or worse. When we are in the grip of toxic emotions, we suffer,
and we usually spread suffering. What if you could learn to free
yourself from these negative patterns so you could enjoy more happiness
and enrich all your relationships? In this compelling work, Leah Guy
shares her deep insight into how you can become aware of and then
transcend maladaptive habits of body and mind. Essential reading for all
who are ready to move beyond negative conditioning and make life more
beautiful by creating loving and healthy relationships with themselves
and others. Highly recommend." ---Michael J. Gelb, author of How to
Think Like Leonardo da Vinci and The Art of Connection "Leah Guy has
assessed the difficult situation into which so many of us were born,
tracked those imprints into our reality today, and in this thoughtful
and practical book, provides tools and perspectives through which we can
really do something about self-healing. In short, we can take our lives
back, evolve our mind-body frequency to another level, and take a deeper
dive into our human potential. Thanks, Leah. for being such a good
guide." ---Mitchell Rabin, holistic psychotherapist, host of A Better
World

This book is not meant to diagnose, treat, or cure any physical or
mental health issues and will not be responsible for such. Please seek
medical or professional help if needed or if you are experiencing, or
have experienced, abuse of any nature. Copyright © 2021 by Leah Guy All
rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner
without the express written consent of the publisher, except in the case
of brief excerpts in critical reviews or articles. All inquiries should
be addressed to Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor,
New York, NY 10018. Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk
at special discounts for sales promotion, corporate gifts, fund-raising,
or educational purposes. Special editions can also be created to
specifications. For details, contact the Special Sales Department,
Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor, New York, NY
10018 or info@skyhorsepublishing.com. Skyhorse® and Skyhorse Publishing®
are registered trademarks of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.®, a Delaware
corporation. Visit our website at www.skyhorsepublishing.com. 10 9 8 7 6
5 4 3 2 1 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is
available on file. Cover design by Daniel Brount Cover illustration by
Shutterstock Print ISBN: 978-1-5107-6320-3 Ebook ISBN: 978-1-5107-6321-0
Printed in the United States of America

For all of my clients, students, workshop attendees, and readers--- you
are brave ones on a selfhealing journey and this book is for you. I have
learned so much in your presence. In particular, how to listen, how to
be a better guide, and how to show up with courage to face deep fears.
And mostly, how even though we have different stories, we share a
universal language of understanding, hope, and perseverance to reach our
highest truth. Thank you.

Contents

Introduction: The Hope in Healing Chapter 1: Identify Toxic Emotions
That Have Controlled Your Life Chapter 2: Understand Your Emotional
Imprints Chapter 3: Recognize Your "Truth" from Your "Story" Chapter 4:
Heal Your Inner Child Chapter 5: Discover Your Authentic Self Chapter 6:
Welcome Self-Love as Medicine That Heals Chapter 7: Create Healthy
Boundaries Chapter 8: Free Emotions and Find Stability Acknowledgments
Index

Introduction The Hope in Healing

"IT'S not you, it's me." These words have become a famous exit strategy;
words commonly used during a breakup. If you receive these words from
your partner, it feels like a dead-end road. There's simply not much you
can say or do when the other person takes full responsibility and
leaves. It is possible, however, to use these words in your favor with
another partner that, unfortunately, many of us have known: Blame. Break
up with blame with the same famous exit strategy. "Blame, this isn't
working out. Thanks for your time and what you've taught me. It's going
to be hard to leave, but this relationship with you is toxic and isn't
working for me any longer. It's nothing you did wrong. It's not you,
it's me. The radical nature of this book is about taking responsibility
for why we feel bad, or at least why we aren't having the kind of life
experience and relationships that we want. It's about understanding why
we push people away, self-sabotage, make excuses, and distract ourselves
with busyness.

For the purposes of this book, for recovery, and for changing your life,
use the words "It's not you, it's me" as your motto. This isn't a
suggestion. To pave the road for personal growth, it's imperative that
you take the reins to create the life you desire, and acknowledge that
you are the only one who can make your life better. Yes, there are tools
to help you (such as this book), but ultimately you hold the key to your
own transformation. Many people spend years in therapy attempting to
make sense of who did what, why, and when. While therapy can be helpful,
spending more time and energy understanding yourself and less time
fixating on the other will give you momentum toward self-healing. "It's
not you, it's me" can liberate you to not only accept your feelings
without blaming, shaming, accusing, excusing, or projecting, but to
actually welcome them with integrity and curiosity. When you dive into
your life experience, and see it from this new perspective, everything
changes. The story becomes real. And reality shines brighter. Freedom is
both an exhilarating and a terrifying word. We say we want to be free of
stress and the same old negative feelings, yet we find ourselves chained
inside an inner prison with walls that have entrapped us for too long.
Unhappy relationships. Unfulfilling jobs. Debt. Friendships that don't
nurture us. Uninspired living situations. We get stuck in the routines
of entrapment and blame everything and everyone for keeping us there.
Until we realize we are keeping ourselves in bad situations, nothing
will change. Until we realize we are in charge of our lives, nothing
will change. Until we realize we can't rewrite the stories of the past,
nothing will change. By stepping into the authority role in your life,
you can be free from the chains that bind you. You may visit the
internal prison from time to time, but you will not be trapped, defined,
or limited by other people's behavior or beliefs, or stuck in the memory
of pain any longer.

Are you ready to break up with blame? Are you ready to experience a
taste of freedom and happiness in your life? I hope so. You deserve it.

The Phoenix Rising The Phoenix Rising analogy was introduced in my first
book, The Fearless Path, and I often use it in my lectures. It is this
energy that I resonate with on my own healing journey, and an analogy
that is powerful to embody. I want to remind you of the power of the
phoenix that you have within you, and to hold it close to your heart.
The majestic phoenix is a beautiful symbol in mythology that displays
pure strength and courage from having fallen into the depths of
catastrophe and rising up from the ashes. When the phoenix felt the end
was encroaching, it built a nest, lit it on fire, and was then consumed
by the flames. From the ashes, the bird arose, powerful and renewed.
It's the classic story of rebirth, renewal, and resurrection. We all
have the capacity to rise again---to renew our energy and pull ourselves
up from the ashes of loss, despair, pain, trauma, and fear---no matter
what depths of pain or selfloathing may be present. I believe that
because I've been there. The fires that engulfed my life included
experiencing a sexual assault in my early twenties. I had other traumas
less definable, and each forced me to essentially leave my body or
dissociate in order to deal with the fear. As the flames of despair took
over, I became paralyzed, numb to emotion. For a period of time, I was a
different person, unrecognizable to myself or to my family and friends.
I became depressed, angry, ashamed, and fearful. I didn't want to live.
Trauma disrupted my whole life. In the "fire," my life began spiraling
into destruction with alcohol, cigarettes, avoidance, antidepressants,
food obsession, and sexual encounters. I cried myself to sleep most
nights, or was high on something. My body shame returned from previous
unprocessed emotions that

cocreated an eating disorder. I over-obsessed about food, and doing
anything I could to be seen, while also trying to remain invisible. I
was living in constant conflict within myself and I hated my life. I
hated the people who violated me so deeply. I hated most things. This
was one of the lowest of lows I had ever experienced and I was desperate
to get up. Thankfully, I did get up. I'm not going to lie and say it was
a spontaneous resurrection. It was an ongoing process fueled by
connection, commitment, and the steps you're going to work through in
this book. If I can get through it, I believe you can too. Your story
may be different than mine, and whatever your story or history, it is
validated here. Too often we don't validate the feelings of the
experiences that we had, and we must start there. We all need support,
and my intention is to be one of the supports in your life. Lean on
these words, do the steps, and believe that change is possible. Because
change is possible! The biggest contributions you can make to your
journey of renewal and reconstruction are: 1. Honesty 2. Commitment 3.
Connection If you aren't completely honest with your feelings,
behaviors, needs, and past history, it will be impossible to make true
transformation in your life. We get really good at creating semi-truths,
saying what others expect, suffocating or diminishing our needs, and
making excuses for the people or situations that hurt us. It's time to
step into raw vulnerability with yourself and become a truth-teller.
This alone is a powerful step. It's not uncommon to commit to many other
things and people except ourselves. Let's change that starting now. Your
self-loyalty will be key in creating new boundaries, trusting yourself,
and building confidence to rise

up strong. It's not just the act of commitment, it's the energy and
intention of commitment that sends a subconscious message to self that
says, I am worthy! If there is one thing we all need in life, it is
connection. From birth and throughout all phases of our lives, we thrive
on support from people, nature, sound, touch, and spiritual connection.
So before you read any further, I want you to think about how to stay
connected to these resources and make them a part of your daily
experience. No one thrives in a desert without water. (Except cacti. You
are not a cactus.) Let's focus on reconstructing the pieces of your life
that feel stuck, broken, or negative. You aren't broken. You, like
others, have had difficult or traumatic experiences, heartbreak, or hurt
that left you feeling disempowered, worthless, afraid, and small. The
good news is you can shift those patterns that up to now have been
difficult to change. It takes mental fortitude to understand the lasting
impact that negative experiences have had on your well-being. Before you
know it, you will dismantle the system of self-sabotage and be on a path
of reconstructing an empowering, healthy, and happy life. How do you get
there? If you want to heal now, this book is for you. Many self-help
books leave the reader with great understanding but no practical plan
for how to make the changes needed to move forward. Here, I provide you
with a simple, effective, no-nonsense approach to healing using my AAA
Method: Acknowledge. Accept. Act. You may think, Oh, yeah, I know those
words, and dismiss the transformational process ahead. Don't jump to
conclusions. Please give these words a chance. Move through the work
with me and apply the AAA Method. You will gain a new perspective of
those words, and your relationship to self will change.

The AAA Method is a facilitator of healing that creates a new landscape
where you can flourish and manifest. It will excavate stagnant, blocked
energy that has been choking off your life force. The AAA Method
actually becomes fun to apply, and it is amazing to witness the shift
from "toxic vibes" to #goodvibes. There is power in rewriting our
imprints, learning new behavioral patterns, and healing the parts of us
that hurt. If you apply my simple threestep method in your personal
healing work, you can be successful in shifting negative emotions,
eliminating false beliefs, alleviating trauma responses, and gaining
self-confidence. The AAA Method will give you a strategy to implement,
while also guiding you to discover your emotional imprints and
vibrational frequencies that have kept you addicted to negative patterns
and behaviors. You will learn how to reframe your stories, raise your
vibration, and create a new energetic matrix that will lead you to a
different life experience. There is some heavy lifting in this book, but
I will make it as straightforward as possible so you can have a system
of success. The AAA Method can help you discover or reclaim healthy and
positive relationships if you experience any of the following emotions
or behaviors in your life: • •

Emotionally stuck, trapped, lost, or blocked Repeating negative
relationships or attracting negative people

•

Unable to make decisions or move forward in positive/ productive ways

• •

Negative self-talk or beliefs about body image Feeling invalidated,
unseen, or unheard

•

Unable to say no or to create healthy boundaries

• •

Feeling responsible for other people's happiness or wellness Deep anger
or resentment, inability to forgive

•

A need to control others

• •

Lack of confidence and fear of rejection Unsafe, fearful, or anxious

•

Unsure of your purpose or why you are here

Within this book, you will identify the toxic emotions that have
controlled you, the stories from which they originated, and how you've
dealt with negative experiences in your life. These factors have
significant impact on your mental, emotional, and energetic health. You
will learn how to use principles of vibration and mindfulness to
overcome toxic patterns. Moving forward on the path to recovery requires
attention to the ways your inner child has been affected and how that
continues to affect you in adulthood. By utilizing the AAA Method, you
will then learn to accept and reidentify your authentic self, re-parent
your inner child, and move toward healing.

About Toxic Emotions We all want to belong, feel purposeful, and be
loved. Seems easy enough, but for most people it's a constant (and often
secret) struggle. Low selfworth bred by negative belief patterns and
unhealthy emotions get in the way. Resentments, fear, anger, and deep
traumatic experiences make us recoil, lash out, or attempt to sidestep
an emotion that threatens our wellbeing. We've grown so used to our pain
that we begin a pattern of resistance, which can easily turn into
self-sabotage or sabotaging relationships. Toxic emotions infect every
area of our lives: relationships, careers, mental health, physical
health, family systems, and quality of life. It's easy to point the
finger and give name(s) or history as the reason for our misery.
However, these are defense mechanisms we use to avoid a deeper sense of
worthlessness.

Negative and toxic emotions are learned behavior either from our family
of origin, environment, or how we were treated. We may have collected
ancestral stories and trauma experiences passed down from generation to
generation. There is a great difference between your true nature and
learned behavior, and my goal is to help you realign with your higher
self, your true nature, and heal the pain that has accumulated
throughout your life. Have you ever asked yourself any of these
questions? "Why do I feel insecure?" "Why am I not as strong as everyone
thinks I am?" "Why do I feel like a child who hasn't fully matured?"
"Why am I afraid of rejection?" "Why do I keep hurting myself?" "I'm a
smart person, so why can't I break this cycle?" "Why am I afraid that no
one will love me if I'm not doing something for them?" "Why don't I like
myself?" "Why do I feel small and invisible?" Asking why doesn't provide
the answer, nor does understanding why offer a full resolution, but it's
a place to start so we can dig a bit deeper and understand our emotional
patterns or imprints. Although you may have the urge to believe negative
truths, you aren't at fault for your less-than-perfect behaviors or
tendencies. You are just responding to pain and suffering in unhealthy
ways. The fact that you're reading this book is a testament to the love
you have for yourself and others. And that love is making you brave,
strong, able, and willing to experience life in a new way. Love says you
are worthy, and that is where to focus. If you start feeding the pattern
of believing negative truths, just take

a pause and say to yourself, Wait, I'm working on my life. I'm brave,
strong, able, and willing to do this. My attempt is proof that love is
in me. I am worthy. Your fear response is normal. Backing away,
repressing, hiding, blaming, anger, denial---these are all normal
responses to pain, because you are trying to protect yourself from more
pain. But because of these fear responses you may have developed
unhealthy patterns that are destructive to your best life. While
sometimes we feel we need to isolate, control, defend, or protect these
behaviors, in reality, these behaviors only serve to keep us stuck. If
you want more from your life and are craving the sweet freedom of ease,
joy, peace, and love, reading this book will improve your awareness of
your own fear-based behaviors and give you steps to heal. The stories we
believe about ourselves dominate how we operate. If those stories are
filled with shame, guilt, or negative beliefs, we get stuck in those
emotions. We continue those negative patterns into adulthood with
self-sabotage. We may act out in attempts to be seen, heard, and
validated, or we act in ways that continue the cycle of pain that has
become so comfortable. In this book we will separate our stories from
our truths, and reframe our perspectives. We become addicted to the pain
that binds us. As uncomfortable as it is, or as much pain as you've
experienced in abuse, neglect, or emotional suffocation, negative
feelings resonate a particular vibration within your cells, memory, and
tissues. These are your imprints. Up till now, at least. Your experience
of feeling a certain way and your sense of worth and fear are tied to
this pattern, and although you know it doesn't feel "good" or "right,"
it has become comfortable. Don't mistake this kind of comfort with
warm-cozy-fuzzy comfort. There's nothing cozy about pain. But comfort
comes from a pattern of familiarity, and over time we accept pain as
normal and reliable. We feed off it.

Operating from your imprint, you continue attracting unhealthy
relationships and experiences---or at least recreating scenarios that
are ohso-familiar---that allow you to continue feeling the way you've
been conditioned to feel. It's the law of attraction. Round and round
you go with the toxic game of self-destruction. In this book you will
dive deeper into your inner world to shake loose the grips of negative
emotions that are weighing you down. As you begin taking responsibility
for your happiness, you step into the authority role to become a
changemaker in your own life. This is exhilarating work. Although
tapping into your authenticity often forces you to face fear, and asks
you to transform resentment, you can then transcend the muck and mire of
your wounds into wings of relief and joy. This work provides the
knowledge and tools to change your emotional and energetic imprints from
early childhood and create a new vibration that will manifest a
different life. It is possible to reignite your passion and engage in
safe, intimate relationships with yourself and others. When you use the
AAA Method, you have the tools needed to succeed. The self-care
exercises in this book are focused on creating healthy boundaries,
opening your heart to get unstuck in relationship patterns, and adopting
a connection to your true nature. This includes relationship patterns
with your higher self so you can change the energy and trajectory of how
you relate to others. You may want to set aside a separate journal or at
least have something handy to jot down notes and do the exercises as you
read. A personal note: To follow the same principles I ask of you, I use
my stories, and those of friends or clients with permission, as a way to
be honest about where I've been and where I am now and to stay present
and committed on my path. I am not a general with no battle scars. I'm
on the field, right here with you. And in that, we stay connected.

So, I thank you in advance for not only accepting who I am, but also
having the wisdom to apply these stories to your own life. As a healing
practitioner, I hear many stories, and I learn from each one. It's
community that provides empathy for the struggles of our humanity. We
are all in this together, and we learn and help each other. You can
count on me to be on your team. You are a fierce and strong warrior.
Claim that for yourself now and you'll be on your way to creating
healthier, happier relationships with yourself and others. I'm so glad
you are here! Your friend,

Leah

Chapter 1 Identify Toxic Emotions That Have Controlled Your Life

LIFE can be so amazing, awe-inspiring, and beautiful. We have much to be
grateful for: an Earth that provides food and natural resources,
unlimited potential for growth, and most everything that a person needs
to function and thrive. But at the same time, we've each been given very
different and often difficult experiences. It's like the gift of life
comes with its own bag of stinky manure. Everyone's experience is
unique, but none without its own cruelty. And no one is immune to it. We
try to negotiate the weight of our circumstances as we navigate through
life, occasionally getting a fresh whiff of the stench along the way.
Although it's unfortunate what many of us must deal with in life, there
can be value in hardship. It's through wrestling with issues of our
heart and mind that we grow, become more empathic, compassionate, and
come to realize what worth really means---the worth of a moment, a
sunset, or even

love. And, hopefully, we come to acknowledge our own worth and purpose
in the world. The best way to reduce the negative impact of our
experience is to till that bag of dung like a good composter would for
his garden. As we process painful experiences, and work new experiences
in, we fertilize and nurture our lives, helping to resolve the tightly
bound toxic soil, allowing new roots to spread and oxygen to enliven our
cells. Emotional composting makes our internal environment less likely
to erode, and prevents the spread of disease. Once you acknowledge and
accept this process, you will become empowered to rise up from the ashes
and soar. The goal of this book is to help you learn how to respond
differently to the life you've been given. Now, getting to those toxic
emotions. A recent meme on Instagram said, "The only toxic relationship
I ever had was the one I had with myself . . . everyone else was just a
reflection of that." What truth. What power! There's nothing more
prickly, yucky, or uncomfortable than long-held toxic emotions. It's
like unhealthy balls of trapped energy circulating through your body,
wreaking havoc on your entire system. The stress of negative emotions
can weaken the heart, immune, digestive, and respiratory systems, as
well as your mental health. You may feel like you can't clear your mind,
as negative thought patterns are hard to stop. Sometimes toxic emotions
feel dirty, like you are unclean. You may feel unattractive and don't
want others to see you fully or get too close. These common physical
sensations reflect unhealthy emotions that are not meant to be stored in
the body for long. Emotions can become so difficult to manage that we
wrestle with them inside for years, developing our own toxic coping
mechanisms such as selfabandonment, betrayal, or abuse. We create more
shameful experiences, overcontrol our lives, or bury our emotions in
order to tolerate ourselves and maintain a familiar identity, even if
that identity is not healthy or positive.

Toxic emotions confine us in a silent prison. Breaking up with blame is
the key to freedom. To start, let's be honest with ourselves and
identify the emotions that control us. Most toxic emotions are developed
from false beliefs attached to core wounds that have manifested in
depth. Some of these beliefs may be that we are not good enough (worthy
of being loved), that we don't belong (we don't matter or feel safe in
the world), or that we are responsible for other people's feelings
(guilty for being imperfect, not allowed to make mistakes). Unprocessed,
unhealthy emotions that are left ignored will become toxic to your
system. It's not the spouse, the money, the parents, the boss, the
amount of (or lack of) time, or the kids. It's us. I'll stop repeating
this soon, but sometimes our psyches need repetitive reassurances to
grasp a new concept. The emotional pains that we've collected and not
processed keep us in unhealthy, unhappy loops. It's your job to identify
the toxic emotions so you can begin to clear them. The most difficult
step toward healing is taking responsibility for how you feel. It's
hard, but it's also empowering. You can start right now by saying "This
is mine now. And I will make changes in my life for the betterment of
me." When you release the need to project and blame, you step into the
fast lane of growth. This work isn't about victimizing yourself or
becoming a martyr. Victims and martyrs cannot survive in the space of
self-healing because being a victim or a martyr drains your power and
creates bypasses around personal growth. Don't allow anyone to walk all
over you. That drains your power. Don't excuse other people's behavior,
even if you think they did the best they could. That also drains your
power. Transformation that lasts comes from integrity, and it results in
the highest vibration of health. The healing process begins with deep,
sometimes uncomfortable reflection. We shift into healing the same way
we shifted into selfdestruction, by accepting the thoughts and feelings
we have about

ourselves. Self-destructive thoughts and feelings were learned by
experiencing shame, being ignored, neglected, or abused. Self-healing
thoughts and feelings are learned by feeling worthy, validated, seen,
and loved. The only difference is that we are no longer reliant on
others to feed us what we need. First, remember not to judge yourself
for how you feel. The goal is to feel better, but let's not make our
negative feelings our foes. They are necessary to teach and guide us,
but they shouldn't dominate everything else. Negative emotions are
natural but unprocessed negative emotions become toxic. Next, be clear
about the actual negative emotions you experience. You may feel bad or
not good enough, but you need to identify the driving force behind those
emotions so you can heal the actual cause. You may say you "feel" ugly,
fat, or broken. Though you may experience a feeling of brokenness, you
are not broken. "Broken" isn't an emotion, just like "fat" isn't an
emotion. Ugly, fat, and broken are not feelings, but ways to bypass the
real emotion that is harder to access such as shame or anguish. Think of
yourself as an investigator of your authentic experience so you can give
close attention to that which needs healing and move forward in a
healthy and happy fashion. You must first identify what emotions are,
and how you cover them up with words that continue the cycle of blame,
denial, and distraction. You're going to get to know yourself in a
brand-new way, and that's the exciting part of healing. Carroll Izard at
the University of Delaware developed a list of valid emotions as
measured in his Differential Emotions Scale (DES-IV). This list is
widely referenced in the medical and educational communities and I've
found it to be useful in my own practice.

List of Valid Emotions Joy

Anguish

Interest

Contempt

Anger Fear

Guilt Shyness

Disgust

Sadness

Shame

Self-hostility

Izard's list may be surprisingly short, but it's important to note that
other emotions are closely related to or fall under the same emotions
above. We will also address surface feelings that create unpleasant
experiences and lead to toxicity. Feelings are the conscious experience
of emotional reactions. For the sake of clarity, I will refer to both
emotions and feelings interchangeably so as to address all aspects of
potential issues. Notice that love is not on the list. Love is
considered a choice, not an emotion or feeling. American psychiatrist
and bestselling author of The Road Less Traveled M. Scott Peck believes
that love is a behavior, too. If you choose love, it's normal to have a
range of emotions and feelings due to the experience of love. It's
common to register emotions and feelings as physical experiences (which
means that emotional experiences can lead to physical pain and disease).
Remember me asking you to commit to that first level of honesty? Here we
are. There's no longer reason to color past events or feelings. When we
lie, we hurt ourselves first. When we speak truth, we heal ourselves
first. There's no rationale, excuse, or explanation needed. This journey
of exploration is to reveal the heart of what pains you, and to
acknowledge the truth of that experience for yourself. When you
acknowledge what you truly feel, you may experience that familiar urge
to hold others responsible. If you ever get the urge to blame others for
why you feel the way you feel, come back to that famous breakup line and
think, Blame, it's not you, it's me. We all want to feel justified in
our feelings and existence, but when we blame or deny, we are blocked

from true healing. Remember, blaming gives most of your power to the
other person. We want to learn to reclaim our power. This doesn't mean
you won't acknowledge where things may have started to go wrong. It
doesn't mean you take responsibility for everything bad that has
happened to you, or look away from the people who may have hurt you. It
simply means that both now, and in the future, you learn to stay present
with reality as you know it and own the way you feel. Only you can own
your behaviors, thoughts, emotions, and choices. It's impossible to
change something you don't own. It's scary to give up the reason for
your feeling and just feel. It's scary to relinquish the offender of
responsibility and own your reality. What this really does is release
you from the power that any other person has over you. Let the person
who hurt you deal with the repercussions of their actions. This mind
shift helps you take control of your choices and allows the other person
to control theirs. Keep your focus on taking care of you, not fixing or
getting even with them. If your energy isn't given to them any longer,
you have more energy to heal the pain that binds you. Every interaction
and relationship serves a purpose. Everything, for better or worse,
either helps you learn and grow, or justifies your positive or negative
beliefs about yourself. Keep the following questions in mind, as they
will be used again on page 13: 1. If you struggle with a difficult
relationship or toxic person in your life, what do you bring to this
relationship? What attitudes, beliefs, wounds, and expectations do you
carry? 2. How is this relationship or person serving you? What is the
reason you are allowing that person to stay in your life? You may want
to jot down some initial thoughts in your journal before you read
further.

Being curious about yourself and situations allows you to ask the
question "why" without bringing on the knee-jerk reactions of blame,
defensiveness, distancing, or anxiety. Why do you stay in situations,
jobs, and relationships that don't serve your health or highest good?
Are you validating limited beliefs of worthlessness or pain? Is the
other person or situation reflecting a positive image of you and
encouraging your potential, or are they confirming fears that you aren't
worthy to be loved, successful, and happy? You may begin to see patterns
of self-sabotage that you didn't realize were at play. You've likely
heard people say, "They made me feel \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ " or "She
makes me so mad I can't see straight." If someone "makes you feel"
angry, there is stored anger energy within you that hasn't been
addressed. If someone "makes you feel" small or weak, there is an
emotional imprint of weakness that is being triggered by the other
person. The truth is, people can't "make you feel" anything. They can
say and do things to trigger you, push your buttons, attempt to
aggravate or affect you, but you are responsible for how you feel. From
here forward, I will put the phrase "make(s) you feel/made me feel" in
quotes to remind us that this is an old pattern of thinking, not a
truth. If someone has ever apologized to you saying, "I'm sorry, I
didn't mean to hurt your feelings," imagine the power you'd feel if you
replied, "You didn't!" When we have strong tools in place, we can
separate the actual words and intentions of the other, look at our
patterns, and recover without blame. Let's take a look at rejection. If
rejection feels like a pain you cannot bear, a circumstance you'll do
anything to avoid, it's likely you have a history of feeling left out
and unloved, or at least wondered Why doesn't someone pick me for their
team? in the past. In other words, if rejection is a toxic feeling that
sits inside of you due to unprocessed pain of shame, then

any form of rejection feels intolerable and terrifying because there's
history there. There's a deep fear, in this instance, that rejection
will confirm to you that you are rejectable and that you aren't worthy
of someone's time, love, and commitment. To be rejected again would
confirm that you are not worthy or lovable. When core wounds come from
people we love and trust the most, it can start a firestorm of emotions
that cut deeply. It's a feeling that everyone tries to avoid, and why we
do a song and dance with our emotional prisoners in attempt to control
the shame we experience. You may subconsciously think, Don't let anyone
see what I know: I am not good enough for you to stay. Why would we want
to keep away from wholeness and joy? We don't. But emotional addiction
is real, and addiction to pain is hard to break without guidance. The
AAA Method will help.

AAA Method A surefire system to begin processing and shifting negative
emotions is my AAA Method. It's like an insurance policy to assure you
are moving toward self-love and healing, instead of harboring negative
experiences and staying in old patterns. The AAA Method includes three
steps: 1. Acknowledgment 2. Acceptance 3. Action Throughout this book
you will be applying these steps. When resistance, hesitation, anger,
defensiveness, or self-sabotage kicks in, pause and use the Method.
Consistency will help you not only gain self-confidence, but feel

more in control as you begin the process of rewriting your emotional
imprints and raising your vibration. The process works like this:

Acknowledgment The first step in making a change is to acknowledge what
is true. Acknowledgment is powerful. If you received the acknowledgments
you desired for all the jobs and efforts you accomplished throughout
your life, they would have made a positive and lasting impact.
Acknowledgment creates firmness and clarity in your reality whereas
ignoring a situation keeps you in denial. If you can find the courage to
own and acknowledge the truth about how you feel, such as "I am full of
resentment," or "I feel . . . " then you are on your way to healing.
What isn't productive is "I am full of resentment because . . . " Now,
you're blaming and denying. Acknowledgment sounds simple, like the other
steps in the AAA Method. However, being truthful and able to see reality
without judgment, blaming, or excuses can be challenging because these
negative responses are reflexes we've learned to defend ourselves.
Unlearning these negative responses may take time.

Acceptance Acceptance is applying acknowledgment, understanding, and
compassion to a feeling, and giving it room to just be. In accepting the
actual feeling or behavior we experience in the present moment of
reality, all of our energy becomes available to move forward, even if
that means just sitting with the truth. Acceptance makes space for
reality, offers grace for the limits of our humanity, aligns the mind
and emotions, and encourages self-love. Don't move too fast through
acceptance. It must be genuine and felt throughout the body in order to
have the power we need to transform. The mind and heart must be in
agreement with acceptance, and once the

acceptance is complete, there is no going back to denial (excuses, old
stories, past experiences).

Action Action is about forward motion toward a new thought, emotion, or
energy. Action doesn't have to include physical movement, although
sometimes it might. It may be an internal and personal action (forming
new beliefs, taking deep breaths, practicing healthy behavior), or at
times action may be following through on major life decisions. I find
that the most sustainable and practical types of action for the purpose
of self-growth are what I call micro-steps. Small, steady movements
toward a new outcome. As long as you are committed to the process, and
get creative along the way, you will be successful. I offer examples of
the AAA Method in action throughout this book, but it may be helpful to
make written reminders for yourself that you are dedicated to healing.
Before we go much further, I'd like to identify some words or terms that
will be used frequently in this book so we can have a similar
understanding. Core Wounds Our beliefs about our worth, our value, and
who we are as individuals are based on the interactions and behaviors of
how others treated us as very small children. Core wounds are
devastating negative beliefs brought on by childhood experiences that
have created emotional or mental pain in adulthood. Core wounds disrupt
optimal health and feelings of safety, unconditional love, or
connection. False (or Limited) Beliefs False or limited beliefs are
things we may believe that are not true. These can originate from
adopting beliefs from our parents or family members without discerning
their truth. They also come from limiting our

understanding of self or the world due to our own insecurities or the
lack of encouragement to be curious, explore, and attain autonomy. False
beliefs are untruths, meaning they may be someone else's opinions, but
not factual information. If someone else's opinions are not healthy or
positive, these beliefs affect our understanding about self and worth.
Emotional Imprints Emotional imprints are the emotions and thoughts that
house our belief system. Imprints are formed in our developmental years
from the information we gathered through life experience, creating
lasting effects on how we operate and view the world today. Vibrational
Frequencies Everything is energy. We vibrate at various frequencies
depending on our state of health, environment, and mental and emotional
beliefs. Every emotion and thought resonates with a certain frequency.
Lower vibrational frequencies generally feel dense, heavy, or negative,
in body, mind, and heart. Higher vibrational frequencies feel lighter,
brighter, and more aligned with positive feelings in body, mind, and
heart. Inner Child Your inner child is a part of you that lives within,
carried forward by memory of the innocent childlike state. Your
developmental maturity may have been stunted at a certain age depending
on trauma, unmet emotional needs, or other difficult experiences that
you were not able to mentally or emotionally process. Your inner child
may become emotionally activated during times of stress or fear in the
adult self. Higher Self

Your higher self is the part of you most aligned with your divine nature
that recognizes your deserving attributes, beauty, and power. It is the
wisdom that is guided by your soul to embody your true nature. Emotional
Trauma Emotional trauma is damage done to your psyche (and emotional or
physical bodies) after experiencing a devastatingly stressful or
frightening life event. Although many people associate trauma with major
life occurrences such as abuse or shock, trauma in this book also refers
to the deeply impactful feelings a situation or event causes in which a
child or adult is not able to process the pain, fear, threat, or
betrayal.

Giving Your Power Away Ownership is power. The ownership of your truth
is your power. And without power on your side, you'll be mired in mud
for years, weighed down by the stories of your past. It will always be
"Sally's" fault. Or Mom's fault. Or your hubby's fault. The "It's not
you, it's me" mentality will free you from blaming any person, place, or
thing to make yourself feel better. If you are focused on the outside
world, not only do you become drained of energy and lose your power, but
your fortress of toxic emotions also grows higher. This system of
toxicity may seem natural or reasonable given past circumstances, but
now that you are free to make your own life choices, you see that
unhealthy reactions and self-sabotage are just defense mechanisms to
keep you away from wholeness and joy. If you allow it, others can drain
your energy. Especially if you have a history of feeling used,
manipulated, or abused, it's easy to give so much power to another
person. When we blame the other person who has "taken our power," we are
really mad at ourselves for not having enough control

over our choices. Defensiveness is the weaker position; it's not the
simplest, but it is the weakest. Let's take your power back. In giving
our power away we think we're losing and the other person is gaining,
but neither is true. It's one thing to give energy to people who ask for
our time or help like when a friend calls or when we volunteer for an
organization. It's nice when friends or loved ones reach out. But most
people give their energy to people when it isn't asked for or wanted,
and then accuse them of not caring, or hurting us if they don't want our
help, opinions, or caretaking. No one should give their energy to people
who haven't asked for it. It only serves your need to wait on the
acceptance and approval of others. You wait to know that they may need
you, which validates your existence because you haven't learned to give
it to yourself. Yet. Notice the number of thoughts you have about other
people or situations that are out of your control. It is likely
staggering. Fixating on what someone else may be doing solves nothing.
Worry gets you nowhere. Waiting for someone to call doesn't make them
call. It only gives you the comfort of addiction---waiting on the
acceptance and approval of others. This continued cycle of addiction to
pain allows you to bypass your own emotions and issues. If you wonder
why you feel so drained, empty, invisible, used, or betrayed, it is
because you are draining your vital energy on others in an attempt to
avoid your discomfort and unhealed core wounds. You have unhealthy
attachments to a perceived sense of love and belonging, which stop you
from feeding healthy energy to self and balanced relationships. You
aren't exhausted from doing too much, you're exhausted from giving your
energy to the wrong thing. I would estimate that my clients talk about
someone else in their life for about 75 percent of the time during our
initial sessions. They tell me about their spouse and what he/she did or
said and then they look at me to validate

their belief about the other. I get it, because what people say and do
can have a great impact, so much so that I've written a book about the
impact of others on us. But in order to make change in your life and
relationships, you have to keep steering the focus back to you. I must
remind my clients that the sessions are about them, not the other
person. We can only grow so much by understanding the behaviors or
history of another. It can help rationalize situations, but it can't
help process our own emotional wounds. Focusing too much on others can
be the greatest distraction from our own growth. Let's get back to those
earlier questions on page 6 about what you bring to a difficult or toxic
relationship, and how that toxic relationship serves you. By serving, I
don't necessarily mean that the relationship is serving your highest
good and it feels beneficial. All too often, toxic relationships
facilitate our negative feelings and feed our addiction to a lower
vibration. And somehow this becomes strangely comfortable. If you're
feeling reactive and triggered at the thought of releasing the hook from
another person (or breaking up with blame) to attend to your own
happiness, this is a good sign that you're in the right place. You can
put this book down and do things the way you've been doing them. You can
keep making rationalizations for all the reasons you feel slighted,
lonely, angry, rejected, or resentful. You can blame or deny, and look
at the world and see all of the ways it has hurt you and all of the
potential it has to take you down. Or you can keep reading and awaken to
a different aspect of yourself. The part of you who wants to be
unchained, whole, and happy. Don't get me wrong, self-healing isn't all
about self-blaming. It's not all about you. It never is. There is always
you and the other, and the impact of the other is great. The way you've
been treated has mattered, for good or bad. And it's important to
acknowledge it honestly and squarely. There's a very good reason for why
you feel the way you feel.

What we want to change is what is happening inside of you, now. Making
change must be fueled by self-love and preservation or it won't last.
Change fueled by trying to prove someone wrong or to get revenge isn't
healthy motivation. It's like dieting for the temporary beach vacation
instead of committing to a permanent healthy lifestyle. Although this
work is about your personal transformation, I can assure you of one
thing: as you make positive changes in your life, it will affect your
relationships with everyone around you. So, as a by-product, this work
will make an impact on others, or at least how you experience them.
That's a good thing. Making a commitment to change is scary. It's the
unknown that we're afraid of and the departure from the norm. This may
bring up anxiety, resentments, anger, and grief. To transform, we have
to navigate new and rocky terrain until we become more familiar with a
new perspective and belief system. Trauma is real. I believe many of us
have far more residual trauma from relationships and family issues than
we recognize. What's hard for many people is getting started because of
the fears that emerge. The deeper the trauma, or the longer you've
functioned from a place of fear, the more intense this work will be.
Let's take it one step at a time, and keep the focus on you versus the
event or the other person. There's nothing wrong with difficult
feelings. Anger, jealousy, dislike, fear, disappointment, shame, and
guilt all have their place in teaching us something about ourselves, or
a relationship, or life. Emotions are meant to be fluid, moving in and
out of our senses as they are experienced. You can always trust that
emotions will circle back, as they should, because you need access to
the full range of emotions to experience life. It's holding on to a
negative emotion that gets you into trouble. Allowing difficult feelings
to process through our emotional bodies will bring us to a healthier
place. It feels risky, I know. But once you move

through the fear of feeling and gain self-confidence, you can then
experience a fuller range of emotions such as joy, peace, self-trust,
and compassion. Our toxic emotions reinforce the belief that we are not
worthy enough to be happy. Happiness doesn't match our current
vibrational level. We do not trust ourselves, or others, to care for us
and not harm us because we don't believe we are valuable. This internal
dialogue is critical, hateful, and self-sabotaging. We live in conflict
because we can't foster a healthy ego and a sense of worth against the
shame, fear, and pain we feel. For some of us, this can blossom into
self-loathing, isolation, or codependency. At the extreme, it can become
full-blown personality disorders.

Identifying Toxic Emotions Toxic emotions are the result of unprocessed
feelings that have been repressed or ignored for too long. Without
overanalyzing, which words stand out to you? Write them down. It can be
one or several, but choose without judgment. Choose with your body.
Which words cause immediate visceral sensations? Which cause emotional
reactions? Which ones make you sad or give you a sinking feeling?

Ashamed

Worthless

Regret

Irritated

Disappointment

Dejected

Resentful

Insecure

Frustration

Heartbroken

Envy

Abnormal

Guilt

Overwhelmed

Depression

Insensitive

Self-absorption

Deprived

Bitterness

Lonely

Anger

Manipulated

Empty

Threatened

Hatred

Incapable

Apathy

Powerless

Denial

Dissatisfaction

Self-loathing Tormented

Hostile Anxiety

Pain Self-criticism

Fear

Helpless

Blaming others

Isolation

Negativity

Bitterness

Chronic complaining

Jealousy

Vengeful

Feeling like a victim

Sadness

Aggressive

Distrust

Despair

Of those you picked, separate three or four that are most familiar, and
have traveled with you throughout many of your relationships and life
experiences. We will work with these as part of your core wound(s). If
you had a hard time picking your top three from the list, past
experiences can help lead you directly to the toxic emotions that are
affecting your life. Think of your most toxic relationship and what you
might have said in the past if you were to explain how that person "made
you feel." Now, take that feeling and match it to the toxic emotions
that come up for you. Sit with these words and feelings for a few
moments, stare at them on the page, and then speak and give them your
full attention and acknowledgment. Can you then move into a place of
accepting them? Use your inner voice, and with your heart say "I see
you, and I accept you" to these toxic emotions. It may be uncomfortable,
but you won't make progress until you can truly accept what is.
Remember, all negative emotions are natural to the degree that they
relate to a particular event or circumstance, but if held internally for
too long they will become toxic. Are you holding on to any of these out
of fear of more suffering? Are you being honest with yourself right now,
or do you feel defensive? Are you itching to explain and blame?

It's natural if part of your brain wants to categorize to make sense of
things. Let it. Then come back to yourself, your feelings, and your
behaviors and repeat the breakup mantra: "Blame, it's not working out
anymore. It's not you, it's me. Thanks for all you've taught me, but I'm
going to move along now and take care of myself." You aren't here to fix
anyone else. In fact, you can't. That's their job. Just like they can't
"make you feel." You can only address your own experiences and work to
have better and more consistent feelings of strength, peace, and love.
Take control of you.

Let's Talk About Shame and Guilt Shame and guilt are two toxic emotions
that many of us carry. They are the most common core wounds. And they
are like siblings from a dysfunctional family, one often feeding the
other in a vicious cycle. •

I'm not worthy/good/good enough/enough. (Shame)

•

I don't belong/I'm different/People don't accept me/I'm not like them.
(Shame)

•

If I were different, I would be loved/understood/validated. (Guilt)

•

I am too much/too sensitive/too ignorant/too slow/too fast. (Shame and
guilt)

Many negative emotions are rooted in shame and/or guilt, and these are
common self-loathing messages that most people have grappled with at one
time or another. As toxicity sets in, these messages become constant.
Without understanding the origin of shame or guilt, we cannot move into
a state of health. The trickiest thing about shame and guilt is that our
inner child absorbed the energy of these emotions and created false
beliefs

that we continue to believe as adults, even if we have no clear idea as
to why we feel the way we do. Shame and guilt lead to the abandonment of
our dreams, and detachment from our relationships. These emotions
decrease our worth and create negative self-talk that hinders healthy
decisions and cause us to measure ourselves against others; being not as
"good/ pretty/skinny/smart/wealthy/funny" as they are, or as we "should"
be. Believing we should live for others can also be rooted in shame or
guilt and becomes ingrained in our psyche. This way of living is
accepted by our social systems, making it hard to identify healthy
behavior. Our career choices, family decisions, creative expression, and
even how we dress often stem from societal expectations. Asking
ourselves "Who am I?" is not as encouraged as asking "If I do it this
way, will I be accepted?" Now, looking at the words you selected and
applying the statements of shame or guilt, from where does your toxic
emotion stem? • •

I'm not worthy/good/good enough/enough. (Shame) I don't belong/I'm
different/People don't accept me/I'm not like them. (Shame)

•

If I were different I would be loved/understood/validated. (Guilt)

•

I am too much/too sensitive/too ignorant/too slow/too fast. (Shame and
guilt)

You may be tapping into fear with these emotions, and that's okay. Fear
can be a signal that things are changing within you and that you are
ready to step out of your comfort zone. Applying the AAA Method will
help you feel more at ease.

AAA Method

Acknowledge that you fear a core wound of shame or guilt. Accept the
presence of fear associated with shame or guilt by allowing it to be
real and felt in your body. Take action to move through the fear with a
small step such as doing an activity you are good at to boost your
confidence and self-love.

A Deeper Look at Shame and Guilt If you suffer from low self-worth or
lack of determination, it's possible that shame and/or guilt are core
wounds for you emotionally, and they could be the source of your pain.
Working with these elements is critical to healing. Shame affects the
development of your ego and sense of self. If you did not have healthy
interactions in your formative years, where you received validation,
encouragement, compassion, and healthy boundaries, it's likely that you
do not have the muscle to demonstrate appropriate nurturing for others
(and yourself) as an adult. Many with a shame wound lack confidence in
self, or ability to express their authentic nature. It becomes a daily
battle to accept their worth or operate from a place of high selfesteem.
When we are healthily supported as children, we learn to self-soothe,
and offer compassion and forgiveness to the self and others. We are
gifted with a mirror of love and acceptance, a positive sense of self,
and are able to claim our worth. Unfortunately, too many children do not
have this experience. Most children are sensitive and loving, constantly
watching their parents or siblings and reacting to their experiences.
When a child is routinely criticized, yelled at, ignored, or in any way
abused, the child interprets these actions and develops shame, a belief
that something is wrong with them, and their parent's upset is their
fault. As children, many of us felt like we were not heard, validated,
or encouraged. Life issues such as competing siblings, a lack of money,

addicted parents, divorce, emotional separation, or constant turmoil led
to fewer family connections or little to no physical and emotional
nurturing. As you dig into your emotional history and energetic
patterns, you may recognize difficult relationships, especially with
your parents or childhood friends and mentors. If the person you relied
on to care for and love you unconditionally didn't provide a safe way
for you to witness yourself and others, or you weren't emotionally
nurtured as a child, you undoubtedly feel a void in your adult life.
Your breakup with those negative feelings begins here. While all
children can drive their parents to anger or frustration (parenting is
not easy), repetitive behavior from the parent is not always attributed
to the child's actions. Unpleasant glances that scream "I don't
approve," questioning the child's ability, yelling, blaming, talking
down to, hitting, emotional neglect, emotional manipulation, expecting
too much, criticizing body image---these types of destructive
interactions leave a lasting impact on children. Parents with
addictions, verbally or emotionally abusive parents, emotionally
unavailable parents, parents who abandoned their child, or narcissistic
parents are some of the most difficult experiences for children that
leave them feeling angry, ashamed, resentful, and unlovable. Even
parents who loved deeply but couldn't be present in their child's life
can contribute to that child's confused and unhealthy relationship with
self and others. It misinforms that child in his or her developmental
years as to what healthy love and care looks and feels like. Children
have great empathy, and they may feel guilty and shamed when they can't
help their loved ones. While they care deeply for their parent who is
dysfunctional or pained, children are also motivated to fix the problem
so that they themselves can be loved in the way they need. This is a
survival skill, rather than a selfish or conscious knowing at that age.
Children yearn to have a present parent, a happy parent, and a
functional

and peaceful parent. Striving to win their parent's attention and
approval is too great of a burden for a child to bear. When a parent
suffers mentally, emotionally, or physically, children will often try to
take on adult responsibility that isn't theirs. They may take on the
parenting role with their siblings, become an emotionally surrogate
spouse, or a parent's best friend or confidant. This can be true for
children of divorced parents as well. Their developing minds and hearts
are too young to make sense of the upset, loss, or trauma they
witnessed, but their empathetic instinct is to help. Many adults
struggle to hold their parents responsible even after years of their own
suffering. They make excuses such as "They did the best they could." "I
believe they loved me even though they never hugged me or told me they
did." The fear of owning our pains and their origins can feel like a
violation to our own blood but it's very important to remember that you
are not blaming. You are acknowledging and accepting your past pains so
that you can accurately assess toxic patterns in order to move forward.
Creating barriers by rationalizing the deficits of others only serves to
minimize your own truth, disempowering you from healing.

The Language of Guilt Many people believe they don't suffer from guilt.
My clients often tell me they don't feel guilt when they tap into their
negative behaviors. But guilt can manifest in a myriad of ways: as the
need to be in control, take on too much responsibility, or become
codependent in relationships. Guilt can look like any of these
scenarios: "Maybe I'm the reason my parents aren't happy. I need to do
better, be better." "If I was more lovable, maybe my sister wouldn't hit
me every night and she'd be happy to spend time with me." "I need to
help my mom because my father doesn't treat her right."

"I'm okay if you're okay, so I'm going to do whatever I can to make sure
you're okay." Guilt is bred from difficult life events that lead a
person to believe they are responsible for how others feel. Of course,
we should have a healthy way to own guilt when we are at fault. The
guilt described here is guilt that is created by an unhealthy attachment
to another, and taking on unnecessary responsibility. This kind of guilt
is a breeding ground for a host of toxic emotions such as anger,
resentment, denial, rebellion, feeling out of control, and shame. Young
minds and hearts cannot process the emotions of others besides the basic
level of love, sorrow, disappointment, and fear. So they learn to carry
the pain or grief of others with them until guilt becomes a part of
their emotional imprint. Using the list on the following page, write the
words in your journal that you have most experienced over the course of
your life when you felt imbalanced. This will help you understand if
your primary source of toxic emotion stems from a place of shame or
guilt, or a combination of both. • •

Lack of ambition Control issues

• •

Digestive disorders Loneliness

• •

Fibromyalgia Addiction

• •

Need for power Stubbornness

• •

Passivity Selfishness

• •

Feeling unworthy Low stamina

• •

Aggression Lack of confidence

• •

Defensiveness Self-criticism

•

Sarcasm

•

Need to dominate

• •

Obsessive compulsive disorder Eating disorders

• •

Helplessness Shaming self or others

• •

Type A personality Emotional outbursts

• •

Entitlement issues Widening of hips

• •

Depression Unproductivity

• •

Low back pain Jealousy

• •

Fear Lack of libido

• •

Adrenal fatigue Bloating

• •

Intimacy issues Codependency

• •

Addiction to food or sex Excess fat

• •

Fluid retention Lack of creativity

• •

Moodiness or stuck emotions Abnormal bowel function

• •

Sexual obsession Feeling detached

• •

Reproductive issues Urinary or kidney problems

• •

Inability to maintain relationships Lymphatic issues

• •

Tightness in hips or knees Apathy

If you chose more descriptors from the list on the left, your
predominant emotional imprint is likely based on shame. If you chose
more from the

right, your imprint is based more in guilt. It is very common for you to
have a combination of both. If shame is the most toxic emotion stemming
from your core wound, you may feel unsafe or unworthy in intimate or
close relationships. Shame blocks a healthy sense of self, a vital life
flow of productivity, and the ability to have healthy relationships and
experiences, while guilt is toxic to passion, connection, and
creativity. However shame and guilt are experienced, they are often the
foundation for self-loathing and self-sabotage. Born from shame and
guilt are insecurities, lack of ambition, and fear of intimacy and/ or
relationships--- all low vibrational frequencies that feel terrible.
Shame and guilt may be keeping you from going after a new job or living
the life you want because you can't abandon the familiar energy imprint
you've created or fear that you'll be forced out of this sense of
familiarity. When you don't feel good or worthy enough, it's hard to
strive for something better, much less live your dreams. Typically,
people with an abundance of shame and guilt are unable to self-identify
or maintain a good feeling (higher vibration) long enough to have a day
without anxiety or panic. Ultimately, we fear that we are the problem.
We believe no one will love and attend to us, or if we had only been
(fill in the blank), then life would be better. This sets up a guilty
conscience that many people are unable to identify. Humans are imperfect
beings and make mistakes. Everyone says that as if they "know," but
knowing and accepting are very different. If you accept the part of
yourself that isn't perfect, you don't have to beat yourself up over
shortcomings. You need to come to your truth and understand how your
toxic emotions developed. If you grew up believing that you were the
reason for someone else's feelings, or believed that you were bad, you
will do whatever you can to avoid more shame or guilt. It's a survival
skill. It's

also an excuse to keep you from realizing your dreams or living a
satisfying life. If you are mindful and aligned with your soul, it will
be possible to follow your moral guidelines, and release the need to
follow another's idea of who you should be. That's why this work of
owning and getting on your own path is important. If you fail to release
the toxic emotions that you developed or inherited, you will not be free
to grow and become stronger. Your life mission is not to carry forward
the negative emotional patterns of your past or your ancestry, but to
learn how to love, evolve, and rise to meet your highest self. The
amount of emotional maturity this requires is huge, so you can add
maturity to your list of positive attributes just by attempting this
kind of work. Keep in mind that owning your feelings and not blaming
others does not mean that you agree with the behavior of others or the
way you were treated. It means that you recognize and acknowledge your
feelings, whatever they are, and it is up to you to work through them
and make change. Toxic emotions don't happen overnight. They are
accumulated over time and based on tons of emotional exchanges.
Everything you do has a purpose and a value, whether you realize it or
not. After you establish your truth from your story in the following
chapter, you'll come to find the value and purpose of your choices. You
can't change history, but as you learn about emotional and energetic
imprints, you'll begin to see how unprocessed toxic emotions have held
you back from some of life's greatest moments.

Chapter 2 Understand Your Emotional Imprints

EMOTIONAL imprints are developed early in life. They are typically based
on how we were treated by others, what we observed in our environment,
and how we emotionally interpreted these behaviors. Think of emotional
imprints as a veil of energy cords woven together like fabric that lives
within and around your body. Your body has connective tissues that keep
its diverse physical systems running smoothly. Your thoughts, emotions,
and energy are also systems that retain memories of external
experiences. This data collection starts when we are infants and evolves
and continues well into adulthood. We develop an understanding of the
roles that people play in our lives as well as an understanding of our
self-worth. We create beliefs based on these roles, which then generate
emotional responses. These emotional responses embed deep into our
belief system, and imprint into our mental and emotional functioning
system.

Imprints are important to understand because they influence how we
operate and interpret life, and how we perceive our own identity. Our
emotional imprints not only dictate how we understand relationships, but
also serve as the system of judgment for ourselves and others. When you
understand how much of your current feelings are associated with the
emotional energetic imprints of your past, you can then create new
imprints that are supportive, informative, and transformative. Like
fingerprints and snowflakes, each emotional imprint is completely
unique. Your specific environment and the people in it combined with
your distinct personality and emotional sensitivities created the unique
design of your imprint. Because we are individuals, our struggle to be
understood or heal can make us feel very alone, but the impact of our
unique imprints has similar consequences, so we can all share resources
to heal. Your expectations of people are dependent on the expectations
you came to trust as developed by the beliefs that imprinted in your
mindemotion-energy body. All of this is normal. Not to be judged, but
understood. In your young developmental years, every negative experience
made an impact and rendered you with a certain belief or feeling (the
imprint). As you relate these interpretations to the beliefs you hold
about yourself, you'll see how deeply these imprints affect the psyche
and your emotional capacity to have relationships with others. For
example, if Dad was often drunk and treated you poorly while inebriated,
you may have a belief that you are not worthy of love (specifically by
men) on a day-to-day basis. This belief was built on layers of
information absorbed by all of your senses over the years in relation to
time spent with your father. Although your mind can rationalize the
impact now, an emotional imprint had already developed in childhood from
feeling scared, alone, or ignored around the prominent male figure in
your young life. It may have also left a mental belief that alcohol is
dangerous, or worse, an emotional imprint that you aren't worth more
than the substance

of alcohol. As a child, you may have become emotionally confused (not
knowing when Dad was sober or when you were going to be treated better),
codependent (believing that your own happiness depends on the happiness
of others), or lonely. Children do not often blame their parents for
poor treatment; they blame themselves. This self-blame sets the stage
for chronic shame, guilt, and lack of positive identity. Children learn
who they are and what value they have to the world by observing actions,
words, and behaviors from the people around them. You may have a false
belief that you are not worthy or truly seen. This isn't a fact. What is
factual is that the person who instilled this false belief in you had
emotional wounds and limitations that made them unable to see you,
validate you, encourage you, or give you the childhood nurturing that
you needed. We interpret life by witnessing our environment. If you
benefited from a healthy environment filled with emotional and mental
support, you have a very different experience from a person who didn't.
Children who feel denied or unable to measure up to certain standards
have an extremely hard time feeling accepted and loved. Children
subconsciously take on too much responsibility for the happiness and
well-being of others. We want Mom or Dad (or Brother/Sister) to be all
right, because we love them and want them to be happy. We also strive to
get the love we need. Our desire to help comes from a loving and
innocent place, but ultimately there is a need to survive. The "if
they're okay, I'll be okay" mentality can easily set the stage for
attachment issues, codependency, enmeshment, and other unhealthy
relational behaviors. It is not appropriate for a child to feel
responsible for anyone's needs outside of the healthy exchange of loving
and being loved. Childhood is the time when we learn what is "right" and
"wrong" and how to be responsible for our words and actions. But a child
who takes on adult responsibilities cannot process the depth of what is
at play. Children should

not counsel their parents, or be their primary comfort or support
system. Children need to feel safe and be loved in order to develop into
mature emotional beings. Children crave discipline, learning, and
healthy boundaries. Because the reality of a child's situation is all
they know, it can become normal to accept unhealthy behaviors. If
children grow up experiencing screaming matches, hitting, neglect, or
substance addiction issues, it is all they know. It's their reality.
Many adults say that their childhoods seemed normal because that's the
way the household typically functioned. Many of those same adults
experienced abuse and/or trauma within the greater family system or
community at large. Even if your family was free of deeper dysfunctions
such as abuse or neglect, you may have been affected by more subtle
discomforts such as disapproving glances, emotional manipulation,
energetic distancing, unrealistic expectations, or unsettling drama. The
mental impact of these kinds of subtleties can leave a lasting effect,
but identifying our emotional imprints and applying the AAA Method can
make it possible to change your perspective, emotional imprint, and
reality. It's common to categorize your emotions as either bad or good.
That's what our minds do. Exploring our imprints and vibrational
frequencies can help us learn to recognize how and why we do this so we
can operate from a different understanding. Although you may feel bad
and want to feel better, it doesn't mean that something is wrong with
you or you aren't good enough. Try to know when this mental judgment
happens and reframe the thought by tapping into the emotion. Emotions
can teach us about our patterns, experiences, and where we are
imbalanced. The key is to fully process our emotions and allow them to
filter through a healthier lens. By applying tools to reset and find our
center, we can shift our vibration higher and experience more internal
ease and freedom. For example, too often anger and fear get bad raps.
While

certainly not enjoyed or encouraged, anger and fear are valid emotions
that are needed in certain times, and they deserve our understanding.
The ability to attend and understand creates connection to self, and
empathy that can be extended to others who are also dealing with anger
or fear. Our emotions are palpable, each emotion having its own
frequency, and part of the intensity of emotions is the fluctuation of
those frequencies. When we understand how and when imprints were formed,
and work to raise our vibration into a healthier state, we can become
more aware and sensitive to our needs. If we can determine if the
frequency is serving us well or keeping us addicted to negative
patterns, we can learn to take action in order to retune and sustain the
frequency for a better life experience. It's exciting stuff!

Challenges in Healing It is human nature to live in packs, so lack of
connection or complete isolation can have a detrimental effect on the
psyche and physical and emotional health of an individual. One of the
biggest challenges as we heal is to step outside the energy matrix of
the family. Each system has its own energy and imprint, and to heal and
grow means that we begin to operate differently, which may impact the
way we feel in relation to the unit. In our self-growth journey there is
often a subliminal fear of abandoning old belief systems. If you are
tied to certain belief systems within your family such as limited
abundance, self-insecurities, or shame in sexuality, it can be
terrifying to feel like you are separating from them as you evolve and
heal. Even though you are not physically leaving your family, when you
begin to change (mentally, emotionally, or energetically), this will be
felt by the others, leading to an overall vibrational shift in the
family unit. No matter how bad our feelings may be, there is an
underlying fear that if we abandon those feelings, we will no longer
have support from and connection with our loved ones. It makes creating
new emotional imprints

difficult. Your current imprints, woven together, create a comfort zone.
A new imprint creates a different relationship pattern to those around
you, but it should not sever the bond of love or affection. Another
difficult aspect of healing is the urge to defend our parents or
caregivers. The love you have for your parents is a bond that is
stronger than most any wrongdoing. Although we do not want to blame them
any longer, we also do not need to make excuses or justifications for
their behavior. This only serves to keep the pain cycle activated,
trapping in our shame, fear, or guilt. We can learn to accept our love
for them while also acknowledging how we were hurt by their behavior or
lack thereof. And while we are not blaming in our self-care journey, we
also should not protect or defend others. That only diminishes the
impact that was left on our psyches and emotional health. Only when we
consciously employ a process of being open and honest about how others
treated us can we make progress. It's common to get stuck trying to
unravel the "why" behind their actions, or the good intentions that we
believed existed. Let's stop making excuses for not getting the
nurturing that we needed and move toward acceptance of that fact. It
doesn't make your parents bad people. For this healing work, I suggest
keeping the focus on you. Acknowledge the shame, guilt, or fear that you
experienced, accept those feelings as real (even if someone did the best
they could), and apply new action to heal the pains that suffocate you.
Remember, if our focus is on the other, we relinquish our power to them.
It's time to bring the focus back to self, apply the knowledge that you
now have, and accept the weight of your burdens. Although you may
partially realize that your childhood affected your adulthood, it's
important to understand its long-term ramifications. If you had negative
childhood experiences, you may feel isolated in your current situation,
or not good enough to be in a loving relationship. You may be on edge
and unsure what to expect day to day, while keeping people at arm's

length so they don't get too close to you. You may not know what
nontoxic, consistent intimacy is--- how could you if you didn't
experience it? The longing for attention and closeness is there, but you
may be caught in the energetic web of a negative imprint that keeps you
from having a healthier experience. And like most patterns, we
repeatedly find ourselves reverting back to the same negative
experiences. Why? Because we become addicted to pain. Addiction sounds
harsh, but emotional addiction is real and needs to be addressed to
break free. Our pain points are so ingrained in our emotional systems
and mental beliefs that they are absorbed in our energy fields. This
cycle is very hard to break. Below we will look at the link of
addictions to emotions and how we experience pleasure from our pain.
It's also not surprising if you are attracted to relationships or
situations with people who "make you feel" similar to the first person
who caused you shame or pain. Even if the situations are not the same,
you are still left feeling the same. This is a critical distinction.
Subconsciously, we seek to recreate the emotional vibrations that are
attached to our imprint. Therefore, we attract people into our lives
that leave us with this same feeling. It's not a relationship chosen
consciously. Let's delve into why this feeling became a certain
vibration within you that helped create and attract most every other
experience in your life. Because your imprint is unique to you, it is
your personal responsibility to be aware of your patterns. I invite you
to pause for a moment. Close your eyes and recognize the awareness deep
in your body. Become present. Allow yourself to bring forward the
general memory of what it felt like to be a child. Don't judge it. For
now, just feel it. Think of all the people, the nights at home, the
mornings, the weekends, the dinners, your bedroom. Just allow yourself
to connect to the memories that formed your childhood and notice how
those memories make you feel. Sit with it for a moment, envisioning the
web of emotions that are within you and that form your energetic field.
When you

open your eyes, jot down your experience. Be clear about the emotions
that you felt, or beliefs and memories that passed through your mind.
Try not to filter. We'll come back to this and use that information.
Let's focus now on your parents. They are main characters in your story.
As such, they are critical elements to your imprint. Everything you
learned came from watching, interacting with, and sensing how life
operates in relationship to these characters. While with your parents or
caregivers, you developed beliefs about everything from relationships
and survival, to behaviors and expectations. These formative beliefs
stemmed from your relational patterns with your parents or caregivers.
You began to understand the meaning of connection, and formed overall
judgments of people, things, and the world. Not only were you learning
about these things, each interaction or person you witnessed "made you
feel" a certain way. Every experience had a strong impact along with a
strong memory (even if you are not consciously aware of it), which
created an emotional belief system that you are likely still operating
from today. It is critical to fully understand the role of emotional
imprints to better understand how you have been reliving these patterns.
The memory of each experience, coupled with the emotions felt throughout
the body, creates an overall energy sensation deep in our cells. As we
mature, these sensations may seem subtle, but become activated through
the subconscious and memory tissue as a reaction to most all
experiences. We too often live our adult lives through the operating
system of our old imprints, and it doesn't work anymore. Your higher
self is awakening and knows that something needs to change. You are
tired of feeling this way, which might be why you are reading this book.
Your lower vibration patterning doesn't align with your highest
vibrational potential. This is why most people seek self-care work. They
have experienced the same lowgrade discomfort, or perhaps a deep sense
of self-loathing, or had bad

relationships for too long. Nothing seems to fix it. They feel stuck and
want to break free. Many of my clients who are successful, mature,
highly functioning adults tell me that inside, they feel like scared,
pained children. They have lost sight of their own realities or
truth---no matter what barometers of success prove otherwise. They feel
chronically sad, disappointed, or unable to feel peace. These are highly
intelligent folks flummoxed by their insecurities. It's more common than
you think. Our imprints are such a powerful force that it is common to
feel magnetized to them, sucked back to any negative vibration that is
held in our being. It's vitally important to continue strengthening
yourself through healing in order to create new, healthy vibrations that
can lead to lifechanging beliefs. I know you would like a quick fix or
magic bullet, but working through these chapters and applying the AAA
Method will help give you the support you need. You are already in the
process of shifting. It's frustrating to do years of therapy or healing
work, only to see patterns repeat and emotions resurface. In fact, your
frustration is a sign that you are targeting your core wounds and making
progress. This method doesn't ask you to abandon that critical path to
your overall growth. It provides additional perspective to your
imprints, but don't expect them to just go away in one fell swoop.
Although similar to traditional therapy that asks us to look at our
family history and identify unhealthy patterns or childhood wounds, the
AAA Method examines the imprints created and how they impact our
perceptions of the world so that we can rebuild a new system in our
lives now. Particularly why we are magnetized back to our imprints, even
when negative, and how imprints dominate our sense of worth,
expectations of others, and relationships to others and self.

Building New Imprints

If you want a different experience, to rise up from the self-sabotage,
you have to settle the conflict within you. This conflict comes about
from being stuck in limited beliefs rather than living in your
authenticity and believing in the power of your reality and potential.
How do we change and build new imprints?

AAA Method Acknowledgment (consciously recognize the false beliefs and
feelings created by our early childhood experience). Acceptance (make
peace with the feelings and false beliefs that formed). Action (take a
step toward our higher self, including re-parenting our inner child,
applying compassion, and self-love).

Building new imprints requires utilizing this method at the ready. Be
aware that developing new patterns will take some internal heavy
lifting. This means recognizing your imprints and vibrations on the
daily and using the AAA Method to create change. It doesn't just happen
overnight, but applied over time you will notice a substantial
difference.

Vibrations Why do we care about vibrations when talking about toxic
emotions? Simply put, higher vibrations support the growth of self-
actualization and emotional and mental wellness. Toxic emotions cannot
live or breed in the frequency of higher vibrations. Learning to raise
your vibration is key to expansion and personal growth. Would you like
some good vibrations? Don't we all. Nothing better than feeling light,
positive, and high on the world. Good feels good. But if we're used to
feeling bad, good can be hard to hold on to. How do we make it last?

Understanding that emotions create certain vibrations and that you can
control your emotions is a game changer. You don't have to be a mystic
to understand. To raise your vibration is to acknowledge that energy
exists, and that your thoughts, feelings, and physical body create
energy depending on the environment and how you experience situations.
The depth of information regarding emotional frequencies is fascinating.
There are specific measuring tools that read the frequency of the human
body, your brain, heartbeat, and vocal tone. The Scale of Positive and
Negative Experience (SPANE) is one of the most respected and referenced
studies that measures the positive and negative effects of emotional
vibrations. Emotional frequency is the vibration with which each emotion
resonates. We feel emotional frequencies in every moment of every day.
Remember, every thought has a feeling associated with it, and every
feeling has a thought. The next page includes some examples that pull us
to a lower vibration: •

Chronic negative mentality

•

Addictive emotional patterns

•

Unhealthy relationships

• •

Anger, resentment, jealousy, revenge, shame, guilt Chemical drugs

•

Excessive natural intoxicators (wine, tobacco, coffee)

•

Unhealthy processed foods

•

Self-criticism

•

Unprocessed emotions

•

Being judgmental of self or others

• •

Toxic household cleaning products Chemically laden foods

•

Exposure to electromagnetic frequency

•

Blaming others for our feelings

•

Dishonesty

•

Taking things that aren't ours

Below are some examples that pull us to a higher vibration. •

Connection to nature

•

Healthy, natural foods and herbs

•

Practicing being mindful and present

• •

High-vibe music Sunlight

•

Self-love

•

Gratitude

•

Connection to spirit

•

Compassion

•

Meditation and breath work

• •

Giving back to others Surrounding yourself with beauty

•

Laughter

•

Exercise

•

Prayer

•

Acts of kindness and generosity

•

Eliminating toxic foods and substances from the body

The higher the vibrational frequency, the more energy or life force you
will experience in your cells. Feelings such as happiness, bliss, and
connection have a certain frequency that will make you feel healthier,
lighter, and more centered in your highest self. Feelings such as rage,
fear, or resentment emit lower frequencies that may feel heavy, sludgy,
or dark. Like all forms of energy, emotional energy expands and
contracts depending on the

frequency it has. Joy and laughter are expansive energies, while shame
and scowling are constrictive energies. When you are vibrating at a
higher frequency that supports feelings of peace, joy, love, and
contentment, you are better able to manage difficult emotions, and the
likelihood of feeling high levels of bodily pains is lower. Whereas,
when you are vibrating at a lower frequency that supports feelings of
anger, sadness, self-loathing, or guilt, it is more difficult to process
challenging experiences and emotions, and you may experience higher
levels of bodily pain.

AAA Method Acknowledge that energy exists and you can control your
energy according to your thoughts, feelings, and environment. Accept the
thoughts and feelings that are within you. Acceptance makes way for
action. If we do not accept, our actions will be based on addiction to
our imprints instead of healing and raising our vibration. Act by taking
micro-steps that are manageable, achievable, and easy to repeat to raise
and sustain your vibration.

Basically, what you emit is a reflection of how you feel. What you emit
is also what you attract. The vibration level that you carry will
resonate with the vibration level of someone or something else, and soon
you'll find yourself playing out your patterns together. It never ceases
to amaze me that even in my work, I attract new clients going through
similar situations as existing clients. And sometimes both are parallel
to a previous or current personal scenario. It's as if I had a menu on
my services offering "the narcissist-codependent dance" and people are
flocking to it, without even realizing its ingredients. They don't have
to. The frequency I was putting out on the topic was exploding into the
cosmic waves and people who resonate at that level recognize the vibe
and reach

out. That's the way it works. We call it amazing, magical, unreal, the
craziest thing. It's energy. You can feel energy, even if you aren't
trying to feel it. The more you tap into the subtle awareness of energy,
the more you become attuned to your higher self. Some people feel it as
a palpable charge, others sense it, and some claim to see it.
Regardless, it's important to be clear on what energy feels like in our
emotional bodies so that we can better identify our specific vibrational
frequency. Some people may claim that they don't feel anything. They
can't sense their emotional bodies or energy. That's okay. It's common
to experience a block in our emotional connection if we are dissociated,
have extreme stress, or feel unsupported. As you move through the AAA
Method and practice, you will become more sensitive. First, you have to
become grounded and learn to trust yourself in this moment. Have you
ever been in a home or office and didn't like the vibe? Maybe it felt
dark, heavy, or frenetic. It may be difficult to say exactly what it
felt like, but you know it didn't feel good. That's an example of what
it feels like when outside energies are not aligned with your own. In
this situation, the vibe in the office was vibrating lower than your
current vibrational frequency. Remember, there is no judgment; just
because it didn't feel good doesn't mean your energy is better or that
another's energy is worse. The energies just didn't match. Sometimes we
can feel when the energy is lower than ours, which makes us feel less
good, and we call it bad. But let's step into the empowering position
and acknowledge that the energy isn't a match. Take the example of using
public transportation in a city. You board and sit or stand next to
someone because space is limited. If you feel uncomfortable, threatened,
or even have a physical response like feeling hot or sticky, this
person's vibration is not a match for you. The energy vibration is
emitting a frequency that is disturbing to you. Maybe it reminds

you of energy frequencies during times of actual threat or harm. Maybe
it resembles your own frequency at times when you've been
self-sabotaging or self-loathing. You know in your body that this lower
vibration doesn't feel good. On the other hand, perhaps you sat next to
someone and felt comfortable, safe, and at ease. This person may have
matched your current vibration or carried a familiar one matching that
of an experience you had with a friend or grandparent. We sense energy
and vibrational frequencies every moment of every day. We sense it with
people, spaces, animals, crystals, plants, homes---everything. We sense
it in natural environments, the beach, the desert, the mountains, or a
tree-lined country road. Energy is everywhere, and without thinking much
about it, we gravitate toward the energy that most aligns with us as we
crave to bring ourselves to a place of familiarity and balance. Now,
here's what's tricky about balance. What seems like balance isn't always
healthy balance. As we know, if we are operating from our original
emotional imprints, we may find comfort in situations and with people
who are aligned with our wounded self, rather than our higher self.
Balancing these imprints would continue a cycle of addiction to pain, so
we should be careful when thinking about balance. If we are working on
shifting and building better relationships, it's beneficial to
acknowledge when we're pulling from our emotional imprints (our story),
or from the place of raising our vibration (some may call this our
higher self, our new reality). Let's look at the vibrational difference
between greasy fast food and fresh organic vegetables. Calories, fat,
and nutritional content aside, on a vibrational level the span is quite
great. Greasy fast food has a lower frequency. If you currently crave
and find the most comfort in fast food, you are likely operating from a
lower vibrational level. No judgment here. We all experience this kind
of pull and craving---that's why they call it comfort food. But someone
operating from a higher vibrational level might

call an organic peach comfort food. This person may have been taught to
love in a way that fed the body optimally, and their wounded vibrational
patterns may show up somewhere else. When considering vibration, it gets
interesting when we look at our choices and even our self-expression in
clothes and material things. Once we tap into the vibrational feelings
in our bodies and give that vibration acknowledgment, we can use the AAA
Method to more easily attune to a higher frequency. Intentional, mindful
thinking on its own has a high frequency, so applying that will help you
vibrate higher.

Determining Your Vibrational Baseline Let's figure out what your
vibrational baseline is according to your beliefs. Remember, your
vibrational baseline correlates to your emotional imprints developed at
a young age, so you may have a variety of frequencies surrounding
different situations. To start, let's agree that there is no judgment in
this practice. I find that no matter how many times I say this, many
people's first response is selfcriticism. Going back to the shame
response we discussed on page 17, you may feel like a wreck, but that
isn't a feeling---what you are feeling is a lower vibration attached to
your core wound. Shame, guilt, fear, sadness . . . these feelings are
here to teach you. Your higher self has brought you here to learn to
vibe up and feel whole. For the purposes of this book, we will focus on
the average baseline number to give you something tangible to work with
as you move forward. But you can apply the process of this work to any
kind of difficult emotion or lower frequency that you have. We'll use a
simple 1--10 scale to note your vibration. A vibration of one would be a
feeling that is low, slow, dense, fearful, heavy, weak, traumatic, sad,
angry, terrified, or like there is a void within you. A vibration of
five would be a feeling of mediocrity, okayness, emotional tolerance,
mild trauma, despondence, a "just live with it"

attitude, or moderate negativity. This vibration has a partial block to
love, aspirations, beauty, and joy. A vibration of ten would be feelings
of lightness, freedom, support, love, security, enlightenment, safety,
and total bliss. This vibration is in complete alignment with your
highest self. You may be an angel and spontaneously evaporate at any
moment! Before you get set on the number, remember that this work isn't
about negating the good in your life. That said, even if you experienced
an upbeat, hopeful, loving, and fun childhood that left you with a
vibrational feeling of eight, I want you to factor in what was really
going on around you. If you felt like an eight in your thoughts or
perceived reality, but were bullied by your brother, or your mom was
aggressive and verbally abusive, or you were alone at home most of the
time, your average number may actually be a six. This scale of vibration
isn't about what you think of yourself or another person at the lowest
of times or even the best of times in your childhood. It is strictly a
vibrational frequency attached to emotion. Even though a vibration of
one may feel low, bad, or less than, this doesn't mean that you or
anyone is low, bad, or less than. It's just a number to help us uncover
our true feelings. Judgment only keeps us in the cycle of blame or
feeling shame, so we are moving beyond that. If we don't do the work to
uncover our true feelings, we won't have an accurate vibrational
baseline from which to work. Assistance from friends, safe family
members, therapists, and healers may offer support to reflect back the
truth of what you may not be able to recall. Close your eyes and get in
touch with that same feeling you tapped into on page 31 that has trailed
you since you were a child. Recognize the good feelings, the difficult
ones, and the overall emotional imprint that you feel around your
energy. On an instinctual, guttural level, what number would you ascribe
to your average, overall vibrational frequency when remembering your

general feeling as a child? Write that number down, and note the people
and circumstances that "made you feel" that way.

What number would you ascribe to your lowest vibrational frequency as a
child? Write that number down, and note the people and circumstances
that "made you feel" that way.

What number would you ascribe to your highest vibrational frequency as a
child? Write that number down, and note the people and circumstances
that "made you feel" that way.

Your average vibrational baseline is likely the middle number between
your lowest and highest vibrational frequencies, but sometimes we have
an average that doesn't exactly measure that way. This may be the result
of a particular trauma that had a deep impact and created a low
vibration for many years, but our memory aside from that trauma elicits
a higher feeling.

Other factors that could skew our overall number include selective
memory, denial, dissociation, and/or using coping mechanisms, which may
have felt healthier at the time than they actually were. Because you are
reading this book and have experienced difficult relationships and
emotions, it's likely that your baseline average is a six or under. Many
who struggle with toxic emotions of shame, guilt, fear, abandonment,
resentment, or other long-held pain hover in the realm of 1-- 5. For
most people, it's useful to reference experiences between the ages of
two to thirteen years old. If you are unable to remember that far back,
or had difficult experiences later in your teens, reflect back on ages
thirteen to eighteen. During childhood, if you regularly felt fearful,
abandoned, unloved, scared, invisible, worthless, guilty, or were abused
or manipulated, your vibrational baseline may be closer to a two or
three. If your childhood was pleasant and your needs were met but either
or both of your parents were emotionally or physically absent, your
number may fall between a five or seven. If life felt lousy in general
but you had a loving grandmother, for example, it doesn't qualify for a
higher score. Instead, recognize your relationship with her as its own
imprint with a varying vibrational baseline, or as your highest
vibrational imprint. Vibration scoring is personal. It's unique to you
and you do not need to defend or justify your number. Just make sure it
resonates with your true feelings. Your vibrational baselines will guide
you to consciously look at the behaviors, relationships, and life
experiences to which you have been attracted or those that have been
attracted to you. If your average emotional imprint resonates with a
four vibration, this means that until you step on the path of conscious
healing, you will likely attract people and experiences that allow you
to keep feeling like a four. Our emotional imprints are hard to break,
but very possible with the AAA Method. Reverting back to the frequency
of your emotional imprint is

like an addiction. It doesn't mean that you are happy or feel good in
your vibrational pattern. It is just what you know and where you have
resonated for so long, that now it is part of you. This familiar energy
guides your behaviors and leaves you with a belief that you are forever
caught in this defeatist cycle. But you are not. Some therapists ask
their clients to examine their relationships with their parents to
better understand why they have relationships with certain mates and
friends. We sometimes find people who treat us like one of our parents
treated us. It's typically the parent with whom we had the most issues,
as we attempt to heal our wounds in association with them. Because
cognitive therapy only affects the mind and beliefs, I believe we have
to go even deeper and effect change in our emotional and energetic
frequencies. We attract people who are not the same as our parent, but
who allow us to feel the same emotional frequency as that parent. For
example, it's not necessary to attract someone like your father to heal
the difficult relationship you had with him. If he was abusive,
dismissive, or emotionally unavailable, and you felt lonely,
misunderstood, or undervalued (let's call that a three), you may attract
someone who has different qualities but still brings out the same
feelings of loneliness, etc. Or you may attract someone completely
opposite who is nurturing and present (resisting the familiar three
vibration in your personal life), in which case you may have other
patterns such as addiction or unhealthy friendships that bring you to
feel the vibration of a three. Somewhere in your personal life, the
pattern of a three vibration will manifest. We cannot rely on someone
else to elevate our own emotional wellbeing. If we cannot sustain a
higher feeling or vibration on our own, we will not be able to sustain
it within a relationship with someone who is attempting to make us feel
better, so it's important to keep reminding ourselves to release blame
and focus on healing.

The Roller Coaster of Addiction Your vibrational baseline isn't the same
in all scenarios. We often create cycles and patterns depending on
different types of relationships and circumstances. Most of us have a
vibrational pattern that if illustrated would look like a ride on a
roller coaster. Have you had a roller-coaster experience with a personal
or intimate relationship? An emotional roller coaster swings us up and
down with highs and lows. The good times are great, and the bad times
are terrible, causing emotional whiplash as the toxicity of it all is
unleashed. Being on an upand-down ride matches many of our imprints and
addictions, as we reach for higher vibrational experiences, and then
crash down and experience a low. That low can feel so bad, even lower
than your baseline low, which creates pain that can trigger
self-sabotaging patterns or detrimental behaviors. In recovery we strive
to come back to our baseline before being able to apply healing
strategies to raise our vibration. When we act out our emotional
addictions we find that the peaks are actually pain points just as much
as the dips are pain points. We are addicted to the entire cycle and the
expectation that we will eventually return to our "comfort" level of
pain. The higher the peak, the harder the fall. Both feed the same
addiction to pain. What we should aim for is to close the gap between
the peak and the dip. That doesn't mean trying to limit high points in
our lives. It means focusing on raising our vibrations to a level
through positive micro-steps that can be sustained with daily
self-growth. Then, we don't see the highs as a form of self-sabotage.
The more emotionally attuned we are to health, the more regularly we
feel balanced and can integrate the peak experience, instead of
reverting back to the addiction to pain. Sometimes balance feels boring
and addictions feel exciting. I get that. But healthy balance that is
full of awareness, acceptance, joy, and peace is more exciting than any
toxic hit of emotion you could ever feel. There's a

mantra I use in my life and in my work that can help free us from our
addictive nature. "I'm addicted to feeling bad. I'm committed to feeling
good." Emotional addiction is real. Not only do we crave and hold on to
familiar emotional patterns, we also put great effort into winning the
affection of others. Seeking validation is part of an addictive pattern.
These addictions keep us stuck in our lower vibrational imprints (and
toxic emotions), as we look to others to identify our worth. If you
struggle with addiction, (and we all do because we all have emotionally
addictive patterns), your addiction keeps you attached to the pain of
your vibrational frequency. You can even think of your vibrational
baseline as an addiction, as addictive feelings and patterns of pain
emerge within relationships all the time. Pain can not only feel easy or
familiar, it can also resonate a particular frequency that is alluring.
When we are too far away from our baseline, especially in the positive
sense, we start craving the feeling of our known pain, and we begin
self-sabotaging behaviors. People use various kinds of self-sabotage to
control pain but simultaneously find comfort within that pain. I was in
a difficult relationship. It would be easy for me to diagnose the other
person with a popular personality disorder and blame him for my misery.
But, because I broke up with blame, I'm going to tell you about my
experience in this relationship pattern. My history is to attract
unavailable men. Emotionally unavailable, mentally unavailable,
physically unavailable---I was never picky with the type, so long as I
was (subconsciously) sure that I wouldn't get my needs met. The
relationship wasn't all bad. There were many times of laughs, deep
connection, and new experiences. But when it was bad, it was really bad.
He displayed his rage with verbal attacks and shouting. All-night fights
ended with me in tears. I even slept in my car on occasion to escape.
There were weeks with no communication, and years of trying to
understand him.

I would try to do better so that he would treat me better. I tried to
fix him, and I walked on eggshells. At times I was afraid of being
physically hurt. The relationship "made me feel" less than, abandoned,
insecure, guilty, and ashamed. Please read what I'm about to say with a
renewed understanding of emotional imprints and energy: I was seeking to
relive all of those emotions and experiences. Not consciously, but
subconsciously. Energetically. Those terrible feelings and experiences
allowed me to stay hooked to the negative beliefs and toxic emotions I
felt and addicted to my own pain. He and that relationship "made me
feel" the same negative beliefs and toxic emotions I harbored within
myself and the same addiction to pain. I would never suggest that this
is the kind of relationship I consciously sought, but because I was
stuck in a negative pattern, it's the only relationship that worked with
my vibration. Let's say I was vibrating at a four in regard to intimate
relationships at that time. I was starving for affection and desperate
to be nurtured in ways I didn't receive as a young person. I'd say some
of those feelings from my childhood had me feeling like a two. Yet, I
also knew there was a better way. I'd seen it and read about it and felt
in my soul that I was capable of healthier love. The yearning to
experience real love felt like I could have an eight experience. My
higher self knew it, but my dense human self wasn't yet ready to accept
it. In this case, I chose a man who initially I found attractive. I felt
like the possibility of an eight was there for sure. He was funny.
(Eight.) He was smart. (Eight.) He was sensitive and intuitive in
interesting ways. (Seven.) We shared in mutual work and creativity.
(Nine.) But he was also hurt and angry, which when on display felt like
a two. Full of shame. (Three.) Manipulative. (Two.) Didn't know how to
be emotionally vulnerable. (Three.) Wasn't reliable. (Two.) Selfish.
(Three.)

Ascribing numbers to people and emotional issues may seem like judgment.
It's not. I'm not rating another person's humanity. These are the
vibrational numbers I felt in this relationship, and are merely a marker
of my own emotional and energetic frequency. While in the relationship I
would experience highs and feel like an eight. And I also experienced
many lows that felt like a two. As you see, the swing between these two
levels held me to an average of 4.5, which was near my baseline
emotional imprint. I was on a roller coaster. What's interesting about
an emotional roller coaster is that most people think they are seeking
the high because it "feels" good. We know the high is temporary and the
higher we go, the lower we will fall. In regard to vibrations and our
addiction to them, we actually seek the low. The low is the high. The
low is what feeds and traps us to our emotional imprint comfort zone.
The low confirms we aren't good enough and don't deserve to be happy.
Similar to drugs, the low is what keeps us addicted. If we didn't have
the low, be it a hard day, stress that needs to be released, pain that
needs attention, or sleepless nights---we wouldn't need the high. To
make the ride smoother and close the gap between highs and lows, use the
AAA Method:

AAA Method Acknowledge what you're feeling---good, too good, or bad.
Accept that you're seeking a high, to distract you from your low; only
to take you back to chasing a high. Act by stabilizing your emotions and
taking small micro-steps to sustain a vibration that feels somewhat
higher than your baseline.

Many of us would like to move from 0--100. We hope for a spontaneous
miracle to help us forget the negative place we came from so that we can
move into a new territory of green grass and daisies. This is why the
"letting go" theory is so popular. It supports the idea that if we can
just move on, our life will change and we will be free. But it doesn't
work that way. Building a new imprint doesn't mean killing off your old
self. It means fully acknowledging and accepting who you are with
conscious thought and taking action to rebuild from a place of
acknowledgment and acceptance. When you acknowledge how often you crave
a feeling or experience that will take you way up or way down, you gain
better control of your addictions. Some of us have this swing throughout
every day, while others may experience it monthly or even yearly. When
you're in control, you can begin to follow through with acceptance and
action. Food, again, is a good example. You know that a box of chocolate
chip cookies is not good for you and that eating the entire box will
make you feel bad. When you're in control, you can stop at one or two.
That's a balanced emotional day. When you're out of control and need a
hit, you eat the whole thing. What you're really doing is seeking the
low that is associated with your pain points. Addiction to food is a
source of self-sabotage. For many, it's easier to control something
tangible that affects how we feel physically than to deal with emotional
pain.

Act to Heal The action element is key to changing our emotional imprints
and vibrational frequencies. Some action may, in fact, be large
decisions or behavioral modifications that will alter your entire life,
but most helpful in the scope of healing are what I call micro-steps.
They will allow you to transition to a slightly higher vibrational
feeling that you can sustain. To stop the cycle of feeding addiction
patterns and reverting back to negative

imprints, the ability to sustain a higher frequency is vital. Over time,
microsteps create a strong foundation for positive change. One of the
problems we have with making change and healing is that we become
overwhelmed. We take on more than we can handle, hoping for big change
now. The urge is to turn in your old life and start anew. I encourage
you to find hope in the resurrection, rising up from where you came, not
extinguishing your past altogether. Overwhelm is a distraction to real
change. Healing doesn't happen all at once. It's not about creating a
new life, it's about co-creating this moment with new meaning. If you
were to paint a picture of a house on a farm, you wouldn't throw 10
colors of paint at the canvas all at once and hope for a house to
appear. You would take it one brush stroke at a time, creating, then
recreating, enhancing lines, shadowing, giving texture, and blending,
until at some point you'd step back and see a house on a farm. The final
product is like magic, but the process is a lot of hard work. Being
overwhelmed comes from knowing we feel like x, we desire to feel like z,
and subconsciously we know there's a whole lot between x and z. True,
it's just one letter. But have you ever been y? Do you know what y feels
like, looks like, smells like? Probably not. Even if you've had some y
experiences, you likely don't know how to sustain that feeling of the
experience. Otherwise, you would. Micro-steps are so small, yet so
powerful. They can take us from a lower vibration to a higher vibration
almost instantly. Each step doesn't transform our whole selves, but
collectively they contain the power to do so. Here's a personal example
to illustrate this point. When I signed the contract for this book, I
immediately felt overwhelmed. To finish the book required formulating
about 50,000 words, as well as organizing them, and then editing the
entire manuscript. That on top of a list of clients and a new house
seemed too much. Although I wanted to write the book, I found

myself distracted by other things. I became overwhelmed and began to
distract myself because to start the book meant I couldn't stop, and I
couldn't conceptualize the whole project. My self-talk was something
like "I'm not ready. I need to wash the dishes or trim the hair on my
dogs' legs." I was confident that completing the book would be a nine or
10 vibrational feeling, which I welcomed. But I'm working with an eight
to 8.5 most days and it was hard to visualize jumping to a 10 from
there. That's what causes overwhelm; too great of a distance between
where we are and where we want to be. Without a process, we become
paralyzed. I applied the AAA Method, and here's what that looked like: •

I acknowledged that I had a book to write.

•

I accepted the deadline to fulfill the contract to make this book
happen.

•

I needed to take some kind of action. A micro-step.

•

I asked myself what micro-step I could take.

•

I could sit and write one sentence.

•

Then, I just did it.

In writing just one sentence, I became engaged in the book, however
briefly, and that engagement helped take me into a higher energy
frequency. I could visualize my book being written, and finished. With
one small micro-step, I shifted my vibration from overwhelm at a seven
(I can't) to action taking (I can), which brought me to about a nine. It
feels so good. I'm still writing. I can stop now, or I can continue.
That is up to how I feel emotionally, physically, and mentally. But I
took the micro-step and shifted from can't to can. From one vibrational
level to the next. When you achieve something, no matter how small, you
build confidence that shifts you to a higher state. And that movement
can take you from not writing a book at all, to being engaged in the
book by writing,

and eventually finishing the goal. The micro-steps keep you from staying
stuck in old patterns. The same principle can be applied to building
healthier relationships. What can you do right now to raise your
vibration, however slightly, within the context of your relationships?
What micro-step will help you move through fear, and into the present
moment with love? Maybe that's being a bit more vulnerable. Maybe it is
showing your true emotions or taking a risk and inviting someone to
enjoy a nature walk. Don't let overwhelm of correcting the entire
relationship stop you from stepping toward your own personal growth.
Remember, as you shift your energy, others will feel that. They will be
forced to either align to it, or it may open the conversation for much
needed change. A business coach once told me "Leah, you are setting such
high expectations, not because you believe in yourself, but because you
don't." That was a mind-blower. Of course, I was immediately defensive,
because that was my natural response to protect my ego. But once I
realized that he wasn't trying to take me down, I was able to
internalize what he said. When we put the bar so far out there (seeking
to jump directly to a nine from a five vibration---in relationships this
is akin to making mental plans for the wedding on the first date),
somewhere inside we know this expectation isn't attainable immediately,
and maybe not even in the near future. Setting unrealistic expectations
distracts us from taking the small steps that build confidence as we
achieve success, keeping us connected with our pain. Setting goals is
important. But the lack of a plan or tools to do the work in moving from
a five to a nine vibration will leave you feeling frustrated, and keep
you stuck in old patterns. When you change your vibration, it changes
everything---how you look at the world, and how you relate to people.
When you vibrate higher and are able to sustain that, you'll begin to
attract people who have a similar energy frequency. If you then
encounter someone with a lower vibration similar to your baseline, you
may feel the

pull toward your "comfort zone" until you consistently apply the tools
of the AAA Method. To raise your vibration in a healthy way, do it
slowly, consistently, and consciously. Don't seek the highs or
lows---seek self-love instead. Take micro-steps to build confidence in
new patterns, and learn to trust yourself by sustaining new patterns in
an ongoing way. That's growth. That's achievable.

Chapter 3 Recognize Your "Truth" from Your "Story"

SUCCESSFUL healing requires examining your story, and recognizing the
truth of who you are, independent of your story. Conscious thought is
important to healing, and is necessary to find acceptance. How does
conscious thought differ from being conscious and having thoughts?
Conscious thought is viewing the world from a more mature self, instead
of a reactionary, programmed mind working on autopilot. It's the
practice of mindfulness and bringing awareness and intention to your
life. Awareness allows you to see from a higher perspective and make
better choices that will support everything you do. As we become more
aware of our imprints, beliefs, and stories, we can make more mindful
observations and are able to interpret the actions and behaviors of
others as separate from us rather than extensions of us. In other words,
mindfulness allows you to step outside of your limited beliefs and
realize that other people's behaviors are not about you, but about them.

Conscious thought and mindfulness are heart-based, not brain-based. Your
emotional intelligence is different from your mental intelligence.
There's a higher intelligence happening when we become mindful,
intentional people. The rational mind can understand reason, but it can
be difficult for the rational mind to understand emotions of the heart.
Acquiring emotional intelligence requires the same diligence and
learning as mental intelligence. The difference is that others cannot
teach you how to feel. That is mastered by your own experience, and
learning how to step into acceptance. Children lack the ability to make
mature mental and emotional responses. Their ability to respond to
others is limited, which is why it's so damaging when parents and
caregivers treat them with a disregard for their welfare. When children
mature into adults, and with the help of conscious thinking, they are
better able to separate out their "natural" response from imprints and
choose a path that is more aligned with curiosity, discovery, openness,
and trust. But it is a learning process. It's common to fight what we
feel. There's a constant inner conflict that is an attempt to get rid of
bad feelings in order to feel better. If we're honest, we know when we
use our old stories and patterns to stay in our comfort zone---in the
vibrational frequency that matches our emotional imprints. Fighting the
negative feelings keeps us separated and disconnected from them, but
acceptance keeps us connected to ourselves. When we acknowledge and
accept our truths, the hard edges around painful emotions begin to
soften. We don't have to hide, deny, or resist. There's no need to
explain or defend ourselves. It is what it is, and it's ours. Acceptance
is a strong medicine, like a salve to difficult emotions. With this
gentle approach, we send a signal to our inner selves that we accept all
parts of us. And guess what happens? The difficult feelings start to
subside. With no resistance, feelings are free to process and will
eventually transform.

Let's use an example of a child who throws a tantrum to get attention.
Maybe the child is hungry, angry, sad, or needs affection. The child
yells, cries, bangs dishes, or does whatever is necessary to get
attention. If the child is ignored, they become even more creative in
their efforts. Scolding makes the child feel hurt and they may withdraw
to their room, causing a feeling of disconnection from the parent as
well as themselves. The parent feels guilty for being harsh or ignoring
the child. Now, a push-pull dynamic is at play in which the parent puts
out even more energy to reconnect with the child and alleviate their
guilt. What has the child learned from this experience? That he must
throw a fit and be punished before he gets his needs met. After feeling
punished and ignored, maybe Mom or Dad will validate him, but they may
also inform him that his needs are too much. This dynamic can easily
become an unhealthy approach to loving. Imagine the same scenario, but
in this case the parent acknowledges what the child needs, accepts this
need, and gives the child attention. Generally, the tantrum will
subside, and the parent stays healthily connected to their child. If
this were a common response from the parent, the child would know that
tantrums aren't necessary to get attention and may become more patient
because they have historically been able to connect and get what they
need. Now, imagine the screaming child as a negative feeling you carry
that is asking for your attention, acceptance, to be heard, cared for,
and attended to. When you are feeling "off," I recommend a simple and
quick meditation practice based on the AAA Method to help you connect to
this negative feeling and reach acceptance. The dialogue goes like this:
"I feel anger. I notice where I feel anger in my body. I breathe into
it, and attempt to soften my body around it with acceptance. Then, I
speak to the anger. 'Anger, I feel you. I see you. I accept you.'"
Usually, within moments, the anger will lessen and you will reach a

sense of compassionate acceptance. With acknowledgment and acceptance,
the anger doesn't rage stronger, but instead settles as if to say, "Oh,
okay. It's okay to be me, now I feel better." Acceptance is an integral
part of building and maintaining relationships with others. It is also a
useful tool to help deal with negative feelings or thoughts. For
example, if you're fighting with someone but you genuinely understand
their point of view, you should acknowledge their truth and accept their
position. When you respond in this manner, your "opponent" no longer has
a position to argue because their side is now validated and accepted,
and the argument can now become a discussion. Whereas if you keep
defending your view or talking over the other person, the argument can
go on for days. The same is true with emotions. When emotions are held
or repressed for too long, they block the ability to receive or validate
incoming emotions. In denial, emotions get stuck. In blaming others,
they get stuck. In subconscious repression, they get stuck. In
dissociating from traumatic experiences, they get stuck. The result is
to default to other negative emotional patterns, which in turn creates
an array of toxic feelings. Resisting negative emotions is like holding
them in prison, and the prison is inside. Not wanting to let them loose
and do more harm, we store them away like a dangerous animal because we
don't trust ourselves to handle such strong feelings. But negative
emotions trapped behind prison doors for too long can transform into
rage. Unleashed rage can be dangerous and extremely toxic not only to
us, but also to people for whom it is not intended. However, if
unprocessed shame is trapped inside, we can grow numb, or disinterested
in life in general. Holding shame internally may feel like a safer
option, but it's just as unhealthy as it may disconnect your true
feelings, your loved ones, and a healthy life.

Many of us believe that if we keep negative emotions inside long enough,
they will change, or burn out with exhaustion. But often they grow in
strength, determination, and energy, finding sneaky ways to slip through
the cracks, distort our perceptions, and attack us without warning.
Stress, physical aches, lashing out at loved ones, depression, and
apathy are common symptoms of repressed negative emotions. These
symptoms range in intensity and frequency depending on the severity of
the wound or trauma. Practicing the art of acceptance is the quickest
way to diffuse negative behaviors, reactions, and triggers. Acceptance
provides space for the negative emotions to live. By trusting our
ability to maturely handle emotions as they arise, acceptance recognizes
the temporary and mercurial nature of them. Emotions always shift when
we make the space for them to do so. The conscious work of the higher
mind can help free them, by giving space and caring attention to the
emotional need. Breaking up with blame and choosing acceptance can be
extremely difficult but are keys to our emotional well-being. It's
common to desire justice to the person who hurt us, and it can feel
unfair to carry so much pain for actions that we aren't responsible for,
but these are the growing pains. As hard as it is to acknowledge and
accept our feelings, it is the only way to evolve and heal, as well as
offer others empathy for their hardships.

Identifying Your Story versus Your Truth Your story is a critical part
of your life experience. It is a combination of the events that happened
in childhood through your teen years that formed your experience of
reality. Your story is not false because it is actually what happened to
you from your perspective. If you wrote a movie that involved all of the
people in your life, told in your childhood voice, it would be your
story. Your story is a summation of the imprint that is attached to your
emotional vibrational baseline.

Your truth is the state of self in the reality of now. You'll often hear
people say, "And that's my story," when sharing who they are. But even
if our story is an important part of our history, it does not need to
define our state of being in present time. It's possible that you have
been subconsciously acting from the addictive pattern of false or
limited beliefs due to your story, without consciously stepping into the
truth of who you are and how you feel now. It's important to understand
the concept of false or limited beliefs as they relate to mental health.
Living with a false belief doesn't mean that what you experience isn't
real or that you do not know truth from lies. It means that at times you
are operating from beliefs that were reinforced by others from past
situations in your life, even if these beliefs are not true for you now.
Look for your internal truth, as that truth will tell you the reality of
the moment, versus the story you may be playing out in your mental,
emotional, and energetic bodies. Staying present in the moment can be so
grounding and healing because it keeps you in the moment of now---not in
the memory of then. Recently, a client of mine who is a mother of three
said that she doesn't feel capable of being a mother. Although the
reality is that she's in the midst of doing the very thing she feels
incapable of doing. She birthed and has deeply cared for each child for
many years, which is no easy task, and she has a healthy and happy
family to prove it. But her internal dialogue, coming from her inner
child who developed insecurities and false beliefs about her
limitations, is running her emotional programming. She is living out her
story, not her truth. She perceives her life through the lens of a
terrified and pained child instead of her conscious adult self because
she didn't get what she needed as a child. She's operating from an
emotional deficit that is tied to her emotional imprint. How can an
insecure child raise three other children? She feels like she can't, but
in reality, she does, even though she's plagued

with a sense of insecurity every day. She doesn't feel like she can own
her new reality and truth because to do so would abandon her false
belief system, and that's all she's ever known. As we worked to
reprogram her subconscious by building new thoughts, re-parenting her
inner child, and raising her self-love and confidence levels, she has
been able to step into her adult self and experience more joy and peace
as a mother. We'll get deeper into inner child work in the next chapter,
but I want you to begin to see how all of this ties together. Separating
your stories from your truths is important to develop trust in your
worth and to build a new foundation. Our stories trap us in false
beliefs about who we are, while our truths help lead us to a path of
possibility and wholeness. Below are examples of how childhood stories
can replay throughout our adult lives.

Example 1 Your mother was addicted to pills. When she was high or about
to get high, she may have felt hopeful, lighthearted, fun, or
accommodating, and you may have felt like she was happy, loving, and
trustworthy. But when she was intoxicated, your mom's personality
changed. Even if she didn't become a scary monster, she may have become
sad, inattentive, withdrawn, hyper, or no longer interested in listening
to you. At this young age, you were not able to understand what
substance abuse can do to a mind or body. You were simply having an
experience that contradicted the experience you had an hour before with
Mom. You may have felt like she became upset, not happy, or extremely
happy for no reason. Perhaps she mentally checked out and you didn't
feel safe or loved at this time. Sadly, there was confusion. You made
discernments and based beliefs on your mother's shifting emotional and
mental states while under the influence, followed by judgments on
safety, connection, and love. Many children in this type of experience
exhibit fear and panic trying to figure out what they can do to

again feel safe, connected, and loved. Children (and adults, if they
haven't done their personal healing work) internalize the behavior of
others as their fault, questioning what they did wrong, what they should
be doing better, if they will be loved again, and ultimately do not feel
safe or comfortable in this environment. It's impossible for a child to
manage, process, or understand this kind of environment. But just
because a child cannot understand what is happening doesn't mean that
they do not have feelings about the situation. Unfortunately, they lack
the maturity and skills to process their feelings, so they internalize,
becoming fearful and angry because it hurts so bad. All they can do is
try to survive. A child will try to understand who they are in
relationship to who their mom is and do what they can to be okay. That
sets a particular imprint on their system, and will likely affect most
every relationship for years to come. When children are hurt they don't
often blame the other, they blame themselves. It's not until children
are older when they begin to place blame for the bad things in their
lives, but by this time they have already adopted the false beliefs of
guilt and shame.

Example 2 Your mother was very present, maybe too present, by doting on
and coddling you constantly. Maybe you were spoiled with no boundaries
or discipline but you knew that Mom loved you to death. She was always
there for you, and she provided anything you needed or wanted. Perhaps
your mom had a relationship with a person or people who did not meet her
needs. It's likely she was turning toward you to satisfy some of those
needs, staying connected to you out of loneliness or insecurity. You had
no space, no discipline, and too much smothering, which vacillated
between comforting and suffocating. With so much parental attention it's
likely you came to believe that people in general owed you attention,
and you should be loved regardless of

your actions or personality. You expected the world to give you what you
deserved and you held people in contempt when they said no. Your ability
to self-limit food, drugs, and money may be difficult, or you may have
trouble staying in relationships with people who are overly attentive as
it triggers your feeling of suffocation. Any of these issues could
become a part of your adult belief system.

Example 3 Your sibling tortured you out of jealousy or rage due to new
family dynamics such as divorce, an additional sibling, or a new
marriage. You may have grown up being fearful of close friendships,
unable to trust those near you not to harm you. Or perhaps you came to
believe that you were inferior and silenced your voice to become a
wallflower. Our stories have the potential to play out in various ways
throughout our adult lives if we don't apply conscious thought. We
associate our past with sensory experiences such as any thought,
feeling, smell, color, or sound. Even something like the touch of a
fabric can remind us of the imprint that was developed through our
stories with the people and events in our lives. No matter how
uncomfortable these feelings may be, the imprint that developed is
comforting and eventually draws us back to it. Your story is powerful,
carrying with it your imprint and emotional vibrational frequency. It's
common to mimic the stories from our childhood imprints in love
relationships, jobs, even with our own children. How many times have you
heard people say "I'm turning into my mother," or "My boss treats me
like a child." Life stories have a great impact on who we are, but we
can apply the AAA Method to step out of our stories and reveal our truth
to help us stop self-sabotaging by reliving false beliefs time and
again. We don't have to deny or ignore our pasts. In fact, it's healthy
to embrace them by using

conscious thought to acknowledge and accept our stories, and taking
action steps to stop them from dominating our lives. When I was younger,
I would sometimes feel alone. Deep loneliness. Was I alone? No. I had
two parents and a sister. I was not abandoned or left wanting. I had
family and a lot of friends. I was not alone but I felt alone because of
the dynamics with people in my household and close relations. My
loneliness mainly stemmed from not feeling understood in my identity as
an artist, a lover of spirit, and a sensitive person. I trailed a
feeling of loneliness throughout my life, so when I entered into
relationships, even friendships, I unconsciously sought people who were
distant. In other words, people who were not available. I even sought
job opportunities that provided a sense of separation. I was searching
for the feeling of aloneness that I had during my youth. It's not what I
wanted. But it's what my emotional and energetic imprints were attracted
to because I was using information based on my story and emotional
vibration. I found comfort in that feeling. However uncomfortable I was
in the loneliness, there's a comfort in the discomfort. And I was
seeking the familiar, safe place of discomfort because that's what I
knew. It was my story. But it doesn't have to be my truth now. If you
recognize patterns in relationships, avoidance, intimacy, trust, shame,
unworthiness, or other issues, examine your story to better understand
the emotional imprint your story has ingrained in you. Once you
acknowledge and accept that you are magnetized back to your story, then
you take the action steps to heal.

AAA Method Acknowledge familiar patterns you are playing out from your
story. Accept that your feelings or behaviors stem from the story of
your past.

Act by creating positive experiences to shift your vibration higher and
form new emotional energetic imprints. Some examples may be: practicing
being present, calling a good friend, or journaling.

The AAA Method will help you attract other people who match your new
imprint. This is how to transform the toxic and painful feelings of the
past to positive feelings of the present. Processing this work can feel
like you've created new DNA---new energetic pathways that support and
validate who you truly are in this moment. Conscious thought and
confidence-building exercises will help you develop these new energetic
pathways. When you can acknowledge, accept, and take action to shift the
pattern of how you have been living out your past wounds based on your
story, it's possible to develop new threads of conscious thoughts and
choices. That new threading weaves together to reinforce a new story.
You will feel safe and happy. You will live a life you desire rather
than being tied to old stories and false beliefs. This is when it's
possible to attract people of like mind who are not toxic, but
supportive. Trust yourself to experience new situations and
relationships. Differentiating your story from your truth allows you to
see the false beliefs that were created from other people's behaviors,
not your inherent worth. For the purpose of discerning your story from
present truth, let's use a simple question to prompt conscious thought.
That question is, "Is this really true?" •

Is it true that you are unworthy because your parent or caregiver with
addiction issues wasn't present?

•

Is it true that you can't make it on your own?

•

Is it true that you aren't smart enough to own your own business?

•

Is it true that all artists are starving?

•

Is it true that if you have a different religious or political view your
family will reject you?

•

Is it true that you have to live in a certain location?

•

Is it true that if you were to take a risk and follow your heart that
you would fail or be unsupported?

The truth is, until you raise your vibrational frequency and
consciousness, any person or situation you attract will match the
frequency of your old story. This is why we must apply the Method before
attempting to establish new imprints. The same process of seeking the
truth works for emotional awareness and intelligence. The more present
you become, the more you can recognize moments of truth. You may ask
yourself, "Do I really feel this way?" "Do I feel the anger or
worthlessness in this moment or is that a feeling I am relating to a
past relationship or experience?" Does the feeling of being unsafe have
to do with this moment or is it a feeling that is attached to trauma in
your past? Is your partner purposefully trying to hurt you, or is your
fear coming from being hurt by someone you loved in the past, even if it
was your partner in the past? Is the shame connected to an old story? If
so, what do you actually feel in this moment? If you currently feel
shame, can you accept the shame and take action to create a new
emotional imprint? It is possible to take control and feel good again.
Releasing the addiction to pain and our stories will expedite the
process. Simply asking yourself how you really feel right now as opposed
to relying on the addiction of toxic emotions as your guide can
jumpstart recovery from our addiction. In the past you may have felt
another way, but how do you feel now? Rather than being magnetized back
to your story, how can you focus on raising your vibration in this
moment?

AAA Method Acknowledge false or limited beliefs that are attached to
your story. Accept the story that created those false beliefs or
emotional pain. Act by taking a micro-step toward self-love and healing
in this moment. Some ideas may be spending time with new people, writing
and expressing yourself more, joining a group or club with people who
have similar interests, or pampering yourself.

A helpful healing exercise that applies the AAA Method in a broader
sense is to figure out what kind of movie your story would make. If your
movie is filled with drama, trauma, and dangerous storylines or
characters, you may need to meditate or work with a qualified therapist
or healing practitioner to gain emotional support. Part of this work is
learning to trust your current adult self to create a safe and committed
practice that will build confidence and offer a deeper sense of
self-love. Acknowledge 1. Identify the characters in your story. This
may include family members, friends, relatives, teachers, babysitters,
or other regularly present people who played a role in your
developmental years. Try to include those who were present in your life
from the ages of two to ten. List these characters in your journal by
name. Also include people who were not always present, but played a key
role in your thinking and actions. This may be someone you wanted to be
close to who didn't seem critical in your story. Develop two storylines:
Main Stars and Supporting Roles. Accept 2. Write at least three pages
that detail your "story." Write it as if you are telling a friend about
a movie or book. Include important details including any experiences
that made you feel either loved and

encouraged or scared, slighted, ashamed, embarrassed, or not smart
enough. Be as open and vulnerable as possible. For example, I
experienced sexual energy and encounters with some of my "best friends"
at a very young age. It was inappropriate but also made me feel part of
a group, desired, and important. I didn't know what sex was at that
time. This experience left me with a certain emotional imprint about
physical boundaries, worth, and gender roles. I would list these people
as Supporting Roles because they were sideline characters that played an
important role in my early development but were not always present. I
would write from my current perspective of those encounters as well as
the mental understanding of what I thought was happening and the
struggle it left inside me. The excitement, the fear, the feeling that I
was doing something wrong, but also the confusion of it and how I felt
loved in that. Act 3. Review your list of toxic emotions from page 22
and write the word(s) that most correspond with your story next to the
corresponding event. Use a red or colored pen to highlight the word.
Next to my early sexual encounters, I would have written "ASHAMED" and
"CONFUSED" as an example. This process can lead to a better
understanding of our toxic emotions, core wounds, emotional imprints,
and vibrational frequencies. Seeing how it all connects can free the
subconscious mind of false beliefs and invite in new experience. Your
story will never be erased, but you don't have to keep pressing rewind
if you use the support of the AAA Method. The characters were real. The
experiences really happened. And the combination of these events and
relationships created your emotional imprints. It can be triggering to
retell your story, but remember that you are doing this to

acknowledge your history and find acceptance to be able to move forward
and rebuild your operating system.

Discovering Your Truth Many of us continue to bring the stories of our
past forward and often act as the person in the original movie, even
when many of the characters and environments have changed. It's
important to be fully present and learn to discern what we are actually
perpetuating from our past versus the truth of what is now. Guilt often
gets in the way of living a healthy life of freedom, and guilt or shame
is often attached to our worth. Guilt says, "You did something wrong"
while shame says, "Something is wrong with you." Think about the story
you just wrote. What is the vibration of that story? Consider how much
different, or not, your life is now. Consciousness is the act of being
present. Acknowledging your past and accepting it is a step toward
healing. Transformation is consciously taking action steps to be in this
moment. When people tell their life stories, and then relate them to
what is happening today, it's often clear that they are stuck in their
emotional imprint. Why? Because they are consumed by what others think,
and they are recreating past situations. Their fear of the future is
attached to the unknown. If guilt or shame has been a part of their
operating system, they can't imagine a life free of those imprints. This
is like emotional scar tissue blocking a healthy flow of energy and
possibility. The "easier" way to cope is to continue giving most of
their energy away to others. If you enjoy writing or journaling, make a
new entry using these questions as prompts: •

Which characters are still in your story?

•

Who or what are remaining triggers for you?

•

What kind of people and experiences do you want to attract to your life
now?

•

Who is your current support team?

•

Who are the new supporting roles or co-stars in your life and what would
you write about your life today?

•

Which behaviors are you repeating?

•

What is your vibrational feeling today? This week? This month? This
year?

• •

How do you spend your time and are you doing what you love? What is it
that you love about your life, and what do you feel you need to change?

•

Have you been successful in maintaining healthy relationships with
others? Name those healthy relationships and find gratitude in your
heart.

•

What hobbies do you love and how do you feel when participating in them?

Practice writing your truth and accepting that truth. Your truth is the
foundation for everything else in your life. Write in a way that
enhances the qualities you have, even if you don't feel as strong as
you'd like in the moment. Remember, you are creating new moments every
moment. There will be plenty of chances to practice. Start with the
basics to be reminded that you're making progress building new imprints
and healthier vibrations. You are doing a good job.

Becoming Present Tune in to this precise moment and take a breath. Be
present right here, right now. Notice the room. How does it feel? Do you
experience anxiety right now, in this space? Are you safe here? Learning
to step into this moment is the path to recognizing the truth of your
current reality. It is scary as we walk one step further from our
stories, but it's an important step to rebuilding the life that we
desire. Freedom comes when you recognize

that in this exact moment, you may actually feel more relief than you
believed. The freedom comes from present awareness that you do not have
to be trapped by the story of your past if you step into the now. You
may be having an anxiety attack in this moment, and that would be your
truth. If you are not having an anxiety attack in this moment, do not
claim that you have anxiety, as that only reinforces previous
uncomfortable experiences. Reinforce the fact that you do not have
anxiety in this moment, and shift your vibration toward feeling good
rather than the expectation of feeling bad. It's important to recognize
and accept that much of your story has shaped you, but it doesn't have
to dominate or control you. Become empowered with the choice to be
present and take micro-steps to maintain control. This does not mean
denying, it means acknowledging, accepting, and taking action in the
now. As you come to realize that many of the feelings you think you have
are not connected to this present moment but to the imprints of your
past, the grip on those negative feelings will lessen in intensity,
allowing for the current flow of feelings to process.

Chapter 4 Heal Your Inner Child

AS we keep moving forward in this book, we'll focus on more specific
ways to take action and heal. Inner child work is very helpful in
discovering and healing the root of our adult issues. The more progress
we make, the more we rebuild the energy matrix of our emotional
imprints. Your inner child is an expression of childhood experiences
that are brought forth to the present. Negative childhood memories that
remain active in your subconscious mind can trigger physical responses
or emotional reactions in adulthood. Your inner child isn't a separate
part of you, but also not the entirety of you. Everyone has an inner
child, and learning to access it is important to personal growth. As you
increase your overall vibration, you will increase the vibe of your
inner child as well. The emotional imprints you developed from childhood
memories have an effect on your belief systems and vibrational frequency
in adulthood. Not all of the memories are bad, and your inner child
isn't a reflection of only negative experiences. Working with the inner
child should also bring

forward hopes and dreams we can call upon to expand our current reality
and joy. Healing your inner child is an important action step of the AAA
Method that allows you to move toward healthier relationships and
experiences. Some strategies to work with the inner child are listed in
this chapter. Working with your inner child will be an experiential
process, and doing the work will reap rewards, including: • • • • • • •

Deepening self-love Increasing self-confidence Learning to create
boundaries Accessing repressed feelings Connecting with joy through play
Feeling a full range of emotions Finding compassion for self and others

When children are scared, hurt, or do not get what they want or need,
they tend to act out their pain or repress their feelings. Children who
were abandoned, abused, or suffered other trauma tend to repress their
feelings of fear, pain, or shame to avoid further scolding or rejection.
As feelings are repressed, our tendency is to avoid relationships or
situations that threaten our sense of security---no one wants to feel
more hurt. When the inner child experiences extreme insecurity or trauma
rather than emotional support, the reaction may be to mimic childlike
responses, making it difficult to achieve healthy, happy adult
relationships. Without realizing it, adults often act out the fears and
emotions from their inner child's wounds. Part of the healing process is
learning when we are reacting to the world from the place of our inner
child. Much of our unprocessed trauma and emotional dysfunction stems
from the negative emotional imprints of our inner child. Some experts
believe

trauma stunts developmental growth at the corresponding age that an
event occurred. The AAA Method can be helpful in healing the inner
child's wound at any stage and learning to re-parent that part of self
to attain a sense of wholeness. First, you will reconnect with your
inner child. Next, you will become aware of when your inner child is
triggered or acting out in present time as well as attempting to teach
you healthier behavior. With practice, it's possible to discern the
child from the adult and the past from the present. As you learn to
re-parent your inner child, you can move on from negative emotional
imprints to rekindle passions and positivity.

Learning Who Is Present Determining if your emotional reaction or
behavior is coming from your inner child or adult self involves staying
aware of your original emotional imprint and vibrational baseline. This
awareness comes down to the question, "Is my inner child running my life
right now, or is my adult self present, using conscious thought and
tuning into my emotional body?" Experiencing emotional triggers often
comes from unhealed childhood pain, but if you make a conscious effort
to remain in the present, you can gain more control over your emotions
and ability to respond. When your inner child gets triggered, you may
feel any of the following: •

Threatened

• • •

Defensive Explosive anger/rage Vindictive

• •

Comparative An urge to cry

• •

Judgmental A need to run away

• •

Attacked Numb or checked out

Triggered behavior based on your inner child's response allows for
tantrums when you don't get your way, punishing others who disagree with
you, or feeling left out. It's possible to listen, speak clearly,
understand the other's perspective, and generally respond to the
incident in a more stable, neutralized way if a disagreement or upset
occurs while you are in your adult state. Life events will always be
triggers, and your wounded inner child may say, "Wait! Don't forget
about me, I'm hurting!" But as an adult committed to personal growth,
you can learn to love yourself into health by applying the AAA Method to
heal your inner child.

AAA Method Acknowledge the presence of your inner child. Accept the
feelings and fears that arise from your inner child. Act to re-parent
your inner child with healthy love, discipline, and nurturing.

Meeting Your Inner Child It may be emotional to meet and acknowledge
your inner child if pain blocks so much of your memory. To get started,
try this exercise and see what unfolds. Think back to when you were
between three to seven years old. Or, if you had more difficult
situations when you were older, like parents divorcing, losing a loved
one, sexual repression due to shame, abandonment, or abuse, think of
yourself between eight and fifteen. For this exercise, rely on the age
that first comes to mind, and try not to judge the outcome. Just stay
present and compassionate with yourself. Close your eyes and remember
yourself as a child in full detail. Notice your size, what you were
wearing, your haircut, face, and any other detail

that you can recall. It's helpful to look at family or school photos.
Prompt your visual with specific things like your favorite outfit,
hairstyle, or toy. Notice the environment. Are you in your bedroom, the
family room, outside, etc.? Where did you often spend time and why?
Visualize yourself in your favorite place, or a safe place, where you
could often be found. For me, I had a pile of rocks down the street
where I would go to "hide" or be alone and feel connected to myself.
Next, imagine yourself as an adult observing your childhood self in this
environment. What do you see? Are other people around, and if so, what
are they doing? What emotions, body language, or facial expressions are
displayed by your childhood self? Allow yourself to go deeper to
experience the memories and emotions that arise. Connect with the energy
of your inner child as much as possible by observing and tuning in from
this perspective. Now, visualize the possibility of your adult self
magically going back in time to this same physical space. Your childhood
self, turning and seeing you there, runs and jumps into your arms with
amazement and glee. There is an immediate bond that is indescribable.
The wholeness satisfies both of you as you connect. You and your
childhood self are one, reconnected forever in love, understanding, and
compassion. Use your energy and heart to extend as much love as possible
to your inner child. In the safety and sanctity of this reunion, notice
if your inner child now feels seen, worthy, loved and safe. It's a good
idea to record the feelings and thoughts you hear from your inner child.
Does your inner child need more attention or a different way to
communicate? Ask your inner child and listen without judgment.

Accepting Your Inner Child By tapping into your inner child's stored
emotion and often raw pain and fears, you can better connect with the
pure-hearted nature of your childhood

self. The more acknowledgment you give your inner child, the greater
understanding and acceptance you will have with yourself and others as
an adult. Finding acceptance starts with accepting all parts of you,
including your inner child. Let's visualize your childhood self again.
Can you accept your inner child for who they are and for their
struggles? Even if you don't have full acceptance of your whole self
yet, can you feel this for that innocent child? Let your inner child
know that regardless of how shy or insecure they may be, no matter how
scared or small they may feel, they are worthy of your time, attention,
and love. Tell the child that they are important to the world and that
you are proud of them. We all need affirmation of who we are and what
we're about. Remind your inner child of their endearing characteristics.
Also acknowledge the sadness, confusion, or pain they experienced, and
assure them that you understand how they feel. Tell your inner child
that you accept them fully and that they are enough. Hold them tight and
reassure them that you have their best interest at heart and that you
will help them create a happy life. Following this dialogue and
connection with your inner child, imagine releasing your childhood self
while you watch like a loving parent. Your inner child turns and waves,
with a new hope in their heart, feeling loved and cared for. As you turn
to leave, remember that it's possible to visit your childhood self any
time. Return your focus back to your adult self, take a deep breath, and
reintegrate into the present moment before moving forward.

Re-Parenting Your Inner Child with Action After reconnecting with your
inner child and internalizing what they need, the next step is to learn
how to re-parent your inner child. First we must understand when your
childhood self is acting out in order to get their needs met. Because we
are so accustomed to old imprints and feelings, identifying

our inner child can be confusing, but learning the difference between
childhood and adult responses is a major step toward growth. Recently my
inner child was triggered and I was able to move through the situation
from a higher vibration by applying the AAA Method. It's another food
story (because food is often a relatable issue for many of us). For much
of my life I suffered with a sensitive stomach. For most of my teen and
young adult years I tried various diets to alleviate discomfort, lose
weight, and feel good. Veganism and vegetarianism led to more health
issues so I swung to the other end of the spectrum and tried the no-carb
paleo diet, finding some relief at various points. I bought special
foods to support my dietary needs but certain family or friends didn't
understand my need to eat differently so they poked fun at me, ate my
food, and called me overly sensitive. Yes, I was that girl at the
restaurant who asked a million dietary questions before ordering. I'm
sure the servers wished I had dined at home. My insecurities and low
vibrational imprints at the time led me to feel disrespected and hurt by
the lack of support I received from others. Even though I was trying to
help myself, I struggled with believing I was worth the effort. My
addiction to pain from core wounds was pulling me in and I worried that
perhaps the people around me were right. What if there wasn't actually
something wrong with my stomach and I was making all of this up in my
head? Shame ensued, but after years of enduring pain, a doctor confirmed
my gluten intolerance, as well as an intolerance to soy, dairy, and some
other foods. Before being validated, my inner child reactions came forth
if other people ate my food. I would get personally triggered because I
was left without the food I needed to avoid pain, but mostly because it
"made me feel" like those who cared for me didn't love me enough to
listen and understand me. My inner child would get terrified because my
own needs were not being met.

I'd like to offer an example of a time when I excelled at working
through a trigger with my inner child. I offered my homemade gluten-free
cookies to my partner because I know he loves sweets. I wanted to share
a few, but he ate the entire plate of them, and I didn't stop him. A
part of me felt proud that he liked my cookies, but the real reason I
didn't stop him was because I didn't have good boundaries in place. Due
to my former emotional imprints, my fear was that if I brought this up,
I may get ridiculed or called selfish and feel emotionally abandoned.
There was a whole container of "regular" cookies in the cupboard. I
didn't remind him of that, nor did he seek them out. He was just
enjoying what was put in front of him. The next day after lunch, he ate
snacks that he brought, none of which I could enjoy. And I was left with
no dessert or snacks because he'd eaten all my cookies. I was so upset
and wanted to cry but instead got mad and stormed out of the house. When
I got to my car, I caught myself feeling like a child, and recognized
that familiar and terrible low vibration.

AAA Method I acknowledged that my inner child was activated and that the
fear and insecurities I was experiencing were a result of my old story.
I accepted the fear that I was feeling. I then acted to subside that
fear by consciously stepping into my higher self and becoming mindful of
my present-day self. I soothed my inner child, bought cookies I could
eat, and enjoyed those cookies.

I called my partner from the car as I was driving to buy new cookies and
told him that I wasn't upset by his behavior, but by an old, unresolved
feeling. I replayed a story in my mind and emotional body that he didn't
care because his behavior triggered memories of the people who had made

negative comments about my diet and sensitivity. Sounds petty, but it
pushes my buttons. The truth is, in that moment with the cookies, I was
upset with myself. Yes, my inner child got triggered and I felt
invalidated and unloved, but mostly I was upset that I didn't use clear
boundaries that I had been working on in the relationship. I knew my
partner was eating all of my cookies. While I wanted to be caring and
generous, the real truth is that I was acting from an imprint of
code-pendency by offering him my cookies rather than asking for what I
needed and telling him where "his" cookies were. He did nothing wrong.
He simply took my offer and enjoyed the cookies. It's not his job to
manage my food needs. I should have stepped into my higher self and used
healthy boundaries rather than trying to win his affection by
over-giving. For example, I could have said "I made some gluten-free
cookies and am happy to share one or two, but I'd like to keep them for
myself to enjoy. There is a container of other cookies you can eat in
the cabinet. May I get them for you?" I know he would have fully
understood and not been offended. But I didn't. Working on our stuff is
a constant process. It feels never-ending, but staying the course is
part of the healing journey. Eventually it becomes part of your
lifestyle. One of the best places to work through our stuff is in
relationships. It helps if the other person has a similar mindset and
commitment to healing which offer you a safe place to share. If not, you
may endure quite a struggle. The most important thing is to be in the
company of others who can either accept you or discuss the process with
you so that you can experiment in new ways to break the pattern. After
my mini-tantrum about the cookies, I apologized to my partner for taking
my feelings out on him. He understood and was glad I shared my
experience, reassuring me that he's there for me. We ended that one in

peace, but sometimes it doesn't go so well. For this one example of
successfully working through a trigger with my inner child, I have one
hundred more examples of failure. It's hard work, but use of the AAA
Method makes it much easier. Learning to reparent your inner child takes
commitment, discipline, attention, and love. It's helpful to know that
as you create a stronger presence within your adult self, the inner
child and the adult have the opportunity to grow together at a more
rapid rate. Discipline comes from a place of love. An undisciplined,
unruly, unattended child does not feel safe or loved in the world. When
children feel safe to explore more about themselves, they are encouraged
to become who they truly are. Offering your inner child new disciplinary
guidelines is an opportunity to participate in life expansion by better
defining what your adult and childhood selves need. When our active
inner child wounds cause repetitive triggered reactions, discipline
should be firm, but being too harsh can encourage more selfsabotage or
unhealthy coping skills. Healthy discipline is helping your inner child
understand what positive boundaries mean and that setting boundaries
does not mean neglecting or ignoring their needs. If you feel like your
inner child is acting out in your life, you can overcome the urge to
react by giving your inner child healthy boundaries and assurances of
how to more healthily emote. As an example, I had to soothe my own inner
child. If I used harsh discipline with my inner child, such as "Leah,
you're being selfish and too sensitive. Get over it!" I would only
affirm the negative feelings from my story. My inner child doesn't need
more scolding, harsh energy, abandonment, or correction. She needs to be
loved and understood. Here is another example of healthy discipline: If
something in your relationship triggers you but you are unaware of why
you are upset, angry, or emotional, take a moment to check in and think
about the potential reasons why your inner child may have been
activated. Perhaps your inner child is experiencing guilt or a deep
sense of

shame, remembering times that you felt abandoned and afraid of being
left alone. Acknowledge your activated inner child, accept the triggered
response as a real emotion or pattern that needs attention, and give
yourself compassion, which includes acknowledging the difference between
your adult and childhood selves. Reassure your inner child that you hear
them and that it will be okay, but right now you need to attend to adult
things like working on your relationship. Let your inner child know that
this evening you will sit with them and share any feelings, fears,
and/or thoughts that need to come forward. Set a time and make a date to
be present, feel, and process. This type of discipline honors the
separation of the inner child and adult. As the adult, be clear that you
are the one making decisions and creating boundaries. You are in charge,
not your inner child, but offer your presence and compassion to your
inner child's needs. When you re-parent with love, your inner child will
settle down with the knowledge that there is time and space for them
because they matter, and will learn how to develop in a safer, healthier
way.

AAA Method Acknowledge the triggered and scared child. Accept the
feelings that are activated. Act by taking a micro-step forward such as
carving out a specified time to process your emotions.

Some recommended action steps in working with your inner child would be:
• •

Speaking or writing to your inner child Playing music and dancing

•

Screaming into pillows to free emotion

•

Meditative coloring

•

Taking yourself and your inner child on a picnic

•

Calling a friend

Whatever your inner child needs to feel safe and loved, make time to
provide that. Being present and aware of your inner child is a major
step toward self-discovery and transformation. Relating to and
reparenting your child in healthy ways will offer assurance that they
have support, attention, and love from the person they love and trust
the most.

Honoring Your Inner Child Consider making a physical space in your home
to honor and stay connected to your inner child. Perhaps you can create
a special altar as a sacred space devoted solely to your inner child. In
this special area, add a photo of yourself as a child around the age you
visualized in the exercise on page 72. Put the photo in a frame and make
it the centerpiece of your altar. Include things you love on the altar
as well as something alive such as a plant or a small fountain with
moving water and some natural elements such as herbs, shells, crystals,
or wooden figurines. You could also place items that your inner child
enjoys, or those that recall a fond memory. Think hair clips,
arrowheads, or marbles. The altar should reflect a tribute to your
childlike energy. You can add any other lovely goodies that have meaning
for you, but make sure these items are not associated with other people
or experiences that carry guilt, shame, disappointment, or other
negative emotions. This is a sacred space to love and honor you. My
altar includes a picture of me in third grade, a plant, crystals,
shells, a collection of wooden elephant figurines I've loved since I was
a little girl, a Tibetan prayer wheel, and a small piece of floral art
from a friend.

Sometimes I add fresh flowers or my favorite jewelry pieces I inherited
from my grandmother. This altar should be displayed where you can access
and visit it regularly, like in your bedroom or meditation space. As you
tend to the natural elements on the altar by watering, pruning, and
touching, you can pause and create a deeper sense of compassion and
connection with your inner child. These actions help build an ongoing
relationship with your inner child, potentially the healthiest parental
role you have had.

Alternate Hand Journaling One of the most productive ways to cut through
patterns and communicate with your inner child is to ask questions. When
I was struggling with my own healing crisis, I worked with several
holistic psychologists and healers. One of them suggested a simple yet
effective exercise called alternate hand journaling. It helped me so
much that I often suggest it to clients as an ongoing part of their
growth. Dedicate a journal or coloring book as a means of communication
with your inner child. Perhaps choose a playful cover. Whenever you are
triggered or doing self-care work, write back and forth in this journal
or book, talking to your inner child. Here's how this is done: •

With your dominant hand, ask your inner child how they are, or what they
need today. Just a single question is fine. Remember, you are
communicating with someone who has limited language skills and emotional
capacity. Keep this simple.

•

Using your non-dominant hand, write the response from your inner child.
This may be frustrating, but that's okay. Writing from your non-dominant
hand allows your brain to slow down and hear the inner child. Young
children are typically challenged to write and share emotions, so this
aligns with their natural state. The response

from your inner child may be short or simple as well. Just start a
dialogue in this safe place of your journal. Check back when you are
feeling a bit off, anxious, or triggered. Talk with your child and be
curious. Your inner child may reveal that they need more downtime, or
they may be fearful. Your inner child may let you know that they don't
feel safe with your new love interest, or something is not right with a
certain friendship. Your inner child may need your attention or want you
to be more childlike at certain times. Don't filter the response from
your inner child. Let them have their own voice and keep in mind that
your inner child has wisdom but also limitations. Don't allow the child
to dictate to you as an adult, but to inform you where you are
emotionally stuck. You can then use the AAA Method to shift that
vibration from feeling bad to feeling good. A good parent doesn't allow
the child to have everything they want. But parents should honor what
the child says, listen to how they feel, and be the person who validates
them, showing discipline and unconditional love. Healthy parents don't
judge, they accept. As adults, parents make the best possible decision
with the information they have, and that's how you should re-parent your
inner child. Starting a new relationship with your inner child will be
the start of a new relationship with yourself and others. If you witness
yourself as a young and beautiful being, feeling compassion and the
desire to soothe, you are taking bold action steps toward healing and
transformation. Accepting and finding compassion for your inner child is
one of the most loving and important things you can do. Your inner child
needs you and wants to grow and develop along with you in healthier
ways. A child who feels safe and healthy will develop a higher
vibrational imprint. As you re-parent your inner child, you are giving
your inner self a second chance to rewrite your childhood imprints and
develop into a healthier, happier adult.

Chapter 5 Discover Your Authentic Self

YOUR authenticity is your worth. It's your greatest asset, your most
prized possession. You may or may not have friends, a decent job, lover,
or beautiful home. There's value in each of those things. But your true
worth? It is right inside of you. Your authenticity is the character,
personality, and spirit that is yours and yours alone. It's your nugget
of uniqueness and your contribution to the universe that adds richness
and depth, diversity and perspective---the world needs exactly what you
have to offer. Authenticity is the ability to reveal your true self. To
feel safe enough to do so, you need to know that someone has your back.
Someone you can trust not to judge you, abandon you, or diminish your
character. That someone needs to be you. Why is it so hard to reveal our
true selves? Why do we hide, become a chameleon, or put on a front for
other people? Worst of all, why do most people lie about who they are?
Fear.

It can be scary to put our most valuable resource on the table. We all
fear the emotional risk of rejection, scorn, being laughed at, or
otherwise dismissed, as these activate our core wounds. These fears can
result in people becoming foreigners to themselves, not taking the time
to even know who they are, what they believe in, or what they truly
desire. Discovering your authenticity requires honesty and learning how
to look within. As you do this, you begin to break addictive patterns
and the energy held to false beliefs. The truth is, we lie to ourselves
as much as (or more than) we lie to others. We create a version of
ourselves for the world to see to protect who we really are. This is the
ego at work, reacting from negative emotional imprints. We tell others
we feel okay when we do not. We take jobs that fill our wallets but not
our hearts. We dress the way the media tells us to, and extend ourselves
in ways that are unhealthy. What we tell ourselves becomes our truth,
and when we're not speaking our inherent truth, our lies leave little
room for growth. Can you imagine being completely authentic with
everyone all of the time? Giving your honest opinion, wearing your
favorite clothes, sharing your deepest desires and passions, acting on
your dreams, and openly expressing your feelings? Even considering this
kind of behavior can spark internal panic. What would others think? You
may not feel able to tolerate their judgment. You may worry about losing
your job, marriage, or children's love if you display your genuine
thoughts, needs, and inclinations. No one wants to be abandoned or
shamed or lose the things we believe make us worthy. Our society tells
us who to be, but if we always follow its lead, we often abandon
ourselves. Thinking based on fear not only keeps us from being our
authentic selves, it empowers others to dictate our lives and determine
our worthiness or our value. We often waste too much time trying to fit
in, placing more importance on the opinions of others than our own.
Think of the energy that

could be put toward our dreams and passions if we weren't trying to
satisfy other people's expectations. When you consider living
authentically, it may bring on a sense of angst, a combination of fear,
anger, and disappointment toward yourself that separates you from your
true spirit. There's no need to feel like a rebel for being you. It
should feel natural to be you. Recently I've been working on a
180-year-old house that needs a major overhaul. When I put the computer
down, I'm going to turn up the music and dance and sing while I caulk
the door trim wearing my painter paints, torn sneakers, and
three-day-old hair bun. I might cry if a good song moves me. I can't
wait. I am in my glory and feel like a nine-plus vibration. There's
nothing to prove, no triggers or emotional addictions, and no one to
impress. I get giddy with excitement after completing each minor task
and can't wait to share this feeling with others. When I'm in my
authenticity I feel safer to relate to the world. If Vogue magazine came
for a photo shoot to capture the "real" Leah, this is what they'd get.
But if I'm doing a video for social media or on television, I'm likely
to pull down my hair, throw on some lip gloss, hide my arm flab with the
right shirt, and move the camera to the room with the best lighting.
Yes, it's socially acceptable, and I could say I'm doing it out of
respect for the viewer, but the hard truth is that I still have
insecurities in sharing parts of myself that could be judged as ugly or
not good enough. To avoid that rejection, I do what's expected, showing
my "acceptable" self and hiding my more vulnerable self. After years of
working toward authenticity, I've come a long way, which I'm happy
about. More sharing without makeup or filters, and I can't wait to free
the rest. Looking our best makes us feel good, and I enjoy that too. We
are all multidimensional beings. But it's important to be aware of when
we are not being authentic, of when we are hiding in shame, fear, or
guilt. Be alert to when you act out your emotional imprints rather than
your authentic truth.

Having on the "right" outfit or being socially "acceptable" doesn't
equate to a higher vibration. Owning your authenticity increases the
vibration of your frequency. When no one is looking, who are you and
what do you enjoy doing? When you feel most at peace with yourself, what
kind of outfit, environment, or people are around you? How can you share
that with the world? Asking yourself these simple questions can be very
challenging to answer. If your mind asks you to judge yourself or it
fears being judged by others, you may be experiencing a lower vibration
attached to a false belief or wound from your emotional imprints.

AAA Method Acknowledge that you are judging yourself in fear of how
others perceive you. Accept this feeling of judgment, even though it's
uncomfortable. Act by applying compassion for the insecurities and fears
associated with your emotional imprints. Sit with your inner child and
grieve the loss of self you've felt throughout your life.

Your True Nature It is very important to separate our learned behaviors
from our true nature. "That's just who I am." "That's just my nature."
Sometimes these words come out of our mouths as justification for poor
behaviors. Reflect on your true nature. You were not born as an anxious,
angry, or defensive person. You did not come into this world with a
vibrational frequency of a two or three. While we have innate wisdom to
grow and develop our true nature, defensive reactions and learned
behaviors are projected when we fear our worth. The truth is, you were
born perfect, and everything else was learned.

You may be a quick-witted thinker, but your nature is not sarcastic.
Sarcasm is a learned behavior to protect your fear of intimacy,
vulnerability, or worth. You may have great empathy for others, but you
were not born to fix others. You may have feelings of anger or
resentment, but you were not born angry and resentful. Learned behaviors
are not who you are. You are behaving in those ways because you did not
learn how to safely process your anger, fear, or feelings of
insecurities and still receive love. Children absorb energy and emotions
as information. If your lineage included ancestral trauma or you
experienced emotional wounds or medical emergencies while in the womb,
you may have absorbed negative patterns or beliefs from your mother.
While some could argue that children are born with less than a ten
vibration, those conditions were still learned. We were all born with a
ten vibration, innocent and pure beings full of love and wonder. Over
time, we developed negative and fearful responses that lowered our
vibrational frequency. We learned to talk quickly in order to protect
our vulnerabilities. We learned to interject with volume in order to be
heard. We learned to fear emotional situations that terrify us, or that
we've seen harm others. The responses we form are either survival
mechanisms against real danger or emotional defenses to protect us from
perceived danger and to feel safer in the world. It's possible to
reprogram your patterns with higher awareness. The next time you are in
a difficult relationship pattern and want to defend yourself, use the
AAA Method. If, for example, your go-to response to perceived danger is
to use sarcasm, practice the following:

AAA Method Acknowledge that sarcasm has previously helped you cope with
negative selfbeliefs. Accept that you feel unworthy of being heard,
loved, or validated and that you use sarcasm to defend this fear.

Act by taking deep breaths or journaling your feelings, and remind
yourself of your true nature as you attempt to respond differently.

When you are triggered, upset, or feel defensive, try this shortcut to
return to your true nature: "This is not who I am. This is a reaction to
difficult past experiences, and I have a choice to respond differently."
Bring your focus inward, soothing your inner child if needed, and
remember who you are. Interacting with others from a place of
authenticity can make us feel very vulnerable. Remember that your
vulnerability likely comes from the fear of not being enough, not from
your true worth as a divine being. As you practice the AAA Method and
build up your authentic sense of self, you will gain confidence and
attract those who are vibrating at a purer and higher frequency. Living
authentically, you will never be alone. This work is the call of the
higher self. The allure to heal and have a happier life comes from a
deep inner knowing that you are much more than the experiences you've
had. The higher self craves to vibrate at a higher frequency, to feel
light and free. It is asking the conscious mind to remember, and to find
the way home. Here's a personal story about inauthenticity. For many
years I worked in the media, owning a small production company and
working as a freelance TV host and on-air talent. As a young girl I had
a dream of working in television and somehow making a difference in
people's lives. It was a dream come true when I moved to Los Angeles and
then NYC to attain my goal booking jobs along the way. While I loved the
media industry, as I grew older, I realized that part of my dream was
the need to be validated because I didn't feel good enough as much as
the love for media itself. One year I decided to pursue my interests and
apply as a producer in the large market of NYC. I wasn't necessarily
qualified for the big league, but I was determined to somehow prove my
on-air hosting chops, and I used this

back-door approach to reach that goal. I sent my resume to Good Morning
America, CNN, and other major television production companies. I had a
few mutual contacts from having already spent years in the industry, but
most of my job search was made up of cold calls and email submissions
online. It was a complete shot in the dark. I heard nothing from my
submissions. Not even a chirp. Months and months of silence. About a
year and a half later I was camping in the woods with a friend and
enjoying the great outdoors, hiking with my dog, and eating bad food
over a fire, when out of the blue I received a call. From CNBC. They
informed me that they had kept my resume on file and were calling to
request an interview for a web producer position on Mad Money with Jim
Cramer. I was beyond excited! In that moment I visualized this
highpowered title, lots of money, possible fame, and a chance to meet
the who's who at CNBC and impress them with my talent. The sky was the
limit. Perhaps hosting an on-air national TV show wasn't that
far-fetched after all. I spent at least a week shopping for the "right"
skirt. (Of course, what I had wasn't good enough.) I found the right
one---just to the knee, black, not too tight, but fitted---that I
believed said, "I've got my act together." I paired my outfit with super
high heels I'd only worn once to a wedding. I'm not sure what I was
thinking, except maybe that I was trying to get tall enough to be
noticed. They were not quite spike, but almost, and I was severely
uncomfortable in them. Looking back, I've made other poor wardrobe
choices, all out of insecurity and trying to look a certain way, but
this one was the worst. I couldn't walk in those shoes. Not even for
five minutes, much less the hour-long tour they had planned to take me
on around the studio. They were interviewing me to be a producer, not a
fashion model. The interview came. Everyone else was in casual attire,
as these people worked twelve- to sixteen-hour days. They had no time
for heels. Overall, the interview went well, but the entire time I was
thinking, This isn't me.

This isn't what I want. I have no interest in getting sucked into a big
corporation, no matter the title or accolades. I don't want to become a
producer on a financial show. I really didn't know why I was there
besides trying to show myself and the world that I was good enough to be
validated by a big media company. My ego was fed, that was about all. I
wobbled out of CNBC with blisters on my heels, numb toes, and a good
dose of humility. The follow-up call was friendly as they informed me
that although I was one of the finalists, they chose a more experienced
producer who was able to work nights and had more experience. I imagine
my shoes screamed, "I don't do the graveyard shift!" Sometimes I wonder
where life would have taken me if I had been offered that job. And for
that reason, I'm glad I wore the heels. If I were being authentic, I
would have realized that I didn't want to produce that show and
graciously declined the interview. But I didn't. Was it a waste of time?
Not in my book. That experience helped lead me closer to my authentic
self in a way that I wasn't capable of on my own. It bruised my ego, but
opened my heart. Had I taken the job, I would have wrestled with my
authenticity for years. A good income with great benefits is important
and alluring. But is that enough? Not for me. Maybe it's not for you,
either. I can laugh now, but I wonder what the woman who gave me the
tour must have been thinking. It's common to make all kinds of
justifications, rationales, excuses, and reasons for why we say or do
the things we do. What if an opportunity comes along for a relationship
with someone who looks the part, and seems to be a good fit, but you
don't feel comfortable revealing your true self? Maybe the person
doesn't understand your history. Maybe they don't have an interest in
spiritual growth. Maybe there are red flags that attract your

former emotional imprint of a four vibration but you're aiming to
sustain the frequency of an eight? Yet you pursue the relationship
anyway. When making choices, ask yourself if you are consciously
choosing from your authentic and empowered self or your lower
vibrational imprint. You may be better suited with someone who doesn't
meet your preconceived idea of "the right one," but rather a person who
matches your new and higher frequency that may, at first sight, not feel
familiar. Perhaps you prefer someone who is living intentionally, who
may not be the wealthiest or prettiest, but has a tender heart, and
encourages you on your path. You may choose the person your parents or
friends may not understand, because they still view you from a lower
vibrational frequency as part of your family imprint. It's important to
do your own personal work to acknowledge and accept your previous
patterns and act to heal the hurt. Only then can you discover your most
authentic self. As truth tellers, the opportunity to live a peaceful and
authentic life becomes reality. Speaking our truth may cause the loss of
a few friends, and while painful, the truth will set you free to attract
people with whom you can resonate your highest vibration.
Self-exploration is the means to look at both the pain and the beauty
that make us who we are. As we become more and more honest with
ourselves, we may notice when we react to the world and others from a
place of defensiveness instead of authentic strength. These behaviors
reinforce the negative or toxic emotions we hold on to for safety,
keeping us disconnected and distant from true peace, love, and
happiness. Shifting to love is courageous. Loving the self is powerful.
It's learning to soothe, not scold. It's learning compassion, not
self-sabotage. It's learning to apply the energy and care we give so
freely to others, to ourselves. Love is the most healing therapy in the
world, yet it is hard to access if we haven't worked through our limited
false beliefs and core wounds. When you're honest with yourself, it's
possible to respond to red flags immediately. There's no need

to convince yourself of anything when you're living in your
authenticity. There's no need to fix others. You will either accept
people as they are if you feel strong enough not to be pulled to a lower
vibrational pattern. Always trust your feelings, and if something
doesn't match what you need, move toward what does. Identify your
internal language to maintain an honest and authentic perspective of
your foundation. It takes presence and acceptance to eradicate
long-held, difficult emotions such as these: • •

"I'm trying to find myself." "I don't know who I am."

•

"I am identified by the labels of others."

•

"I am not special."

•

"My family operates like this, so I have to operate like this."

•

"I've never pursued the life that I wanted."

•

"This isn't what I expected."

• •

"That's just my nature." "My life looks unrecognizable."

Our identity is often based on a conceived idea of worthiness relative
to a specific function, person, or job. Value is a subjective thing. The
power of the mind is so strong that it can create an entire belief
system around the perspectives, thoughts, or emotions of other people.
As adults it's important to think about what we actually believe as
truth about ourselves, and surround ourselves with healthy people who
support us in breaking old patterns that diminish our worth. There's a
distinct difference between how you view yourself and how others view
you. We often judge ourselves against what other people think of us or
believe us to be, but our judgment is subject to old inner wounds and
emotional patterns. If we try to live another person's version of who

they think we are, or want us to be, we will forever feel lost and
unanchored in our authenticity. Personal authenticity and acceptance is
the security you need to blossom into your most divine self. Discovering
and claiming the truth of your authentic self will allow you to direct
love and healing to the places that need it most. Given that our values
come from the people we respected, loved, and depended upon as children,
any hints of disapproval from these people could have instilled a false
belief that something is wrong with us. Our present-day value can also
be determined by interactions with people we don't know well or at all.
We judge ourselves against friends with more or less money, celebrity
lifestyles, or other people's relationships. We try to make sense of our
value in relation to most anything, and when we don't understand or
trust something, we're often left with insecure feelings of what or who
we should be.

Who You Are The below exercise is an important first step to discover
who you really are. Include a thorough intake or inventory of yourself,
including negative beliefs and perhaps grandiose beliefs. Throw it all
onto the page and purge every single one. An unfiltered look at yourself
may feel scary, but hiding from it will trap the negative energies. Be
completely honest, unfiltered, vulnerable, and willing to own all parts
of yourself. This allows you to better understand the false beliefs of
your "stories" and begin to clear toxic energy so you can vibrate higher
in your truth. In your journal, reflect on this question: "Who am I?"
Describe who you are without any filter or judgment, and refrain from
identifying yourself in relation to another person. Do not identify
yourself as a mother, father, friend, wife, or employee. Instead, use
great detail to describe yourself and the inherent qualities that make
you who you are. Be specific and as vulnerable as possible. Write
whatever comes to mind.

For example, I am a tenderhearted, sensitive woman. I'm a strong
presence in my community, yet I feel extremely vulnerable in personal
relationships. I'm in my middle-aged years, becoming more aware of the
value of time, my worth, and aging. Although I'm confident in many areas
of my life, I have self-image insecurities. I am gifted with beautiful
hair, but as it is beginning to change, I find myself feeling identified
with my age and talking negatively to myself. My regrets make me feel
vulnerable, but I am very strong in my pursuits of purpose and healing.
I love to help others. Sometimes I get angry and feel like a fraud. I'm
afraid of certain relationships. I am an artist who loves to paint
abstract nature with acrylic paints but most of my art never ends up
being the image I first sit to create. I always get frustrated while
painting but in the frustration flows creativity that comes out
organically, and I just go with that. I am a pianist. I'm a good person
but I feel poorly that I don't call my friends as much as I think they
would like. In my art I find freedom to be fully me and I feel alive. I
am emotional, and sometimes I worry that I'm too emotional. I feel like
people don't understand how I process the world. I express myself with
words, laughter, tears, art, music, dancing, and creativity. I'm
generally a positive person, but I need a lot of sleep or I get cranky.
When I'm alone I feel peaceful, but I'm no stranger to loneliness. I
love to enjoy a nice long bath to think about the day and just unwind.
See if you can write at least one page about yourself, two if possible.
This is a challenging exercise, but as a living creature, you have many
aspects of you to share. When resistance sets in, remind yourself that
you are committed to love.

Speaking to Self and Others How we speak to ourselves confirms our
reality. Our internal critical voice is attached to pain. The pain comes
out as negative self-talk, a sharp tongue to others, impatience,
self-sabotage, criticism, and general discontent.

Speaking to yourself with acknowledgment and acceptance is attached to
love and honor. Self-trust and self-confidence increase when you speak
your truth. Many of us are masterful at hiding our feelings. We hide
behind the clouds of guilt, not wanting to hurt another's feelings, not
wanting to rock the boat, or masking our true emotions or needs based on
what we think others expect just to make life "easier." We also hide
behind clouds of shame such as not feeling smart enough, worthy enough,
visible, or important enough to share our ideas and feelings with
others. Often we remain silent rather than risk rejection or
unworthiness. But learning how to speak out and be authentic is critical
to self-love and healing. In fact, I have a saying that "revealing is
healing." It's important to practice finding your voice, sharing your
authenticity, and claiming your worth with integrity, compassion, and
strength to gain new ground in your new life. Speaking your truth is not
to be argumentative, combative, defensive, or insensitive to others. At
times your truth may ruffle feathers or create defensiveness in others,
but those are their feelings to work through, not yours. Speaking your
truth is to be honest, compassionate, and forthright in your expression
while still considering your audience. Not everyone will understand you,
nor should they. Not everyone will agree or accept what you say, and
they don't have to. Trust in yourself enough to accept another's
disapproval. If you become triggered from perceived rejection, pause and
step into your higher self and apply the AAA Method. When you realize
their opinion is not a personal reflection of you, you can then manage
your emotions without trying to manage theirs. You can still stand proud
in your truth without everyone's reactions causing you to default back
to your "story." In time, and with enough practice, these efforts will
be beneficial, but the first step is to become confident and speak from
your heart.

Confidence can be gained by taking persistent micro-steps toward
authenticity. Continue to be honest with yourself to continue your
healing journey. The more you engage with integrity in your own life,
the more your inner self feels worthy of time, attention, and love. Make
sure your heart is open. Meaning, if you are speaking from
defensiveness, resentment, and fear, or are operating in
protection-mode, it is likely that you are not in touch with your
deepest truth. To be fully authentic means to risk being vulnerable
enough to say what you need and how you feel. It's scary. But it is
necessary. Speak from your heart even in large groups or presentations.
Notice if you are monitoring your words for fear of being judged.
Consider your audience, but don't try to become your audience.
Authenticity requires you to express your style, personality, emotions,
and unique thoughts. You don't have to monitor everything you say if you
are being authentic. Authenticity and mindfulness work well together,
but trying to be something you are not, or performing instead of sharing
(unless you're a performer), will not transmit your authenticity to your
audience. Most people, even in one-onone relationships, prefer to know
and see who you really are, not to judge you, but to witness and
experience what you have to offer. It makes them feel safer and able to
share their own authenticity as well. It is freeing to be truly
authentic. This feeling of freedom may initiate fear, but keep in mind
that you are becoming more whole. Being responsible to yourself doesn't
mean you aren't responsible to other people. In fact, the more you show
up for yourself in a healthy way, the more you can show up for others.

Determine Your Wants Create a two-column list. On the left side write
"shoulds" and on the right side write "wants." Put a line down the
middle and write a list under the "shoulds" column such as "I should eat
better." "I should call my cousin

more." "I should put money aside for \_\_\_\_." Below your list of
shoulds, add statements such as, "If I had done \_\_\_\_ better, or at
all." Think about what you're writing. If you had done what, what could
have been different? Question if this is or was your obligation or duty
as a human being. Next to each should, write the vibrational frequency
you associate with it from our scale on page 35. Under the "wants"
column, write another list of the things that you want to do. Some of
them may be repeats from the "should" column. "I want to eat better." "I
want to go to Paris." "I want a new job." Below your list of wants, add
statements such as, "If I \_\_\_\_," and add some possible action steps
of how to turn your wants into possibilities and reality. Note next to
each want the vibrational feeling you have in dreaming about it or
feeling a sense of accomplishment. Which list is longer or fuller? Does
the should list feel heavy, or like too much obligation? Does the want
list make you excited and eager? Reframing your internal dialogue and
acknowledging what your soul needs is an important step to actualizing a
new reality. Of course, we don't always get everything we want. It's
also important to recognize that our obligations can also connect us to
feelings of love. An imbalance is only created when you live out the
expectations of others more than the desires of your heart. It's your
decision to determine how you want to live. The more you identify and
question your truth, the closer you will be to your authentic self and a
happier life. Empowerment is a major step toward healthier relationships
with yourself and others.

Chapter 6 Welcome Self-Love as Medicine That Heals

SELF-LOVE. It sounds so cliché these days. In the commercial market and
social media world, self-love and self-care have become the trend,
forcing every conceivable form of pleasure or escape in order to live
your best life, get your act together, and eliminate pain. But there is
real value in self-love. In healing, it is a step toward empowerment and
confidence, and it leads you to the highest vibration possible. There is
great reward in allowing the time and energy to love yourself, and it
doesn't encourage you to become narcissistic. There's nothing selfish or
vain about genuine self-love. Loving yourself does not take away or
diminish the love you have for others. Never. This belief is part of the
problem. The idea that to love and care for yourself is selfish comes
from an energy belief based in "lack" thinking, which is attached to
shame. People who believe that self-love is selfish or narcissistic have
limited beliefs about worthiness and abundance

and fear capacities to love out of fear they aren't "enough." It's not
entirely their fault. Over time they've learned that being a good person
means you should put others above yourself. These learned beliefs
developed from a place of fear. It's polite to open a door for someone
if you feel inclined to do it. Being polite, considerate, caring, and
loving are all wonderful attributes when these things come from the
heart. However, if our actions come from a sense of guilt or shame, we
cross the line into unhealthy patterns. Impressing someone, fulfilling
expectations of others, or seeking approval of others are all examples
of unhealthy behavior to prove our worthiness. These are self-serving
actions that stem from our emotional imprints. Self-love does not take
away from loving others. It doesn't mean that you are unable to love
others because you're too busy loving yourself. Think about it this way.
If you love sweet potato fries, and also love chocolate cake, does your
love of cake steal from your love of fries? If you love your cousin Suzy
and also love your cousin George, do you have to choose which one you
love more? Does your love for Suzy make your love for George unhealthy?
Can you love the color orange and also love dogs? The point is that it's
possible to love yourself fully and still have plenty of love for
others. In fact, you will have more. Some people may try to shame you
for loving yourself and not always putting others first. The real shame
likely belongs to those doing the shaming. These people typically have
toxic shame or guilt, which they try to transfer onto others to
alleviate their own suffering. When we absorb that shame or guilt
(especially as children), it creates a false belief system that we are
not as valuable as others. This is not true. Self-love is not only
thinking about ourselves, it is also about taking care of our needs in
order to establish good boundaries and healthy interactions with others.
Subconscious self-blame has its roots in the desire

to fix someone else's problem. When we stop putting the problems of
others ahead of our own and use conscious thought, we can acknowledge
the parts of us that are suffering while participating in relationships
with others. It's your personal responsibility to be healthier, happier,
and to experience emotional freedom. It may seem unfair, but you evolve
by owning what is yours in order to embody the lesson that was intended
for you to learn. Thank those who taught you life lessons. Parents,
siblings, mentors, friends, and lovers are your ultimate teachers. Show
gratitude for them as you heal and transcend. Self-abandonment is a
subconscious way to keep our wounds safe and to deny our needs. By
blaming or attempting to control others, we abandon ourselves. We play
small from a limited belief system, put others ahead of ourselves, and
let the inner critic or voice of another stop us from chasing our
dreams. We stay quiet and do not speak our truth. Ultimately, self-love
is learning how to stop this process of self-abandonment. It's common to
abandon our opinions, needs, and dreams. There are always excuses for
why we abandon these things, but the truth is that we abandon them
because of our fear of rejection and low self-worth. It's difficult to
believe that we are "good enough" so we place others in front of us.

Putting Action in the Method To make the AAA Method effective, we must
focus on taking action. Action steps can help support a higher
vibrational frequency that leads to happier and healthier relationships,
but if we do not acknowledge our story and our truth, and accept where
we are now, any action we take will feel like one step forward and two
steps back. "Doing" keeps us busy and sometimes distracted, while
"being" helps us stay in the moment, learning to be present to our
higher self. Consciously being can actually be a very

healthy action step. It may be as subtle as shifting your mindset from
reactive to conscious thought. There are many ways to support your
personal growth. As a general rule, start with the densest energies
first (your physical body) to create a foundation for you to grow. Like
a pyramid, start with your self-care and build a strong and sturdy base
from which to build. The more grounded you are, the higher you can rise.
Physically taking care of your body can help shift emotions, elevate
your mood, clear your mind, and raise the vibration of your energy
field. Eating well does wonders to create harmony with each of these
areas. As you tend to your physical self, it's a tangible reminder to
self how deeply you care. The steadier you feel, physically and
emotionally, the more strength you have to raise your overall vibration
by addressing the root of your issues. Face your fears and rise up to
the challenge of growing. Reassure your inner child that you matter and
that you are committed to feeling better. There's an interesting
similarity among people who have low selfworth. They struggle to take
action. Without connection to one's worth, it's difficult to make
decisions, to risk failing, or find the energy to plan. Selfesteem and
action are related. In terms of energy, both self-esteem and action are
governed by the solar plexus chakra. Low self-worth causes people to
withdraw, wait, and watch. They wait to be chosen, instead of doing the
choosing. This is especially true in relationships.

Choosing versus Being Chosen Waiting to be chosen occurs when you wait
for approval and validation from others that you are enough. You are
placing your worth in someone else's hands while you sit on the
sidelines of your life, hoping for confirmation. Waiting for people to
call, waiting for your talents to be

noticed, waiting to be asked. Think of all the time we have wasted as we
wait to be chosen in many areas of our lives. A Chooser steps forward
from an empowered place as a present and confident person. A Chooser
asks for what they need or what they desire. A person who chooses calls
the shots, puts their hat in the ring, steps up to the plate, and
prepares for their future. They take the greatest action step of all
time by choosing their life. The act of waiting has a lower vibration
than proactively choosing. At times you must wait for a response, but
that's different than living by default while waiting to be chosen.
Think about the second hand on a clock. Imagine it represents the
micro-movements of your life. Being engaged in proactive and conscious
decisions (i.e. being the chooser), you are constantly in motion toward
a healthy and meaningful life. When you wait to be chosen, the second
hand is stalled, suspended in time, and only moves forward when someone
else decides your fate. This places your power in the hands of others,
weakening your position and creating stagnation in your energy, mind,
and life. Choosers have self-confidence and allow feedback from others.
They have trust in themselves to grow from any outcome. You might think,
but I don't have confidence. Be mindful of that negative thinking
because false beliefs are attached to your original emotional imprint.
You can gain selfconfidence each and every day by practicing the AAA
Method. If you still feel hesitant about trusting yourself after this
exercise, go back and rework the Method around authenticity.

AAA Method Acknowledge that you have low self-confidence.
Compassionately accept that your confidence is low.

Act by taking a micro-step to better connect with your truth such as
doing something that you know you're good at, or taking a moment to
focus on being here now and reapplying the practice toward something
else you may need to improve on.

Becoming a Chooser doesn't mean everyone is going to choose you back.
That's okay. The more you step forward with authenticity and express
your desires and needs with integrity, the more you will grow into your
whole self with more confidence. Choosing allows you to move forward on
your terms, taking in each lesson and experience as opportunities to
grow. Years ago when I auditioned in LA and NYC for jobs, I was
constantly feeling rejected. The number of times I didn't get callbacks
was vastly greater than the times I did get a call. I didn't feel good
enough, even though I knew I was competing in large markets, and not
being selected was inevitable. A friend in the industry once said to me,
"You can make it in this town if you have the stomach for rejection." At
the time, I wasn't sure I had that kind of stomach, but her words helped
to shift my perspective. Rejection triggered my lower vibration of false
beliefs from old emotional imprints, and I was using it to keep me
stuck. I was trying to "win" the approval of casting directors. I was
waiting to be chosen. When I began to go to the auditions as an
opportunity to practice and learn, my attitude changed. I could never
lose. I began to place less focus on the outcome, and more on the
opportunity to hone my skills, meet people in the business, strengthen
my vulnerabilities, and share my unique personality. From that point
forward, every audition was fulfilling, and I booked a lot more jobs as
well! Being a Chooser is a form of self-love. It is consciously
embodying your true self while participating in the world. Being a
chooser shifts your vibration quickly from "I'm not sure about myself so
I'll let others decide"

to "This is something I want to do for myself, and I'll feel great about
the attempt, no matter the outcome." Learning to empower yourself is
daily self-care. You don't have to prove yourself, but just be confident
in who you are and what you want. When you know that your needs matter,
you will no longer wait for approval. This is the way out of
self-abandonment.

Meeting Emotional Needs A very wise therapist once told me, "You are not
in relationships to get your emotional needs met. You are in
relationships to get relational needs met." Insert head-blown emoji
here. Children need their parents for support, love, and to teach them
how to process emotional needs. As adults we should be able to meet our
own individual emotional needs, but many of us expect our emotional
needs to be met by our partners. It's not your partner's role to make
you happier or to help you process emotional trauma. It's not their job
to help you follow your dreams or to make you feel confident. It's not
their job to make you feel loved or worthy. This truth is both
liberating and terrifying. My inner child wants to kick and scream,
"NOOO!" But it is this truth that helped me to end my chase of seeking
validation and unconditional love from "unavailable" people. It places
responsibility on where it is meant to be, and breaks my negative
emotional imprint. I now know that is not the job of anyone but me. All
of us are responsible to meet our own emotional needs. Relationships are
started with people as they are, wounds and all. But too often there is
an expectation that the person you are in a relationship with is going
to heal your wounds, save you, fix you, or make you happy. And vice
versa. We validate ourselves. We love ourselves. When we find our own
worth and joy, purpose and satisfaction, we can then enter relationships
clearly, being able to experience life with others. Healthy
relationships allow us to

relate to others and experience life's ups and downs together, sharing
support and presence. The healthy and right partner will reflect back to
you some of your deepest wounds and fears and will hold the space for
you to do your own work while they care about you in the process. Human
contact and connection to others is essential to be healthy. When we are
emotionally healthy, we may have a desire for things, but not a needy
expectation. Need versus desire is an interesting topic. What are other
"needs" that should be expected from others? What do you need that you
cannot give yourself as an adult? What do you want from another person?
What deficits do you bring to the relationship with the expectation that
another person will fulfill? I may want someone to alleviate a burden in
my life, but the bigger issue is why am I not handling the situation in
a healthier way so that it is not a burden in the first place? Everyone
needs healthy relationships and connection to others, but we should not
be dependent on others to make us happy. When stressed, it's common to
want empathy and someone to listen to you or hold you. Your emotional
needs can be met by seeking therapy, online courses, or support groups
with people who can guide and provide support. Relationships are where
relational needs are met---enjoying sunsets, watching movies, talking
about philosophy, politics, or spirituality. Relationships are created
by sharing common interests. You may try new food recipes, enjoy
intimacy and laughter, and share music or other interests. You may also
relate to one's past experiences or family dynamics, offering compassion
and understanding. It's good to talk to your partner about how you feel
and ask for their compassion and wisdom, but it's not healthy to expect
your partner to fix you. To address emotional needs, we must learn how
to self-soothe, process emotions, shift our energies, and empower
ourselves. Social slang calls this "adulting." You may not feel like
"adulting" every day. It's difficult. There are times when our inner
child cries out, "I need a break! I need to color,

play, and rest!" Making time for those feelings is taking care of your
emotional health and asking yourself what needs you have and how you can
best satisfy them.

Your Language of Self-Love We each have a language for how we express
love to ourselves. I created a simple classification of the language of
self-love as follows: Denier: Little to no acceptance or practice of
self-love, denying yourself of loving feelings. Dater: Superficial
pampering, caught in the curious stage but never turning into a deep
relationship (just enough to feel good but not enough to fully commit).
Doter: Daily routines of self-love that reflect acceptance, discipline,
encouragement, and giving yourself the love that you need. Learning to
love yourself can be an uncomfortable experience if you believe that
attention to your wellness is selfish. But like any relationship, we
need to practice growing by acknowledging our weaknesses, fears, and
trepidations as they arise. The relationship with the self takes great
commitment because your accountability partner is you. Consider the
language you use as well as your internal voice when working on
self-love. Do you deny, date, or dote in your practice of selflove? Use
the following prompts to guide your thinking. 1. I easily take
meaningful private time. (Taking time to journal, listen to music, going
out to a restaurant, dinner for one.) 2. I care for myself physically.
(Practicing good nutrition, seeing a physician if ill, regular
maintenance, massage, exercise.)

3. My mental health is a priority. (Prioritizing meditation, slow walks
in the park, using new brain muscles, or personal therapy.) 4. I process
and attend to my emotional needs. (Seeking counsel, support groups,
allowing time to emote, journaling, expressing how I feel, reaching out
to others, committing to self-growth, happiness, and wholeness.) 5. I am
devoted to my spiritual life. (Active in prayer, meditation, moments of
silent reflection, communing with nature, sacred music or rituals.) If
you made excuses or felt guilt or resistance to the above statements,
you may lean toward the self-love language of a denier. Denial means
using excuses such as "I don't have enough time" or "I'm too shy to
spend an evening out alone." If you responded with yes and no answers
and a tinge of guilt that you are not doing all of the above statements,
you are likely a dater in the language of self-love, meaning you are not
sure if you are fond enough to invest. If you enjoyed answering yes to
most of the above, you are likely in a healthy, committed (and doting!)
relationship with yourself. Self-love is an art. There is no right way
to acquire self-love, but when you use the AAA Method, no other feeling
will provide such wholeness. You know the feeling you have when you are
unconditionally caring for someone or something from a pure place in
your heart? The place that doesn't judge, condemn, or criticize? That is
the place where the source of self-love stems. The good news is there is
no shortage of love. It may be hard to access at times, especially when
we are programmed to hold shame and guilt, but it is always available to
those who do the work. As with many things in life, small but consistent
efforts of self-love make the biggest impact. Love doesn't equate to
big-ticket experiences. We don't need a weekly massage or trips to
holistic spas to fully care for

ourselves. We can feel better with small acts of self-love that build
esteem, trust, and happiness. This is an inside job that no spa can
offer. Recently I was able to use the Method to deepen my self-love.
When my boyfriend stays with me, I get that Sunday morning feeling. You
know the feeling of taking it slow and easy, treating yourself to brunch
and inspiring music? I like to make us pancakes, turkey bacon, and fruit
smoothies on those days. One time I realized that I only make pancakes
on those days when he or family members visited. I love pancakes so
much, but I only cooked them for special breakfasts with others. Making
pancakes for myself felt like a lot of effort, so I didn't bother.

AAA Method I acknowledged my limited thinking and self-denial. I
accepted the sadness that I placed more worth on the joy of others than
myself. I acted by making pancakes for myself, which has now become one
of my favorite meals most every day.

Pancake making is a perfect micro-step toward self-love that took little
effort. Enjoying them alone is now a treat, and this act elevates my
vibrational frequency every morning. Developing any skill takes
commitment, repetition, compassion, and ongoing practice. But you have
to take that first micro-step. Self-love helps comfort and soothe your
inner child, and also builds confidence in your adult self that you are
worth the investment. These can be small investments or larger ones, but
they should all be lovingly positive, reassuring, and achievable.
Reflect on how love is expressed to others. Sometimes we give gifts, and
other times we may express love by just listening. Or we may send a note
to commemorate a special date, or share a

song that reminds us of the person. Other times we may feel gratitude
and whisper the simple words, "I love you." When was the last time you
whispered those words to yourself? What a shame that we've been taught
that to love ourselves is wrong and selfish. How is it possible that
we've been asked to be such loving and giving people to everyone but
ourselves? The world could be different if we loved ourselves and did
what's best for our hearts. It's time to stop living for the approval of
others and focus on what feels right to us.

Silencing Your Inner Critic Your inner critic is the voice of judgment
that says you "should." Sometimes this critic is the memory of a
parent's voice, or it may be criticism from siblings or friends. When
you hear the voice of judgment, acknowledge it and take stock of your
life and your experiences in it as the mind would have you do. But know
that you are more than your mind, and the judge you hear does not always
have to overpower your compassionate heart and higher self to create
inner conflict. It's easy to hold unreasonable expectations when we
judge and compare ourselves to others. Depending on our level of shame
or guilt from childhood imprints, we begin to operate based in fear of
judgment linked to our worthiness. We use judgment to prove our worth or
lack thereof. It is not a healthy behavioral system. Many of us have
been taught to ignore, override, or deny the negative thoughts and
messages we feel, but the more we acknowledge and accept these messages,
the more power we have to change their vibration. The healthy way to
quiet the inner critic is to acknowledge and accept it, then apply new
voices and perspectives to act as change agents. These new voices and
perspectives become healing balms for the broken spirit. "I don't know
why . . . " or "I've always been . . . " or "It's just the way I am . .
. " are examples of false truths that are wrapped around old stories,

the false belief systems that were created in our developmental years
during stressful or traumatic times. To rewrite these false belief
systems and find new truths, we must face our reality and empower
ourselves with curious minds, new words, and self-love patterns that
reinforce confidence, selfesteem, and value. Like emotions, if we
acknowledge and accept the thought, we allow the thought to settle. We
become the observer. "I hear you" or "I feel you" are strong
acknowledgments you can tell your inner critic to help dissipate its
power of judgment. This offers an opportunity to soothe the inner
wounds, by being present and addressing upsets or false beliefs. When
your inner critic is at work, think of it as the voice of your wounded
inner child. It's like a tape recorder of the false beliefs and fears
developed (or heard) over the years. If we play the recording without
conscious thought or attention, we will continue to hear the same thing.
Press pause, listen, and accept what you hear, then apply a new script
of your truth. This truth becomes real with continued practice. With
practice, you become masterful. Becoming masterful is more than
"thinking positive" or making affirmations. Positive thinking is useful
to explore higher perspectives, but we need to honor the way we feel and
allow our thoughts and feelings to transform healthily. People often use
positive thinking as an escape from processing the feelings they need to
work through. It's possible to rewire our emotional nature and wounded
selves by applying gentle but firm discipline, including acknowledging
false truths, accepting emotions to discern the source of shame and
guilt, and taking micro-step actions to apply deep compassion for our
humanness. Another way to heal the inner critic is to take inventory and
acknowledge a potential pattern of self-sabotage. What part of you is
keeping you stuck in a lower vibrational frequency attached to your old
imprints? As you identify the critic, you can shift your energy from

judgment to acceptance, and then follow with action. Below are a list of
terms to describe different types of inner critics. Choose those you
most identify with, and note if certain terms define a pattern in your
relationships. Blamer: Are you mad, angry, accusatory, or otherwise
stuck in a loop of looking to blame others for your current mood or
outlook? Critic: Are you critical of your looks, lack of success, your
partner's behavior, or comparing yourself to a friend/colleague?
Defender: Do you feel on edge, defensive, or the need to rationalize
your feelings or behavior to ensure acceptance from others? Wounded
Child: Do you feel unusually uneasy and off-balance emotionally, stuck
in a fear pattern of feeling unsafe, unloved, or unworthy? Are you
easily triggered and act out from a place of pain? Foe: Are you treating
yourself unkindly by not taking care of your emotional needs, not eating
a healthy diet, not taking risks, making poor choices, or denying
yourself compassion? Fixer: Are you focused on helping others in order
to feel a sense of value or worth? Do you make sure others are okay so
that you feel okay? Keep in mind that these terms do not identify you.
They are words and phrases to help reveal your inner critic when it
attempts to stop you from growth. Revealing your inner critic can help
indicate where you need to apply self-love efforts. The pattern that is
attached to your inner critic stems from old emotional imprints that
developed false beliefs about who you are, therefore limiting your
potential. After acknowledging and accepting your patterns, use the
following list to guide you into actions of self-love. Friend: Be kind
to yourself and accept your life and emotions as well as what you have
to offer. Becoming your own friend is the first action step to heal
repetitive patterns.

Forgiver: Open your heart to become loving and offer grace and
forgiveness to yourself and those in your presence. Acknowledging your
own humanity and trying your best allows room for more self-compassion.
Lover: Being present, tender, and compassionate can allow yourself to
feel loved. Do you have a heart full of promise and hope? What goodness
can you wish for yourself today and for those you love? Healer: Taking
ownership of your feelings and negative patterns by applying the AAA
Method will help attend to the imbalances that arise in your body, mind,
or emotions. As you commit to self-growth and have faith in something
greater than yourself, you can follow your intuition and lead with your
heart to healing. Let's be clear about the difference between
discernment and judgment. Judging is the act of choosing good or bad or
right or wrong. It often comes from the inner critic who is either
projecting pain or trying to avoid more pain. The mind attempts to avoid
discomfort by averting attempts to grow, change, or take risks. This is
especially true for risks that could discredit false beliefs that you
are unworthy, when in fact, with new skills you would realize that you
are worthy. Your mind does not want you to suffer, it just doesn't have
the emotional or spiritual intelligence that you have. You are not your
mind. If you rely on your mind to control your behavior, you will indeed
be held back by its limited abilities to override false beliefs. This is
why we work on emotions and energy. You must retrain your mind to know
that you are safe to grow, that new patterns can be healthy, and that
when you feel differently, you will think differently. In this case the
word differently means more than feeling happy, sad, or angry. It means
vibrational differences. Energy is important, and can effect a positive
shift in our mental and emotional bodies. It is all connected. Whereas
judgment is of the mind, discernment is of a higher wisdom. Discernment
uses our senses to get a clearer vision of what is true and real.

Although discernment and judgment seem closely related, discernment is a
healthier choice (a higher vibration) that is connected to conscious
mindfulness, rather than to reactionary beliefs from the limited mind.
Discernment needs our higher minds to see, versus the limited mind to
critique. Discerning (tuning into our feelings instead of reacting with
our minds and egos to old stories) also provides stability for emotional
processing. We have a wonderful opportunity to level up to our divine
nature and heal our limited beliefs. Discernment is a high vibrational
ability, and needs a foundation of self-trust, self-confidence, and
connection to your higher self. As you practice self-love and raising
your vibration in the days to come, act as a detective to discern your
actions, thoughts, and patterns and notice who is showing up in your
life each day. Write about these discernments in your journal each
evening in the third person. First identify the person who showed up
(the Blamer, Critic, Defender, Wounded Child, Foe, or Fixer). Imagine
what this person says to your best friend. List and observe their woes,
their judgments of self and others, who they blame, and why they are
defensive. As you listen to your story through this voice, imagine how
you would counsel them. What do you hear them saying and what do you see
as their pattern or issue? It may look something like this: She is so
hard on herself today. She takes on so much responsibility and doesn't
give herself a break. I see an insecurity that is seemingly uncalled
for, although it must be from a past hurt, likely related to her father
being so hard on her. She's a lovely woman, although it appears that she
doesn't recognize it, because she is scorning the size of her legs.
She's angry at her spouse and criticizing him. Maybe she isn't
appreciating the qualities of herself enough or she has too high
expectations of him or what he doesn't give her. No one is confirming
her insecurities at the moment, so I assume this

judgment is coming from an old trigger that makes her think she isn't
good enough. I guess it is related to the comments her friend's mother
made that she "couldn't see her knees" the day she wore shorts in middle
school. Notice how you spoke to yourself about who you are. If you have
a hard time remembering or catching the internal dialogue, set a
reminder on your computer or phone that says "What did you just say?" to
prompt a mindfulness to your inner voice. Next, apply the AAA Method in
your journal writing using the above guide, friend, forgiver, lover, and
healer. Writing again in the third person, as if you were talking to a
friend, see if you can help soothe your inner critic by offering
presence (friendships), forgiveness (self-compassion), love
(encouragement and validation), and healing (acknowledgement,
acceptance, and action). It may look something like this: I see you
struggling with insecurity today and being hard on yourself. I know it
must be hard to juggle so much, there's a lot of stress to manage. I'm
here for you and love you so much. I see your legs and they are healthy
and strong. Many would love to walk in your shoes. Be gentle with
yourself and take the time you need to process those deep hurts. It's
hard to remember sometimes, but your friend's mother had her own
insecurities and insensitivities. Her comment really had nothing to do
with you. Part of healing is recognizing other's limitations and not
taking things so personally, but looking at what can be done internally.
You are such a sweet and beautiful person, lovable too! Why don't you
take some time doing something kind and healthy like a nice walk and
deep breathing? Maybe listen to that favorite band of yours too. That
always puts a smile on your face and a lightness in your step!

Finding Compassion Compassion and forgiveness are two basic emotions
that can be difficult to give to ourselves if we have experienced years
of neglect and pain. Tapping into these energies requires a committed
persistence. When you may not feel forgiving, apply the presence of
self-love. Even when you feel confused about what compassion feels like,
take actions to show yourself that you care. Compassion is care in
action. It's an emotion that is full of awareness and acceptance,
blended with behaviors that relay information of love. Think of a
helpless young pup, or a child who is down and out. When you feel
compassion for someone, the natural inclination is to offer help, even
if that's offering a hug, a cup of tea, a listening ear, or trying to
cheer someone up. We sympathize and we have that tug in our hearts that
feels deeply for a person in need. When it's you that's hurting, can you
feel deeply for yourself, or your inner child? Can you hold the space
for the pain, be present, and extend loving kindness? Self-care is what
we must offer ourselves. If you feel undeserving, it's likely that you
are stuck in old energetic imprints of shame, guilt, or fear. The
inability to forgive is a signal to apply the AAA Method. Practice this
Method until you feel neutral, and then take micro-steps toward
self-love. This will help you feel worthy, and that you can trust
yourself in the face of difficult situations or triggers. Displaying
gratitude is one of the easiest ways to tap into forgiveness and
compassion. It's difficult to remain in fear, anger, or shame when you
connect with things for which you are grateful.

"Gratitude makes sense of our past, brings peace for today, and creates
a vision for tomorrow." ---Melody Beattie, author of Codependent No More

Take a quick break to become present. List three to four things you feel
grateful for today. Don't itemize the things you "should" feel grateful
for. Practice feeling grateful for things that bring you relief, joy,
satisfaction, hope, or whatever opens your heart. Lists are effective
reminders when you feel stuck. They're an easy way to quickly increase
your energy vibration.

Sending Love There doesn't ever seem to be enough time to do what we
want and need to accomplish. The reality is that progress toward
self-love and healing may not happen quickly. Take time and challenge
yourself with the task below. Get a piece of paper and an envelope. If
you have stationery, that's even better. At the top of the paper, write
your name, followed by a comma. I want you to write a love letter to
yourself. The letter should speak to the self-sabotage, self-harm,
criticisms, and anguish you have experienced. Using the tools in this
book, be reminded that hope is possible. Practice the AAA Method.
Reinforce your truths and strengths. Most importantly, offer as much
compassion and forgiveness for yourself as possible, and state it in
words. Write how sorry you feel for ignoring your needs. How grateful
you are to have a new opportunity for forgiveness and self-love. Relate
your love for your innocent inner child. Convey your anguish for the
negative words and behaviors you experience in order to protect
yourself, then practice forgiveness. Open your heart and make amends to
someone you truly love. When you complete this letter of love,
forgiveness, and understanding, place the letter in the envelope and
mail it to yourself. Use a stamp and drop it at the post office. You are
worth the time and effort!

Honoring Your Worth There are many ways to interpret the world that
could confirm negative thoughts stemming from emotional imprints such as
"I am not worth

anyone's time, money, friendship, or love." Seeking that confirmation
does not make it true, it serves to activate the core wounds from
traumatic childhood experiences. As you continue on the path of healing,
it is up to you to stop this false belief cycle based on other people's
words, wounds, and shortcomings. Understanding your worth starts with
acknowledging the truth of who you are, accepting your previous story
(who you believed yourself to be in relation to others or who others
believe you should be), and taking action to love yourself. Loving
yourself builds self-confidence, self-worth, trust, balance, and inner
peace. It is a beautiful thing. Take notice when the voice of negative
self-talk, criticism, or shame begins. The voice may be small or large
but is part of your self-love language. It wants to keep you attached to
the fear of false truths that you are not enough. Also notice when your
inner voice says, "yeah, but . . ." Try to answer these questions with
love and appreciation without any excuses or judgment. Write the answers
in your journal. What do you value most about your body? (Example: I
love and appreciate the way my body heals itself. Sometimes when I am
sick or have a cut on my skin, I'm amazed at how my body performs and
heals itself. It makes me want to care for my body even more.) What do
you value most about your personality or character? (Example: I love
that I am flexible, diverse, and have an adventurous spirit. When I am
in the flow of life and trusting myself I am an outgoing person who
loves to explore and enjoy the company of other people. I love to help
people and that feels wonderful.) What do you value most about your
mind?

(Example: I value that my mind wants to keep learning. I love to observe
people, and experience new things. The fact that I can continue to take
in information and process it amazes me!) What do you value most about
your emotions? (Example: I am a very sensitive and emotional person. I
value the fact that I can feel my feelings, and I have access to a wide
range of emotions. I appreciate that I cry easily when I feel sad or
afraid and also have the emotional resources to understand the
difference between my emotions.) The more we acknowledge, accept, and
openly share about the qualities that make us the amazing people we are,
the more we shift the inner voice of the critic to a voice that speaks
praise, confidence, and love to our inner child. It is a powerful way to
shift energetic imprints. The feelings that come with appreciation,
compassion, acceptance, and grace alert your inner self that you are
beautiful, unique, and special. You are so gifted and capable, worthy
and valuable. Have you ever stopped to think how blessed you are to have
your body, the tiny hairs, the functioning lungs, the magical way your
organs function and keep you alive? You are truly a miracle! How can you
be a miracle and not be worthy? It's just not possible.

Buying-Power Exercise We've now come to one of my favorite self-love
exercises. This exercise is about honoring your worth. Think of one of
your favorite people. This should be a person you like to shower with
affection, love, gifts, and goodness. (You aren't allowed to change the
person when you read the exercise!) What would you gift them for their
birthday or holiday? How do you show your love and bring joy to their
life? Do you go out of your way to get an item or create a special
experience? Do you save up money to splurge on

their special day? Do you take time off to help them celebrate an
important life event? As soon as possible, purchase something of similar
cost to what you would gift your loved one or spend the same energy to
create an experience for them, but do this for yourself. No excuses. You
may feel your insides recoil. You're thinking of all the reasons why you
"shouldn't" or why you "can't." This exercise helps to wrestle with the
belief that you don't matter as much. That you don't need something.
That you aren't worth the expense of a gift that isn't necessary. As
mentioned earlier in this book, it's not necessary to spend money to
experience self-love. Money is often a superficial expression. But this
is a practice to help you look into the feelings you have about
yourself. Do you overspend on yourself but are stingy with others? Do
you only spend on others and not yourself? What comes to mind when given
the direction to create an experience that honors yourself, no matter
the effort, time, or cost? Take a moment to delve into any lingering
false beliefs that say you are not as valuable as others or that you
don't deserve joy. You are worth as much time, energy, and love as any
other being on earth.

Chapter 7 Create Healthy Boundaries

THERE are many ways to encourage self-growth and confidence. One of the
most impactful ways is to establish and implement healthy boundaries
within relationships. If you struggle to feel inner strength and/or
trust in yourself and others, creating boundaries will give you the
supportive structure to move forward. Your needs matter just as much as
another's, and creating boundaries is a personal step toward healing.
Boundaries can be difficult to establish and maintain if you have
negative belief patterns stemming from former wounds and emotional
imprints. Some may fear that implementing boundaries would be hurtful
and ultimately lead to rejection. Saying no can bring up insecurities
that make us think we do not have a place of worth to have a voice. Or
we fear that defining our needs would cause strife within the family or
intimate relationships. It's important to know that these fears may
arise when considering boundaries, but applying the AAA Method will help
move you past them.

It's also important to understand the difference between unhealthy and
healthy boundaries. Unhealthy boundaries serve as protective walls
created out of the need to protect, defend, or keep others at bay.
Healthy boundaries serve to establish deeper intimacy, trust, and a
sense of personal safety, allowing better relationships with others.

The Walls We Build Let's look at the emotional and energetic walls we
build and how they differ from healthy boundaries. Emotional walls are
thoughts or energy put forth to help avoid future pain from others.
These walls are defense mechanisms to provide a sense of "safety," but
ultimately, they create separation from our authentic selves, and keep
us in a self-destructive mindset. The emotional walls we build are often
subconscious limits on our feelings or experiences in an effort to avoid
more hurt. Some people make conscious decisions to limit experiences,
but this behavior limits joy rather than keeping negative feelings out.
Have you ever had any of these thoughts? • •

"That's the last time I'll ever do that." "I need to protect my heart."

• •

"I'll never go through that kind of pain again." "Men/women can't be
trusted."

•

"I gave it all I had and it didn't work, so I'm not trying again."

These types of reactions are based in fear. To avoid past hurt or
rejection, we build mental walls to limit pain by blocking opportunities
and love. Most people don't desire to block love or good feelings, but
that's what happens when we control experiences to limit pain. Shifting
our mindset from avoidance to allowance will heal our hearts and create
healthier relationships. Allowance doesn't mean allowing others to take
advantage of us. Nor does it mean we allow negative patterns or

people who vibrate at a low level to pull us down to our previous
emotional imprints. Allowance is being open to full experiences in your
life. As you learn healthy boundaries and how to trust in yourself, it
will become easier to handle experiences in new and more positive ways.

Transcending the Walls in Your Heart Some people believe that in order
to heal we must dismantle the emotional walls by tearing them down one
experience at a time to replace every personal thought, feeling, or
memory. That is an exhausting and impractical process. If too much time
is spent analyzing how the walls were built, we will lack the energy
needed to implement healthier structures. Life and healing are not
linear events. The effort to figure out actions and emotions from the
past results in looking back at others, rather than looking forward
within. In remodeling a kitchen, we remove each tile, trash it, and put
in a new one. But as emotional beings, a multidimensional approach is
more effective in remodeling our lives. With the higher intelligence of
our consciousness and emotional brains, we are capable of holding space
for the past as well as the now, all while creating a dynamic future.
When fear, pain, or lower vibrational energy is present due to unhealthy
past experiences, the heart can be difficult to open, fearing the risk
of vulnerability. Yet we are emotionally intelligent beings, so we crave
and need love and connection even when we can't acknowledge that need.
It's tempting to control the flow and exchange of love in an attempt to
monitor potential threats. For example, some people become excellent
"givers," always outpouring help, energy, love, and gifts. Being a
giving person is a beautiful quality, but over-giving is a defense
mechanism and a distraction from personal needs. The heart becomes a
one-way street, allowing the giver to experience part of the love
exchange, but blocks love from being accepted within to avoid potential
pain. If you give but don't

receive, you may have created walls to prevent being hurt in your
relationships. Others operate differently, opening their heart to
receive love, but closing their heart to give love. This type of
behavior is often diagnosed as narcissistic, but in reality it is
behavior by those hiding behind a fear of unworthiness. True narcissists
may have a wound in deep shame, which manifests as ego-based but is
actually insecurity. Perhaps those with insecurities were shut down or
denied by a parent, or made to feel that what they offered wasn't good
enough. This results in an emotional imprint manifested as behavioral
limitations projected by the ego. If only parts of our hearts are open,
we limit the fullness of love and create a roller-coaster addiction
pattern, and often a back-and-forth power exchange in relationships.
This is one way to self-destruct in an emotional way that can lead to
the experience of love feeling heavy, controlled, and manipulated. For
example, you may have experienced a difficult breakup or loss. The pain
was excruciating and in the process of grief, you decided
(subconsciously or consciously) to not go through a similar experience
again. The pain was too big and you decided not to risk the heartbreak
again. So you closed down your heart and limited when or if you would
love again, instead of being open to see what new love experience may
come in the future. In this example, we stop co-creating our life from
an empowered place of trust and intuition, and limit most possibilities
from approaching us. This could also lead to attracting others who
operate on a similar vibrational level. Two people with walls in place
will stress their relationship within the tension of those walls. It's
tempting to shut down or turn off the part of us that was hurt, but love
cannot operate healthily this way. A closed heart limits intimacy,
trust, vulnerability, and authenticity. We are always on guard. If we
pick and choose the part of our heart and experiences to keep, we must
turn away the

rest. This causes a constant state of internal conflict, damaging our
psyche, emotional bodies, relationships, and energy field. In a state of
conflict, we cannot raise our vibration.

Fear I was dating this person and we were having a very difficult time.
I couldn't understand what the issues were, so I talked with my
therapist. She said, "Remember, when a person fully opens their heart,
it is not all rainbows and sunshine that come out. The pain, unresolved
grief, and fear come out too." With her counsel I gained insight into
the heart of the other person, but it also made sense of my own fears as
I walked toward another relationship that could potentially hurt me. I
felt tinges of love, excitement, and hope, but I also felt threatened by
pain and grief from my past. Because these past feelings can be
overwhelming, it's important to slowly open our hearts, and boundaries
can be helpful. Take small steps to open your heart to see more of the
world, or dip your toe into a new relationship, while making sure you
always feel safe. All of this requires that we not become a victim to
our previous pain, but honor it by learning from it. It means paying
attention to the process. Admittedly, I have rushed into things and not
honored the process at times. The repercussions of rushing can be
brutal. Love, just like healing, is a process. Some people meet and fall
in love in ten minutes, believing they've found their soul mate. If
that's true, they probably learned how to set healthy boundaries.
Another possible scenario is that they found someone who vibrated on the
same level of emotional imprints and dove into the "perfect match." As
you begin to observe yourself from a new and different perspective with
a higher frequency, you will feel safe to test new experiences and take
a chance in trusting your heart. Issues of building emotional walls
apply to more than intimate relationships. Walls are created with our
colleagues, neighbors, friends, and

families. It's how we learn to interact with the world out of fear. The
goal is to identify these walls and be honest and courageous enough to
rise above them to instill healthy boundaries.

Transcendence Transcendence is to rise above. To best use your energy
and efforts (and create new emotional imprints), practice going beyond
the mentality that you can change your past or other people, and direct
your energy higher. Transcendence is a stepladder to take you beyond the
pain and fear, and closer to your higher self. As you transcend, you
will experience an immediate positive shift in vibration as you focus on
possibility, hope, and growth. Transcendence is the way to awaken a
higher perspective. Transcendence embodies the spirit of acceptance and
compassion while helping you rise like a phoenix from the ashes. No
longer will you deny your past, but use your energy to create the
future. The story that held you back can be integrated into your present
being, creating fullness and experience without triggering you and
dragging you down. Allow your heart to open. Allow the exchange of love
to flow openly both ways as a receiver and a giver. Be confident that
love is a medicine to heal as it releases harmful fears. With healthy
and strong boundaries, you can rise above and operate safely in your
heart space, body, and mind.

Healthy Boundaries Establishing emotional boundaries is important to
achieving good mental health. Boundaries are crucial for healthy
intimate relationships, but also very important for family, friends, and
work relationships. Additionally, healthy boundaries can expand the
possibilities of intimacy. Emotional health and growth require clear
boundaries. The fear of declaring boundaries is that by creating
self-care measures it will lead to rejection or aloneness. These fears
stem from our emotional imprints,

triggering a low vibration. Healthy boundaries expand the possibilities
of intimacy and trust in all relationships and offer more emotional
availability with your partner. It's helpful to think of healthy
boundaries as the opposite of emotional walls. We do not create them to
limit our experience or feelings, but to expand the possibility of
safely feeling, living authentically, and being intimate. Personally,
healthy boundaries have been hard for me to maintain in the past, and
may be hard for you too. I continue to practice, and that's all I'm
asking of you. It's easy as an authority to tell people how things are
done, but the part of me that is eager to help is equally eager to put
the work in myself. Regardless of where you fall on building boundaries,
know that you are not alone. Boundaries are hard to enforce, but they
can make the difference between a toxic relationship and a healthy one.
Why are boundaries hard to enforce? Some people with certain emotional
imprints fear their boundaries will hurt the feelings of others. They
fear rejection if they assert what they want and need. The fear is
similar to being left alone on an island, with a fortress barrier that
no one can penetrate because they are "too much" or "intolerable."
Fortunately, this is not true. Some people use boundaries as an
opportunity to assert authority, control others, or get revenge. These
reasons stem from an addiction to pain and cannot sustain healthy
boundaries. Seeking authority, control, or revenge is tied to a feeling
of pain. Healthy boundaries provide guidance on how to operate, create
safety, and show ourselves respect. They are very effective tools for
clear communication and they offer a deep sense of trust. This is true
for us personally, as well as for other people. Within the family,
healthy boundaries can be challenging, especially if family members act
as victims or pile on guilt. As you grow up and become a responsible
adult, family members may try to "make you feel" responsible for their
happiness and well-being, or to manage their emotional needs. Do

not try to control or fix the lives of others. And do not expect others
to fix your life. That's why boundaries are helpful. Putting boundaries
in place will help you break up with blame and take ownership of your
life. No longer a victim, martyr, or blamer, boundaries help to define
your time, ownership, and space. You may think, But I'm my mom's best
friend and if I spend too much time involved in my life, she'll be
lonely and upset. I want to find my friend a better job so she stops
complaining about money and we can go on vacations together. I need to
help my stepdaughter care for her kids because I have more experience
and I can see she's struggling. My boyfriend tells me what to wear and
although it makes me uncomfortable, I don't want him to feel insecure or
jealous when we're out. Mom needs her own friends and happiness, and you
need to live your own life without guilt or shame. Your friend is
responsible for finding her own job and making the money she feels she
deserves, wants, or needs. It's her choice to prioritize a vacation.
Your stepdaughter needs to practice being a mom and only asking for help
and support when she needs it. You need to decide what clothes make you
feel comfortable and respectable, and let your boyfriend work through
his insecurities and improve his self-esteem. He should not ask you to
protect his fears. It is hard to watch a parent or sibling suffer. If
others ask for your help and you can assist them without jeopardizing
your own life or breaking your boundaries, helping is a gift. But it
isn't your responsibility to take care of the emotional well-being of
others, or the financial cares of those who are capable. It's not your
job to make your mom happy, or your father less lonely. You cannot
change their feelings. You can only give love and understanding. There
are times you may want to spend more time with your father, or take your
sister's children for the weekend, or feel compassion for your
boyfriend. There's nothing wrong with that, but make sure you are doing

these things because you want to, not because you feel obligated or fear
someone will leave you if you decline. Creating healthy boundaries ahead
of time will help you determine the right course of action for you.
Children also need boundaries, discipline, and support to learn and to
grow. They actually crave structure to help them understand
expectations, privacy, and respect of social norms. Children with
healthy boundaries learn what is right and wrong and how to function
within appropriate behaviors. They know that stepping outside of those
boundaries results in repercussions. Over time, they understand
tolerance, trust, responsibility, and respect. They also know how to
interact with their parents and siblings in an intimate way. The same is
true for adults. Firm boundaries help bring clarity to the needs that
best serve your highest good. Start by asking for what you need,
speaking your truth, and not relying on others to take care of your
emotional needs. With this understanding, others will find it easier to
relate to you. If you feel extra stress or fear during a chaotic time in
life, try to enforce more boundaries, including alone time such as
carving out time to take online courses or meditate. To set a new
boundary, alert your mate that you need more time or space to take care
of yourself. Not taking care of yourself and turning on Netflix will
avoid your needs, playing into the addiction of self-sabotage. The
structure of healthy boundaries helps us to show up, be fully present,
and develop true intimacy with ourselves. We don't cling or feel needy
when we're fulfilling our own inner needs with self-care and strong
boundaries in place. Healthy boundaries not only protect your needs,
they also place value on your worth and integrity. Healthy boundaries
put a kibosh on unhealthy attachments, dysfunctional partnerships,
abusive family members, or codependent friends. Wouldn't it be amazing
to be free of unhealthy interactions and

relationships? You can create that world if you choose. When we are
stuck in unhealthy patterns and dependencies it can seem impossible to
break free, but it is possible using the AAA Method. Acknowledgment,
acceptance, and action with an added dose of courage and commitment can
help you break the cycle. Boundaries are more than just saying no,
although that can be a part of your boundary language if needed. It's
also about saying yes to what you do need, and learning to function
within the space of clear expectations. It may be true that the person
you have certain expectations from cannot satisfy your needs. In this
case, it is time to reevaluate if this is a healthy expectation from a
partner, or if you can accept them for who they are. If you fear
boundaries, there may be more work to do with your inner child. Perhaps
he/she still feels afraid of being left, unprotected, unworthy, or
invalidated. Remind your inner child that he/she is strong, capable, and
healthy, and that you don't need validation or approval from anyone
other than your adult self. We all need healthy love, but it truly
starts inside of us. Boundaries are a wonderful self-love tool. It's
important that you review your boundaries as you continue to heal to be
sure they remain in alignment with your higher self. What do boundaries
look like? Here are a few examples: • •

No work texts after 6:00 pm. Taking one day of personal space away from
your partner each month.

•

No calls from family before noon or after 8:00 pm (unless an emergency).

•

Not to be spoken to in a diminishing way by your boss.

•

A thirty-minute speaking break after an argument.

•

One month of dating before intimacy.

•

A special savings account for future night classes that only you can
access.

•

No conversations about politics or news at dinner.

•

Being able to say "I'm sorry, I'm not able to help you with that" when
your brother asks for regular nonpaid childcare.

•

Saying yes to something you desire.

Once you have healthy boundaries in place you can more easily accept
people for who they are, free from trying to be someone you are not in
order to accommodate others. Should they need your support, let them ask
and then determine what feels right to you. This is easier when the
people you are in relationships with also have healthy boundaries and
self-care practices. If not, perhaps you can be a healthy example for
them. The most difficult part about implementing boundaries is enforcing
them. You are the only gatekeeper, so it's up to you to follow through
on what you need. If someone crosses the boundary and there are no
repercussions, you don't have a boundary, you have a suggestion. If fear
keeps you from saying or doing something to protect your boundary, you
need to reframe how shame, guilt, fear, and disappointment are
controlling your life. If your boundary is crossed, make a plan to
follow through with action. This may include a conversation (speaking
your truth), other communication (an email, setting a meeting with a
counselor), taking space, and/or deciding when and how to resolve the
matter that is fair to both parties. You can still have forgiveness,
compassion, and love while maintaining boundaries. They simply offer
healthy ways to secure a safe space in your life, and in your future. If
the boundary is to be respected, be consistent and follow through with
legitimate self-care steps that honor those boundaries every day,
particularly during times of stress, crises, or global pandemics.

When you confidently ask for what you need, speak your truth, and do not
rely on others to take care of your emotional needs, it's possible to
gain the bandwidth to relate in a healthier way because you feel safe to
fully be present. From a safe place, learn to trust and be vulnerable
and intimate with others. There is no need to be clingy or feel needy,
because you are fulfilling your inner needs. There is no fear of abuse
because guidelines (boundaries) are in place to alert you before abuse
can start, or continue. When others are allowed to treat us poorly, do
not blame them because you are the one allowing it. The guilt-trips, the
shaming, or the lies---none of that is about you, it's about them, but
you've taken it on as a means to enforce your own lower vibrational
pattern. Without clear boundaries, you give poor treatment permission to
become a part of your life. Always check to see if you are operating
from a place of guilt, shame, codependency, or false beliefs that you
are not worthy when inside an unhealthy relationship. Abusive patterns
can be stopped. You cannot control the actions of others, for that is
not your responsibility. But you can control your own. We abandon
ourselves when others are allowed to cross our boundaries or when we
don't honor our personal boundaries. These actions take us back to the
addiction to pain we feel when we think we don't matter. When your needs
are abandoned, your inner child gets triggered and you begin to operate
from a lower vibrational imprint. What boundaries do you need? In your
journal, practice writing boundaries for specific people and situations.
For example, you may title one page "work." What boundaries do you need
with your boss or colleagues? Some examples may be: •

Allow text exchanges between 8:00 am--6:00 pm only.

• •

Respond to emails up until 7:00 pm only. Log off of work devices at 8:00
pm.

•

Do not work through lunch breaks.

•

Ask to be spoken to in a respectful way.

Write your boundaries and remember to focus only on what you need. Don't
fixate on what you don't need, as that can stir up defenses. Include how
you will handle situations if your boundaries are broken. Make a
boundary page for each person or situation in which you may need to
implement safe structure. One of my favorite quotes is from Brené Brown,
"Being clear is being kind." When we don't speak with clear intention,
authenticity, feelings, or thoughts, we are not giving the other person
the opportunity to care for us fully or respect our boundaries. And
that's not fair or kind to either party. We cannot expect others to know
what we need or who we are unless we clearly tell them. When we speak
with clarity, even when it's difficult, we honor the other person, and
we respect their emotional intelligence and capability. Being clear
offers opportunities to give and receive care, own our worth, and
acknowledge the worth of others. It is a kind and clean way to relate.
If we don't know who we are, what we want or need, or how to emotionally
care for ourselves, being clear is impossible. It's vitally important to
work through the steps of discovering who you are versus who you thought
you were in relation to others (See Chapters 2 and 3 on pages 25 and
53). Understanding yourself is the foundation for self-care. When you
are clear about how you feel, who you are, and learn to take emotional
care of yourself, you will be happier, stronger, and living a life you
truly love.

Transcending-the-Walls Meditation The following mindfulness meditation
is a five-minute practice intended to help you observe your inner world.
With intention, this practice can be very profound. This is an excellent
time to practice the AAA Method.

Close your eyes and begin to focus on your breath. Follow your breath
into your body, allowing your muscles to relax. Your breathing is
effortless. Place full intention on your inhalation and imagine your
breath traveling down into your belly and becoming one with your
rhythmic flow. Begin sensing your internal organs, tapping into your
inner landscape, emotions, muscles, bones, and circulation. If you feel
anxious, small, sad, or disempowered, sit with that and breathe
acceptance into your heart until it softens. This can be the action step
toward healing, sitting and breathing, being the observer of your
experience. With your inner voice, ask yourself where you have
constructed emotional walls or blocks in your heart or physical body.
Listen closely for any messages, resistance, anger, tears, or
revelations. You may also ask yourself, what purpose do these walls
serve? Imagine with each inhale that your breath elevates you to a
higher place. You become lighter, freer, and you see your world with a
new perspective. Each inhale allows you to make space for all of your
history and difficulty, while continuing to rise stronger, more capable
and accepting. Put a smile on your face while you breathe. Feel your
body integrate your past experiences while also expanding to create new
life. When you are ready, use your exhales to begin grounding yourself
in the current moment. Before coming out of meditation, make sure you
feel safe and grounded. Take your time and use your senses to notice the
smells and feelings in your current room. When you are ready, gently
open your eyes. Meditation can be challenging, but the beauty of
meditation is that there is no right or wrong. It's about being in the
moment of the experience. Just doing it is doing it right! These aren't
easy things to move through, so be proud of your efforts.

Chapter 8 Free Emotions and Find Stability

IT'S important to always remember that your mind is strong, but it's
also important to know that your heart is stronger. The power is within
you to change your life. By learning about your emotions and doing the
work to heal, you are making conscious and brave efforts toward
self-love to meet the highest vibration of your soul. You are evolving
and changing with every breath you take. With every thought and every
recognized emotion, you are rising up into your highest alignment. You
are love. One of the greatest lessons in life is to learn that pain and
love are coexisting emotions. This is the human condition. With
practice, we can come to acknowledge and respect the relationship
between love and pain, and learn that this is the most fragile yet
strongest force of nature. Every day, think about how love in action is
the ultimate compassion. Reading books may not change your life, but the
commitment to learn reinforces a new self-love language that will
improve your vibration and

create a new imprint, filled with beliefs that are yours, and emotions
that are healthier. Learning new information can open you to new
possibilities. Be proud of your efforts and commitment. You are giving a
gift to yourself and to the world. Personal growth can become stymied
when people become overwhelmed. When we get overwhelmed, it's difficult
to take action. It's easy to focus on the big picture of your life and
forget what is available right now. Healing personal trauma or deeply
ingrained belief patterns requires you to acknowledge and accept your
past, while remaining present in the now with intention to create
change. Utilizing the AAA Method will help you refocus and build a
sustainable foundation, while also attending to the pain of past
experiences. When feeling overwhelmed in a situation, pause and remove
yourself from the situation as gently as possible, whether excusing
yourself to the restroom or saying "I need a moment." Take a breath, and
while thinking of the particular problem or relationship in your life,
apply the AAA Method.

AAA Method Acknowledge the feeling, behavior, or dynamic in the
relationship and recognize if this is a recurring pattern, a trigger for
your inner child, or an addiction to emotional imprints. Accept the
feeling and situation so that you can own your part. Act by taking
micro-steps toward a new vibrational experience that is sustainable.

Some people think that our thoughts are stronger than our emotions, but
it is really the other way around. The search for mental clarity, mental
stability, acuity, and peace is a driving force behind quests for
healing. A common misperception is if we fix our minds, we make
ourselves right. Using knowledge and analyzing our processes is fine,
but don't ignore

addictions to emotional responses and how they will set us up for
repeated patterns. There are generally two types of people: thinker
types who analyze and rationalize everything in their lives, and
emotional types who experience the world by their feelings, throwing
lists out the window. Balance is important regardless of your type. We
are naturally inclined to process emotions, but the impact of negative
emotional wounds compels many of us to function from our minds. If you
are a more rational, logical person by nature, it is helpful to learn
skills to access your emotions. It's not always what you think, but what
you feel. In your daily language, notice the words you use to describe
your experience. Do you use more "I think" or "I feel" statements?
People who function with their mind too often get caught up with the
whirlwind of information and speed of communication transmission, so
they spend most of their time trying to understand and rationalize with
worry, overthinking, or judgment. They disregard other types of
intelligence such as their heart, intuition, or energy to make
decisions. Everyone has access to emotion, but many ignore emotional
intelligence and rely on their minds to make sense of the world. As
every thought has a feeling attached to it, it makes sense to place our
efforts toward exploring the feeling of our experiences, rather than
attempting to only make rational sense of it. This action puts us in
touch with our subtle senses such as energy and intuition, and helps us
gain a greater awareness of our vibrational shifts in environments and
relationships. Many intelligent people have not developed the emotional
intelligence or sensitivity to live from their higher vibrational self.
Mental intelligence does not equate to emotional health. Nor does it
enhance our peace of mind, intuition, or individual perspectives. The
path to spiritual awakening and self-realization doesn't happen by
becoming smarter or more analytical. This evolution takes a different
kind of wisdom.

One of my former clients is a successful brain surgeon with a reputation
of saving people's lives. He is keenly aware of how the brain functions
and the protocol to help patients through dire emergencies. His career
was thriving, but personally he was miserable. He struggled his entire
life with a deep sense of shame, which hindered his ability to enjoy
healthy relationships. He used money to solve problems, and he ignored
issues with potential partners because he ignored his emotional wounds
and the need to heal them. It is possible to use various energy patterns
in various situations. At work a person may vibrate at a higher level
than in their personal lives or vice versa. This is due to the type of
wounding and severity of our wounds. One may connect and excel in the
workplace if they are confident and talented at their craft, allowing
the mind and ego to accomplish the task at hand. In relationships, they
may carry out an emotional imprint that says they are unlovable or
unworthy. Without achieving personal growth, they are stuck in a lower
vibrational pattern that causes stress, anxiety, and unhappiness. Fear
of feeling hinders access to emotional intelligence. It may feel safer
to think our way through our lives rather than feeling our way through,
but this behavior only feeds the fear of feeling. It is scary to look at
the fear of pain or loss in the face. The lack of acknowledgment and
acceptance of a loss disconnects us from our main power source---love.
Instead, we experience fragmented mental and emotional lives. It's not
possible to force truths or untruths without causing psychological
damage. Attempting to make an experience untrue in your emotional body
may cause long-term mental, emotional, or physical disease. Heartbreak
has stimulated physical ailments and addictions, and lingering grief or
anger can last a lifetime, sometimes shortening one's life. Our minds
try to protect us from feeling pain, so it diverts pain to anxiety,
denial, magical thinking,

or other avenues of mental escape and dissociation. We use our minds as
a first line of defense. It's not possible to control the amount of pain
or suffering we will experience in our lifetime, but processing and
managing how we intake experiences can lead to freedom and long-term
stability. By coming to full acknowledgment and acceptance, you can
allow your mind to be an observer without dominating your action. Take
micro-steps to increase selfconfidence so that you can be the
facilitator in processing your emotions. Some time ago, my inner critic
was shaming me about sleeping late. I felt like a lazy child and was
thankful that I was living alone so no one could witness my faults. I
reverted to a mental defense mode and selfsabotage as I created
rationalizations and excuses for my behavior. But I continued to feel
like a failure. I tried to find self-compassion, but it didn't work
because I was dealing with both a mental false belief (there's only a
certain time to wake up that is acceptable for adults) and an emotional
belief (I am unworthy, I feel like a fraud). I felt compelled to explain
to my parents, to clients, and to God why I was sleeping later and not
beginning my workday until noon. Even as I write now, I feel the need to
explain the insomnia caused by perimenopause, or how I have to catch my
cat late at night, or my blue-light addiction due to writing this book,
or the adrenal overload from moving to a new town, alone, during a
pandemic. (But, I won't.)

AAA Method I acknowledged the reasons I've been sleeping late. I fully
accepted my behavior, and assured my inner child that I don't think any
less of her for trying to get the rest she needs. I told myself that
there's no shame in keeping different hours than other people, and I
reminded myself how fortunate it is to be able to create my own
schedule.

I developed an action plan of micro-steps to encourage better sleep
hygiene: more water each day, turning off the computer before 9:00 pm,
daily exercise, and herbal support for hormones.

Eventually, I stopped and thought, Hold-up, Leah, you are feeling
triggered and small. Utilize the AAA Method. With the knowledge learned
from the Method, I moved from my self-deprecating state and into the
present state of an adult with tools to help me improve. I no longer
felt shame. I was empowered, and I looked forward to retiring each night
as early as possible, even if just a few minutes earlier than before.
Perhaps you can relate to this story. This process may seem exhaustive,
but all of those thoughts happened within seconds. It's awareness and
commitment that can bring us to the moment when our vibration quickly
shifts from shame to self-confidence. Feeling like a child, I was
resonating the vibration of a three to a four that was associated with
my emotional imprint of shame. I wanted to hide in a closet, but after
processing and applying the Method, my vibration improved to a seven or
eight, and I went on with my day. You can achieve similar results with
practice. Don't deny yourself. Be an active observer of your thoughts
and emotions and use your power to create change.

Perspective The ability to understand and acquire emotional freedom
requires a change in perspective. Emotional imprints and belief systems
were developed over time according to the information and behaviors we
witnessed and absorbed from those around us. With conscious thought,
it's possible to move to a higher perspective and gain not only
understanding, but compassion and peace. Prayer, meditation, and
developmental self-care work is very helpful in becoming more grounded.

Referring back to my sleep example, the emotional imprints I developed
as a child led me to believe that confident and successful people rise
early to get a fresh start to their day. Why do I have these thoughts? I
recall feeling ashamed if I slept late, as if I disappointed my mom and
dad. I believed they would think less of me if I didn't rise when they
did to start my day. My parents, like many others, had obligations and
jobs, along with two children, which meant a full day of important
things to accomplish. They did what they had to do. Observing this, but
also wanting to sleep in or stay up late to play, made me feel that I
wasn't responsible or good enough. I was a sensitive child who felt
shame if I disappointed my parents. This belief system surrounding sleep
has stayed with me throughout my adult life. Although I know it may be
healthier to fall asleep and rise earlier, is it realistic for most
people? If you don't follow that schedule, are you a bad person? For
years, my answer was yes, and I judged others who slept the morning
away. I didn't realize when I was growing up that some people stay up to
make art, or have different schedules because of evening work shifts, or
chose to enjoy the quiet hours of the dark rather than the early morning
sun. It's easy to judge our actions as "right" or "wrong." It's more
difficult to seek self-understanding and acceptance of what is right for
our own lives based not on justifications that keep our fears alive and
vibrations low, but on what nourishes our higher self. When I was older
I stayed the night at my mom's house and was amazed that she slept until
after 9:00 am. It upended my entire belief system and I began to
question my previous reality! That instance led me to a new perspective
and helped me question my false belief. I realized how limited my mind
was when operating from a place of insecurities and selfcriticism. My
judgmental mind blocked the curious spirit of my heart. To raise your
perspective, use the AAA Method. When we achieve a higher perspective
it's possible to put ourselves in someone else's shoes,

employing empathy for others and compassion for ourselves. Remember,
judgments come from fear in the mind. People have small views of the
world from their lens of limited beliefs and fear. Being curious and
having compassion and acceptance allows one to step outside of lower
vibrations and view the world from a higher place. As an example, Joe
the sculptor likes to work in the evening when it is cooler and more
quiet in the house. He sleeps during the morning hours and he and his
family accept his preferred schedule. Joe is clear about who he is, and
with perspective and empathy, we can acknowledge and accept Joe as well.
In this case, the action part of the Method is retraining our mind when
tempted to judge with conscious thought.

AAA Method Acknowledge false beliefs by calling them out. Accept that
these beliefs have been with you for a long time, even though they make
you uncomfortable or bring conflict. Act to take micro-steps in
discovering what is true for you. Ask yourself Is this true? to
determine if you are aligned with your highest self.

Try this visualization to raise your perspective. Close your eyes and
focus on a person in your life. Imagine you are on ground level,
eye-to-eye. Feel what it is like to relate to that person on a
one-on-one basis. Notice their frustrations, the joy, the way you
interpret their behavior, and how you judge their character. Notice what
you feel from this relationship. Next, imagine stepping into a magical
hot-air balloon. With each inhale you rise up into the sky, until you
are floating above the trees. Each breath takes you closer to the
clouds, each change of position offers a different perspective. You feel
free, light, and one with nature. If you look upon that relationship
from this perspective, what do you notice and how do you feel?

If you could watch this person in their private time, what are their
struggles, and what is the beauty you see in them in their quiet times?
Whatever you see, can you gain more compassion, understanding, and
allowance to welcome acceptance into your heart? From a new perspective
can you understand how your actions or words might be affecting them in
a way you didn't realize? Can you understand how much they try, or not,
and allow their actions to teach you about their intentions? Our minds
are amazing tools, but if we process the world with limited perspective,
it's not possible to fully engage our spiritual and emotional power.
Keep in mind that each thought has an emotion attached to it. Even when
your mind works to its fullest capacity, your emotional intlligence
continues to ask for our attention. As I write, I am very much in my
mind. If I use conscious thought and recognize my feelings, I realize
how excited I am to write and finish this book and share it with you. I
have a sense of freedom in sharing my sleep story, and my hope is it
will inspire freedom for you to share your truths. I also notice a
twinge of insecurity, questioning if my work is enough or will the book
make an impact? I feel desire in my heart to help others, and it feels
so good. I notice fatigue. I am aware of all of these feelings as I
write these words. The emotions we have don't need to be "charged" in
order to be noticed. They can be subtle, like an undercurrent of
movement. The more we touch base with what we feel, the more we have a
full experience of the truth in our current reality. It takes practice.
An awareness of thoughts and feelings helps us to secure a spot in the
present moment, overriding the toxic emotions from our past. Some people
think we shouldn't be too emotional, or let our emotions get the best of
us. There's a difference in being emotionally attuned (intelligent) and
emotionally out of control. From my personal experience, having an
emotional fit on the streets in Manhattan isn't the preferred way

to process. But emotional outbursts can (and do) happen. Optimally, the
AAA Method provides the skills to recognize difficult emotions before
they become volcanic. Emotions are meant to flow, not become stagnant.
If we stifle the movement of an emotion, we can become stuck. Trauma or
other distressing life events have the potential to keep us stuck in the
lowest vibrational emotion that relates to those events. While the mind
attempts to protect us by deflecting from painful memories, that
deflection is also halting healthy emotional processing. Meditation has
been shown to help those who suffer with PTSD because of the ability of
the mind and emotions to be acknowledged and processed in a safe space.
With practice, the inner world and higher consciousness learns to
acknowledge thoughts, feelings, or triggers that arise. Instead of
pushing them away by denial or distraction, meditation encourages us to
be present and witness our thoughts and feelings in the moment. By
allowing our thoughts and feelings to be present, we are better able to
dissipate any threatening charge using the energy of acknowledgment and
acceptance. Pain and fear cause more pain and fear. Efforts to control
or manipulate these difficult feelings hinder our ability to fully
process them. We try to ward off anything that could potentially trigger
a similar feeling in an effort to avoid more pain and fear, but this
only creates a vicious cycle. If you've ever burned your finger and had
a dramatic reaction to it, it's likely that you would develop pain or
fear around stoves, fire, or potential threats. Whereas if you burned
yourself and had a support system in place that was calm and attentive
without inflating the "what if" fear factor, perhaps you would handle
potential threats without as much pain or fear. It makes sense that our
mind would respond with pain or fear, but this reaction alone inhibits
our ability to achieve a healing vibration. Love, forgiveness, and
compassion are blocked when we focus on defending and denying fear,
anger, resentment, and pain. Instead, allow the emotion of the

event to be present and to process through so you can welcome new
emotions that are connected with new experiences. Love relationships are
a breeding ground for negative emotional imprints. Negative reactions to
a relationship that caused pain or fear can easily create expectations
of more pain and fear in the next relationship, unless you focus on your
own healing to rewrite your emotional imprint, raise your frequency, and
meet someone at a new vibrational level. Trust is fundamental to
transforming toxic emotions. First, we must build self-esteem, gain
confidence, and release any blame, shame, or guilt developed from our
past so that we can trust ourselves. I encourage you to stay the course.
Micro-shifts will snowball toward the development of new patterns to
secure a safe place within. As you practice and shift, you may feel a
rebirth of positive feelings and happiness, along with the ability to
handle situations and relationships with a new energy. You may even feel
as if your DNA changed, and hopefully that will be the case. Welcome the
new growth, use your mind, and follow your heart to the highest and best
sensation of aliveness! Use this simple exercise when you are
overthinking an issue or problem. For decisions that you find hard to
make or concerns about a questionable relationship, ask yourself, What
do I feel? Take a moment to step into conscious thought, connect into
your emotional body, check the vibration, and see what you find. The
mind can be tricky as it tries to rationalize and refer to old
behaviors. By getting in touch with how you feel, you'll have a more
accurate guide to alert you about the health and energy of a particular
choice. Weigh each decision by pulling up the feeling of one option and
checking the vibration, then pulling up the feeling of another option
and checking the vibration, noticing any changes that feel like a
higher, positive vibration or a lower, fearful one. Let the guide come
from within you.

Mastering discernment helps to create stability and free old negative
emotions such as resentment and judgment. Can you discern your feeling
in the moment versus the thought about a feeling that you had in the
past? Think of a negative memory, then remember what your belief or
feeling was when you were experiencing that memory. Next, return to the
present, and use the AAA Method to notice if your current feeling is
different than the original. Do you still feel angry, sad, or bitter? Or
are you attached to the original feeling and stuck in a belief pattern
that you should still feel that way? The brain processes thoughts, but
take the time and space needed for your emotional body to activate so
that you can process feelings. Otherwise you will continue to carry the
same toxic emotions and expect different results. That isn't the path to
good health.

Expanding the Heart Expanding your heart and achieving stability are the
final pieces to overcoming toxic emotions. Living with an open heart is
essential to authenticity and healthy relationships. Not only will you
feel the difference in your daily living, you may notice that your world
becomes a softer and more enjoyable place. We learn to close channels in
our heart in order to lessen the risk of being hurt. If you've been
hurt, you know the pain and fear that is associated with "putting your
heart on the line" again. But self-love can help us feel safer and allow
us to take risks to enter new relationships. Experiencing love can be as
scary as not being loved at all. At times it feels even more
frightening. If we haven't felt worthy, lovable, or safe being intimate
and vulnerable, we are going to experience similar feelings with the
love we show ourselves. And it's common to place similar restrictions on
relationships with others, whether we've realized it or not.

It takes daily practice to find stability in self-love and the ability
to free a painful past. It won't come naturally if you haven't been
given tools or seen healthy love in action. Be patient and gentle with
yourself, but affirm your own growth by committing to using the AAA
Method and showing up in each moment. Your inner child needs constant
reassurance with attention, positive reinforcement, and encouragement,
until they mature and feel stronger. Your inner child desires to be
truly loved. Only you can satisfy this need. Now that you better
understand your patterns, your stories, and your truth, I hope you feel
more confident to grow in love with yourself, being kind and gentle with
yourself and with others. With changes to your emotional imprint, you
will desire to experience the best for yourself and you will attract the
same in return. This is the true form of manifestation--- attracting
that which resonates with your belief system and energetic frequency. To
help continue on your journey, check out the exercises below. Review
them when you feel stuck or when you are eager to rise up even further.
Heart-Opening Exercise: Put your right hand over your heart. Place your
left hand over your right hand. Take three deep breaths. Bring to mind
the sweet, innocent child that came into this world for a purpose. Feel
compassion and hope in your heart as they learn and grow. Repeat this
mantra out loud at least three times: "I deeply and completely love and
accept myself." Fire Ceremony: This ceremony should only be done in a
safe and contained area with a firepit or fireplace. This exercise is
most productive when there is a full moon, new moon, or seasonal
solstice. Write down difficult thoughts or emotions from your past that
linger in your mind or feel repetitive in relationships. Write a letter
to your higher consciousness about the fear of letting go of old
beliefs. Be honest and descriptive. Make

sure that these words come from your heart. Write about your gratitude
for self-care and love, for the opportunity to continue to change and
grow. Fold the paper lengthwise or roll it into a cone shape. Light the
bigger end while holding the paper in your other hand. Once the paper
catches flame, put the rest of it into a flaming fire and as it burns,
imagine the universe accepting your offering with gratitude, blessings,
and love. Feel the lightness in your heart as you watch the last bits of
these toxic emotions transform. With a humble spirit and a faith to
surrender to the highest good, trust the divine energies to hear you and
support your efforts in your world. You can now trust that what no
longer serves the highest expression of you will be changed. Exercise
Your Heart: Movement is extremely helpful for the heart muscle, and the
emotional muscle. Actively engage in yoga, aerobic exercise, Qigong,
walking, rebounding, gentle running, or bicycling. Get the heart moving
to allow new life energy to flow. In supporting our physical bodies, we
support our emotional bodies as well. Transformation happens daily.
Change is the only constant, regardless of how much we want to tighten
our grips on the past. When you make the choice to acknowledge change,
acceptance of that change can bring opportunity along with the unknown.
Take micro action steps to face difficult feelings and support your most
innate desire to change. You have the power to spark the energy of
transformation. You have the power to change your life, one moment at a
time. Soon, you will dance to a new beat, with people who give you love
and accept your love. Our life journey is like a winding path. We spiral
up and evolve toward a higher vibration, or we spiral down to be pulled
back by the weight of our pain addictions. It is part of our life lesson
to circle back to issues time and again. This is a normal part of the
journey. Healing is a process. There is no quick fix. But when you feel
weighed down by emotions, or thrown back

into your old imprint by triggers, use the tools in this book to change
the force of motion and move forward into higher consciousness. All of
the answers are within you. At any moment you are only one thought,
feeling, or action away from living a new life.

Self-Love Contract This practice is to fully commit to your self-growth
and self-love. Making a contract with yourself may seem silly, but
putting pen to paper and signing your name can make a meaningful impact
on your psyche and emotional imprint. Personal signatures are powerful.
Your energy, personality, style, and uniqueness are displayed in your
signature. This act is also one of respect to honor the work you've done
and commit to do in the future. Live a life that is authentic, full,
rewarding, and geared toward personal evolution that provides positive
fuel to the world. Please write here or copy the following on a blank
piece of paper and sign in ink.

Self-Love Contract Date: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Location: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ I,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
hereby commit my best efforts to the growth and practice of self-love. I
now recognize that I am worthy of my investment. Loving myself adds
great value to my life and to the lives of others. I,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
am capable of learning new skills and techniques and I will apply them
regularly to heal my inner child, build confidence in my adult self, and
remember that self-love does not take away from my love for others, nor
does it replace another's love for me.

I,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
commit time each day to a mindfulness practice that is focused on the
reality of my truth, and the expansion of my vibrational baseline. I am
grateful for the stories of my past that shaped me, but they do not have
to define me. Loving myself, Signature
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Date
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ I hope this book and the AAA Method
continue to serve your highest good so that you can vibrate higher, live
happier, and have amazing relationships with yourself and others for all
the years to come. There's nothing I love more than to help a person
create positive change in their life using their own resources,
determination, and spirit. Witnessing life being reborn as one rises up
to meet their highest self is one of my greatest joys. I am very honored
and humbled to be a part of your life and am grateful to have this
opportunity to share my thoughts, stories, and truths. I trust that we
will stay connected at some level for the rest of time.

Acknowledgments

WITH complete gratitude, I thank the Ones who arranged a meeting with
John Willig; a fearless agent, a constant cheerleader, and a good friend
without whom this book never would have happened. And to the publisher
and editors, in particular Nicole Mele, who believed that this book was
much needed in our world today, I am honored for your trust in me. I'm
indebted to my mother, Cheryl King, who in addition to my first book,
has now spent even more hours editing this book. I imagine that wasn't
part of her retirement plan, but I am so grateful. Dear friends Helen
Rodgers and Laura Zaccardi, who helped revise, edit, and comment with
loving encouragement, I am very appreciative of your time, and for
allowing me to be an absent friend while writing this book. And to Eve
Salov, who has challenged me to look at deeper parts of myself, others,
and life differently, I am grateful for your authenticity, humor, and
love. With equal gratitude I thank my father, Rick Guy, extended family
members, and my many friends who continue to share their presence,
wisdom, and love. And for the one who inspires me most to keep going,
even when life is arduous: Corkie, otherwise known as The Corkster,
Corks, The

Corkmeister, and Buddy. He is the epitome of overcoming adversity and a
living example of pure love. To the outside world, it seemed he needed
me in order to survive, but the reality is I needed him more.

Index

A AAA Method, xiii, xiv, xvii, 7--9, 18, 28, 33--34, 36, 47, 49
acceptance, 8--9, 18, 33, 36, 47, 55--56, 62, 64, 72, 76, 79, 86-- 87,
101, 106, 134, 137, 140 acknowledgment, 8, 18, 33, 36, 47, 55, 62, 64,
72, 76, 79, 86-- 87, 101, 106, 134, 137, 140 action, 8--9, 18, 33, 36,
47--51, 62, 64, 72, 76, 79, 86--87, 99--101, 106, 134, 137, 140
attraction, 62 authentic self, 86 consistency with, 8 feeling
overwhelmed, 134 inner child, 72, 76, 79 inner critic, 137 perspective,
140 raising vibration, 64 sarcasm, 87 self-confidence, 101 self-love,
106 your story, 65--66 abandonment, 42, 70, 99 abuse, xvii, 2--3, 28, 70
acceptance, xiii, 8--9, 16, 18, 33, 36, 47, 54--57, 62, 64, 72, 76, 79,
82, 86--87, 92, 101, 106, 116, 124, 134, 137, 140 choosing, 57 of loss,
136 acknowledgment, xiii, 8, 18, 33, 36, 47, 55, 62, 64, 72, 76, 79,
86--87, 101, 106, 134, 137, 140 of loss, 136

act, xiii acting out, xvi action, 8--9, 18, 33, 36, 47--51, 62, 64, 72,
76, 79, 86--87, 99--101, 106, 134, 137, 140 to heal, 48--51 and
self-esteem, 100 and vibrational frequency, 99--100 addiction, 22,
30--31 addictive emotional patterns, 35 emotional, 7 emotional roller
coaster, 44--48 emotional roller coaster and AAA Method, 47 to feeling
bad, 45 food, 48 to pain, 7, 75, 125 parents', 20 adulting, 104
affirmation, 74 aggression, 16, 22 alcohol, xi, 35 allowance, 120--121
altar, 79--80 alternate hand journaling, 80--82 ambition, 22--23 anger,
xiv, xv, xvi, 4, 7, 15, 28, 35, 84, 86 angst, 84 anguish, 4
antidepressants, xi anxiety, xiv, 15 apathy, 15, 22, 56 appreciation,
116 attachment, 27 attraction, xvii, 62 authenticity, xvii, 95. See also
Authentic self freeing nature of, 95 job example, 88--90 vs. who others
believe us to be, 92 authentic self, xiv AAA Method, 86

and angst, 84 discovering, 83--96 discovering, exercise, 93--94 and
fear, 83--84 authority, 125 role, x avoidance, xi, 62 vs. allowance, 120
awareness, 31, 53 of thoughts and feelings, 141

B balance, 38--39, 115, 135 feels boring, 44 Beattie, Melody, 113
beauty, 35 belief patterns, xv beliefs, false, 3, 10, 57--58, 63, 91,
108--109 belief systems, 29, 92, 139 development, 138 rewriting, 108
belonging, 3 betrayal, 2 bitterness, 15--16 blame, ix, x, xvi, 5, 12,
15--16, 27, 30, 35, 57, 129, 141 bliss, 36 bloating, 22 boundaries, 70
action for crossing, 129 allowance, 120--121 for authority, 125 and
blame, 125 children, 126 clarity of, 130 for control, 125 creating
healthy boundaries, 119--132 enforcement of, 125, 128--129 examples, 128

for family, 125 fear of, 119, 124, 127 healthy, 124--131 healthy,
purpose of, 127 healthy vs. unhealthy, 120 importance of, 124 inner
child, 127--128, 130 journaling, 130 parents, 126 for poor treatment,
129 and rejection, 125 for revenge, 125 saying no or yes, 127 bowel
function, 22 breathing, 35 brokenness, 4 Brown, Brené, 130 busyness, ix
buying-power exercise, 116--117

C change commitment to, 14 creating within you, 14 choosing vs. being
chosen, 100--102 cigarettes, xi cleaning products, 35 CNBC, 89 CNN, 88
codependency, 15, 22, 27, 37, 129 Codependent No More (Beattie), 113
coffee, 35 commitment, xii compassion, 19, 35, 70, 82, 116, 124, 137,
142 finding, 113--114 and gratitude, 113 complaining, 16 composting,
emotional, 2

confidence, xiv, 19, 95, 141 connection, xii, xiii, 22 connective
tissue, 25 conscious being, 99 conscious thought, 53--54, 61, 63, 138,
141 contempt, 4 contentment, 36 contract, self-love, 146--147 control,
xiv, 22, 125 core wounds, 9--10 creativity, 22 criticism, 35 curiosity,
6, 81

D dater, 104 debt, x defense mechanisms, xv, 11 defensiveness, 22
dejection, 15 denial, xvi, 15, 56 denier, 104 depression, 15, 22, 56
deprivation, 15 despair, 16 detachment, 22 determination, 18, 56
Differential Emotions Scale (DES-IV), 4 digestive issues, 22
disappointment, 15, 84, 129 discernment journaling, 111--112 and
stability, 143 vs. judgment, 110--111 discipline, 77, 108 disgust, 4
dishonesty, 35 dissatisfaction, 15

distrust, 16 domination, 22 doter, 104 drugs, 35

E eating disorder, xi, 22 ego, 84 emotions being present in, 142
categorizing, 28 charged, 141 difficult, examples of, 91--92 emotionally
attuned, 141 emotionally out of control, 141 flowing, 141 free emotions
and stability, 133--147 frequency of, 28--29 giving up reasons for, 6 as
physical experiences, 5 range of, 70 resisting, 56 unprocessed, 35
valid, 4 what they teach us, 28 emotions, negative holding onto, 14, 56
naturalness of, 16 emotions, toxic, xv--xviii, 141 driving force behind,
4 how you cover them up, 4 identifying, 1--24 impact of, 2 infect every
area, xv learned behavior, xv questions to ask, xv--xvi reinforce belief
of not being worthy, 15 releasing, 23

root of, 3, 18 silent prison, 2 and trust, 141 vs. negative emotions, 4
wrestling with, 2 empathy, 20, 103 empowerment, 102 emptiness, 15
energy, 56, 110 giving away, 12 matrix of family, 29 patterns, 136
enmeshment, 27 entitlement issues, 22 entrapment, x environment, 27
envy, 15 excuses, ix exercise, 35

F family, xv fat, 22 fatigue, adrenal, 22 fear, xi, xv, 4, 15, 18, 22,
28, 36, 42, 83--84, 86, 129 and boundaries, 127 of boundaries, 124 cycle
of, 142 of feeling, 136 and opening your heart, 123 The Fearless Path
(Guy), xi feelings. See Emotions hiding, 94 repressed, 70 fibromyalgia,
22 fire ceremony, 145 fluid retention, 22 food, 35--36, 48, 74--76

chemicals in, 35 obsession, xi forgiveness, 19, 113--114, 142 and
gratitude, 113 freedom, x, xvi friendships, x frustration, 15, 33

G generosity, 36 goals, setting, 51 Good Morning America, 88 grace, 116
gratitude, 35, 113--114 grounding, 37 guilt, 4, 15, 17--24, 35, 42,
66--67, 94, 105, 107--108, 129, 141 AAA Method, 18 creation of, 21
language of, 21--24 and passion, connection, and creativity, 23 and
unhealthy patterns, 98 Guy, Leah, xi

H happiness, 36, 106 responsibility for, xvii hardship, value in, 1--2
hate, 15 healing challenges in, 29--33 and conscious thought, 53 gradual
nature of, 48--49 through action, 48--51 health emotional, 103 mental,
xv, 105 physical, xv, 99--100, 105 heart, expanding the, 143--146

exercise your heart, 145 fire ceremony, 145 heart-opening exercise,
144--145 helplessness, 15, 22 hips, widening, 22 honesty, xii, 5, 84, 91
hope, 114 hostility, 15

I identity, 27, 92 imprints, emotional, xvii, 8, 10, 23, 61 awareness
of, 71 building new, 33--34 building using AAA Method, 33 changing and
building new, 33--34 from childhood, 69 comfort zones, 29 development,
25, 27--29, 138 importance of, 25--26 magnetization of, 32--33 negative
and love relationships, 142 and parents, 32--33 understanding, 25--51
uniqueness of, 26 inner child, xiv, xv, 10--11, 17, 58, 88, 116 AAA
Method, 72, 76, 79 accepting, 73--74 acknowledging, 78 actions steps for
working with, 79 altar to, 79--80 boundaries, 127--128, 130 cause of
unprocessed trauma and emotional dysfunction, 70 and childhood
experiences, 69 curiosity, 81 discipline, 77--78 healing, 69--82
honoring, 79--80

identifying as cause of reaction or behavior, 71 inner critic, 108
meeting, 72--73 new relationship with, 81--82 re-parenting with action,
74--79 rewards from working with, 70 self-love, 107 separation from
adult, 78 talking to, 81 triggering of, 71--72, 76, 78 inner critic,
116, 137--138 AAA Method, 137 acknowledge and accept, 108 blamer, 109
critic, 109 false beliefs, 108--109 fixer, 109 foe, 109 as inner child,
108 inventory and acknowledge self-sabotage, 109 "should," 107
silencing, 107--112 wounded child, 109 insecurity, 15, 23, 70
insensitivity, 15 Instagram, 2 integrity, 3 intelligence emotional, 54,
135--136 mental, 54, 135 interest, 4 intimacy, 22--23, 30, 62, 86, 124,
127 invalidation, xiv investigator of your authentic experience, 4
irritation, 15 isolation, 15--16 "It's not you, it's me," ix, x Izard,
Carroll, 4--5

J jealousy, 16, 22, 35 jobs, x journaling, 93--94, 111--112, 130. See
Alternate hand journaling joy, xvii, 4, 36 and play, 70 judging others,
35 yourself, 4, 35 judgment, 143 fear of, 107 vs. discernment, 110--111

K kindness, 36

L laughter, 35 lies, 5 to ourselves, 84 life, spiritual, 105 loneliness,
15, 22, 61--62 loss, xi acceptance and acknowledgment of, 136 love, xvi,
4, 36, 142. See Emotions as compassion, 133 love letter to yourself, 114
and pain, 133 sending, 114 lymphatic issues, 22

M Mad Money with Jim Cramer, 89 manipulation, 15 maturity, 24
meditation, 35, 138, 141 practice, 55

transcending-the-walls, 131--132 meme, 2 micro-steps, 9, 49--50, 95,
109, 137 mind, as line of defense, 136 mindfulness, 35, 53--54, 92, 95
money, 117 music, 35

N narcissism, 37, 122 nature, connection to, 35 needs, meeting
emotional, 102--105 options for, 104 vs. relational needs, 102--103
needs, relational, 102--104 negativity, 16, 35 neglect, xvii, 3, 28 no,
saying, xiv nurturing, 18--19

O obsession, sexual, 22 obsessive compulsive disorder, 22 outbursts,
emotional, 22 overthinking exercise, 143 overwhelmed feeling, 15,
48--49, 134 AAA Method, 49--50, 134 ownership, 11

P pain, xi, xv, xvi, 15 addiction to, xvii, 30--31, 75, 125 back, 22
cycle of, xvii, 142 and love, 133 parents, 19--20, 26--28, 31, 42--43,
55, 99, 102, 126 and blame, 20--21 defending, 29--30

ramifications of, 30 passion, 22 passivity, 22 past, acknowledging, 66
patterns, negative, xvi peace, 36, 115 Peck, Scott, 5 people emotional
type, 135 thinker type, 135 personality disorders, 15 perspective,
138--143 AAA Method, 140 visualization exercise, 140 Phoenix Rising
analog, xi fire, xi positive thinking, 108 power, 15, 22 giving away,
11--12 reclaiming, 5 taking back, 12 prayer, 35, 138 presentness,
achieving, 68 PTSD, 141 purpose, xiv

Q quality of life, xv

R rage, 36, 56 rationalizations, 13, 137 rebirth, xi reflection, 3
regret, 15 rejection, xiv, 7, 102 relationships, 23 attracted to those
with pain, 31

building and maintaining, 56 difficult, questions to ask about, 6
healthy, 22 inability to maintain, 22 love relationships and negative
emotional imprints, 141 sabotaging, xv unhappy, x, xiv unhealthy, 35
relationships, toxic questions about, 13 serving you, 13 and toxic
emotions, 16 relief, xvii renewal, xi repression, xvi, 70 reproductive
issues, 22 resentment, xiv, xvii, 15, 35--36, 42, 86, 143 resistance,
105 pattern of, xv responsibility for how you feel, 3 for other's
happiness, xiv, 3, 27, 125--126 resurrection, xi, xii revenge, 35, 125
The Roade Less Traveled (Peck), 5

S sadness, 4, 16 safety, xiv, 22 sarcasm, 22, 86 AAA Method, 87 Scale of
Positive and Negative Experience (SPANE), 34 self, higher, 11, 88
self-abandonment, 2, 99 self-absorption, 15 self-blame, 98 self-care,
102, 113, 138 self-confidence, 8, 70, 101

AAA Method, 101 self-criticism, 15, 22 self-destructiveness, 3
self-esteem, 100, 106, 141 self-exploration, 91 self-healing, 3, 13
self-hostility, 4 self-identification, 23 selfishness, 22 self-loathing,
xi, 15, 23 self-love, 9, 35, 70, 91, 102--103, 114 AAA Method, 106
action to love yourself, 115 as an art, 105 classification, 104
contract, 146--147 forgiver, 110, 112 friend, 110, 112 healer, 110, 112
and inner child, 107 language, 104--107 list to guide you into self-love
actions, 109--110 lover, 110, 112 and loving others, 98 as medicine that
heals, 97--117 prompts, 1--5 value of, 97 self-loyalty, xii
self-sabotage, ix, xv, 8, 11, 23, 33, 44--45, 137 self-soothing, 19, 104
self-talk, xiv self-worth, xvii, xc, 18, 100 sexuality, xi shame, 3--4,
17--22, 35, 42, 56, 62, 66--67, 94, 107--108, 129, 136, 138, 141 AAA
Method, 18 body, xi development of ego and sense of self, 18--19 how it
develops, 19--20

and relationships, 22 and sense of self, 22 and unhealthy patterns, 98
shyness, 4 speaking to large groups, 95 to others, 94--95 to yourself,
94, 112 spiraling, 146 spirit, connection to, 35 stamina, 22 stories
about ourselves, xvi story, your, 57--66 AAA Method, 62 accepting, 115
asking if it is true, 63 examples, 59--60 mimicking, 61 as a movie,
65--66 question prompts, 67 vs. your truth, 57--66 stress, x
stubbornness, 22 suffocation, emotional, xvii sunlight, 35 support
groups, 104

T theft, 35 therapy, x, 33, 43, 104 cognitive, 43 threats, 15 tightness
in hips/knees, 22 time, private, 105 tobacco, 35 torment, 15
transcendence, 123--124 transformation, 3, 66, 145--146

trauma, xi, 56, 70, 134, 141 emotional, 11 reality of, 14 stunts
developmental growth, 70 true nature, 86--92 shortcut to return to, 88
vs. learned behaviors, 86--87 trust, 62, 106, 115, 124, 141 yourself, 15
truth, 5 acknowledging and accepting, 54 discovering your, 66--68 false,
108 negative, xv questions prompts, 67 recognizing your truth, 53--68
speaking your truth, 94--95, 127, 129 your truth, 57--66, 115 your truth
vs. your story, 57--66 Type A personality, 22

U uniqueness, 1 University of Delaware, 4 unproductivity, 22
unworthiness, 22, 62 urinary or kidney problems, 22

V validation, 3, 45, 103 value, 92 vengefulness, 16 vibration, xvii, 8,
23, 34 39 AAA Method, 36 awareness of, 71 experiencing, 37--38 higher,
35 lower, 35

raising, 44, 50--51, 111 raising with AAA Method, 64 recreating those
attached to imprint, 31 similar to that of parent, 43 vibrational
baseline, determining, 39--43 vibrational frequencies, 10 vibrational
frequencies and action, 99--100 vibrational frequencies and choosing,
100 victimization, 16 visualization, 140 vulnerability, 86, 88

W walls based on fear, 120 emotional, 120 emotional, transcending,
121--122 wants, determining your, 96 worthiness, 3, 15, 92, 107 honoring
your worth, 114--116 questions, 115--116


