How to Heal Toxic Thoughts

OceanofPDF.com

Other books by Sandra Ingerman Soul Retrieval: Mending the Fragmented
Self Welcome Home: Following Your Soul's Journey Home A Fall to Grace
(fiction) Medicine for the Earth: How to Transform Personal and
Environmental Toxins Shamanic Journeying: A Beginner's Guide

Audio Lecture Series (produced by Sounds True) The Soul Retrieval
Journey A Beginner's Guide to Shamanic Journeying Miracles for the Earth

OceanofPDF.com

How to Heal Toxic Thoughts

Sandra Ingerman

New York/London www.sterlingpublishing.com/kids

OceanofPDF.com

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available

Ingerman, Sandra. How to heal toxic thoughts : simple tools for personal
transformation / Sandra Ingerman. p. cm. ISBN-13: 978-1-4027-4260-6
ISBN-10: 1-4027-4260-6 1. Spiritual healing. 2. Shamanism---Miscellanea.
3. Thought and thinking---Religious aspects--- Miscellanea. I. Title.

BL65.M4I43 2007 131--dc22 2006038789 4 6 8 10 9 7 5

Published by Sterling Publishing Co., Inc. 387 Park Avenue South, New
York, NY 10016 © 2007 by Sandra Ingerman Distributed in Canada by
Sterling Publishing c/o Canadian Manda Group, 165 Dufferin Street
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M6K 3H6 Distributed in the United Kingdom by
GMC Distribution Services Castle Place, 166 High Street, Lewes, East
Sussex, England BN7 1XU Distributed in Australia by Capricorn Link
(Australia) Pty. Ltd. P.O. Box 704, Windsor, NSW 2756, Australia

Manufactured in the United States of America All rights reserved

Sterling ISBN 978-1-4027-4260-6

For information about custom editions, special sales, premium and
corporate purchases, please contact Sterling Special Sales Department at
800-805-5489 or specialsales@sterlingpublishing.com. OceanofPDF.com

To my husband, Woods Shoemaker, and my parents, Aaron and Lee Ingerman
To the children of the world now and in the future: May we leave you a
healthy and peaceful planet to live on so that you may thrive

OceanofPDF.com

Contents Introduction Chapter 1

The Alchemy of the Soul

Chapter 2

Stop the Reaction

Chapter 3

Transmute the Energy

Chapter 4

More Tools for Transformation

Chapter 5

The Nature of Projections

Chapter 6

A Time for Reflection

Chapter 7

Protect Yourself in a Toxic World

Chapter 8

Toward a New Consciousness

Appendix

Frequently Asked Questions

Evolution

About the Author Acknowledgments

OceanofPDF.com

of

How to Heal Toxic Thoughts

OceanofPDF.com

Once upon a time as the children were sleeping, a spell was cast upon
the lands. When we awoke from the night, this spell had us believe that
only what we could see in the physical world was real. Under this spell,
a magical, deep, rich, exciting way to experience life ended for all the
children. For there is so much more to the world around us than what we
can see with our ordinary eyes, hear with our ordinary ears, feel in our
bodies beyond the sense of ordinary touch. And when we forgot this we
forgot the magic of being alive. As the veils between the seen and
unseen worlds closed, children learned how to survive instead of how to
thrive. They grew into suspicious adults who lost the ability to trust
others as they forgot about the power of love. They learned how to
manipulate others and to compete to get what they wanted. But now the
spell is wearing off. The adults who were once children are waking up
and remembering the ways of the hidden world. And as new children are
born, they come in and help the rest of us remember. The time has come
to wake up from the trance. Wake up now!

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction One night I had a very powerful dream. I was standing
around a water cooler with a group of coworkers. We were sipping our
coffee and talking. The conversation seemed to be cordial, but I became
aware that some of the workers were sending psychic "punches" to the
others. I could actually see these invisible punches striking people in
the solar plexus, and it amazed me. I would say to one who'd been
punched, "Are you okay?" And then to the other, "Did you see what you
just did?" My dream made visible the invisible interactions of the
hidden world. In waking life, exchanges like these are just as
real---and all too common. When we observe how people behave, there may
not seem to be any hostility. We may see a smile on the face of someone
listening to us. But what is happening on an invisible level? What
feelings are we triggering in him or her through our conversation or our
presence? We are more than our bodies, our thoughts, and our past
experiences. We also have an invisible dimension that we call
spirit---an aspect I like to think of as "who we are beyond our skin."
We can't see this part of ourselves, but together with body and mind it
makes up our whole being. And every time we interact with others in a
visible, tangible way, on the level of the spirit an invisible exchange
of energy is taking place too. Each of us plays different roles in these
exchanges; sometimes we are the senders, sometimes the receivers. And
when the energy is negative, it can do harm just as physical violence
can. Look at some of the phrases we commonly use to describe our daily
dealings and how they make us feel. How many of them are associated with
violent acts? She's being pushy. He's invading my space. I felt beaten
down. She was worn down. He was kicked when he was down. She stabbed me
in the back. The whole group was held hostage by his behavior. She was
looking daggers at him. The room was filled with explosive energy.

I made a suggestion but I was shot down. The energy of violence acts on
an invisible, psychic level, but it impacts both our physical health and
our psychological well-being. We simply do not feel well on any level
when we live and work in an environment that is thick with negative
energy. You have surely been in a room where the fear or anger was
tangible. You know it doesn't feel good to be there. You already know
how toxic thoughts can be. Since 1980 I have been studying an ancient
form of spiritual healing called shamanism. The practice of shamanism
dates back at least 40,000 years and, some anthropologists believe,
possibly more than 100,000. A shaman is a man or woman who reads omens,
divines information, and watches for signs in nature, working in
partnership with the invisible and hidden worlds. Shamans have taken on
many roles in tribal communities, acting as healers, doctors, priests,
psychotherapists, mystics, and storytellers. Historically, the shaman
was responsible for keeping the community healthy, divining food
sources, maintaining balance between the people and the natural world,
and performing ceremonies to honor birth, death, and other life cycles
both in humans and in nature. Today, shamanism is still practiced
worldwide, and in some indigenous cultures the ceremonies and healing
practices have been passed down through the generations unchanged. In
other cultures, the practices have evolved to deal with emotional and
physical illnesses traditional shamans did not face, including the rise
of certain cancers due to environmental pollution and immunedeficiency
problems such as chronic fatigue. In the past, shamans were the doctors
and psychologists of their communities. Today shamans work in
conjunction with traditional medical and psychological practices. They
look at the spiritual cause of illness--- what is happening on the
invisible level. Let's say for example that you had a diagnosis of
cancer and went to a shaman in South America; the shaman would look at
what was happening to you "beyond your skin," on the unseen level of the
spirit. This spiritual diagnosis might explain that someone had sent you
anger, causing your physical illness. Before we developed guns and
bombs, indigenous cultures used psychic warfare. They disempowered and
overthrew their enemies by cursing them, consciously sending negative
energy to those they wished to harm. Their

weapons were thought-forms that could actually act as poison arrows,
with the same effect as ingesting a poison into the body. But all
indigenous cultures understand that there is a difference between
sending negative energy, such as anger, and merely expressing it. When
someone expresses anger without sending out that poison arrow, he or she
is simply acknowledging the feeling of anger, but the anger has no force
or movement that could cause harm to another. In our culture, where we
only acknowledge the visible---what we can see and experience on a
tangible level---we deny this level of awareness, so we send our poison
arrows unconsciously, not realizing the harm we do. This might be
experienced by another as a slap in the face or a kick or punch. When
you express a feeling without sending it, you simply state what you are
feeling without a force behind it. What might be an energetic slap,
kick, or punch is transformed by your intention to positive energy
containing light and love, and this becomes the energy released into the
room. In this way you are not harming another, but are also not harming
yourself by repressing the energy you are feeling. Tools for working to
transform the energy behind your thoughts and feelings will be given as
you read on. Here's an example of how this might happen. Let's say I am
sitting in a meeting at work. One of my colleagues says something that
triggers my fear that my job might be eliminated. But instead of dealing
with my fear, I start to repeat to myself how much I hate my boss. Now
I'm projecting anger silently but powerfully out into the room. The word
hate, as I say it to myself, has a great deal of force fueled by the
fear I'm feeling. The problematic energy shoots out into the room with
as much impact as if I were punching and kicking everyone in it. Think
about this scenario and all the different ways it is played out by you
and people you know every day. And think about how much problematic
energy we are bombarded with day in and day out. Living in such energy
is wearing us down---each of us individually and all of us together.
Imagine your hand. Now imagine that one of the fingers on your hand
drops to the floor and believes that it has a life of its own,
independent from the rest of your body. It sounds preposterous. But
isn't this how we are behaving as humans today? We have forgotten what
indigenous peoples and

quantum physicists know: that we are not independent from the body we
belong to, the web of life that connects us all. From an indigenous
point of view there is a spirit that lives in all things, and we are
connected to this spirit, not separate from it. We are connected to
everything that is alive. Trees, plants, rocks, clouds, rivers, oceans,
stars, humans, animals, and insects are all part of one organism,
interdependent, and we are related to all of these life-forms, not just
to other humans. The energies of all of life link together into a web of
life. A change in one part makes a change in the entire web. Here's an
example. Let's say in the area where you live there is a species of bird
that eats a certain insect. If this bird becomes extinct, there will be
no way to control the population of this insect. The whole ecosystem
where you live will suffer. Or think of it this way. Bees are
responsible for pollinating flowers. As the environment changes due to
the actions of humankind, bees are now being endangered. The environment
in which they live is polluted and this is affecting their health.
Without bees the sources of food for humans will also be in danger.
There has always been a partnership between pollinators and plants; one
third of all the food we eat comes from crops that require animal
pollinators, a role often filled by bees. These are physical examples of
how the web of life works. But indigenous cultures also teach about our
connection to an unseen web of life in which we are all connected
energetically to one spiritual force. We give this force different
names, depending on what religious or philosophical traditions we
follow, but by any name it is the source of life. You can use your body
again to understand how our connection to our source works. If you break
one of your arms, it is not just your arm that is hurt. Your arm is not
isolated from the rest of your body. Your whole being is hurt. Every
cell in your body is impacted. In the same way, we are part of a whole
organism, and every action we take in life affects that organism. Every
change we make in our consciousness ripples through the entire web of
life. When we project toxic energy, it hurts all living beings. When we
feel peace, it helps bring all beings peace. For thousands of years
spiritual teachings have said that our outer world is a reflection of
our own inner state of consciousness. If you want to

change the world outside, then you must learn how to change your state
within. If we look at today's environmental pollution from a spiritual
perspective, we see that the pollution in our outer world is a
reflection of the pollution in our inner world. This means that our
toxic thoughts, feelings, attitudes, and beliefs are being reflected
back to us by the pollution we see in our water, air, and earth. The
energy from our negative thoughts and emotions is going into the water
we drink, the air we breathe, the food we eat. And it is creating
illness in others. But when we learn how to work through our negative
thoughts, emotions, attitudes, and beliefs, we can create peace and
well-being within us that helps to heal the world around us. Gandhi
said, "Be the change that you want to see in the world." I put it this
way: "It is not what we do that changes the world, it is who we become."
In our work together, you will learn to identify your toxic thoughts,
transmute their negative energy, and shield yourself from the harmful
influences others are projecting out of ignorance. I will show you
simple ways to transform who you are in the world so that you can become
a true expression of peace. This is an adaptation of a story indigenous
traditions tell: A grandfather was talking to his grandson about many
things. He said, "I feel as if two wolves are fighting in my heart. One
wolf is vengeful, angry, violent, and the other is loving,
compassionate, and strong." The grandson asked the grandfather, "Which
wolf will win the fight in your heart?" The grandfather replied, "The
one I feed." Which wolf are you feeding?

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1

OceanofPDF.com

The Alchemy of the Soul Many people today think that the old alchemists
literally turned lead into gold. But in actuality they were working on a
metaphorical level, changing lead-heavy consciousness into golden light.
The word alchemy, from the Aramaic, means "working within and through
the dense darkness inside." In this book we will use the ancient
principle of alchemy to lighten the soul's darkness---to transform the
energy you project in the world into love and light that can heal you
and others.

The Power of Presence I am sure you have met people you instinctively
don't want to be around. They are like a dark cloud. But other people
seem to lift you up just by being in their presence. Here in the West,
billions of dollars are spent "beautifying" the body, which is a rather
shallow endeavor since there is a deeper beauty that we all possess.
You've probably seen people who are not attractive as it's defined by
magazines and beauty experts. But there is beauty in the light they
exude and the way they carry themselves in the world. There is a peace,
a still center, and a power that comes from within, felt by everyone
with whom they have contact. This ability to shine on those around us is
something we all can achieve. We must turn our attention to healing our
environment, the world, and ourselves by the light we shine. We must
clean up the psychic environment we live in by learning how to transform
our energy. This is what brings magic back into our lives. This is what
makes us beautiful.

Our Reactive Selves None of us wants to live in a hostile environment,
but that is where we find ourselves today. Divisive energy is toxic. As
our feelings of separation and division grow deeper, so does the
toxicity around us. As human beings we have egos, and the nature of the
ego is to feel separate from others. The experience of feeling separate
from others creates

a host of emotions: anger, fear, jealousy, despair, violence, hate. And
because it's also human to compare ourselves with others, our
interactions with the people around us touch deep nerves of self-worth
and survival. We might feel that others have more intelligence, beauty,
or wealth than we do. Our conversations with others might make us feel
as if we are being judged. Our relationships with other people might
lead us to feel "less than." It is important to understand that having
emotions is good. As conscious human beings, we are naturally going to
have feelings about what we see, hear, and experience. And we need to
express our emotions as a way to let off necessary steam---cancer
research has shown that people who repress their emotions often manifest
physical illness. We have a right to our feelings and thoughts; they
lead us into the depth of consciousness where true growth can occur. But
we want to allow our darker states of consciousness to nurture the seeds
that new life springs from. We don't want to just stay stuck in the
darkness. In our work together we will look at practical ways to process
the negative thoughts and emotions that come up throughout the day. We
will learn how to express emotions in a healthy way, not just dump our
negativity on others. In this way you can still feel your feelings, but
the end product will be different. Instead of sending toxic energy to
others and into the environment, you will learn how to send energy that
becomes positive input.

Our Toxic Triggers Our emotional reactions are set off by all kinds of
triggers: the conversations we have with others, the normal issues that
arise in family and other relationships, even outside events. We are
often "triggered" when we watch the news. When we feel strongly about
our values and opinions, we may be triggered by statements made and
policies set by political leaders. If we are not allowed to fully
express ourselves in work or school situations, we may feel triggered
because our creativity is stifled. Which of these common triggers sets
off an emotional reaction in you? My family treats me like a child. I
felt humiliated when he brought up such an embarrassing story about my
past.

I'm tired of my siblings competing with me for love. I feel hurt when
I'm told I should be more like my brother. I'm so angry about the way
the country is headed. I feel so sad for all those people who lost their
homes and loved ones in the earthquake. I feel hopeless about all the
injustice in the world. I hate feeling judged by my boss. My coworker's
behavior just grates on my nerves. The examples I gave probably
stimulated a variety of problematic thoughts and emotions that you
experience in your daily life, probably more often than you'd like
to---perhaps even most of the time. We all have the bad habit of
reacting and allowing ourselves to be triggered. And when we are in
reaction mode all the time---when we spend our time trying to defend our
opinions and shore up our self-worth---our senses start to become dulled
and we cannot take in all that life has to offer. Instead of thriving,
we often feel as if we are just surviving. When we have to protect
ourselves all the time, we pay a heavy price. We need to learn new
habits for how we react to those around us. Think of exercising a muscle
that you haven't used for a long time. At first it might take great
effort to get the muscle moving with grace and ease. But as you build
your strength and flexibility, the movement becomes natural. In the
chapters ahead, I will share techniques for changing your patterns of
reaction and transforming your energy from negative to positive---simple
practices that you can do anywhere and anytime, even while you are
driving. And I hope you will feel inspired by what I share to come up
with some methods of your own.

Take Some Time Out What you've read so far has given you a lot to think
about. Here is an exercise for you to use at this point to allow
yourself to absorb and consider all the information you have just read.
Before moving on to the next section, I ask that you read through the
exercise, outlined in the paragraphs that follow. Then close the book
and sit in silence for a few minutes.

Start by just breathing deeply into your abdomen. Put your hands on your
abdomen and breathe deeply enough that you feel your hands move up and
down as you inhale and exhale. Take some slow, deep breaths. And just
concentrate on your breath and your breathing for one or two minutes.
Now allow yourself to reflect on what you have read. Notice what the
material brings up for you. Just notice. You don't need to do anything
with what you are feeling or thinking. But you do need to make a choice
on how you want to proceed. Begin to answer the following questions. If
you like, you can take some time now or later to write the answers in a
journal. Do you feel that there is any truth to what you have read about
how unconscious we are of the energy behind our thoughts and emotions?
Would you like to do some personal work on this issue to find inner
peace for yourself and to shine your own beauty and light in the world?
If you've answered yes to these questions, are you willing to commit to
the work? This work is an alchemy of the soul. It is a way of finding
depth and richness in life and with your interaction with others. It is
a way to change living in a superficial way to a life of more depth and
beauty. This is a practice that doesn't really take time, but it does
take a willingness to stay aware throughout the day. It takes a
commitment to work through the thoughts and feelings that come up for
you. This work will take willpower on your part, for it takes a lot of
willpower to stop the energy of a negative reaction moving in full force
and replace it with a positive energy. And, like all things that call
for willpower, it will take practice, too. At first the task at hand
might seem difficult for some of you, for in our culture we have not
been trained to control our minds. But with practice you will find it
easier and easier to work with your mind to create harmony and peace in
your life instead of letting your mind get hooked into fear and anger.
As you do the work outlined ahead, you will find yourself feeling more
and more freedom to create states of consciousness and energy that
empower you to change your own world.

All spiritual practices teach about the power of intention. When we set
an intention, we set in motion the wheels of change in our lives. When
we set an intention, action naturally follows. If you say yes to the
commitment, then set an intention now. This intention will start to
create the action---the way for you to change your way of being in the
world. One way to empower an intention is to tell someone else what you
are planning to do. If there is someone in your life with whom you can
share this work, tell him or her what changes you are getting ready to
make in your life. If not, you might put the intention in writing, in a
journal or a note to yourself, or simply set it in your mind and heart.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2

OceanofPDF.com

Stop the Reaction Think of your life as a garden. We all know how it
feels to walk through a garden that has been tended with love. In our
work together, we will look at ways to feed and nurture your garden of
life and weed out what does not support health and growth. As you learn
how to transmute and transform the energy behind your negative thoughts,
emotions, attitudes, and beliefs, the reward you find is inner peace. As
you bathe in a state of love and appreciation, you experience energy
that allows you and your garden to thrive. To do this, you need to break
the cycle of triggers and habitual reactions that can make you feel
trapped in your negativity. In this chapter you will learn how to tell
when you're reacting and what you can do to stop the reaction. Because
our habits are deeply ingrained, this work may seem difficult at times.
But remember, we are ultimately responsible for how we react and act.
Open your mind to embrace your possibilities.

Connecting with Your Inner Peace and Light Please do the following
preparation exercise, which will take you about ten or fifteen minutes.
Of course you can do it longer if you wish. First, read through the
exercise so you can use it to guide your visualization. If you prefer,
you might ask someone to read it aloud to you as you do the exercise. Or
you could record yourself reading it aloud, then play the recording to
guide you. Next, find a comfortable spot to sit or lie down where you
will not be disturbed. If you like, you can put on some music that is
relaxing and peaceful to you. You might want to draw the blinds or
curtains or place a scarf over your eyes. Begin by placing your hands on
your abdomen and start to breathe slowly. It doesn't matter if you
breathe through your nose or mouth. What is important is that you take
some deep breaths all the way down into your belly. Breathe comfortably
for a few minutes, allowing your body to move into a deep and relaxed
state. Allow your troubles and

thoughts to be taken away by your breath. Feel your troubles and
thoughts being transformed into pure light. As you continue to breathe
slowly and deeply into your abdomen, think about a place in nature that
you love. It is a place of great beauty or peace. It might be right
where you live, nearby, or a faraway place you've traveled to.
Experience yourself being in this place as fully as you can right now.
Look around you and see all that there is to see. What are the colors,
the plant life, the tree life, the animals, the birds, the fish? What
life-forms inhabit this place? What does the sky look like? Are there
clouds or is it clear? What is the color of the sky? What are the sounds
of nature around you? Does the wind make a sound or is the air still and
silent? If there is water in this place, what is the sound? Is there
birdsong here? What other life-forms are singing and communicating to
you in this place? Take a deep breath and take in the fragrance of the
fresh, clean air. What else do you smell in this place? Now feel your
body sinking into the earth. The earth is holding you, supporting you,
and loving you as it does each second in your life. Feel the air on your
body. Do you feel it gently caressing you as it does in your life with
each breath that you take? What is the temperature of the air? Do you
feel the sun above you feeding you with the energy of life as it does
each day of your life? Is there moisture in the air nourishing each cell
of your body, as we all depend on water to nourish us on all levels?
Being in this place helps you to remember the preciousness of life.
Being here now is a time-out from your busy life filled with activity
and many thoughts. As you breathe, allow yourself to experience the
peace and calm of being in nature as it reminds you of being connected
to all of life. You are not just fingers living an independent life. You
are connected to an organism of life that is always feeding you. You are
connected to a web of life. As you breathe, deeply experience this
connection. Where did this great earth filled with such beauty come
from? Where did you come from? What about other life-forms on earth?
Consider the miracle of a body. It is such a complex makeup of cells
that form organs, which have intelligence and give us life. We have a
brain that

allows us to experience this beauty and joy of being alive. We have the
ability to create beauty and joy in our lives. Some creator or creative
force of the universe created us. Continuing to breathe deeply,
experience your creator or creative force. Experience the love and light
from which you were created. Experience how, like your creator, you also
have the capacity to create love and light with your breath and
thoughts. Sink deeply into the experience of love from which this planet
was created. Something so filled with beauty must have been created from
pure love and joy. Now put your hands on your heart. Listening to the
sound of your heartbeat, experience yourself as more than just a
physical body, thoughts, and life experiences. Allow your body to sink
away into the earth. Travel deep within yourself until you experience
yourself as just pure light. You are a being of light. And you were
given a body to experience the joys and wonders of earth. You can see
beauty with your eyes. You can feel beauty with your body and with your
sense of touch. You can feel the love of the sun, earth, air, and water.
You can hear joy and beauty with your ears. You can hear the wind's
caressing messages of love. You can smell the sweetness of life and
taste the wonders of the food this great earth gives us in abundance.
With your mind you can create thoughts that go out into the universe and
rain back down on you as creations from your love and light. You have
the ability to manifest love and joy in your life. This is your destiny.
Now slowly dress yourself in your body again: cells, bones, organs, and
skin. Embrace this body that has so much to experience, while at the
same time remembering that you are a being of spiritual light.
Experience this place you are in with new eyes. Experience the depth of
love and light here and the magic of life. Remember you have come here
to experience and share love with all life-forms. Remember; remember the
truth of who you are. As you continue to breathe with your hands on your
heart, take one memory of being in this place and hold it in your heart.
You might choose a symbol, a sound, a feeling, a smell, or a taste. Draw
several

deep breaths into your heart, embodying the symbol, sound, feeling,
smell, or taste. With your breath, allow your consciousness to bring you
back to the room you are lying or sitting in. Come back with the memory
that you are love and light. Hold in your heart the experience of life
as precious. And when you are ready, take your time, open your eyes, and
experience yourself as fully present. You might experience a different
vibration in your body. Breathe very slowly throughout your body. Allow
your breath to fully ground you. Feel your breath moving through your
feet down into the earth, connecting you to the earth. Feel your body on
your floor, pillow, chair, or bed grounding you to the earth. Listen to
the sounds in your room grounding you back home.

Discerning Your Truth When we find ourselves facing conflict---with
another person, with our circumstances, or within ourselves---we don't
always respond to just what is happening in the moment. Consciously or
unconsciously, our mind often attaches to some past experience that
triggers a fear or survival reaction, such as the well-known "fight or
flight," not related to the situation at hand. Part of our work is to
learn to discern the difference between a real threat that warrants our
attention and a perceived threat created by our mind. We need to learn
how to rely on our inner knowing, our intuition, which comes from deep
within, beyond the memories of our past experiences. In the preparation
exercise, you spent time experiencing your own inner peace and light,
connecting with a source of truth deep within you. Now take a couple of
minutes to try a more specific, very simple exercise to help you learn
the difference between the thinking mind, which doesn't always give us
accurate information, and the intuitive mind, which knows the truth.
Think about something that you love---a food, a flower, a taste, or a
smell. Keep it simple. Go inside yourself, saying these words: I love
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Notice the sensations in your body as you tell
yourself a truth. Do you perceive an image inside yourself when you do
this? Do you get a physical feeling? Is there another sense that lets
you know that you have told yourself a truth?

Get up and walk around. Do a simple task to detach your mind and your
senses from the experience you've just had. Then sit down again and this
time tell yourself a lie: I hate \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (the same
thing you said you loved). Notice the feeling in your body when you tell
yourself a lie. Does a visual image form? Does a different sense set off
an alarm? Try doing the same exercise with other statements: I want to
live a life where I am fulfilled and healthy and know the truth of who I
am. I am unwilling to settle for a life filled with superficiality. I do
not want to live a life where I am fulfilled and healthy and know the
truth of who I am. I am willing to settle for a life filled with
superficiality. Notice how you feel as you say these different sets of
statements to yourself. Practice this over the next few weeks. It will
help you learn to differentiate between the false fear triggered by a
painful memory and the truth of your inner knowing. As human beings we
all have emotions. We all have problematic thoughts that come up in
response to others and our environment. This is typical. We are working
to transform the invisible energy behind these thoughts and emotions
into an energy that embraces love and light. Part of our growing process
is to learn how to avoid reacting automatically. We want to have our
experiences and work through our feelings, not just walk around the
world reacting to everything that creates a challenge for us. Our mind
moves into automatic reactions very quickly. So it's important to learn
how to stop these automatic defensive reactions when a trigger creates
fear or anger. But how do we stop when the defensive reaction has become
a habit?

Exercises to Stop Reactions

Here is one technique that I work with to stop myself from moving into a
reactive state. Come up with an image that is precious to you, like the
face of a baby you know, or the face of a kitten or puppy. Picture
yourself sending the energy behind your emotions to that precious being.
Do you want to be sending toxic energy to someone or something precious
to you? Take a breath and think about who's actually receiving your
toxic energy. For example, let's say a telemarketer calls and disturbs
you during dinner. Perhaps you had a bad day at work and your boss
"dumped" on you because he was also having a bad day. On an unconscious
level you dump all your aggressions onto this telemarketer. But the
telemarketer is just trying to put food on the table for his family.
Does he deserve to receive all this aggressive energy? Simply taking
time to think this through---simply acknowledging the recipient of the
energy---can stop the reaction. As you work to change your patterns of
reaction, it's important to feel no guilt. The energy behind guilt is
not healthy. Many of us have learned through experience that it's
acceptable to kick others when we feel down. But when you allow yourself
to get lost in the energy of guilt, you are essentially kicking
yourself. An important part of this practice is learning to act lovingly
toward yourself as well as others, since you, too, are a precious being
that should not be harmed. We are attempting to change our cultural
conditioning and move to a new evolution of consciousness. This
consciousness recognizes the impact our energy has on others and the
planet: It is a consciousness of love. And making this shift takes work.
The first step is to want to make the shift and to set an intention to
do so. Once we set an intention, a change in our behavior will naturally
follow. And learning how to transform our habitual reactions to others
is an important part of that change.

Put Discernment into Action Another method you might try using to stop a
reaction comes from the truth-or-lie exercise I shared, in which you
practiced identifying the images and sensations that come when you
connect with (or deny) your inner

knowing. This time, think of a symbol or feeling you can practice that
will give you the message to stop, take a deep breath, and not react.
Perhaps you envision a stop sign appearing as you are about to send
negative energy. Or perhaps you feel a knot or butterflies in your
stomach. Once again, we are not repressing or denying our feelings. We
are working all the way through them to turn them into something that
will nourish our soul. If you have ever done any gardening, think about
compost. When we compost consciously, beautiful flowers grow in our
garden. When we don't work with our compost, it just sits around and
rots.

Try an Experiment with a Plant Here is a technique I use in my workshops
to help participants become more conscious of the energy behind their
thoughts and emotions throughout the day. I bring to the workshop
three-inch sod pots, soil, and herb seeds. I ask each participant to
plant a little pot that will be a metaphor for his or her garden of life
and to carry the plant around throughout the day, observing what energy
is going into that garden. For example, someone is at lunch with her
little plant when the conversation turns into a heated political debate
or moves into despair over the current climate changes. If she works
through her feelings, the plant gets the energy of love. If she just
sits on her feelings, simmers, and sends out anger to the person whose
comments are triggering her problematic thoughts, this energy goes into
the plant. So it would be this negative energy that ends up feeding her
life instead of the energy of love. Sometimes a participant actually
puts a string through her pot and wears it like a necklace so that the
plant lies on her heart. When she learns to transform the energy of her
thoughts, attitudes, beliefs, and emotions into love and light, the
seeds germinate very quickly. I have watched seeds germinate within two
days when they are fed in this way. Perhaps it's impractical for you to
try such an experiment. If so, then you can buy a small plant to put on
your desk at work or somewhere in your home where you will be around it
a lot. Notice throughout the day the energy feeding your plant. This
same energy is feeding your body and life. You could also try this
experiment with food and beverages. The energy you put into what you eat
and drink is what you are digesting. Pay attention

to the energy you're sending out while you purchase, prepare, or consume
your food and drink throughout the day. What energy is feeding you ?

Look in a Mirror You could also try emoting while you watch yourself in
a mirror. There might be some resistance to doing this; after all, no
one wants to observe himself or herself acting out in a toxic way. But
try it if you can. At some point you might start laughing at the
absurdity of your behavior. This is good. One of the causes of toxic
thoughts is that we tend to take ourselves too seriously. Bringing humor
into our life creates a space for lightness and joy to permeate, and
this creates healing.

Express, Don't Send One day I was planning my errand route. I had one
appointment I had to get to in the afternoon. I planned to run a large
number of errands before I had to show up for my appointment. If the
"errand gods" were with me, I could get all my errands done. But I left
no room for any delay. I was driving down a major street when the driver
in front of me stopped his car to let a large truck turn out of a
driveway. The turn was a tight one and would take many tries. Now there
was no way for me to complete all the errands I was determined to get
done. My patience level was very low. I was leaving town in a few days
and I felt completely stressed out. It embarrasses me to say that this
act of kindness by the driver in front of me moved me into a state of
anger. I knew I was not being rational and that it was not a big deal
that I would have to postpone some of my errands. But my adrenaline was
really going. I sat in my car and kept repeating to myself, "Express,
don't send." To do this, I simply stated that I felt frustration that I
could not finish my errands. This is a fact. At the same time through my
intention I transformed the energy emanating from me to light rather
than a force that contains a harmful psychic punch. As I did this I
looked at the driver. He seemed like a nice man. Why would I even want
to send poisonous energy his way? By using this kind of self-talk I was
able to stop any harm going his way. By

acknowledging my feelings I was able to stop my reaction and change my
behavior. Feeling stressed out can make us act in ways we might regret
later on. Try repeating the motto "Express, don't send" as you find
yourself losing patience over the actions of others. You might write it
on pieces of paper and leave them in places where you might need this
reminder. Leave such a note on the dashboard of your car or on your desk
at work. Think of places where you need such a reminder. Think of how
much creative and productive energy can become available to you when you
are freed from reactions to anger and fear.

Practical Ways to "Plant Your Garden" We've looked at ways to stop your
automatic reactions so you can feed your life-garden with positive
rather than negative energy. You can extend the principle in practical
ways into different areas of your life. For example, I love to spin
fiber into yarn on a spinning wheel. As I spin I think about spinning
love into the yarn. In this way, people who wear what I make out of the
yarn will be embraced in love. If you sew, crochet, or knit, you might
want to consider the energy that goes into the clothes, scarves,
afghans, and other creations that will be covering your loved ones. When
I cook or bake I think about how much I love the people I am preparing
the food for. In this way they will ingest and absorb love. Think about
what you are feeding yourself and your loved ones based on your mood as
you prepare your food. As I feed the wild birds and squirrels outside, I
feel deep appreciation for the birds' songs and the animals' presence on
the land. As I water my houseplants and my garden, I give thanks for
their beauty so that I am feeding the soil and plants with love. You can
do the same thing if you look at what energies go into your home as you
do chores and repairs. You can use this principle out in the world too.
One of my daily errands is to go to the post office, where the energy is
often thick with anger and frustration due to long and slow-moving
lines. Part of my practice is to set an intention to lift the mood of
the workers and customers who seem stressed out. I might do this by
using kind words in conversations, by smiling at people, or just by
sending out loving energy.

You can change what you "feed" your body, your home, your work
environment, and your creative projects by raising your awareness and
setting the intention to infuse love into everything you do. Use your
imagination to think about places in your own personal and professional
life where you might do this work. How do you want to plant your garden?

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3

OceanofPDF.com

Transmute the Energy The real work begins once you stop reacting. The
first step is honoring your thoughts and emotions, realizing that you
are entitled to your feelings. The second step is acknowledging that you
want to shift your energy. The third step is learning how to actually
change the energy emanating from you into a vibration of love and light.
In this chapter we will look at specific techniques you can learn and
use to transform energy, starting with the simplest of all: breathing.

Using Our Breath to Transmute Back in the 1970s I worked for a temp
agency and was assigned to different secretarial and office jobs. One of
these was in a bank in a skyscraper in a very large city. My desk was on
the same floor as the bank's vice president. The air in the office came
through vents near the floor. Sometimes the air coming through would
make the vice president's feet cold, so the air would be turned off. By
three o'clock each afternoon I was so oxygen-deprived, I would literally
pass out at my desk. One of my coworkers would have to help me walk
outside to get some air before I could go back in and continue my work.
As the weeks went by, I found myself getting the flu a lot and finally
had to quit the job. I loved the people I worked with, but the lack of
oxygen was making me sick. In our culture we just don't breathe
properly, which is a major cause of both physical and emotional illness.
I have a friend who was dealing with paralyzing anxiety for years. She
tried to treat herself with various antianxiety medications, as well as
alcohol, food, and other forms of escape, without success. Then my
husband, Woods, who teaches meditation, yoga, and breathing, offered to
show her some simple breathing practices she could try for five minutes
a day. She immediately noticed that her anxiety began to lift. After a
short while, she found that as long as she did the simple breathing
exercises daily, her anxiety did not return. Much has been written on
breathing and how it affects our health and well-being. To be healthy
both emotionally and physically, we need oxygen

and we need to breathe correctly. For thousands of years, different
breathing methods have been used to increase what the yogic traditions
call prana, or life-force. Breathing is also a simple, effective way to
transform energy. When you are in the grip of a reaction you may notice
that your breathing is shallow and rapid, which may make your face feel
hot. But when you are feeling centered, happy, or peaceful, you breathe
with ease. One of the benefits of breathing is to help you find your
center. In fact, it is the easiest way to get centered when you find
yourself being triggered by the words or behavior of others. Change
cannot occur if we aren't centered. Breathing can also help you stop the
energy that goes into focusing on negative thoughts. When you breathe
deeply, it can help you shift your energy from simply thinking to
feeling more in touch with your body. Once you are more in touch with
your body, you can access a state of deep inner knowing and move out of
a reactionary state. I have found that it's easy to get too hung up on
the specifics of breathing practices. You can research different books
on breathing later, if you choose, but for now I suggest that you might
want to keep things simple and just be more conscious of how you
breathe. You can start right now.

Try Some Breathing Please read the next few paragraphs for some
guidelines on conscious breathing. Then put down the book. You can
remain seated or you can lie down. Close your eyes and place your hands
on your abdomen. Take some deep breaths so that you feel your abdomen
rising and falling. Breathe through your nose or mouth. Most traditions
teach that it is best to breathe through your nose. One East Indian yoga
teacher says that as the breath moves through your nose and into your
sinuses, a calming effect is created in your body. I have also worked
with breathing exercises where people are instructed to breathe through
their mouths. Find which way is more comfortable for you. Breathe
slowly. Rapid breathing is not a way to center; in fact, it might make
you feel "spaced out" and ungrounded. There are breathing practices that
do use rapid breaths to energize the body and are part of

certain well-known spiritual practices. But here we are looking at how
to calm the body. If you haven't tried slow deep breathing before, you
might feel a little disoriented. This is especially likely if you
usually breathe in a shallow fashion. When we breathe shallowly, our
energy contracts. When we breathe deeply, oxygen begins flowing
throughout our entire body. The vibration of our body begins to shift,
and we feel more expanded. One of the benefits of allowing yourself to
take slow deep breaths is that you will feel your own presence growing.
And, once again, you will feel centered. If you do this when you feel
triggered, you will notice that the energy you put out into the room
changes. Others will notice it too.

A Calming Exercise Here is a breathing exercise that you can use to
create calm in the midst of a reactive mental or emotional state. When
trying to attain a calm state through breathing, you want to make sure
your exhalation is longer than your inhalation. The teaching here is
that to get a good inhalation, you actually begin by exhaling. Begin by
letting out air in a long exhalation. Then take a breath in and pause.
Next, do a long exhalation. Now pause again. There are a variety of ways
that you can do this exercise. You can inhale on a count of four, pause,
and then exhale as you count to eight. Or, instead of counting, you can
repeat to yourself the word calm or the phrase I am calm or I am
peaceful during the exhalation. Different people find that different
counts work for them. If it stresses your body to exhale for eight
counts, obviously this will not be an exercise that produces a calm
state. Experiment and see what way works the best for you.

Breathing to Create a State of Balance In the last exercise you learned
that to calm the body, it is important to exhale longer than you inhale.
If you want to achieve a state of balance, use

the same number of counts on the inhale as on the exhale, remembering to
pause in between. Here, as in the last exercise, you want to start with
an exhalation. Then you want to find a comfortable count that works for
you, somewhere between four and eight counts. Breathe in for four to
eight counts, pause, and then breathe out for the same number of counts.

Breathing In and Through Your Heart Another way of breathing to change
your state of consciousness is to imagine yourself breathing in and
through your heart. (You tried a little of this technique in Chapter 2
in the exercise for connecting with your inner peace and light.)
Actually put your hands on your heart so that you will feel your heart
as you breathe in and out. Put an image or feeling of something precious
in your heart as you do this. I find that when I breathe in and through
my heart, I have more access to my intuition. My energy moves from my
normal state of mental chatter and reaction to a place of peace. I use
this when I teach workshops. As I breathe in and through my heart, I
find that my words come from a deep place of knowing. People who have
studied with me for a long time know when I am breathing through my
heart. My presence changes significantly in the room as I shift more
into an expanded state of consciousness and awareness. And the benefit
for both my students and myself is that I am in a place of love and
peace when I breathe through my heart, which affects everyone in the
room. A client of mine, George, was having a terrible time with his
supervisor at work. Their chemistry was the sort that always seemed to
cause an explosive reaction when they were together. Obviously their
energies did not mix in a harmonious fashion. I taught George the
process of breathing through his heart while focusing on a precious
image or feeling he had placed there. He practiced this for a while and
noticed a shift inside himself.

One day, as a fight with his supervisor was beginning, he decided to try
breathing through his heart. She was not aware of what he was doing, but
all of a sudden there was silence in the room. The energy shifted, as
did the conversation. For the first time, George felt a sense of
compassion for his supervisor. Over time, as he continued to use this
technique, his relationship with her changed. Breathing is one of the
simplest ways to transform any energy. When we are in reaction mode, our
breathing becomes shallow. The more stressed out we become, the more we
react. When we breathe deeply, the energy changes on its own. Try some
breathing while you are with other people. Notice how the energy in the
room changes as you move into a centered and calm space. Notice how you
can transform the energy in the room simply by breathing. Notice how
your own presence moves from a contracted state into a more expanded
state. Notice the sense of peace that you feel as you do this. Take some
time out to breathe now.

Working with the Energy behind Our Words Words hold a tremendous amount
of power. They affect our relationships with others as well as what we
end up creating in the world, and they are powerful tools for
transforming the energy we project. I see words as seeds. Every time we
plant a seed word, it will grow. In the garden of your life, are you
planting seeds of love or seeds of hate and fear? Various ancient
cultures understand the power of words and so treat them with great
respect. The Navajo people have a saying: "May you walk in beauty."
Whenever someone from the Navajo nation attends one of my lectures that
includes a discussion on the power of words, he or she always comes up
to me and explains the significance of the phrase. Essentially, it means
don't say anything to another person unless it will create beauty in his
or her life. Hebrew and Sanskrit are what we call "vibrational
languages." In Sanskrit it is believed that when you say a word, the
vibration from that word goes up into the universe and comes back down
as a physical manifestation. One Hindu creation story tells that the
world sprang forth from the skulls of the goddess Kali's necklace. Each
skull was a letter in the

Sanskrit language. There are stories in the Hebrew tradition, too, about
how words can be used to heal or to harm, to create or to destroy.
Hebrew is also called a consonantal language, meaning that it is made of
consonants and not vowels. This is because the sounds and vibrations of
the vowels are the real power; the consonants are what contain the power
and therefore define the parameters of the power coming through. By not
writing out the vowels, the language keeps the most powerful words
secret. You have to be told which vowels are used in a particular word.
Also, a word could be an extremely powerful word using one set of
vowels, but an ordinary word using another set of vowels. The Qabbalists
say that the world was created by the letters of the alphabet, meaning
through the use of sound and vibration. The Hebrew bible embodies the
very sound of creation, the vibrations that actually were used to create
and manifest. Therefore words are "creative," and if they are creative
they can also be destructive. In ancient Egypt, action and words were
often the same thing; words had so much power that often a metaphor was
used in the place of a word. Otherwise it was thought that the energy of
the word---potentially destructive---would manifest physically. The
creation stories of many cultures teach that the world was created with
a sound or word. Genesis says that God created the world with the words
"Let there be light." The New Testament says, "In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." In the cosmology
of the Hopi, the sun god and earth goddess chant life into being. The
Hindu scriptures teach us that aum is the sacred syllable from which the
entire universe was created. Even abracadabra, the incantation that many
of us said as children, is actually a word of power that comes from the
Aramaic. The original spelling is abraq ad habra, which literally means,
"I will create as I speak."

What Do Your Words Create? Here is a simple exercise to try. First, read
through the visualization or ask someone to read it aloud to you. Or, if
you like, make a recording of yourself reading it. Then get into a
comfortable position either sitting up or lying down, either in nature
or in your home. If you do this at home, you can put on some relaxing
music that helps you move into an expanded place.

Think of a place in nature that you like to visit. This might be the
same place you went to in the opening exercise of the preceding chapter.
Find a nice rock or a place on the earth where you can sit. Experience
yourself being there with all your senses alive and open. Look around
you and see all that there is to see in this place. Hear the sounds of
nature around you. Feel the breeze on your skin and the ground or rock
beneath you. Smell the fragrances here and taste the air. As you sit in
this precious spot on earth, start to say out loud some of the words you
commonly use. Notice the vibration that travels out into the air and up
into the sky. Here are some words to get you started. Try saying the
word brilliance. Notice the invisible energy around this word. Now try
saying the word radiance and notice what vibration is being sent out
with this word. Try saying the word hate and notice the energy behind
it. Now try saying despair and pity. As you sit in this place, try words
you use in your own daily vocabulary. Notice what you send out and how
it is affecting the energy field of the planet and the web of life.
Notice what is raining back down on you as the energy you send out
returns and manifests in your physical world. Notice what seeds you are
planting in your garden of life. Now as you continue this practice, try
shifting your intention and notice if it changes the impact of the
energy. Is there a different manifestation if you send the words I hate
you? Notice how the intention behind your words fuels their power.
Practice words as long as you wish. When you are done, reflect on what
you have learned about how to create a beautiful life-garden. And when
you feel ready, take some deep breaths and experience yourself returning
to the place you are lying or sitting in. Allow your breath to connect
you with your body and the earth. And when you are ready, open your
eyes. When I offer this exercise to my students, they're often surprised
to realize how often it is not the word itself but the intention behind
the word that makes a difference. In our culture, just as we don't look
at the energy behind our thoughts and emotions, we don't look at the
power behind our words; we don't consider what plants will grow from the
seeds we plant in

another person's psyche. At a conference, I led a group of health
professionals through the same exercise you just did. I asked them to
watch the vibration coming out of the words they used when they gave
medical diagnoses to their patients. The exercise had a big impact on
them as it opened their eyes to the effect their own words could have on
their patients, not just at the level of information, but at a deeper
level.

Using Words to Manifest Good I have been working with the power of words
since the early 1990s, and I try to be vigilant about the words I use in
my workshops and with my clients. I always ask myself this question: Am
I planting seeds of hope, love, and inspiration? Or am I planting seeds
of fear? This doesn't apply only to the words we say out loud to others.
This same concept applies to our self-talk. A problematic state of
consciousness can be drawn out and given force if you are using words
that bring you down. If you say to yourself that you are not a good
person and that you will never be able to create what you want, then
that is exactly how your life will unfold. If you fill your mind with
positive words, the energy and vibration will change in your life,
leading to a positive manifestation. If you use words of hope, you will
manifest hope. Shamans are masters of the power of words. A classic
shamanic healing practice in which the shaman uses words to cure the
patient's illness is called word doctoring. Shamanic practitioners are
also skilled at telling healing stories that open the patient's
imagination to the possibility of healing. For example, in my healing
practice I try to inspire clients by sharing stories of how their lives
can change in positive ways. Instead of focusing on past traumas, I
focus on the gifts that have been returned to them during the healing. I
might acknowledge that a client has had challenges in the past, but I
focus on the good news that the ability to love has returned, or the
ability to use creative energy has returned, or the ability to trust has
returned. In this way, clients feel that there is hope to move forward
in creating a better life that is filled with joy. There are many
brilliant doctors and psychotherapists today who are masters at word
doctoring and telling healing stories. In a sense, everything a
practitioner says to a patient is a sort of story; the key is whether
the story

locks the patient into a diagnosis or gives him or her inspiration and
hope that growth and healing is possible. Caroline Casey, astrologer and
author of Making the Gods Work for You, says my all-time favorite line:
"Imagination lays the tracks for the reality train to drive down." Our
ability to heal and to change the environment we live in is directly
associated with our ability to use our imagination to dream into being
the world in which we want to live. Politicians, religious leaders, and
spiritual leaders can use this power to manipulate followers by
instilling fear into a person's imagination. Or they can inspire by
stimulating people's imaginations with unlimited possibilities. And it
is all done through words. Create lists of words that have the energy
you want to manifest in your life. Try to use these words throughout the
day. Notice how speaking these words out loud helps you feel more
positive and creative. On my desk I have Post-it notes filled with
powerful words I wish to manifest. Some of my favorite words are joy,
awe, splendor, radiance, love, appreciation, light, magic, expansion,
gratitude, wonder, and luminescence. I keep Post-it notes in my car with
inspirational and positive words to help me when I begin to feel some
road rage. At the moment my reaction arises, I see the words and realize
that I have the choice and the power to stop my automatic, angry
reaction. I surround myself with these words so that I have easy access
to them in situations likely to trigger a negative response. I conduct a
lot of my business over the phone, and occasionally there are conflicts.
During a difficult conversation, being surrounded by inspirational words
reminds me that I can choose my response to the energies around me and
my response can change the situation. If I respond to conflict by using
words that express the energies of love and peace, then that is the
energy that follows. If I find myself reflexively engaging in conflict,
creating feelings of hopelessness and anger in the other person, then
those are the energies that will prevail between us. Some of my students
have worked with the power of words in business meetings. When a
discussion becomes hostile, they counter with positive and inspirational
statements that immediately shift the energy in the room. This is a
useful reminder that while we usually can't change other people,

we do have choices and those choices can transform our situations and
ourselves.

The Power of Decrees versus Petitions When we use our words to heal
others and ourselves, we have a choice between using petitions and
decrees. A petition is begging to ask for help. A decree is standing in
your power with the understanding that all the help you need in life is
available to you right now. Sometimes we feel like petitioning for help;
we feel powerless in a situation, down for the count. That is fine. It's
just important to know the difference in vibration between the energy of
a petition and the energy of a decree. Take a minute to notice the
difference. A decree might be: I am love. I am being held in the loving
arms of-God, the Goddess, Buddha, Mary, Jesus, the universe, etc. I have
strong boundaries to protect myself from negativity. I am strong. I am
whole. A petition might be: Please help me be strong. Please love me.
Please make me whole. Petitions ask for change to happen. Decrees help
you make change happen; they help you transform energy because you are
acknowledging that you already have all the help and tools you need. I
write decrees on index cards so I can look at them when I need strength
and inspiration. I often paste one of these cards in my notebook or
notepad to help me during a business meeting. I might choose one of the
following phrases: "I am using my creativity to move this work in a
positive and joyful direction." "All the support I need is here with me
now." "I am surrounded and embraced with the love of the universe."
These are statements of power that shift my state of consciousness. When
I shift my state of consciousness I change the quality of my presence in
a room. When I change my presence I can shift the energies around me. A
decree is also an effective and powerful tool when we have a loved one
who is suffering or

when the suffering of others in a world catastrophe touches us. Often we
respond to someone's suffering with pity, but that can actually rob him
of his power to deal with the situation. Let's say that one of your
friends has been diagnosed with cancer. If you respond from a place of
pity and think to yourself, "You poor thing," you actually pull your
friend down. If you think to yourself, "She is a strong person and has
the strength, support, and tools to deal with this situation," you
actually raise her up energetically, which empowers her. I know a lot of
people who don't let others know when they are being challenged by a
life situation because they don't want to be pitied. I have friends and
students who did not share when they were diagnosed with cancer because
they were afraid that the fear and hopelessness put out by others in
their behalf would turn into destructive energy that would take away the
possibility of healing. Today we see on the news heartbreaking stories
of people who have lost loved ones, homes, and possessions in war or
natural disasters. Of course we feel compassion for all who are
suffering. But on this scale, too, pity takes away their power. When you
find yourself moving into a state of pity for people who have suffered
losses, try turning your feeling into a decree. You can say something
like, "I see the light and strength in all those who have lost their
loved ones or their homes." This is just one example. You can try out
some other wording and see what feels best for you. Because this is such
an important point, I give my students the following example to fully
understand it. Let's say that you are a facing a life challenge and you
have communicated your challenge to the thousands of people reading this
book. Would you rather thousands of people around the world start to
say, "You poor, poor person, I have such great pity for you"? Or would
you prefer to hear thousands of voices saying, "I know you can get
through this time. I am sending you courage, encouragement, and prayers
of support"? When you feel as if you are in a hole, words of
encouragement can help to pull you out of the hole. Words of pity,
however well meant, can actually push you deeper in.

Writing Decrees

Let's take some time out and write some decrees. I will give you some
more examples to inspire you. Two thousand years ago, when Celtic
soldiers went into battle against their Roman conquerors, instead of
praying---"Please help me"---they would say, "The power of the sun is
with me now." They would acknowledge the power they embraced. Reread
those two different statements and notice which one creates a feeling of
strength for you. Here is a Celtic prayer that uses decrees: Deep peace
of the running waves to you. Deep peace of the flowing air to you. Deep
peace of the quiet earth to you. Deep peace of the shining stars to you.
Deep peace of the Son of Peace to you. Here is a decree one of my
students sent me as a gift: Power of the waterfall be yours. Purity of
the waterfall be yours. Spirituality of waterfall be yours. I keep his
card on my desk where I see it every day. The following decrees come
from the Christian tradition: The light of God surrounds me. The love of
God enfolds me. The power of God protects me. The presence of God
watches over me. Wherever I am, God is. Find a quiet place that supports
you while you practice writing out some decrees. You might want to put
on some music. Or you might choose a place outside, where the power of
nature can support you. Write out some decrees that you can use in
different scenarios. When you watch the news and see a catastrophe where
others are suffering, write down a decree that you can use throughout
the day to empower them with the strength to face their challenge. Some
examples

might be: "I see you in your strength right now." "May you know that you
are held in love by the world community." When you receive a phone call
from a friend or loved one talking about his suffering, write down a
decree that provides the energetic help he needs to cope with what is
happening in his life. Examples here might be: "The power to deal with
your challenge is with you now." "Courage be yours now." You can also
write some decrees using words and descriptions from nature. Here are a
couple of examples of decrees I have written demonstrating how the
Celtic people might word a decree: "Blessings of a strong oak tree upon
you with deep roots that provide strength and the ability to stay
centered in the midst of challenging times." "May the blessings of the
bear be yours as bear knows how to go within and heal himself when
wounded." Now write out some decrees that can empower you in your life.
You can try using a decree in your life by repeating it to yourself
throughout the day, like a mantra. In Sanskrit, man means "mind" and tra
means "freeing." So when you repeat a decree as you would recite a
mantra, you are using words of power to manifest positive energy and
power in your life and freeing your own mind at the same time.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4

OceanofPDF.com

More Tools for Transformation There are many ways to transform the
energy you manifest in the world. In this chapter we will look at
techniques that build on the tools we've already begun to use, as well
as tools that use the power of symbols and the elements of nature.

Burst Your Troubles Like Bubbles Songs, which combine the power of words
with the power of breathing, have been used for thousands of years to
promote physical and emotional well-being and to shift energy into a
state of empowerment. When you really sing a song with gusto, you will
find that your energy moves from your head into your heart. The oxygen
moving through your song also awakens the rest of your body. I feel
strongly that many of us gave our power away to others when we were told
that we couldn't sing. Some of us were told, as children, that our
singing voice was so bad, it could hurt people's ears---and now we are
too shy to open our mouth. But when we stop allowing music to flow
through us in song, our energy collapses. You can always shift your
state of consciousness by singing something inspirational---either a
piece you created or one you learned. Santa Fe, New Mexico, where I
live, has been in a drought for years. Every summer becomes tense as
fire season approaches. I have to live with the knowledge that a fire
could destroy my home. I have used all the work I've been describing to
transform the energy of the fear I feel every summer. Early one June
morning, I heard on the news that the day was going to be very hot. I
wanted to give some of my moisture-starved plants some help, so I headed
out to water them. As I left my house to go to the garden, I saw that
the sky was filled with smoke. There was a fire close by, and all my old
fears started to fill up my energy.

I was reacting to the smell of smoke and the smoke in the sky. As I
began watering, I realized that I was feeding my garden, which was
already struggling, with the energy of fear. At that moment I made a
choice to stop my reaction because I wanted to feed my garden with love,
not fear. So I started to sing a song I'd learned at a workshop about
opening up and surrendering to light and love. At first I sounded pretty
pitiful, as I was trying to force a state I wasn't feeling. But I
continued, knowing that if I kept singing I would feel a physical and
emotional shift in my body. And as I kept singing, the fear left my
body. Energetically I moved into a state of surrender, just
acknowledging that I wanted to share love and light with my plants at
this moment. After I finished watering, I went into the house to get
something. When I came out I was singing the song softly, maintaining
the state of openness that I wanted to hold. There was a jackrabbit in
the garden munching the grass. As I passed the jackrabbit, he watched me
and he showed no fear. He was cautious at first, then he went back to
eating grass. I felt that this was a great sign of how my energy had
shifted. The rabbits that come to my house flee at the first sight or
sound of humans. The fact that this rabbit stayed put while I passed by
showed that my energy held no fear. When we can change our internal
energy, all life is affected by the shift. Think of a song that you
already know. This is a song that lifts you up when you sing it by its
beat, melody, and words. Find a song that feels energizing to your body.
Sing it out loud when you are alone, or hum it when you are in public,
to shift your state of consciousness. Notice how the world around you
reflects your song of love and light back to you. Songs and music are
healing, and this has been known for thousands of years. Plants, trees,
animals, people---all life loves to be sung to. As time goes on, you
might find yourself composing your own songs to shift your energy.

Simply Observe Have you noticed that when you take a drive in the
country, your observation of the scenery shifts you into a state of
peace and calm? Watching the scenery change can also move you from
thoughts of the past into focusing on the present moment.

Some spiritual practices teach observation as a way to change one's
state of consciousness. From meditation to psychotherapy to physics, the
underlying belief is that the presence of the observer---even the very
act of observing---changes that which is being observed. Bacteria being
observed under a microscope change their movement because of the fact
that a technician is observing them. It has been found that the
intention of the observer determines whether an electron exhibits itself
as a particle or a wave. And when we are in a state of anger and we just
observe it without trying to change it, our energy will shift too. I
have a strong part of my personality called "the observer." The observer
will say, "Oh, you are feeling anxious right now. That's okay. Just
experience that." This observer has been so helpful when I've needed to
work through a state of consciousness. Sometimes I find myself so
triggered by an event or conversation that my usual methods to transform
the energy behind my thoughts and emotions just do not work. No matter
how much willpower I put into changing a negative thought into a
positive thought, I am simply stuck. If I resist and tell myself I
shouldn't be having these thoughts or emotions, I end up stoking the
fire; resisting states of consciousness only makes the problem grow
larger. But if I move into a state of observation and don't try to
change how I am feeling or thinking, the energy is simply met and
observed. At this point, the energy changes. During times when I can't
control my reaction I repeat the following phrases to myself: "I am very
angry right now, and I need to experience this anger. I ask that the
energy around my anger be transformed into an energy of love and light.
I ask that no one be harmed, including myself, while I sit and work
through this state." It may sound like a lot of words, but they just
take seconds and they make a tremendous difference. This process allows
my mind to do what it has to do while protecting others and myself from
negative energy. When I move into such a reactive state, the first
question I ask myself is: To whom am I sending this energy? This
question motivates me to ask for the energy to be transformed into light
so I won't harm anyone. The same energy can feel toxic for my own body,
too, so I use a decree that acknowledges I am being held in the loving
arms of the universe while I change this lead-heavy consciousness into
gold-light consciousness. As I have said before, this work is a
discipline requiring you to be aware of your habitual reactions. It
takes daily practice so that it becomes a habit

for you to stop reactions and to transform the energy you share in the
world. To get to a place where you feel love, peace, and calm is a great
reward. To get to a place where you feel that you are a being of light
and then shining that light in the world is a gift to yourself and to
those around you. Embrace, recognize, and observe. The end result will
be change, healing, and evolution. We talk about body, mind, and spirit.
The part of us that is spirit is who we are beyond our body, and our
thoughts, and our past experiences. It is an invisible part of us that
is pure spiritual light and exists in divine perfection at all times.
The Italian psychiatrist Roberto Assagioli, who lived and worked at the
same time as Freud, believed that we are already perfect and whole and
that the therapist's true role was to simply help the client remember
this. In a form of therapy he developed, called psychosynthesis, he
created many guided visualizations to help clients tap into their inner
knowing. In one, called the Disidentification Exercise, he leads you
through a process to step back from what is triggering you and to
experience that perfect, spiritual part of yourself. I put an adaptation
of this exercise in my book Medicine for the Earth. There are also books
on psychosynthesis where the whole exercise is written out. I've done
this exercise with many clients and have used it myself since 1982, when
I was introduced to Assagioli's work while getting my master's in
Counseling Psychology. I use a very short version to help me when I am
in a triggered and reactive state. I simply repeat to myself: I have a
body, but I am not my body. I have a mind and thoughts, but I am not my
mind. I have emotions and feelings, but I am not my emotions. I can do
this while I am driving and it works like a charm for me to disengage
from a reactionary state. It helps me remember that I am so much more
than the self-absorbed state I am caught up in. It reminds me that there
is a beauty to life that warrants my good energy. In the space that is
created when I detach from the state of reactive consciousness I am in,
I can breathe through my heart and feel love for the preciousness of
life. Take a few minutes to think about situations where this could be
useful to you. And when your reactions arise, just give it a try.

Working with Symbols and Pictures Carl Jung said that symbols speak to
the unconscious and create change. A simple way of thinking about this
is that, when we meditate on a symbol, a process begins in the depth of
our being that we might not have an intellectual explanation for. A
symbol or a picture can change our state of consciousness in the same
way I described a song can do. It can lift our mood just by its beauty.
As we are so conditioned to react immediately to other people and to
outside stimuli, it is important to surround ourselves with reminders
that can help us break the habit. If you put a picture or a symbol up
where you will see it a lot, it will be a powerful reminder to stop and
not react. In my office I have many pictures and symbols that remind me
that I want to create a sacred space that is healing for myself and
others in my office and also in the world. Among them are pictures of
religious and spiritual teachers who taught about the power of love and
compassion. I have a picture I painted of the light of my own spirit
that reminds me of the truth of who I am. I have pictures of nature,
such as flowers, trees, and stars, that keep me centered in my
connection to all of life. They remind me that the energy I put out does
affect all of life. To stop your habitual reactions, put one or more
inspirational pictures up in a place where you tend to lose yourself to
negative thoughts and emotions. Put reminders on your desk at work and
in your home to help you to remember, anchor into yourself a positive
feeling. Put up pictures that make you smile and inspire a joyful
state---perhaps pictures of loved ones or beautiful places in nature
that you like to visit. Surround yourself with symbols such as hearts,
the moon, the sun, the earth, stars, or your favorite flower that remind
you of beauty and the preciousness of life. And remember to keep
singing.

Nature Heals Us We are part of nature. We are affected by the change in
the seasons and the cycles of the moon. As indigenous peoples put it,
the earth has a heartbeat and we are one with the heartbeat of the
earth. But modern technology has separated us from the cycles of nature.
We wake in the morning to an alarm clock instead of rising to the light
of the

sun. As we have electricity, we do not go to sleep with the cycle of the
sun either. Our homes "protect" us from living in accordance with the
change of seasons as, through the use of heat and air conditioning, we
can separate ourselves from our outer environment. We look at calendars
to tell us when the seasons are changing instead of watching the signs
of change outside. Our cycles of activity and rest do not always flow
with the cycles of nature, and we no longer connect with the heartbeat
of the earth. Irene is a doctor who works with people who have many
allergies and have become very environmentally sensitive. She is a
wonderful medical doctor who is also extremely intuitive. Some years
ago, a patient named Jennifer came to see her. She had been in a car
accident several months before and had sustained a head injury. In the
following months, her health took a nosedive and she developed multiple
problems, including severe anxiety and environmental illness, which
results when the stress of living in environmental pollution wears down
our immune systems. Some people are more sensitive than others and have
a greater impact from this environmental stress. These people can become
allergic to fragrances, most food, and even the materials used to build
homes and offices. Depending on the degree of environmental illness,
some people have a hard time living in today's world. Jennifer was such
a person. She could no longer work, and she had used up all her savings.
She was desperate. Her friends chipped in for her to see Irene. Irene
took her history and gave her some suggestions. Jennifer told Irene she
had no money to pay for any kind of treatment. But Irene wanted to help
her, and she took some time in silence to see if her intuition had
anything to offer. Then she told Jennifer to go live in a cabin in the
mountains and lie on the earth every day---for at least thirty minutes
twice a day, if not longer---rain, snow, or sunshine, until she was
well. Jennifer thought Irene was crazy. But she found a cabin whose
owner needed a housesitter. After about a year had gone by, Irene was at
a party when a very extroverted and flamboyant woman approached her and
started talking to her as if they were best friends. Irene asked her,
"Do I know you?" The woman was Jennifer, and she said that she had
followed Irene's instructions. She had bundled up and lain on the earth
every day and it had worked.

There are many stories like this of people who have overcome a variety
of illnesses by moving into nature and living there until they heal. It
goes back to the concept that we are not fingers separate from the hand,
having an independent life from our own body or the body of the earth.
We are part of a larger organism. When we perceive ourselves as
separate, independent fingers, we are cut off from living in the harmony
and flow of nature. We separate ourselves from the nurturing we receive
from the elements---earth, air, water, and fire in the form of the sun.
In physics, "coherence" describes a state of harmony as perfect as the
phenomenon you hear when you are listening to an amazing symphony in
which the instruments are playing so well together, you cannot separate
them out. All the sounds are in concert. When we are in a harmonious
state where we experience in our bodies the connection with nature, the
web of life, and our spiritual light, we too are in a state of
coherence, all our cells communicating with one another in concert as in
a beautiful symphony. It's when we experience ourselves as separate and
we move into triggered reactive states or states of stress that our
cellular communication breaks down and makes us ill. Here are some
techniques you can use to strengthen your connection with every element
in nature and to transmute your energy into love and light.

Water Forms Us Read the visualization below. When you are done, close
your eyes and spend a couple of minutes in appreciation for the element
water. Before you were born onto this great earth you were just a little
spark of light preparing to start a new adventure as a spirit coming to
earth in a human form. And it is your destiny to learn how to be a
spirit in a body who can manifest beauty and caretake this great earth.
You found a womb to enter. While you were in the womb, water held you as
you grew, protected you from any physical harm, and carried the
nutrients from your mother to you, and as water broke, you entered into
the world. Water continues to nurture you. You are mostly made up of
water. The water you drink and the water that comes from the sky
nurtures and

cleanses you. You feel calm and peaceful when you are around large
bodies of water; you love to hear the waves of the ocean and the sound
of rushing rivers. Water reminds you that all life is about movement and
change as you encounter it throughout the day. When you feel as if you
need to transform an energy that you are sending out, or you need to
cleanse yourself of an energy you have taken in from others, you can use
the life-force of water. You can experience the energy leaving you and
being transformed into light while you wash your hands, or while you
take a shower or bath, or while you stand in the rain. These are just
some suggestions, and I hope I have inspired you to come up with your
own way to work with water. But please do not just dump negativity into
this incredible living being. Instead, experience yourself letting go of
the energy and then visualize the energy transforming into light as it
travels with water back to the source.

Air Cleanses Us After you read the following visualization, take a
moment in silence to honor all the gifts of air. It is often said that
the first living being you bond with after leaving the womb is your
mother. In actuality, the first living being you bond with is air. For
your life begins with the first breath you take. And with each breath,
you continue an intimate relationship with air. Air is an incredible
teacher of how we are all connected. When you breathe out, some of your
DNA travels out of you and someone else breathes it in. So you are
constantly connected with all of life through your breath. Air is the
last living being you say good-bye to as you leave your body and this
great earth with your final breath. Air gives us life and can also help
us release and cleanse energies that we want transformed into light. If
you feel the need to shift your state of consciousness, try blowing
bubbles into the air. Envision the energy transforming into light while
the bubbles carry your light into the world.

You can stand outside in the wind and let it cleanse you of any
negativity you are sending or any negativity that you feel you have
taken on. Again, as with water, you want to see what is being released
into the wind as an energy of love and light.

Earth Supports Us After reading this visualization, allow yourself to
feel the power and appreciate the beauty of earth. As you are born into
a body, you are now connected with the great living body we call earth.
Earth supports and holds you as you grow and live. Every step you take
connects you with this great life-force. You are nurtured by the
incredible abundance of food the earth provides, and your soul is
nurtured as you experience the extraordinary beauty of the earth and the
life it supports. You are in awe of gems of all colors, flowering
plants, gracious trees, and all the life-forms that are created on the
earth. The earth holds you and embraces you in love. When you feel you
have energy to release, you can visualize burying it in the earth with
great gratitude, asking that this energy be transformed into light and
love. This light and love will seed the earth in such a way that you and
others can continue to be nurtured.

Fire Transforms Us After reading this visualization, take a moment to
appreciate the power that the sun shares. Think about how fire brings
new life into our lives. There would be no life without the sun. Each
morning for thousands of years, people around the world have given
thanks for its return. Today we still honor the power of the sun. From
childhood as you grew and started to play outside, you were energized by
the sun, which is the element of fire. And still today the sun shines
inside of you and this is your spirit. The sun shines above you, giving
energy to all that is alive without asking for anything in return.

The sun reminds you of your passion for life. As the sun shines brightly
above you, generating energy to nurture all of life, your own sun shines
within, fueling your creativity. The element of fire that burns teaches
us about life and death. Fire takes what needs to be destroyed and
always brings us new life, as with the seeds within the earth that need
the heat of fire to germinate and burst forth in beauty. Fire teaches
you about transformation, regeneration, and the continual cycle of death
and rebirth. As you need to transform the energy you are sending or the
energy you have taken on, you can use the energy of the sun. You might
imagine putting the energy into a bonfire and having the fire, a natural
transformer, shift the energy. Imagine yourself feeding the fire with
the energy you wish to transform into love and light. When I do this, it
works every time.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5

OceanofPDF.com

The Nature of Projections We are like the facets of a diamond. The many
aspects of our personality are sculpted by destiny, and by our parents,
siblings, family, teachers, and other authority figures, and by friends.
We are shaped by the joys and hurts of our past relationships and
experiences. Many parts of our personality are available for all to see,
but others are tucked away in secret places---both strong and wounded
parts of ourselves. Many of us hide our inner light, for we were taught
we would not receive love if we shone too brightly. Many of us hide
parts of ourselves associated with times we felt we didn't belong and
other experiences that bring up fear, sadness, and anger. When we look
into a mirror, even we don't see these aspects. But when we meet someone
whose behavior expresses one of these hidden aspects of us, he or she
can trigger a strong reaction. We may not even know these people
personally; maybe we've seen them through the media or experienced them
through their writing. But in situations such as these we can find
ourselves projecting onto other people qualities that lie hidden inside
of us. We tend to blame others for our feelings, thoughts, attitudes,
and beliefs. We also tend to idolize others without acknowledging that
we have the same gifts and talents within, though we might express them
differently in the world. And we also tend to project our own suffering,
in the form of pity, onto others whom we think are suffering in some
way. For example, if you feel that you like how someone shines, it means
you have that same ability but have not yet allowed yourself to express
it. If you "hate" a personality trait in someone else, it means that
same trait also lies hidden inside of you. Whatever you can see in
others is also a part of you. When we are able to acknowledge our
projections and experience parts of ourselves that are hidden, we stop
sending so much of our energy to others. We embrace these parts that are
carried within us. And as human beings we are here to learn, grow, and
evolve. We are here to learn how to sculpt the deeply hidden parts of
ourselves into a work of beauty, love, and light.

Examining Your Projections Try the following exercise. Take a notebook
outside or find a comfortable place inside where you won't be disturbed.
Write down the names of two people whom you put on a pedestal. Write
down the qualities they express in the world that inspire you. Now start
to write a simple story about how you have these qualities buried
within. Write quickly, without thinking, to unlock the hidden secrets
buried in your unconscious. Try writing with your eyes closed or
half-opened. Don't worry about how it looks on the page or how it
sounds. Just keep writing. Just let your pen move without thought or
effort. Now try to do the same exercise with two people whom you really
do not like or admire. Write down the aspects of their personality or
behavior that trigger you, what it is about them you react to. Take a
deep breath. Now start to write a story about how these qualities are
also facets of you that you have kept hidden. Don't worry if it doesn't
have a beginning, middle, and end. Don't judge what you write; just
allow what comes to flow through you. The next step is to be able to
look at people who trigger you from a place of compassion. You don't
want to pity them, as this pulls down their energy, hindering their own
process of evolution. But you also don't want to rationalize their
behavior in the world. For example, if someone commits a crime that
harms another, you want to have compassion for what moved him to a path
of violence. And at the same time you might recognize that a violent
streak lives in your unconscious. It does not mean it is okay to act out
in a violent way. We all have choices about how we respond to our past
abuses and wounds. But it could be that this divine being has forgotten
his spiritual light and hasn't yet found the tools to work through his
wounds and remember his light. Try moving into a state of love and
appreciation for this person. Notice how your energy shifts.
Experiencing love and appreciation for all of life is the most potent
form of transforming energy I know.

Projecting Through Envy We often compare ourselves to others, imagining
that someone else has a better life, or a happier marriage, or a more
satisfying career than we do. The truth is that this is pure projection.
The reason we project is that we don't always have an accurate
reflection of ourselves. We cannot always see what we do have in life
and who we really are. So we look outside ourselves and use others as a
mirror, a basis for judgments about our lives. I was giving a lecture
with another spiritual teacher in a very affluent part of California.
After our individual presentations we gave time for questions and
answers. One of the comments from the audience was about how the people
who lived in this area had more than others did. The assumption was that
this affluence created better lives. This comment was made several
times, and each time I found myself feeling uneasy. Finally I needed to
speak up. I have been teaching and working with clients in my healing
and counseling practice for over twenty years. In meeting thousands of
people, I have not seen that material wealth creates happiness. To the
contrary, some of the wealthiest people I have worked with are also the
unhappiest people I know. I have seen people who live in poverty who
have a presence that lights up any room they are in. The quality of
laughter in their eyes is the envy of those whose eyes are filled with
emptiness and suffering. This does not mean that I do not take issue
with all the inequality in the world. What I am saying is that having
material wealth does not always equate to a life of happiness. But this
is the assumption we project onto the wealthy and famous when we envy
what they have. Some sense of competition can serve us well. It is often
through feeling competitive that we strive to be the best we can be, so
this can inspire us to keep working and growing. But you know what deep
jealousy and envy feel like. Jealousy might be a lover flirting; envy is
desiring what someone has. And they hurt both your body and your psyche.
It hurts the people you feel jealous and envious of, too, as you rob
their energy. You may even unconsciously send toxic thoughts to them if
your jealousy or envy leads to anger you don't express. Envy can become
toxic in you and in the world. And I bet each of you has had a taste of
this.

You've heard the adage that in life we can perceive our cup as
half-empty or half-full. When we move into strong feelings of jealousy
and envy, we are coming from a place of lack, from the experience that
our cup is halfempty. And yet creation comes from a place of abundance.
You cannot create from a place of lack. So what do you do when you move
into this frame of mind, negatively comparing yourself to others? First
you must remember that, like diamonds, we all manifest different facets
of beauty and brilliance in the world. I have never seen a group of
people comparing the beauty of stars in the night sky. Nor have I heard
people comparing the beauty of flowers. We might feel drawn to one
flower over another, but we honor all flowers for the beauty they
possess. We must treat one another---and ourselves---the same way. We
all have a destiny, but at the same time we also have the opportunity to
make choices. We can create happy lives with what we are given. Or we
can choose to be bitter over what life gives us. It is important for us
to see that by the choices we make, we can grow, learn, and evolve. The
key to working through feelings of envy is first to acknowledge them,
because they are a powerful emotion and should not be invalidated. At
the same time, you don't want the energy to become toxic to yourself or
others. What follows is an exercise to help you work through your
projections by acknowledging your gifts. Take a few minutes to go inside
yourself, into a deep place of appreciation for who you are and how your
life experiences have shaped you into the being that you are today. You
are a star, and when you can recognize who you are beyond your thoughts
and your body, you can shine your light in the world. You have made a
difference in the world through your life and actions. It is the small
acts of kindness that you might have done on behalf of another---at
work, in the grocery store, at school, in line at the bank---that truly
show you have embraced your own brilliance. When people near the end of
life share their experience of reflecting on their lives, they say it is
the small acts of kindness remembered that bring them comfort and peace.
Can you remember just one small act of kindness that you have done on
behalf of another?

The more you can acknowledge your own personal beauty and brilliance,
the less you will compare what you have or what you perceive you don't
have with others. The more you can appreciate who you have become
through your life experiences, the more wealth you will feel inside. The
more richness you feel in acknowledging your own strengths and beauty,
the less you will look outside of yourself and compare yourself with
others. This requires taking some time each day to go within and reflect
on what you do have and what you have done in the world. You can do this
in the morning before you start your day. Or you can make it a practice
before you go to sleep each night. In time, you will create a peace
inside that you wouldn't trade with another human being on the planet.
And from this place of abundance you will begin to experience the
unlimited possibilities you have to create in your life.

Projecting Despair, Pity, and Fear In 2005, I spent about a month in
Europe teaching and traveling. It was an extraordinary trip, and all my
workshops went well. But at the same time I was experiencing the joy of
sharing my work, I was also facing some significant personal challenges.
I was in Switzerland when Hurricane Wilma hit Florida, and I discovered
that the media was not accurately reporting the extent of the damage.
When I found out just how bad things really were, I became afraid for my
ninety-one-year-old parents, who lived in the hurricane's path. For
nearly twenty-four hours I suffered deeply as I could not find out if
they were all right. It turned out that my projection was not accurate
at all. My parents were safe and being well taken care of. My
imagination had led me to images of fear and suffering. But the deep
sadness I'd felt over their unknown fate had opened me up emotionally.
When I left Switzerland to go to Austria and to my next workshop, I
caught some of the world news on CNN, and in my open and vulnerable
state, scenes of the Pakistanis still living in tents long after the
earthquake in their country hit me hard. On top of it all, in my
conversations with the people I was meeting in my travels, I seemed to
keep coming across stories of animal abuse.

As I flew from Austria to meet my husband in Amsterdam, I found that I
was moving into a depression about the state of the world and the
behavior of people toward one another and all of life. I found myself
facing a deep, dark tunnel I had not experienced in many years. There
was no way around it. Entering into this tunnel seemed to be the next
step on my path. I knew the tunnel was very long, and I also knew from
my past experience that I would make it through. The only way out was
through. But as I felt myself getting ready to move forward into this
darkness, I heard a voice from deep inside say that there was another
choice, another way, another path. I asked this voice to tell me more.
It said I should remember that my external world is all a projection. It
asked me: What are you projecting onto all of life? Let's go back to the
story about my parents. When I had no news on their well-being, I
suffered deeply as I imagined them crying and in fear. But my projected
picture of them was quite the opposite of their experience. They were
happy and grateful that they were not harmed and that food and water was
brought to them. They never felt any fear. They missed electricity, and
hot water to bathe in, but that was a small price to pay for the fact
that they were not hurt. Just as I had been projecting the experience of
suffering onto my parents, I realized that I was projecting a tremendous
amount of suffering into the world. And I did remember that I had a
choice. I also realized that spiraling into a dark depression did not
help me, the planet, or the rest of life. I began to work with decrees
to help me move out of the tunnel. I recognized that if I wanted to be
of service I needed to choose this new path. Changing my perception
would change my reality. I had already written about this principle in
Medicine for the Earth. And now I was having a deeper experience of my
own teaching. We can project darkness and suffering into the world. We
can project hate and anger into the world. Or we can make the choice to
project love, beauty, light, and peace into the world. During my time in
Europe I was asked by the depth of my being to choose the latter, and I
did. The most creative forces in the world use the power of focus and
projection. As a world community, are we tapping into this great power
together? Can we be a greater force in the world by joining together our

spiritual energies from a place of love for all of life? Can we change
what we all project in the world?

Projecting Light into the Darkness Let's say that you invited all the
people around the world reading this book to project a perception onto
you of what kind of person you are and what you are experiencing in
life. Would you want that image to be one of a person who is suffering
and should be pitied? Or would you like to be seen as a person standing
strong in your divine light? Would you like a projection of being a
person at peace with life? I suggest that you spend some time thinking
about the power of projection. I have met many people who have traveled
to indigenous cultures where people live in extreme poverty. But when
one looks into the eyes of many of these people, a joy can be seen that
is surprising. On one level, you can say, "These poor people---they have
no homes and food to eat." Yet many of them carry a joy and peace that
those who have an abundance of material wealth don't carry. Is this a
lesson for us: that we often project suffering onto others who are not
experiencing suffering? I am not saying that everyone is at peace with
his or her life. But we also must look at how we project darkness in the
world. Millions of people around the world are projecting powerful
energy onto others through their perception. Let us make a choice to
gather our own energies together to consciously focus a projection onto
the world that we would want projected onto ourselves.

We Always Have a Choice All of us face challenges in life. We do have a
choice in how we can react to those challenges. Some people who were
abused in childhood grow up to be compassionate healers because they
have made a commitment not to pass on the energies of abuse. Others who
faced similar circumstances spend their lives in bitterness,
perpetuating the abuse. We can look to our own friends, family, and
members of our community to see shining examples of people who have
turned their lives around. These people came through very tough times
and now inspire all of us with hope that we can do the same. We can also
look to numerous examples of

political and spiritual leaders who have turned their deep suffering
around to be an inspiration to the world community. Michelle Bachelet,
the president of Chile, survived imprisonment and torture under the
Pinochet regime thirty years ago. In her victory speech, she promised
tolerance: "Because I was the victim of hatred, I have dedicated my life
to reverse that hatred and turn it into understanding, tolerance
and---why not say it---into love." Nelson Mandela spent years in prison
for speaking out against apartheid and racial discrimination. Since
being released from prison he has traveled around the world inspiring
people of all races. He speaks to the issues of equality, strength, and
love. The Dalai Lama was forced by the Chinese government to leave
Tibet, his beloved home. The Buddhist people in Tibet have suffered
severe religious persecution, yet the Dalai Lama teaches love and
compassion. He is known throughout the world for his ability to move
beyond bitterness and to teach about the power of forgiveness. A student
of mine told me an interesting story that gave me a lot to think about.
It illustrates the way our perception creates our reality and underlines
our choice to be bitter or grateful about what life brings us. This
story was told by a woman from Cambodia who had to flee political
persecution. She left with her family in the middle of the night. They
had to escape so quickly, they could not bring any money or possessions
with them. They were starving and thirsty after days without food or
drink. They finally came upon soiled rice and contaminated water. But
the woman said they were so grateful to find food when they were hungry
and water to drink when they were thirsty that they did not see the food
or water as contaminated. There were no feelings of bitterness about
what they had gone through, only gratitude for how they always found
what they needed. They ate the food and drank the water and did not get
sick. You can choose to work with the power of projection to raise the
spiritual vibration of the world by transforming dense, dark states of
consciousness into lighter, bright states of consciousness. Start by
thinking about what you would want a group of people projecting onto
you. Then look at what you are projecting into the world. Would you like
to change that projection? This work involves working spiritually with
changing the collective consciousness through the invisible and imaginal
realms. It takes a great

deal of focus. We have to set a strong intention and come from a place
of love. We cannot perceive ourselves as separate from the collective
field around us. To project harmony, we must become harmony. Tapping
into our imagination of what is possible is crucial to this work. But
the process involves more than mental imaging. You want to get your
whole being involved. With your breath, feel yourself becoming peaceful,
and with your whole being, project that peace outward. Become light and
with your whole being project that light out into the world. Become
love, and project that love. Bring your children into this work. Teach
them how to project light and peace into the world. This will help them
keep light and hope in their own lives.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6

OceanofPDF.com

A Time for Reflection The work I am sharing with you takes discipline
and willpower. It requires you to stay focused on your intention. You
must have a vision of how you want to change your own life as well as
the environment in which you live and work. It's good to keep checking
in on your progress. It's easy to stay focused about doing personal work
when everything is going right. But when your body is hurting because of
an illness, accident, or stress, you may find you become very
weak-willed. When you are having a bad day, you may find it's easy to
lose focus. And these are the times when you need focus most to
transmute the energy of your own self-talk and the energy you are
feeding others. If you have ever watched or participated in sports, you
know what I mean. When you are at the top of your game, performing well,
it is easy to stay centered and "ride the wave." If you are dancing,
miss a step, and don't immediately regain your rhythm, you lose your
ground and your balance. But if you can take a deep breath, regain your
center, and stand back up with grace, the dance isn't ruined; it takes
on a whole new depth. In tennis, if a player is upset because of a bad
call, he cannot get lost in his feelings about what happened. The game
moves too quickly. He must focus, get positive, and stay centered in
order to get back in the game. At the end of each day, reflect on how
well you handled your reactions, your thoughts, and your energy. How
successful were you at stopping yourself from moving into a reactive
state? How focused were you about shifting negative states of
consciousness and changing your interactions with others? How did it
feel to do the work? Did you notice a shift that felt rewarding for you?
Did you change the environment you live and work in? How could you
improve on what you did?

What Do You Feed? To check how your day's work has gone, try this
exercise.

Imagine two beings that can represent your state of consciousness. You
might want to imagine two identical blow-up dolls that you pump air into
so they get smaller or grow bigger. Label one the energy behind your
positive thoughts, attitudes, emotions, and beliefs. Label one the
energy behind your problematic thoughts, attitudes, emotions, and
beliefs. At the end of your day, notice which doll looks plumper and
which looks underfed. Which one did you feed more? This is an exercise
for reflection, not for judging yourself. We are learning practices that
can change our lives. We need to have patience with ourselves as we
learn a new form of behavior while at the same time breaking bad
habitual behavior. Remember, until we learn how to forgive ourselves we
never really understand how to love others. Being on a spiritual path is
like walking on a fine rope. When you judge yourself, you fall off. The
key is to get up, take a deep breath, find your center, and get back on
the path and keep walking.

Changing Your Lifestyle After working for a while on transmuting and
transforming your energy, you will notice that you have become more
sensitive on an energetic level. You'll be more attuned to other input
that affects your energy and how you move in and out of reactive states,
such as how much you exercise, what you eat, and how much stress there
is in your life. Delving into these topics fully is beyond the scope of
this book. But I will encourage you to look at your lifestyle. For
example, some studies have shown that foods that are high in fat can
clog your liver, making you feel anger toward everything and everyone.
For some people, too much caffeine creates a state of anxiety. Some
substances, such as sugar, might create a state of emotional and
physical depression shortly after you eat them. Eating foods that you
are allergic to can also affect your moods, producing anger, depression,
or fear. Begin tracking how you feel after you eat to discover the
impact of different foods on your mood. If you are stressed out all the
time, it will be hard to stay centered. You might say that you cannot
avoid living in a stressful way. But try to remember that when you first
began reading this book, I asked you if you were willing to settle for a
life where you survive rather than thrive. The

only person who can change your life is you. Try to find simple ways to
cut back on stress in your life. Start by making one small change where
you let go of some stress. Notice the difference in your mood, your
outlook, and the energy you send to yourself and out into the world.
Healthy bodies and healthy psyches need movement. We are part of nature,
and everything in nature moves. There is a song in which the words say,
"Earth is my body, water is my blood, air is my breath, and fire is my
spirit." Water that is moving is healthy. When water is stagnant, it
becomes polluted. Air that is moving is healthy. Air that is not moving
becomes stale. The earth itself is in constant movement. Our spirit,
which is fire, needs movement or we lose passion and meaning for life.
We stop being creative and fall into feelings of depression and despair.
Walk, dance, run. Do yoga or other forms of moving meditation, such as
tai chi or chi gong. Join a gym or work out at home. You can find the
time to take at least a fifteen-minute walk a day; it will clear your
head and move the oxygen in your blood. If you don't pay any attention
to making lifestyle changes that support your physical and mental
health, you might find that the work you are doing in this book only
heals symptoms as they arise. To create real, lifelong change, you have
to integrate the work you do on the spiritual level with the way you
treat your body and your mind.

Effects of the Work There are two main effects that you may experience
as you get serious about doing the work of transmuting and transforming
the energy you send out. As I've said, you may become more sensitive to
the energies around you. But you will also stop perceiving yourself as a
victim to the behavior of others. I noticed these effects after I first
started writing about this subject in my second book, Welcome Home:
Following Your Soul's Journey Home, which was published in 1993. I took
the work quite seriously. Every time I had a negative thought I would
ask myself, "To whom did you just send that energy?" As I continued
doing this, I found that psychically I was very open. I became acutely
aware of my own energy and the energies around me. I felt like a

new baby, thin-skinned, needing to take extra care of myself in my
vulnerability. This experience was not bad, it was just new for me. When
we go about our lives reacting to the behavior of others and to our
external circumstances, we end up always "stuck" in the times of our
lives when things did not work out for us, tied to our old wounds and
hurts. We are always being pulled back by our past. You will find that,
as you do the work of transmuting the energy behind your reactive
states, you also make a choice to let go of your past. This is a big
initiation. Initiation experiences create change in which you move into
a whole new energy and vibration in your life. Initiations shape you
into a new individual. You will be free of the past hurts that bind you.
This will create an experience of living your life more in the present
and creating unlimited possibilities for the future. Although the pain
of the past is uncomfortable, it is familiar. Now you will find yourself
walking on an unfamiliar path as you free yourself from your past and
work with states of consciousness that arise in the present. This is
exciting work, and as you work through any fear that it brings up, you
will find yourself moving forward to a life of harmony, peace, and
beauty. You will notice that you no longer perceive yourself as a victim
to others around you or to your life circumstances. You always have
ability to change your response to people and the energies around you.
And this is a stance of power. You will find yourself attracting new
people into your life who reflect back to you your change in
consciousness. You will find new situations being created in your life
that reflect back the clarity that comes from staying in the present.
You will thrive instead of just survive. We are part of nature, and in
nature there are cycles. The sun goes up and the sun goes down. Weather
constantly changes. Storms come and go. You will find that as you do
your spiritual work you are also following natural cycles. There will be
days when you feel great and so inspired about your new way of being in
the world. And there will be days when you will fall into wondering,
"What's the use?" This is nature. And just as weather constantly
changes, you can always rely on one thing: This too shall pass.

Don't get too hung up on the final result. Just stay in the present, in
a place of love and appreciation for all you are experiencing and the
great life adventure you are on. Just keep up the work; keep walking the
path.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7

OceanofPDF.com

Protect Yourself in a Toxic World Travel back in time to visit a classic
shamanic healing ceremony in Siberia. It is nighttime, and a bonfire is
burning in the middle of the space where the shaman is doing her work.
She is in a large dirt circle that is surrounded by pine trees. The air
is pleasant, and it feels good to be outside. The stars and the beauty
of the full moon light the sky. The shaman and her patient stand in a
circle of village members who have come with the intention that their
beloved community member will have a successful healing. The shaman
drums, dances, and sings during the ceremony. Hundreds of little mirrors
sewn into her costume glitter as she sings and dances in the darkness of
night. She also wears a belt with brass mirrors lining it. The mirrors
reflect back any negative energies that might come toward her as she
removes the illness from her client. These energies are sent back to
their source with love. As you do your work today, whether in a business
meeting, in a healing session, or as you are out in the world, what can
you use as a symbol of protection to deflect any hostile or fearful
energies directed toward you? And how do you deflect them using the
energy of love?

The Energy of Protection We live in a world that is largely unaware of
the energetic impact of thoughts and words. So far we've been examining
what you can do to become more aware and in control of your own energy.
Now we're going to take a look at what steps you can take to protect
yourself from the negative energy of others. Please keep in mind that if
you become paranoid about needing protection, this is a form of toxic
energy in itself. I have found that when people start to fear that they
are being attacked on a psychic level, the effects of the attack
actually grow stronger. There is no need to dwell in the fear that
others can hurt you with their energy. You don't want to walk around all
day in a suit of armor, but there are some simple ways to create a

soft protective energy field around you. You have a lot of power in
these situations to protect yourself. Here, we will look at some methods
you can use. I was lecturing on the issue of psychic attack at one of my
workshops. After the workshop was over, I had a dream in which Jesus
appeared filled with light. The light was shining through his heart and
hands and out the top of his head. He proceeded to tell me that when you
fill yourself with your own spiritual light and shine that light, there
is no way for negativity to enter you or the space around you. I had
discovered this myself over the years of working with the issue of
attack and protection. But I felt this dream was a wonderful reminder
that light is a potent way to protect ourselves. Our evolution of
consciousness is moving us to fully embrace the truth that we are beings
of light and to shine our light in the world. The more you can
experience your own inner light, your sun within, infusing each cell of
your being, the more healing is available to you and through you to the
web of life.

Using a Blue Egg I was at a party in Berkeley during the early 1980s.
There was a small group of teachers and healers present. Someone asked
the group about ways that we had found to psychically protect ourselves.
One of the women there was from the Chumash, a Native American tribe
from California. She told us how her people surround their energy fields
in a protective blue egg. Blue is my favorite color, so I have been
using this visualization method ever since. I have written about it in
my books and taught it in my workshops and private sessions. The
feedback I've received indicates that it's a potent method. Let's say
that you are in a helping profession, so you are impacted by your
clients' energy. You want to encourage them to share the depths of their
feelings and thoughts, but if you always take these energies into
yourself, it could create burnout and even emotional or physical
illness. To make sure you don't absorb the energy, imagine a blue egg of
light surrounding you. In this way, whatever energy others share cannot
enter your own field of energy. Some people like to imagine a white
light surrounding them. Find a color that works for you. It is not the
color that

matters, it is the intention you set to be surrounded by a protective
energy field. Remember: Your intention sets action in motion.

Using a Protective Symbol Another way to work is to imagine a symbol
that can act as a shield for you. You might have seen an image that you
already know would be a great shield. Or you might sit with some crayons
or colored pens and see what symbol comes to you. Set an intention to
draw a symbol that you can use for protection and watch what emerges.
You can create a drawing or painting of this symbol and actually put it
up in your office or where you meet people. Or you can just imagine this
symbol sitting in your solar plexus area, shielding you from any
negative energies coming your way.

The Protective Mirror A method used in indigenous cultures when you feel
you are vulnerable and need more help is to put a mirror under your bed.
Anything coming to you during the night will be reflected back. I give
this method to students or clients to use only when they feel they are
under very strong attack, so vulnerable that visualizing themselves
surrounded by protective energies is beyond them or does not seem like
enough protection.

Protective Beings I do a short visualization before I go to sleep at
night. I see myself on the land, lying down beside a campfire to sleep.
Four tall firewatchers stand guard over me as I sleep. I can drift off
knowing that I have protective forces watching my sleep space. I have
found this to be very powerful, especially during the times when I have
felt thin-skinned.

Fending Off Attack Until now we've looked at ways you can protect
yourself from unconscious negative energy. But if the negative energy is
intentional, other methods are more effective. If you feel that someone
has actually targeted you and is

psychically attacking you, do not move into a state of fear. It is the
fear, not the attack, that eventually ends up harming you. Remember, you
are a being of light and you do have power. You don't want to retaliate
and become aggressive and psychically counterattack someone you feel is
trying to send harmful energies to you, lest what you send be returned
to you exponentially.

Return to Sender To deflect harmful energy sent with intention, I use
the metaphor of someone sending me a gift in the mail. I look at the box
and decide that I don't want to receive the gift. So I write on the box
"Return to sender with love" and put it back in the mail. I make sure I
am infusing the box with love so I am not sending back harmful energies.
In this way, I am not doing harm to another, but at the same time I am
standing in my power and not taking on other people's energy that is not
mine.

Cut the Ties That Bind As you look at creating harmonious energies in
your life, it is time to reevaluate your relationships with others. You
do not have to be anyone's psychic punching bag, whether those involved
are spouses, lovers, family, friends, coworkers, or bosses or other
authority figures. Being a psychic punching bag is not your job. It
makes you a slave to another, and the days of slavery are over. To
declare your psychic freedom, develop your personal boundaries, and work
on regaining your self-esteem, try cutting the energetic ties that bind
you to people who don't reflect love back to you. These are not healthy
relationships. Imagine a cord from your solar plexus to a person you
want freedom from. Imagine using a pair of scissors to cut the cord
binding you to him or her.

Using the Power of Nature You can use the same elemental exercises I
suggested in Chapter 4 to clear yourself of attacking energies. Ask the
power of nature to support you in

transmuting any negative energy that has come into your space into love
and light. You can wash your hands or take a shower, washing away
negativity and transforming all the energy that was sent to you into
pure light and love. You can have the power of sun clear you or ask the
wind to take from you that which does not belong to you. You can ask the
earth to take any negative energies from you that need to be composted
into fertilizer. You can do this as a visualization or out in nature.

Take the High Road If you want to walk the high road, I will give you an
exercise that you might find challenging at first but that will
eventually lead you to feeling peaceful. From a spiritual point of view,
everything that occurs in the external world is a reflection of your own
inner state. So think about this: When you feel that someone is
psychically attacking you, it may be a reflection of your own behavior.
Spend some time giving this full consideration. It is a realization that
does not come easily, especially when you have taken the stance of a
victim and feel attached to your innocence. Take some time to walk
outside and breathe deeply. Take some time to write down your thoughts
about the recipient of your projections. Can you admit to any of this
behavior? If you do this, I promise you a peace that will be freeing.
You will be so grateful that you were willing to undertake this act of
courage and look at how your own behavior is being reflected back to
you. Once you have identified this, you can go back over some of the
earlier exercises in the book to work on your energy with a new
perspective. Or you can look for outside help to discover the source of
your behavior and work it through.

Experience All You Take In As Light The more stressed out we become, the
more vulnerable we are to toxic energy. Take time out to breathe. Learn
to absorb the power of the sun, air, water, and earth. Take a walk in
nature with the intention of absorbing the power of the elements. From a
spiritual perspective, everything is light. The food you eat is light,
created from love. As you eat, experience yourself eating light and
love. As

you bathe and drink water, experience yourself taking in love and light.
As you breathe, experience taking in the light and the love of air. As
you feel the warmth of the sun, experience taking in the light feeding
your cells and healing you on all levels. If you adopt just this one
practice you will find your health and wellbeing changing dramatically.
Earth, air, water, and fire in the form of the sun give us life. Take in
the power and light. Absorb it. It is a gift for you to receive. Do the
same with the light and the power of the universe. Take it in.
Strengthen your body, mind, and spirit with the light of life. The light
outside of you is also a reflection of your own internal light. As you
become stronger, you will not feel so vulnerable to the negativity
around you. The key here is the ability to receive and absorb the light
into your body and psyche. Think of yourself as a dry sponge absorbing
water. Or think of yourself as a flower that has been in the rain for
weeks: The sun finally comes out, and, as a flower, you soak in the
light and warmth. If you like, you can find another metaphor to use that
will help you fully get the experience of absorbing light.

Stories of Success Jackie and Paul are married and they are both
brilliant lawyers. As longtime students of mine, they started to work
with some of this material when I wrote about it in my second book,
Welcome Home: Following Your Soul's Journey Home, in 1993. They went
deeper with the material as I wrote more on the subject in 2001 in
Medicine for the Earth: How to Transform Personal and Environmental
Toxins. Over the years they have tried all that I have written here in
their work with clients, in the courtroom, and at challenging times in
their marriage. Some methods they use more than others. They use
breathing through their hearts while they listen to the stories of their
clients. This prevents them from making judgments and helps them access
intuitive knowledge on how they can best serve. They both breathe
through their hearts and visualize themselves surrounded by a
translucent blue egg when the energy becomes aggressive in a heated
courtroom debate. This helps them maintain a state of peace and calm in
the midst of conflict.

They both work with the power of words and decrees when they speak in
court. They keep putting out energy of love and light as they react to
different courtroom antics and dramas. And they never pity their
clients. They perceive their clients in their divinity, with the
strength to deal with whatever the outcome might be. They wash their
hands at the end of the day, experiencing any toxic energies they have
taken on being transformed into love and light. Margo is a therapist
who, when she began to work with me, was physically ill and exhausted
from taking on the pain and suffering of her clients. First I had to
educate her about the ignorance in a modern-day culture of how one
person's energy can be sent to another person and manifest itself as
illness. Of course, in her case, the energies sent were not malignant.
They came from clients who were working on themselves to become better
people. In learning how to express themselves in the world, they were
working through the wounds of the past. I taught Margo the methods of
protection that I have written about. This was useful, because she
wanted to continue encouraging her clients to emote; she just didn't
want to take their problematic energies into her own body and psyche.
Margo found that if she visualized a bright shining sun in her solar
plexus, the sun could transmute any problematic energies that got into
her field. She also liked using the translucent blue egg to surround
herself while she worked with others. More and more she has been getting
in touch with her internal light and her divinity. And she has been
excited to see that as she creates a loving and sacred space by the
light she shares, her clients are responding quickly to her work and
healing faster.

How to Clear a Space There may be times when you feel you would like to
clear a space of negative energies that have built up there. There are
many ways to do this. As always, the power of intention is important.
Techniques and methods do not heal; love heals. As you can infuse any
space you work or live in with love, you can create sacred space
anywhere. And when you work in a

sacred space, the love infused in it touches every person who enters the
room; it lifts them up and heals them. Breathing through your heart and
infusing the room with love and light will always work to clear a space.
If you like, you can try some other practices as well. Candles, to most
all of us, have some association with light and sacredness. We are used
to seeing candles burning in holy spaces. You can light a small candle
to represent the light being called upon to fill your space and keep it
burning while you are working. The candle will reflect back to you the
light within and without. You can ask fire, a great transformer, to
transmute and transform any energy in the space that needs to be
cleared. You can close your eyes and visualize yourself putting energies
in the fire that need to be transformed into light and love. Some people
like to burn incense to clear a space. The Native Americans burn sage,
cedar, or sweetgrass as incense. In South America, copal and different
forms of bark from trees are used. In Australia, eucalyptus leaves are
burned. But we are so bombarded with pollution today that many people's
immune systems are deficient. This can cause an allergy to fragrances. I
find that I can no longer burn incense at my workshops because of people
who are allergic to the smoke or to the fragrance. Sometimes I will use
a spray of rose water to clear the space before anyone arrives or after
they've all gone. The fragrance does not linger. And, obviously, at your
place of work these methods may seem crazy to others. Here again the
power of intention will work. You might want to bring in fresh flowers
and put them on your desk to remind you that the space you are working
in is sacred and filled with the light and love of the universe. Or you
might want to hang an inspirational picture or keep a picture on your
desk that will have the same effect. However you decide to clear your
space, begin by going deep within and experiencing your internal light
moving through every cell of your body and pouring out of you. When you
do this, you actually change the space you are in. You lift everyone up
who comes into your presence.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8

OceanofPDF.com

Toward a New Evolution of Consciousness Imagine a world where, instead
of watching the nightly news, everyone energetically checks in on the
health of the whole web of life. Imagine a world where people gather
their energies to heal the wounds of separation and infuse each strand
of the web of life with light and love. Imagine a world where you're
walking down the street and someone accidentally sends you the energy of
his thoughts, then says "pardon me," just as if he or she had
inadvertently bumped into you or stepped on your toes. Imagine a world
where people have made the choice to walk the high road with the
realization that all life is connected and that we must take care of
this great earth that gives us an abundance of life. A world in which
everyone as living beings understands the need to honor earth, air,
water, and fire as the sun, and to hold all life-forms as equally
precious. Imagine a world where people join together in community to
share resources and truly help one another, not just in times of
distress but in the good times too. Imagine a world where love and light
are shared with each thought and emotion experienced. And where people
see the spiritual light within and remember that we were all created
from love and light, and we all shine as brightly as the stars in the
night sky. Use your imagination to call this world into being. Engage
all your senses. See the scenery of such a world. Feel what it would
feel like to live a life filled with love and light. Hear the sounds of
people laughing and speaking words of love. Smell the fragrances in the
air. Taste the tastes. Use your passion for wanting to live in such a
world as fuel for your creation. And experience it as if it is already
here now.

We Are Evolving We know our perception creates our reality. Spiritual
teachings throughout the world tell us that we create what we believe
and that everything begins

on a spiritual level before manifesting in the physical world. If we
choose to perceive negativity, anger, and fear all around us, that will
be our experience. If we move into a place of love and appreciation for
all of life, our perception changes, creating light and love all around
us. Learning how to transmute the energy behind our thoughts, emotions,
attitudes, and belief systems is a spiritual practice. Working with
discipline on the words we use in our own self-talk and out loud with
others is a spiritual practice. When we look at who we are beyond our
skin we find that we are spiritual light, source, creator, the creative
forces of the universe, God. Experiencing all people as spiritual light
and connected is the most powerful way to transmute and transform toxic
states of consciousness. As we bring these practices more and more into
our lives, we will see a change in the physical world we live in. We
will experience a world that embraces love, light, harmony, beauty, and
peace. I really believe that the stories the children of the future will
read are not about one hero or heroine saving the world. The stories
read to the children of the future are about communities of people
gathering their energies together to change the world. I find that most
people are extremely open and receptive to the concepts I've shared
here. But there are not many people who are willing to take on the
discipline required. Many people I work with would rather maintain the
illusion that their energy doesn't impact the world. And I am hoping
that those of you reading this book will choose to become psychic
warriors and help change the collective consciousness. When I say
psychic warriors I am not using the term in an aggressive way. I mean
that it takes the discipline, stamina, intention, and focus of a warrior
to be successful at this work. Our world and how the energy moves to
create the future is in our hands. This is a gift and also a challenge.
We can meet the challenge. No one else is going to make the world a
better place to live in. We hold the power. Always remember in time of
conflict and change: Stay focused. Stay positive. Stay centered.

Remember that every change in consciousness we experience, no matter how
small it seems, ripples through the entire web of life. Each change you
make changes the collective consciousness of the planet. Set an
intention to integrate some of the practices written in this book and
watch the beauty that manifests in your life and in the world. After you
finish reading this book, put the book down. Close your eyes and take a
few deep breaths, keeping a precious image or feeling in your heart.
Take just a few minutes in silence and experience the collective energy
of anger, fear, frustration, and despair in the world being transformed
into love and light. May this love and light bring light into all the
dark places in the world. And may this energy of love and light rain
back down on every living being, filling all with love. Each day use
this decree, or create your own: Love and light is surrounding us and
filling all of life now. If you state a decree or do a short meditation
like this for just a few minutes a day, you can start to change the
collective energy of the world we share. We can create a loving
environment in which to live and work. It takes all of us to gather our
collective energies together to do so. It is who we become, not what we
do, that changes the world. Let us all set an intention to shine our
light in the world and lift up everyone in our presence. This means
while we are on line at the bank, the grocery store, or the gas station.
This means sending our light into the world and changing the entire web
of life. This means creating a world where we all thrive and don't just
survive. Find the light in you and let it shine. The world and the
future of the world will change. Go back to the story in the
introduction of the Native American grandfather talking to his grandson
about the two wolves in his heart. There are two hearts that are being
fed right now in the world. There is the heart filled with love, light,
unity, compassion, and respect for all of life. There is the heart
filled with hate, anger, fear, and separation. Let's gather our energies
together as a world community and heal the wounds of separation and feed
the heart of love.

Blessings of the power of the sun be yours, filling you with light and
vitality. Blessings of the beauty of the night sky be yours, reminding
you of the preciousness of life. Blessings of the light of the moon be
yours, reflecting back to you your spiritual beauty. Blessings of the
love of the earth be yours, embracing you with love and with deep inner
peace.

OceanofPDF.com

Appendix

Frequently Asked Questions Does this mean I can never be grumpy?
No. Just as there is stormy weather, there are times for feeling grumpy.
Just transform the energy coming out of your grumpiness into love and
light so that it is not hurting you or others. Then enjoy being grumpy!
How do I take back toxic energy I might have sent to a loved one?
Intention is key, as action will always follow. First, do not feel
guilty about your human frailties. We are all here to learn, and
learning is a process. On a psychic level, ask for healing for anyone
that you feel you might have harmed. See that person in his or her
divine perfection right now. Does this mean I have to like everyone?
Isn't this being superficial? Part of our work is to look at how others
reflect back parts of ourselves we do not like. At the same time, it is
true that we all meet people with whom our chemistry doesn't mix. You do
not need to love or even like everyone. You can still experience him or
her as a divine being. This is the real work. Go back and do the work
outlined in Chapter 5 on projection. You might make a choice not to
spend any more time you need to with this person. But transform the
energy around your judgments. I have heard it said that there is no such
thing as positive or negative energy---that all energy is neutral. Can
you address this? As part of the human condition there are different
levels that we are working on simultaneously. As humans we often have to
learn how to dance gracefully with the many paradoxes of life. We live
in a world of duality. The sun comes up and then goes down. It is not
light or dark all the time. We judge things as good and bad, right and

wrong. But on a spiritual level there is only one web of life, one
source, one light, one creative force of the universe. There is no good
or bad; there is only energy. A former student of mine is a master at
working with this concept. She plays the cello in a symphony. She says
that the audience arrives in a variety of states. Some people are tired.
Some people have had a terrible day. Some people are angry or depressed.
Some people are incredibly excited about being present at the concert.
Some people are joyful about getting a night out with friends or a loved
one. The list goes on. My student says that she perceives this all as
energy that she can absorb and use to be the best cello player. So if a
person is sending anger, this is great energy for her to use as she
plays. If a person is bored, this is energy available for her to use. If
a person is happy, this, too, is just energy available for her to use.
You can only imagine the possibilities for all of us when we stop
judging energy as good or bad and see it simply as energy that is
available for us to use in our work and lives. But we are starting with
a modern-day culture that is deeply unconscious and ignorant about our
energy and behavior. I feel very strongly that the first step is to
teach people how to be more responsible for the energy they put out into
the world, to understand how we react and act as victims, and to
acknowledge how we blame others and our life circumstances for what is
not working in our lives. To skip this step would be doing a spiritual
bypass. We have to do this work before we can be initiated into a new
way of working with energy.

OceanofPDF.com

About the Author Sandra Ingerman, MA, is the author of Soul Retrieval:
Mending the Fragmented Self, Welcome Home: Following Your Soul's Journey
Home, A Fall to Grace, Medicine for the Earth: How to Transform Personal
and Environmental Toxins, and Shamanic Journeying: A Beginner's Guide
(book and CD). She is also the author of the audio programs The Soul
Retrieval Journey, The Beginner's Guide to Shamanic Journeying, and
Miracles for the Earth---all produced by Sounds True. Sandra teaches
workshops internationally on shamanic journeying, healing, and reversing
environmental pollution using spiritual methods. She has trained and
founded an international alliance of Medicine for the Earth Teachers and
shamanic teachers. Sandra is recognized for bridging ancient
cross-cultural healing methods into our modern culture to address the
needs of our times. Sandra is a licensed Marriage and Family Therapist
and Professional Mental Health Counselor. She is also a board-certified
expert on traumatic stress. For more information on her work and a
schedule of Sandra's workshops, please visit her Web site at:
www.shamanicvisions.com/ingerman.html. On this site you can also read
her monthly column, "Transmutation News." Sandra has published a few
articles on her work at www.sandraingerman.com. Please also visit her
other Web sites: www.shamanicteachers.com and
www.medicinefortheearth.com, where Sandra lists teachers of the
spiritual work she shares in all her books. If you are looking for a
shamanic practitioner with whom you wish to work for spiritual healing,
visit www.shamanicteachers.com and click on the "practitioners" link.

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments I give many thanks to my agent, Barbara Moulton, who
continues to support my work and me, even though I typically stray from
the norm. I thank Patricia Gift and all those at Sterling Publishing who
did such a good job in producing this book. I would like to thank Anne
Barthel at Sterling Publishing for her brilliant editorial help. Nancy
Sherwood (www.earthsea.ca) is the author of the story "The Two Wolves"
in the introduction. This is Nancy's adaptation of an oral story told in
many cultures. She generously allowed me to use her original version of
the story. Thank you, Nancy! Debra Chesnut was a great help, and I thank
her for her explanation of how Hebrew is a vibrational and consonantal
language. I would like to thank Tom Cowan, author of many books,
including Fire in the Head, for his help with Celtic history. I am in
deep gratitude to all the teachers and practitioners who trained with me
and have formed an alliance to teach this material so the world becomes
a harmonious and peaceful place for all of life. And I wish to thank
Woods Shoemaker and my parents, Aaron and Lee Ingerman, and my family
for their continued unconditional love and support.

OceanofPDF.com


