.

MARTIN E. P. SELIGMAN, PH.D

What You Can Change . . . and What You Can't Martin E. P. Seligman,
Ph.D., professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania and a
past president of the American Psychological Association, is a leading
expert on motivation and emotion and an authority on learned
helplessness. He is the director of the Positive Psychology Center at
the University of Pennsylvania. His many books include Authentic
Happiness and Learned Optimism. Dr. Seligman's research has been
supported by the National Institute on Mental Health, the National
Institute of Aging, the National Science Foundation, the Department of
Education, the MacArthur Foundation, the Templeton Foundation, and the
Guggenheim Foundation.

ALSO BY MARTIN E. P. SELIGMAN, PH.D.

Learned Optimism Learned Helplessness:

A Theory for the Age of Personal Control Authentic Happiness The
Optimistic Child

To

NICOLE DANA SELIGMAN born August 26, 1991, at the end of a week

in which human beings changed what for most of this century had seemed

beyond change.

Born into a new world.

God, grant me serenity to accept the things I cannot

change, courage to change the things I can, and wisdom to know the di
erence.

Attributed to Friedrich Oetinger

(1702--1782), and to Reinhold Niebuhr,

"The Serenity Prayer" (1934)

CONTENTS

Preface to the Vintage Edition PART ONE

Biological Psychiatry vs. Psychotherapy and Self-Improvement 1. What
Changes? What Doesn't Change? 2. Booters and Bootstrappers: The Age of
Self-Improvement and Psychotherapy 3. Drugs, Germs, and Genes: The Age
of Biological Psychiatry PART TWO

Changing Your Emotional Life: Anxiety, Depression, and Anger 4. Everyday
Anxiety 5. Catastrophic Thinking: Panic 6. Phobias 7. Obsessions 8.
Depression 9. The Angry Person 10. Post-traumatic Stress PART THREE

Changing Your Habits of Eating, Drinking, and Making Merry 11. Sex 12.
Dieting: A Waist Is a Terrible Thing to Mind 13. Alcohol

PART FOUR

Growing Up---At Last 14. Shedding the Skins of Childhood 15. Depth and
Change: The Theory Acknowledgments Notes

PREFACE TO THE VINTAGE EDITION

What You Can Change . . . and What You Can't was my attempt to review
with un inching candor the e ectiveness of most of the di erent kinds of
treatment for the major psychological disorders. As I survey the e
ectiveness of these treatments thirteen years later, I am somewhat
surprised to nd that most of the results remain the same, and the rest
are not substantially di erent. But a pattern has become increasingly
clear, and it is important for consumers to know about it. Because of
the exigencies of nancing and insurance, the psychological and
biological treatments of patients confront ever more restricted budgets.
In response, the professions of clinical psychology and psychiatry, as
well as their research arms, have come to concentrate on re ghting
rather than re prevention. They focus almost entirely on crisis
management and the rendering of cosmetic symptom relief, and they have
all but given up on the notion of cure. There are two kinds of
medications, and similarly, there are two kinds of psychological
interventions: curative and cosmetic. With medication, if you take an
antibiotic and you take it long enough, it cures by killing the
bacterial invaders. That is, when you're done taking it, the disease
does not recrudesce. On the other hand, if you take quinine for malaria,
you only get suppression of the symptoms. When you stop taking quinine,
malaria returns. Quinine is a cosmetic drug, a palliative, and all
medications can be classi ed either as curative in intention or cosmetic
in intention. Palliation is a good thing (I'm wearing a hearing aid
right now.), but it is not the highest goal of interventions. Ideally,
intervention is a way station to cure. Yet every drug in the
psycho-pharmacopoeia is cosmetic. There are no curative drugs, and
biological psychiatry seems to have

given up on the notion of cure. I am by no means a Freudian, but one
thing that was exemplary about Freud was that he and his disciples
sought cures. Freud wanted a psychotherapy that was like antibiotics,
not a psychotherapy of cosmetics, and palliation is still not a signi
cant goal in Freudian psychotherapy. But the decline of Freudian in
uence, as well as the stringencies of insurance plans, has shifted the
focus of clinical psychology and psychiatry from cure to symptom relief.
This book examines just how good this symptom relief is when di erent
drugs and psychotherapies are compared for di erent psychological
problems. Roughly these treatments are about 65 percent e ective.
Depression, as you will read below, is typical. Consider two treatments
that "work," cognitive therapy versus SSRI's (e.g., Prozac). For each,
you get roughly a 65 percent relief rate, along with a placebo e ect
that ranges from 45 percent to 55 percent. This means that the
treatment's net actual e ect is between 10 and 20 percent. The more
compelling the placebo, the higher the placebo percentage, and therefore
the smaller the actual e ect. These sobering numbers crop up over and
over, whether you're looking at the percent of patients who experience
relief or at the percent of their symptoms for which patients experience
relief.1\*

Why are the e ects of almost all the drugs and psychotherapies only
small to moderate? Why have therapists reached a 65 percent barrier?
From the rst day I took up skiing until ve years later when I quit, I
was always ghting the mountain. Skiing was never easy. Every
psychotherapeutic intervention is a " ghting the mountain" intervention.
The treatments don't catch on and maintain themselves. In general,
therapeutic techniques share the properties of being di cult to do and
di cult to incorporate into one's life. In fact, the way researchers
usually measure therapy e ects is how long they last before they "melt"
once treatment is discontinued.

Scienti c ignorance, cost limitations, and the decline of Freudian
psychotherapy may not be the only reasons for the 65 percent e ect:
Better treatments may always be elusive. In the therapeutic century that
we've just lived through, it was the job of the therapist to minimize
negative emotion: to dispense the drugs or the speci c psychotherapy
that would make people less anxious, less angry, or less depressed. But
there is another approach to symptoms, older than the notion of therapy:
learning to function well in the face of symptoms---dealing with them.
Dealing with your symptoms is beginning to look more important again in
light of the most important research nding in the eld of personality of
the last quarter of the twentieth century: that most personality traits
are highly heritable.2\* Symptoms often, but not always, stem from
personality traits. As such, I believe that they are modi able, but only
within limits. How do we address the likelihood that most psychological
symptoms stem from heritable personality traits that can be ameliorated
but not wholly eliminated? Do you know how snipers and ghter pilots are
trained? (I'm not endorsing sniping by the way; I only describe how
training is done.) It takes about twenty-four hours for a sniper to get
into position, and then it can take another thirty-six hours to get the
shot o . Now that means that typically before a sniper shoots, he has
not slept for two or more days. He's extremely tired. Now, let's say the
military went to a psychotherapist or a biological psychiatrist and
asked how she would train a sniper? She undoubtedly would use drugs or
psychological interventions to break up the sniper's fatigue.

That's not how snipers are trained, however. One trains a sniper by
having him practice shooting when he is extremely tired. That is, one
teaches snipers to deal with the negative state he is in so as to
function very well in the presence of fatigue. Similarly, ghter pilots
are selected to be rugged individuals and not to scare easily. There are
many things that happen to ghter pilots that terrify even the most
rugged personality, however. But one does not call

on therapists to teach the tricks of anxiety reduction, thereby training
candidates to become relaxed ghter pilots. Rather, the trainer heads the
plane straight for the ground until the trainee is in terror, and the
trainee then learns to pull up even when terri ed. The negative emotions
and the negative personality traits have very strong biological limits,
and perhaps the best science and practice will ever do with the
approaches I review in this book is to encourage people to live in the
best part of their set range of psychological symptoms. Think about
Abraham Lincoln and Winston Churchill, both likely unipolar depressives.
They were both enormously productive human beings who dealt with their
"black dogs" and functioned beautifully even when very depressed. So
here is my prescription for how to use this book optimally: If you or
someone you are close to has symptoms of a mental disorder, you will be
able to nd here candid and tough-minded recommendations for what speci c
psychotherapy or what medications are likely to help and the degree to
which they are likely to help. But these will not be curative. Many of
the symptoms will recur, even if they are so ameliorated. An
oldfashioned virtue must be coupled to these interventions. It is called
courage: the courage to understand your psychological problems and
manage them so as to function well in spite of them. When you couple
courage with the interventions that I now review, you may break the 65
percent barrier. ---Martin Seligman Wynnewood, Pennsylvania, September
2006

1\* Kirsch, I., Moore, T., Scoboria, A. & Nicholls, S. (2002). The
Emperor's New Drugs: An

Analysis of Antidepressant Medication Data Submitted to the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration.

Prevention

&

Treatment,

nals.apa.org/prevention/volume5/toc-jul15-02.htm.

July

15-02.htm

http://jour-

2\* Pinker, S. The Blank Slate. (New York: Viking, 2002)

PART ONE

Biological Psychiatry vs. Psychotherapy and Self-Improvement

1 What Changes? What Doesn't Change?

TWO WORLDVIEWS are in collision. On the one hand, this is the age of
psychotherapy and the age of self-improvement. Millions are struggling
to change: We diet, we jog, we meditate. We adopt new modes of thought
to counteract our depressions. We practice relaxation to curtail stress.
We exercise to expand our memory and to quadruple our reading speed. We
adopt draconian regimes to give up smoking. We raise our little boys and
girls to androgyny. We come out of the closet or we try to become
heterosexual. We seek to lose our taste for alcohol. We seek more
meaning in life. We try to extend our life span. Sometimes it works. But
distressingly often, self-improvement and psychotherapy fail. The cost
is enormous. We think we are worthless. We feel guilty and ashamed. We
believe we have no willpower and that we are failures. We give up trying
to change. Trudy, like tens of millions of Americans, is desperate
because she believes, quite

incorrectly, that she is a failure. She nds herself even worse o after
ten years of trying everything to lose weight.

Trudy weighed 175 pounds when she graduated from Brown a decade ago.
Four times

since, she has slimmed to under 125: Weight Watchers, Nutri-System, six
months under the care of a private behavior therapist, and, last year,
Optifast. With each regime the weight came o

quickly, if not painlessly. Each time the fat returned, faster and more
of

it. Trudy now weighs 195 and has given up.

In its faith that we can change anything, the self-improvement movement
expects Trudy to succeed in her ght against fat, even though she is such
an obvious loser in the weight game. On the other hand, there is a view
that expects Trudy to fail. For this is not only the age of
self-improvement and therapy, this is the age of biological psychiatry.
The human genome will be nearly mapped before the millennium is over.
The brain systems underlying sex, hearing, memory, left-handed-ness, and
sadness are now known. Psychoactive drugs---external agents---quiet our
fears, relieve our blues, bring us bliss, dampen our mania, and dissolve
our delusions more e ectively than we can on our own. Our very
personality---our intelligence and musical talent, even our
religiousness, our conscience (or its absence), our politics, and our
exuberance---turns out to be more the product of our genes than almost
anyone would have believed a decade ago. Identical twins reared apart
are uncannily similar in all these traits, almost as similar as they are
for height and weight. The underlying message of the age of biological
psychiatry is that our biology frequently makes changing, in spite of
all our e orts, impossible. But the view that all is genetic and
biochemical and therefore cannot change is also very often wrong. Many
individuals surpass their IQs, fail to "respond" to drugs, make sweeping
changes in their lives, live on when their cancer is "terminal," or defy
the hormones and brain circuitry that "dictate" lust or femininity or
memory loss. Clay is one of many who ignored the conventional wisdom
that his problem was "biological" and found just the right
psychotherapy, which worked quickly and permanently.

Out of the blue, about once a week, Clay, a software designer, was
having panic

attacks. His heart started to pound, he couldn't catch his breath, and
he was sure he was

going to die. After about an hour of terror, the panic subsided. Clay
underwent four years of psychoanalysis, which gave him insight into his
childhood feelings of abandonment but didn't lessen the panic attacks.
Then he was on high doses of Xanax (alprazolam, a tranquilizer) for a
year; during that time he only panicked once a month, but he was so

sleepy most of the time that he lost his two biggest accounts. So Clay
stopped taking Xanax

and the panic returned with unabated fury. Two years ago, he had ten
sessions of

cognitive therapy for panic disorder. He corrected his mistaken belief
that the symptoms of anxiety (e.g., heart racing, shortness of breath)
are catastrophic: symptoms of an impending heart attack. Since then he
hasn't had a single attack.

As the ideologies of biological psychiatry and self-improvement collide,
a resolution is apparent. There are some things about ourselves that can
be changed, others that cannot, and some that can be changed only with
extreme di culty. What can we succeed in changing about ourselves? What
can we not? Why did Trudy fail and Clay succeed? When can we overcome
our biology? When is our biology our destiny? These are the central
questions I will address in this book.

A great deal is now known about change. Much of this knowledge exists
only in the technical literature, and it has often been obfuscated by
vested commercial, therapeutic, and, not the least, political interests.
The behaviorists long ago told the world that everything can be
changed---intelligence, sexuality, mood, masculinity or femininity. The
psychoanalysts still claim that with enough insight, all your
personality traits can be "worked through." The Marxist left, the
"politically correct," and the self-help industry added their voices to
this convenient chorus. In contrast, the pharmaceutical companies, the
biologists mapping the human genome, and the extreme right wing tell us
that our character is xed, that we are prisoners of our genes and the
chemicals bathing our brains, that short of powerful drugs, genetic
engineering, or brain surgery, nothing basic can change: certainly not
mood, or intelligence, or sexuality, or masculinity. These are all
ideologically driven falsehoods. Here are some facts about what you can
change: Panic can be easily unlearned, but cannot be cured by
medication.

The sexual "dysfunctions"---frigidity, impotence, premature
ejaculation---are easily unlearned.

Our moods, which can wreak havoc with our physical health, are readily
controlled. Depression can be cured by straightforward changes in
conscious thinking or helped by medication, but it cannot be cured by
insight into childhood. Optimism is a learned skill. Once learned, it
increases achievement at work and improves physical health. Here are
some facts about what doesn't change: Dieting, in the long run, almost
never works. Kids do not become androgynous easily.

No treatment is known to improve on the natural course of recovery from
alcoholism. Homosexuality does not become heterosexuality.

Reliving childhood trauma does not undo adult personality problems. To
deal with what we cannot change, the rst step, all too often evaded, is
to know what about ourselves will not yield. But that is not the end of
the matter; there are usually ways of coping. Much of successful living
consists of learning to make the best of a bad situation. My purpose
here, in part, is not only to point out what will not easily change but
to impart the skills for coping with what you cannot change. This book
is the rst accurate and factual guide to what you can change and what
you cannot change. Since I am going to argue that so many loudly
trumpeted claims about self-improvement, psychotherapy, medication, and
genetics are not to be believed, that some things about you will not
change no matter how much you try, but that other things will change
easily, you should know a little about my quali cations. I have spent
the last thirty years working on the question of "plasticity," academic
jargon for what changes and what doesn't. I

have worked both sides of the street. I started my academic life in the
eld pretentiously called "learning." Like most of the social sciences of
the 1960s, the psychology of learning was enthusiastically
environmental, its ideology a reaction to the stillfresh nightmare of
the genetically minded Nazis. Just arrange the rewards and punishments
right, learning theory held, and the organism (pigeon, adult human, rat,
rhesus monkey, or toddler---it mattered so little that we simply called
all of them "S's," for "Subjects") would absorb whatever you wanted to
teach it. My years in the learning laboratory taught me that there were
many things organisms wouldn't learn no matter how ingenious the
experiment. Rats wouldn't learn that tones predicted poisoning, and
pigeons wouldn't learn to peck keys to avoid getting shocked. (Humans
are even more resistant to change---but more on that later.) My rst
book, The Biological Boundaries of Learning (1972), set out a theory,
"Preparedness," of how natural selection shapes what

we can and cannot learn.1 Evolution, acting through our genes and our
nervous system, has made it simple for us to change in certain ways and
almost impossible for us to change in others.

With the constraints that evolution places on learning very much in
mind, I had to pick my problems carefully. I was and I am an unabashed
do-gooder. I wanted to discover things that would relieve su
ering---leaving knowledge for knowledge's sake to other, purer souls.
Some psychological su ering seemed to me unyielding, unchangeable
because of biology. Other problems seemed more tractable, solvable if
only I was patient enough, worked hard enough, and was clever enough. I
had to discover the "plastic" problems on which to work. I chose to work
on helplessness, depression, and pessimism. Each of these, I found,
could be learned and could be unlearned. In 1975, I wrote Helplessness:
On Depression, Development, and Death. Its focus was on how helplessness
was learned in the wake of uncontrollable bad events, and how this
posture could devastate the rest of one's life. My most recent book,
Learned Optimism (1991), was very much the opposite. It spelled out
fteen years of my research documenting

the bad news: Habits of pessimism lead to depression, wither
achievement, and undermine physical health. The good news is that
pessimism can be unlearned, and that with its removal depression,
underachievement, and poor health can be alleviated. My present research
program is trying to prevent America's most costly mental
illness---depression---rather than waiting to attempt cures after it
strikes. All this is very much in the spirit of the age of
selfimprovement and the age of therapy.2

A recurring theme of this book will be the need for truth in packaging
in psychology and psychiatry; so I had best start by laying out my
biases and my background. The nature of the beast. This book is about
the psychological beasts: depression, anxiety, stupidity, meanness,
traumatic stress, alcoholism, fatness, sexual "perversion." When I was a
callow learning theorist, I knew I was stalking after those beasts. I
did not then realize that to understand them I had to take into account
another beast, the human beast.

My ideology told me that environment is completely responsible for the
psychological beasts. Stupidity is caused by ignorance; provide enough
books and education, and you will cure stupidity. Depression and anxiety
are caused by trauma, particularly bad childhood experience; minimize
bad experience, raise children without adversity, and you will banish
depression and anxiety. Prejudice is caused by unfamiliarity; get people
acquainted, and prejudice will disappear. Sexual "perversion" is caused
by repression and suppression; let it all hang out, and everyone will
become lusty heterosexuals.

My bias now is that while this is not wholly wrong, it is seriously
incomplete. The long evolutionary history of our species has also shaped
our stupidities, our fears, our sadness, our crimes, what we lust after,
and much else besides. The species we are combines with what actually
happens to us to burden us with psychological beasts or to protect us
against them. To understand and undo such malevolent e ects, we must
face the human beast.

No sacred cows. This book walks a political tightrope. On one side is
the racist segment of the right, fervently hoping that intelligence,
femininity, and criminality are all entirely genetic. On the other side
are many aging 1960s liberals and their "politically correct" campus
heirs, condemning all who dare to speak ill of victims; failure, they
say, results from poverty, racism, a bad upbringing, a malevolent
system, under-privilege, deprivation---from anything but oneself.

My loyalty is not to the right or to the left. I have no patience for
their sacred cows or their special pleading. My loyalty is to reasoned
argument, to the unfashionable positions that deserve a hearing, to the
thoughtful weighing of evidence. I realize that much of what I will say
in this book is grist for the agendas of both political positions. I
believe that facing the beast entails airing unpopular arguments. When
the evidence points toward genetic causes, I will say so. When the
evidence points toward a bad environment or bad parenting as
responsible, I will say so. When the evidence points toward
unchangeability, I will say so. When the evidence points to e ective
ways of changing, I will say that too. Outcome studies as best evidence.
Suppose for a moment that an epidemic of German measles is predicted.
You are pregnant and you know that German measles causes birth defects.
Two vaccines, Measex and Pneuplox, are on the market. A famous Hollywood
star says on TV that she was given Measex and didn't get German measles.
An Olympic sprinter also adds her testimonial. Your best friend has
heard good things about Measex. Pneuplox, on the other hand, is not
advertising. But it has been tested in what is called an outcome study,
in which it was administered to ve hundred people: Only two of these
people contracted German measles. Another ve hundred received a sham
injection: Twenty-eight of them got German measles. Now assume that
Measex has not been so tested. Which vaccine do you want? The one that
has passed a rigorous outcome test, of course. Making up your mind about
self-improvement courses, psychotherapy, and medications for you and
your family is di cult

because the industries that champion them are enormous and pro table and
try to sell themselves with highly persuasive means: testimonials, case
histories, word of mouth, endorsements ("My doctor is the best
specialist on X in the East"), all slick forms of advertising. Just as
this is no way to pick a vaccine or to decide on whether to have
chemotherapy versus radiation for cancer, this is no way to decide on
whether to try a particular diet, or whether to send your father to a
particular alcohol-treatment center, or whether to take a particular
drug for depression or to have psychotherapy. Much better
evidence---outcome studies---is now often available. In the collision
between self-improvement and biological psychiatry, the two sides have
until recently used di erent sorts of evidence. The biological
psychiatrists started with case histories but then built up to outcome
studies---comparing a treated group with a group given a sugar pill, a
placebo. The self-improvement and psychotherapy advocates still rely,
for the most part, on single case histories and testimonials: before and
after snapshots of some formerly obese person, a dramatic case report
from a professional football player in Alcoholics Anonymous, a case of
sudden recovery from profound depression following an angry
confrontation with Mother. Case histories make absorbing reading, but
they are clinically very weak, and, usually, self-serving evidence. The
seller presents the case history that testi es to his product's e
ectiveness. You never know how many failures there were.

The evaluation of change has improved recently. When the late Gerald
Klerman became director of ADAMHA (the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental
Health Administration of the federal government) under President Jimmy
Carter, he argued that psychotherapies should be evaluated in the same
hard-nosed way that the Federal Drug Administration evaluates drugs. He
funded comparisons of drugs and of psychotherapies. Much of what
psychology and psychiatry professionals now know comes from many such
careful and costly studies. But little of this has ltered down to the
general public, partly because of the power of the drug and
psychotherapy guilds. For many problems, we can now assert

with con dence that some therapies work and some do not. Little of this
technology has found its way into the self-improvement industry, but
when I make claims about e ectiveness, I will lean heavily on outcome
studies. I will often use case histories to illustrate important points,
but only when they are backed by more substantial evidence.

These, then, are my biases. Now that you know them, you should also know
your own. What are your underlying prejudices about self-improvement? Do
you think that therapy can change almost all of your personality traits?
Or do you think that character is xed? Do you think that what you do is
the product of choice, of the environment, or of genes? Lisa Friedman
Miller, the author of the following survey, has obtained responses from
thousands of people in order to explore how di erent views of change
relate to emotions and politics. There are no right or wrong answers,
but your score will tell you where you stand on the crucial issue of
change. Circle the choice that best ts your view. This survey will take
you less than ve minutes.

HUMAN PLASTICITY QUESTIONNAIRE3 Tom is shopping at a department store
when he spots a sweater that he likes. He goes into the dressing room to
try it on but notices that it costs too much money. Tom steals the
sweater by covering it with his jacket and then walking out of the
store. What accounts for Tom stealing the sweater from the department
store? Your opinion: 1. How much is Tom's behavior in uenced by the
immediate situation?

Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 2. How much is Tom's behavior in
uenced by more removed situations (e.g., childhood, race, the system)?
Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 3. How much is Tom's behavior in
uenced by the kind of person he is? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much
4. How much is Tom's behavior in uenced by his own decision to act that
way? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much Now suppose that you explained
to Tom that what he had done was wrong. You suggested that he change. He
agreed that he should change and that he wants to change. 5. How
completely could Tom change? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Completely change
Now suppose that you had never approached Tom on the issue of his
behavior. 6. How much do you think Tom would have changed anyway?

Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Completely changed John meets a woman at a
friend's party and asks her on a date for the next evening. At the end
of their date, John says that he wants to have sex with the woman. When
she refuses, he presses her against a wall and starts taking o her
clothes. What accounts for John taking o the woman's clothes? Your
opinion: 1. How much is John's behavior in uenced by the immediate
situation? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 2. How much is John's
behavior in uenced by more removed situations (e.g., childhood, race,
the system)? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 3. How much is John's
behavior in uenced by the kind of person he is? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Very much 4. How much is John's behavior in uenced by his own decision
to act that way? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much Now suppose that you
explained to John that what he had done was wrong. You suggested that he
change. He agreed that he should

change and that he wants to change. 5. How completely could John change?
Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Completely change Now suppose that you had
never approached John on the issue of his behavior. 6. How much do you
think John would have changed anyway? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Completely changed Dave is on his way home from class when he sees a
brand-new automobile on the street. Taking his keys from his pocket,
Dave deliberately carves three long lines across the hood of the car.
What accounts for Dave defacing the automobile? Your opinion: 1. How
much is Dave's behavior in uenced by the immediate situation? Not at all
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 2. How much is Dave's behavior in uenced by more
removed situations (e.g., childhood, race, the system)?

Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much 3. How much is Dave's behavior in
uenced by the kind of person he is? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much
4. How much is Dave's behavior in uenced by his own decision to act that
way? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Very much Now suppose that you explained
to Dave that what he had done was wrong. You suggested that he change.
He agreed that he should change and that he wants to change. 5. How
completely could Dave change? Not at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Completely change
Now suppose that you had never approached Dave on the issue of his
behavior. 6. How much do you think Dave would have changed anyway? Not
at all 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Completely changed

To score your test, simply add up your numbers for each one of the six
questions and ll in the total score below. Each of your totals should be
between 3 and 21. Question 1 (Immediate situation) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Question 2 (Removed situation) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Question 3 (Character)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Question 4 (Choice) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Question 5 (Change) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Question 6 (Change by himself) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ What do these scores mean?

Question 1 taps your belief that people are pushed around by the
immediate situation. If you scored 18 or above, you are in the quarter
that believes most in the potency of the immediate situation; 15 is
average; if you scored 9 or below, you are in the quarter of Americans
who believe least in the power of immediate circumstances. Democrats
tend to score 16 and above, whereas Republicans and independents usually
score below 15.

Question 2 is about the importance of a person's life history, and the
higher you score, the more you endorse its signi cance. People who score
19 or more are in the quarter that most believes in life history; above
16 is in the top half; and 12 or below is the most skeptical quarter.
The higher you score, the more you endorse welfare, a rmative action,
and foreign aid; also, the more depressed you tend to be. The lower you
score, the more you are for the death penalty, abortion, and military
intervention.

Question 3 is about character. People who score 21 or more are in the
quarter that most believes in character; 18 or more is in the upper
half; and 14 or less is in the lower quarter. The higher your score,
test results have shown, the more you believe in welfare, a rmative
action, and economic assistance, and the more you believe in the death
penalty, military intervention, and abortion.

The older you are, the more you believe in character. As you can see,
this scale breaks apart liberal and conservative stereotypes.

Question 4 taps your belief in the power of choice and willpower. The
top quarter of Americans score 21; above 19 is in the top half; 16 or
below is in the quarter that least believes in the power of choice.
People who score high are more socially and economically conservative,
less depressed, and older.

Question 5 is about how sweeping you think change can be. A score of 20
or above puts you in the top quarter; 16 or above in the top half; and a
score of 10 or below puts you in the bottom quarter. People who score
high are socially liberal and more in favor of welfare, a rmative
action, and foreign aid.

Question 6 taps your belief in change. If you scored 11 or above, you
are in the top quarter of those who believe that things naturally change
a lot; 8 or above is the top half; 3 marks the quarter of those who most
believe things stay the same. People with high scores believe more in
foreign aid, welfare, and a rmative action, and are more socially and
economically liberal. People with low scores believe more in the death
penalty, military intervention, and abortion. IN THE DOMAIN of human
personality, what are the facts? That, of course, is what this book is
about. I want to provide an understanding of what you can and what you
can't change about yourself so that you can concentrate your limited
time and energy on what is possible. So much time has been wasted. So
much needless frustration has been endured. So much of therapy, so much
of child rearing, so much of self-improving, and even some of the great
social movements in our century have come to nothing because they tried
to change the unchangeable. Too often we have wrongly thought we were
weak-willed failures, when the changes we wanted to make in ourselves
were just not possible. But all this e ort was necessary: Because there
have been so many failures, we are now able to see

the boundaries of the unchangeable; this in turn allows us to see
clearly for the rst time the boundaries of what is changeable.

The knowledge of the di erence between what we can change and what we
must accept in ourselves is the beginning of real change. With this
knowledge, we can use our precious time to make the many rewarding
changes that are possible. We can live with less self-reproach and less
remorse. We can live with greater con dence. This knowledge is a new
understanding of who we are and where we are going.

2 Booters and Bootstrappers: The Age of Self-Improvement and
Psychotherapy "The end of our foundation is the knowledge of causes,

and the secret motion of things, and the enlarging of the bounds of
human empire for the a ecting of all things possible."

Inscription over the door of the

House of Solomon---Francis Bacon,

The New Atlantis, 1626

WHAT AMERICANS believe people can change is---in historical perspective
---truly astonishing. We are told from childhood that we can improve
ourselves in almost every way. This is what our schools are supposed to
help us accomplish. Our children are not just to be lled up with facts
but taught to read, to be good citizens, to be lovingly sexual, to
exercise, to have high self-esteem, to enjoy literature, to be tolerant
of people who are di erent, to play baseball, to sing on key, to be
competitive as well as cooperative, to lead and to follow, to have good
health habits, to be ambitious, to use condoms, to obey the law. The
reality may fall short, but that is the mission of American schools.
Improving is absolutely central to American ideology. It is tantamount
in importance to freedom in our national identity; indeed, advancement
is probably the end for which Americans

believe freedom is the means. Every boy and, at last, every girl might
be president of the United States---with enough work and ambition. The
reality may fall short, but that is the ideal that Americans profess.

This is more than empty rhetoric. There is an enormous, and pro table,
self-improvement industry that plays to your desire to achieve. Adult
Americans spend billions of dollars and pass tens of billions of hours
taking courses in • Selling • Dieting • Memory

• Overcoming Fear of Flying • Interpreting Your

• Meditation

Dreams

• Time

• Asserting

Management

Yourself

• Stress Management • Charm • Controlling Anger

• Diplomacy • Etiquette

• Becoming Richer Spiritually • Becoming Richer Materially • Buying •
Loving Better • Falling out of Love

• Becoming Funny • Writing

• Martial Arts

• Becoming Less

• Controlling Your

• Negotiation

Feminine

Family

• Exercise

• Becoming More

• Becoming Less

• Life Extension

Feminine

Type A

• Relaxation

• Overcoming

• Being On Time

Homosexuality

• Getting Elected

• Small Talk

• Overcoming

• Public Speaking

• Reading Speed

Homophobia

• Snagging a Mate

• Giving Up Alcohol

• Increasing

• Appreciating

Intelligence Test

Wine

Scores

• Giving Up

• Learning

Drugs

Optimism

• Giving Up On

• Music Appreciation • Performing Music • Fighting Depression • Letting
Go • Opening Up

• Drawing with

• Picking Up

the

Women

People Who Take Right Hemisphere • Picking Up Men Drugs

• Taking Other

• Talking to

People's

Children

Perspectives

• Talking on the

• Winning Friends • Learning

Phone • Loving Yourself

• Positive Thinking • Realistic

• Math Phobia • Teaching

• Listening

Thinking This does little more than scratch the surface of what courses
are available. But what all these share is the simple premise that we
can change, improve, and advance. Is this so obvious as to not need
saying? Its very obviousness, how deeply we all accept it, is just the
point---because most of humankind over most of history has not believed
anything remotely like this. Traditionally, most people in the West have
believed that human character is xed and unalterable, that people do not
and cannot improve, advance, or perfect themselves. The change from a
deep belief in the unchangeability of character to an equally deep
belief in the capacity to improve is recent, and it represents one of
the most fundamental and important revolutions in modern thought.
Strangely, this is a history that has gone unwritten. How did Americans
come to believe so strongly in human plasticity? Where did the belief in
psychotherapy come from? From where did our faith in self-improvement
emanate? The Seder and the Road to Damascus How do we hear and retell
the great acts of courage of the JudeoChristian tradition? Let's examine
two of them: the Exodus from Egypt and the conversion of Saul. Do you
think that the Israelites, hard oppressed by Pharaoh, screwed up their
courage, decided they must have freedom, and bravely gathered themselves
up and ed? This is what I thought until I listened more closely to the
readings at a recent Seder. Here is the story of the Passover as told in
the Haggadah. Listen for who did what to whom. And he went down into
Egypt, compelled by the word of God, and sojourned

there. . . . And the children of Israel were fruitful, increased
abundantly, multiplied, and became exceedingly mighty. . . . "I have
caused thee to multiply like the growth of the eld."

And the Egyptians ill-treated us, a icted us, and laid heavy bondage
upon us. And we cried unto the Eternal. . . . And the Eternal heard our
voice. . . . And the

Eternal brought us forth from Egypt, with a strong hand and with an
outstretched arm, with great terror, and with signs and wonders.1

God is the actor, and the Israelites (and, to a lesser extent, the
Egyptians) are the acted-upon. There is almost nothing that the
Israelites do that is not caused or commanded by God. Their only act
without God's command is to complain. This paradigmatic act of
liberation is not portrayed as the act of a brave people resolved on
freedom. It is not even commanded by a daring general. Moses, in fact,
merely quotes God verbatim, as ordered. God says: I will be with thy
mouth, and with his \[Aaron's\] mouth, and will teach you what ye shall
do. (Exodus 4:15)

Every step of the way, the good events are wholly the doing of God. When
the situation improves, it is not by human agency but by God's
intervention. Indeed, this is the central message of the tale and why we
are supposed to retell it every Passover. Examine a di erent major
event, one from Christianity---the conversion of Saul. Do you think that
Saul rued his mistreatment of Jesus' followers, was fed up with the old
religion, understood with blinded insight the promise of Jesus, and
decided to convert? This is what I thought until I reread Acts 9: And
suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: And he fell
to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why

persecutest thou me?

And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou

persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me do?
And the

Lord said unto him, Arise, and go to the city, and it shall be told thee
what thou must do. . . .

The Lord . . . hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and
be lled with

the Holy Ghost.

And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he
received

sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.

Again, God is the actor and Saul is passively acquiescent. Saul merely
inquires, but God commands. There is no decision making, not a wisp of
thought or choice or insight on Saul's part. The Bible is almost devoid
of psychology.2 You will search the Old Testament and the New Testament
in vain for feats of human intention---individual choice, decision, and
preference. You will search in vain for some hero wreaking change by his
own initiative in a world of adversity. You will search in vain for a
character who thinks, weighs the pros and cons, and then acts. God
commands Abraham to sacri ce Isaac, the son of his old age. Abraham,
without a thought, saddles his ass and sets o .3 So it goes with the
entire dramatis personae of the Bible.

The Bible presents a stunning contrast with modern reportage. When any
major event occurs today---an earthquake, the World Cup, a battle eld
victory, an assassination, a riot in Los Angeles--- reporters badger the
participants with "How does it feel?" and "What was going through your
mind?" It is anachronistic to wonder how Joshua felt upon toppling the
walls of Jericho. This impulse was totally alien to those who reported
the monumental doings from the time of Abraham to the time of Jesus.
What happened--- particularly if it was good, an improvement, an
advance---was simply God's intervention in human a airs. Human thought,
decision, and intention played no role. The Scriptures militantly and
uniformly nullify human agency. This dogma of human implasticity
pervades Western civilization from biblical times through the next two
thousand years. Cracks in the Firmament This dour view of human
advancement---that if things improve, it is only through God's
grace---went largely unchallenged through the

Middle Ages. While the Middle Ages are no longer characterized as
utterly stagnant, there undoubtedly was a great slowing of change in
human a airs. For eight hundred years, individual character did not
change, and the society did not change much. Sons largely did what their
fathers did before them. Women were little noted. The poor remained
poor. The rich remained rich. Knowledge, coming only from authority, did
not accumulate. Except for astronomy describing the heavenly bodies'
movements, science did not progress. The Church was at the center,
standing immutable on the Rock of Peter. The pace of change mirrored the
ideology. Then three cracks in the rmament appeared---liberty, science,
and free will---and the dogma of human implasticity nally shattered. The
rst crack was the movement toward individual liberty.

Political liberty. On June 15, 1215, at Runnymede, England, a handful of
rebellious barons wrested from King John a document, Magna Carta, that
protected them from some of the caprices of their king. While it hardly
proclaimed universal su rage, Magna Carta is certainly the forerunner of
freedom as we know it: No freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or
disseised \[dispossessed\], or

outlawed, or exiled, or in any way destroyed, nor will we go upon him,
nor will we

send upon him, except by the legal judgment of his peers or by the law
of the land. . ..

All persons are to be free to come and go, except outlaws and prisoners.

The growth of freedom was glacial in its pace, however, and it was more
than four centuries before civil war broke out in England, Charles I was
beheaded, and the Commonwealth declared. It was almost six centuries
before the American Revolution realized John Locke's claim that
government derives its power from the consent of the governed. This was
followed in 1789 by the even more sweepingly democratic Declaration of
the Rights of Man of the French Revolution.

The movement toward liberty had now become a torrent. For our purposes,
it is one of the three streams that washed away the dogma that human
character cannot change and that individuals cannot, without the
intervention of God, improve or advance.

The second crack was the belief that we are not completely at the mercy
of nature. Science can manipulate nature. Until the Renaissance, Western
science did little but describe God's creation, though detailed
observation of the tides and of the heavenly bodies predicted eclipses,
and sometimes even oods, pretty well. Given the prevailing worldview
that humans were powerless to change the nature of things and that all
knowledge depended upon authority, the feeble science of the era should
come as no surprise.

Enter Francis Bacon, one of the truly iconoclastic minds of the
Renaissance. Bacon, who it has been speculated wrote the works
attributed to Shakespeare and was the bastard son of the Virgin Queen,
Elizabeth I, was born in 1561. His father was Nicholas Bacon, keeper of
the great seal of England, and his mother was Anne Cooke,
lady-in-waiting to Elizabeth. Bacon senior was notable for his social
progress: He had been a clerk before Henry VIII established the Anglican
church, but when Henry abolished the monasteries, and was short of
loyalists to run things, he promoted Nicholas Bacon, among other
formerly humble men. Bacon senior leapt social barriers, becoming the
rst member of his family to rise in class. First the Black Death had
destroyed the feudal system; now Henry had disenfranchised many of the
gentry, opening up the higher-status jobs that the myriad plague dead
and Henry's new enemies had once lled. Whole families scrambled upward.
Francis Bacon grew up knowing that the social order is not xed. Francis
Bacon entered Cambridge at twelve (no arti cially prolonged adolescence
in this subsistence economy) and immediately loathed the mandatory
Aristotelian curriculum that then passed for knowledge. He rebelled
against it openly. In a breathtaking break with the past, he urged us to
look to nature---not

to authority---for knowledge in order to bene t humankind. Science
should not be restricted merely to observing nature passively, he said.
Humans can actually manipulate nature (just as he had learned that man
could alter the social order). We can do experiments. If we want to know
why water is boiling, we should not consult Aristotle or the Church. We
can experiment and nd out. We remove the re and the boiling stops. We
rekindle the re and the boiling resumes. Fire is the cause.

Science can change things, Bacon told us. Within fty years Isaac Newton
had unlocked the secrets of motion. This was followed rapidly by an
explosion of knowledge in medicine, agriculture, and economics. In a
burst of activity, the next two centuries witnessed human beings
changing their kings, their God, and Nature herself. Perhaps human
beings, as individuals, could even change themselves. But for this to
become plausible, the nal crack in the rmament had to appear. It did,
and in deceptively academic guise ---in debate among theologians. Free
will. In the 1480s, heretics were burned at the stake all over Europe.
The infamous Malleus Male carum, a guide to detecting witches and
torturing them into confessing, was published. With the stench of
burning esh in his nostrils, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, a young
Ferraran aristocrat, arrived in Rome and de ed the dogma of human
implasticity. In his Oration: On the Dignity of Man, Pico's God tells
Adam Neither a determined dwelling place, nor a unique shape, nor a role
that is

peculiarly your own have we given you, O Adam, so that you may have and
possess

what habitation, shape, and roles you yourself may wish for according to
your desire and as you decide. The nature of all the rest is de ned and
encompassed by laws prescribed by us; you, restrained by no limitations,
of your own free will in whose hand I have placed you, shall appoint
your own nature.4

Pico revels in the vision that man is free to choose. Man is endowed by
his Creator with the potential of raising himself above all created
beings, even above the angels.

The pope condemned Pico and prohibited his writings. Pico wandered
barefoot through the world and died of fever at age thirty-one. But
within thirty years, the Protestant Reformation was in full swing. The
Catholic church lost its monopoly on the spiritual life of Europe. The
Reformation was decidedly not, however, a celebration of free will.
Luther dismissed freedom of the will, viewing humanity as having been
created vile and powerless: Everyone is fallen, all of us merit
damnation.5

John Calvin then argued that everyone is damned or saved even before
they are born. God predestines some of us to eternal life and the rest
of us to eternal death. His elect are kept by God in faith and holiness
through their lives. Worldly success can be an emblem of their election.
No actions you undertake, no choices you make, will change your fate.
Unaided, humans are incapable of choosing good, and human reason is
incapable of knowing a single truth beyond the mere existence of God.
Good works do not produce grace. Your destiny is sealed before you are
born. If this is so, why should people bother to try to be good? How
could people be held responsible for their actions? The theological
battle for human agency was engaged. On the outcome of this monumental
battle hinged the very fate of the idea that humans can change and
advance themselves. By the beginning of the seventeenth century, liberal
Dutch Protestants, led by Jacobus Arminius (the latinization of Jacob
Harmensen), claimed that man

has free will and participates in his election to grace.6 To be saved we
must meet God, if not halfway, some of the way. This was dubbed "the
Arminian Heresy." This debate continued for almost two hundred years,
with inroads made by the Arminians in Holland immediately and in England
one hundred years later during the Restoration purge of the Calvinists.
This "heresy" then became popular through the evangelical preaching of
John Wesley, the English cofounder of Methodism,

who preached this doctrine of salvation widely. First, Wesley declared,
humans have free will: He was endowed with a will, exerting itself in
various a ections and passions; and,

lastly, with liberty, or freedom of choice; without which all the rest
would have been in vain . . . he would have been as incapable of vice or
virtue as any part of inanimate creation. In these, in the power of self
motion, understanding, will, and liberty, the natural image of God
consisted.7

Wesley told the masses who turned out for his sermons that God o ers
salvation in general but that humans, using free will, actively
participate in attaining their own salvation by using the "means": The
sure and general rule for all who groan for the salvation of God is
this--- Whenever opportunity serves, use all the means which God has
ordained; for who knows in which God will meet thee with the grace that
bringeth salvation?8

Wesley's charismatic sermons, heard through the cities, towns, and
villages of England, Wales, and Northern Ireland, and in the American
colonies, and the e ciency of the organizations he set up to keep the
converted from backsliding made Methodism a strong and popular religion.
Free will now entered popular consciousness. Ordinary people no longer
saw themselves as passive vessels waiting to be lled with grace.
Ordinary human life could be improved. Ordinary people could act to
better themselves. Even the insane, formerly thought hopeless, were now
unshackled from their prison walls. In 1792, Philippe Pinel, newly
appointed chief physician of La Bicetre asylum in Paris, boldly struck
the chains from his patients in the presence of the leaders of the
French Revolution. SO BY THE BEGINNING of the nineteenth century, the
three cracks in the dogma of human implasticity had grown into
irreparable ssures. The American and French revolutions had been fought
and won; many had attained a large measure of political liberty. It was
widely believed that science could change nature, that humans need not
sit passively by and let nature grind them down, that human beings

have free will. It followed that human beings could change and better
themselves. The dogma of human implasticity that had lasted almost two
thousand years and had paralyzed human progress was at last overthrown.
The Dogma of Human Plasticity There was no better soil than that of
nineteenth-century America for this new dogma. Rugged individualism was
America's answer to the unraveling European mind-set of human
implasticity. All of these fed the faith: the democratic idea that all
men are created equal an endless frontier for the poor to nd riches

waves of immigrants, subsistence laborers who were soon clamoring for
power the gold rush

the motto "Rags to Riches"

universal schooling the notion of criminal rehabilitation public
libraries

the freeing of the slaves

the drive toward women's su rage

a new religious liberalism that emphasized free will and good works as
the road to heaven

the idealization of the entrepreneur---ambition and initiative incarnate
The Federalists, skeptical that the people could govern themselves
wisely ("Your people, sir---your people is a great beast!" declared
Alexander Hamilton), soon lost their hold on power to the Democrats. Few
now advocated human implasticity. The rst half of the nineteenth century
became a great age of social reform. The

evangelical religious movement of the American frontier was intensely
individualistic, the meetings climaxing with the drama of the choice of
Christ. Utopian communities sprang up to achieve human perfection. It
was commonly accepted that humans could change and improve. Andrew
Jackson, when he was president-elect, gave voice to it: I believe man
can be elevated; man can become more and more endowed with

divinity; and as he does he becomes more God-like in his character and
capable of governing himself. Let us go on elevating our people,
perfecting our institutions,

until democracy shall reach such a point of perfection that we can
acclaim with truth that the voice of the people is the voice of God.9

There were two dominant opinions in this era as to who can be the agent
of change; both are still very much with us as we enter the next
millennium. The booters and the bootstrappers. The hooters believed that
people can improve, but that the agent of change must be someone else.
For some of the booters, the means of change was the therapist who
guides the patient into change. Freud, the founder of the therapeutic
movement, tried self-analysis and gave up. My self-analysis remains
interrupted. I have realized why I can analyze myself

only with the help of knowledge obtained objectively (like an outsider).
True selfanalysis is impossible; otherwise there would be no neurotic
illness.10

When the analysand and the analyst are the same, the con icts that
distort thinking and impede insight are insuperable.

For other booters, the means of human advancement was changing the
social institutions. These reformers founded public libraries, installed
universal schooling, advocated rehabilitation of criminals, urged moral
treatment of the insane, marched for women's su rage and abolition of
slavery, and founded Utopian communities. They still march today. Marx
epitomized this view of

change: Humans are prisoners of the capitalistic economic system; change
the economic system, put the means of production into the hands of the
workers, and thereby change humanity for the better.

Out of this group, the idea of a "social science" emerged. In the wake
of Chicago's Haymarket Riot of 1886, in which seventy policemen were
injured and one killed by armed strikers, class warfare became apparent
to American opinion makers. Their explanation of bad behavior shifted
from bad character (immutable and individual) to poverty and social
class (changeable and general). The cure was to improve the environment
of the lower class, since the individual perpetrators were not
responsible. Theologians asked "not how every individual was
responsible, but how they could be responsible for the many who were
not."11The science of social institutions took this program as its
agenda. For still other booters, the means of change was to manipulate
the environmental contingencies that a ect the individual. The
behaviorists, led by John Watson, told us that the child is totally a
product of the environment. Watson said in 1920 that the only way to
change

is to remake the individual by changing his environment in such a way
that new habits have to form. The more completely they change, the more
the personality changes. Few individuals can do all this unaided.12

The science of learning theory was dedicated to this proposition (B. F.
Skinner was the most popular recent advocate of this worldview).

All these propositions share the notion that people will change. But
they need to be booted into it---by a therapist, by reformed social
institutions, by benevolent manipulation of the environment. People
can't change on their own. The booters are the heirs of Francis Bacon.
The bootstrappers are the heirs of the individualism of Pico, Arminius,
and Wesley. The agent of change is the self: Human beings can lift
themselves by their own bootstraps.

For some of the bootstrappers, self-improvement had theological roots,
derived from Wesley and nineteenth-century liberal Protestantism melded
with the American doctrine of "rugged individualism." Norman Vincent
Peale's The Power of Positive Thinking, published in 1952, and Robert
Schuller's present-day Sunday-morning preaching in the Crystal Cathedral
have touched

the lives of tens of millions of Americans.13 Individuals believe that
they can achieve success in this world by improving themselves, and
salvation in the next by good works. Emile Coué, the French pharmacist
who urged turn-of-the-century pill takers to accompany their medication
with the thought "Every day and in every way, I am becoming better and
better," was a worthy secular forerunner of these contemporary religious
bootstrappers.

Humanistic psychologists are also bootstrappers. Abraham Maslow urged
"self-actualization" as the highest form of human motivation, though it
is only when more basic needs---like food, safety, love, and
self-esteem---are slaked that we can achieve it. The ideas of will,
responsibility, and freedom command center stage in existential and
humanistic psychotherapy; patients can even have disorders of will, and
therapy emphasizes widening the capacity to choose. The advocates of
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) are also bootstrappers. In 1935, Dr. Robert H.
Smith began AA, and since that time AA has assisted perhaps a million
people in giving up alcohol, a problem that had once seemed quite
hopeless. AA is not pure bootstrapping, however: One element in recovery
is individual determination and will. This is coupled with a belief in
assistance from a Higher Power and vigorous social support from the
group. In fact, AA is a curious mix of the seemingly con icting elements
of self-improvement and acceding to a higher power, and I will look at
its doctrines and its successes and failures more closely in the chapter
on alcoholism. In twentieth-century America, somewhere between the
ministrations of the booters and the boosterism of the bootstrappers,
the dogma of human implasticity died. The old dogma has been

replaced by a new dogma, its opposite, which maintains that human beings
can always change and improve---by the agency of others and by
themselves. Like the dogma it has usurped, the new one makes sweeping
claims. All aspects of human character, it says, can, with enough e ort,
or learning, or insight, yield and change for the better. Is the dogma
of human plasticity true?

The Maximal Self Many widespread beliefs are true. Some, like the
medieval belief that the moon is covered with a crystal sphere, are
false: Some are self-ful lling. The rest of this book is about whether
the belief in limitless human plasticity is true. But before evaluating
it, I want to emphasize that the belief that we can change ourselves di
ers from most other beliefs. It has, at the very least, one remarkable
selfful lling aspect.

The society we live in exalts the self---the self that can change itself
and can even change the way it thinks. Our economy increasingly thrives
on individual whim. Our society grants power to the self that selves
have never had before. We live in the age of personal control. When the
assembly line was created at the turn of this century, we could buy only
white refrigerators. Painting every refrigerator the same color saved
money. In the 1950s, the development of rudimentary machine intelligence
created a bewildering range of choices. It became possible (and pro
table, if there was a market for it) to, say, encrust every hundredth
refrigerator with rhinestones. Such a market was created by the glori
cation of individual choice. Now all jeans are no longer blue; they come
in dozens of colors and hundreds of varieties. With the permutation of
available options, you are o ered a staggering number of di erent models
of new cars. There are hundreds of kinds of aspirin and a thousand kinds
of beer.

To create a market for all these products, advertising whipped up a
great enthusiasm for personal control. The deciding, choosing,
pleasure-preoccupied self became big business. (Now there is even a
successful magazine called Self.) When the individual has a lot of money
to spend, individualism becomes a pro table worldview. Since World War
II, America has become a rich country. Although tens of millions have
been left out of the prosperity, Americans on the average now have more
buying power than any other people in history. Our wealth is tied to the
bewildering array of choices opened to us by the selfsame process that
produced the rhinestone refrigerator. We have more food, more clothes,
more education, more concerts, more books, and more marketed knowledge
to choose from than any other people has ever had.

Who chooses? The self. The modern self is not the peasant of yore, with
a xed future yawning ahead. He (and now she, e ectively doubling the
market---and add in kids) is a frantic trading oor of options,
decisions, and preferences. The result is a kind of self never before
seen on the planet---the Maximal Self. The self has a history. We have
seen that until the Renaissance the self was minimal; in a Fra Angelico
painting everyone but Jesus looks just like everyone else. With Pico and
Bacon the self expanded, and in the works of El Greco and Rembrandt the
bystanders no longer look like interchangeable members of a chorus. By
Andrew Jackson's time the self, wielding political power, possessing
free will, and capable of divine perfectibility, had become elaborate.
Our wealth and our technology have now culminated in a self that, to a
degree never experienced before, chooses, feels pleasure and pain,
dictates action, optimizes, and even has rare ed attributes ---like
esteem and e cacy and con dence and control and knowledge. I call this
new self, with its absorbing concern for its grati cations and losses,
the Maximal Self, to distinguish it from what it has replaced, the
Minimal Self, the self of the Bible and of Luther. The Minimal Self did
little more than just behave; it was

certainly less preoccupied with how it felt. It was more concerned with
duty.

Advocating self-improvement would have made no sense before the rise of
the Maximal Self. A society that views tornadoes as God's will does not
build tornado shelters. Even if it does, people will not go into them or
even listen to the radio for tornado warnings. A society that views
drinking as stemming from a bad and immutable character will not try to
get alcoholics to refrain from drinking. A society that views depression
as stemming from bad genes or unfortunate brain chemistry will not
attempt to have depressives change what they think when they encounter
failure. Notions of therapy, rehabilitation, and self-improvement do not
arise in a society of Minimal Selves, which would not be much interested
in psychology in the rst place. Believing the dogma of human
implasticity, the Minimal Self does not act to change itself. But when a
society exalts the self, as ours does, the self, its thoughts, and their
consequences become objects of careful science, of therapy and of
improvement. This improving self is not a chimera. Self-improvement and
therapy often work well, and it is a belief in human plasticity that
underlies these strategies. The Maximal Self believes that it can change
and improve, and this very belief allows change and improvement. The
dogma of human plasticity tends to ful ll itself.

3 Drugs, Germs, and Genes: The Age of Biological Psychiatry

FOR ALL THEIR CURRENCY, self-improvement and psychotherapy are viewed by
many with skepticism and even disdain, for this is also the age of
biological psychiatry, with its biomedical vision of emotion,
personality, and mental illness. It has three basic principles: Mental
illness is really physical illness. Emotion and mood are determined by
brain chemistry. Personality is determined by genes. All three run
counter to the idea that we can change ourselves--- with or without a
therapist. Biological psychiatry has a radically di erent vision of
change: Curing the underlying physical illness cures mental illness.
Drugs cure negative emotions and moods. Our personality is xed. This is
the extreme position. There are many compromise positions that refer to
the "interaction" of biology and environment, genetic "contribution,"
"preparedness," and genetic "predispositions." Some of these compromises
are just anesthetics, numbing us into thinking that the fundamental
dispute between nature and nurture has somehow been solved or is a

pseudoquestion. Much of this book is about reasonable in-between
positions, but this chapter is not. It lays out the extreme position,
and the extreme position is neither frivolous nor is it a straw man. It
represents the bedrock beliefs of a very large part of the biomedical
world. This view emerges from three momentous discoveries. The Italian
Pox, the French Pox, the English Pox The worst epidemic of madness in
recorded history began a few years after Columbus discovered the New
World and continued with mounting ferocity until the beginning of our
century. It a icted the mighty---from Henry VIII to Randolph Churchill,
Winston's brilliant, erratic father---along with the ordinary. First
there was a weakness in the arms and legs, then eccentricity, then
downright delusions of grandeur, then global paralysis, stupor, and
death. The malady took its name from its nal, paralytic symptom: general
paresis. By 1884, the asylums of Europe burst with men in the nal stages
of this disease, shrieking obscenities. Controversy swirled over its
cause. Established opinion, led by the dean of German psychiatry,
Wilhelm Griesinger, held that paresis comes from loose living,
especially from inhaling bad cigars. A minority---empirical scientists
rather than armchair psychiatrists, among them the young Richard von Kra
t-Ebing---held that it comes from syphilis. Griesinger would have none
of this. How could it come from syphilis? Many paretics had had no
sexual contact for years. Almost all heatedly denied ever having had
syphilis. A few others may have had syphilis, but twenty or thirty years
before---a sore on their penises for a week and then the sore
disappeared. How could paresis possibly come from syphilis? Scientists
then could not just look into the brain of one of these dead paretics
and see if the syphilitic germ was present. In this era, microscopes
were still primitive and tissue stains even worse. When you looked into
the brain, what you saw was grayish-white mush. Moreover, the syphilitic
organism was unknown---it was just a

hypothetical germ; no one had ever seen it. The evidence was mounting,
however, that paresis was a disorder of the brain: The pupils of
paretics' eyes didn't contract when light was ashed on them, and the
autopsied brains of dead paretics were shrunken.

It was not only Griesinger who denied that this mental illness is a
disease of the body. Unlike today, when we argue that madness is either
mental or physical, nineteenth-century common sense held otherwise.
Madness was a moral defect, the outward manifestation of a bad
character. Strange as this sounds to our ears, this belief was an
advance over the common sense of earlier centuries, which had held that
madness was possession by the Devil. Kra t-Ebing changed all this. In
one of the most daring experiments in psychiatric history, he showed
that general paresis is caused by syphilis. He showed this without once
looking at the brain, and he showed this thirty years before anyone was
to glimpse Treponema pallidum, the syphilitic spirochete, through a
microscope. He knew, as did all streetwise males, that syphilis, like
measles or mumps, was a disease you could not catch twice. If you got a
sore on your penis once after intercourse with an infected woman, you
would be uncomfortable for a few weeks: Urination stung; you might run a
fever. After that you seemed to be safe and could then enjoy unlimited
pleasure with even the most notorious whores, and never get another
sore.

Kra t-Ebing experimented on nine of his patients, all middle-aged men
with delusions of grandeur, all of whom vehemently denied ever having
had the shameful "French pox" (the Germans called it the French pox; the
French called it the Italian pox; the Italians called it the English
pox). He scraped material from the penile sores of men who had just
contracted syphilis (no armchair science, this) and injected it into
these nine paretics. Not one of the nine developed a sore. The
controversy was settled by one monumental experiment. All nine of these
men must already have had syphilis, and the syphilitic germ must
therefore cause, by some very slow process, general paresis.

Supporting evidence soon cascaded in. Treponema pallidum was discovered,
and was found in the brains of paretics. A simple blood test was
developed to detect syphilis, and "606," so named because six hundred
and ve prior concoctions had failed, was created---it killed Treponema
and thus prevented paresis. So successful was Kra t-Ebing's work that
the most common mental illness of the nineteenth century was eradicated
within a generation. (When we look for paretics in Philadelphia---where
I teach at the University of Pennsylvania---to instruct present-day
medical students, it is very hard to nd one.) But Kra t-Ebing, this
scientist of courage and genius, accomplished more than just discovering
the cause of paresis. With this discovery, he convinced the medical
world of something much more global: Mental illness is just an illness
of the body. This became the rst principle, the rallying cry, and the
agenda for the new eld of biological psychiatry. A century of research
on schizophrenia, depression, Alzheimer's, and many other problems
hypothesized as stemming from some underlying brain disorder followed.
Schizophrenia is now seen as caused by too much of a neurotransmitter in
the brain; depression by too little of another neurotransmitter;
Alzheimer's by the deterioration of certain nerve centers; overweight by
the underactivity of another center (the verdict is in on none of this).
It follows for all mental illness that real change is possible only
after eliminating the physical illness. Kill the spirochetes, for
example, and the mental deterioration ends. Raise the neurotransmitter
level and cure depression; lower the level and cure schizophrenia.
Lobotomize---cut out the appropriate brain centers--- and cure the
anxiety disorders. Reset the appetite center with a drug and cure
overweight. Psychotherapy for a biological illness, from this point of
view, is sentimental nonsense. At best, it might be cosmetic: A
therapist might help a paretic adjust to his worsening mental and
physical state; a therapist might urge a schizophrenic not to forget to
take his pills and not to tell his boss about his delusions.

Drugs and Emotion Here is what orid psychosis look like: Lester shows up
at his father's dry-goods store one morning in a terrifying costume. He

is stark naked, painted a dull brownish red from head to toe, and is
daubed with slime. There is an enormous barbed shhook sticking out of
his cheek.1 "I'm a worm!" he babbles as he crawls along the oor. The
cashier calls the police, and

Lester is dragged o to Baptist Memorial Hospital

In the hospital, Lester is oridly schizophrenic. He hallucinates the
sounds o sh in a

feeding frenzy. He believes that he is the object of their frenzy. He
retains the singular delusion that he is a worm, probably related to his
despair over his girlfriend's walking out

on him ("You worm!" she shouted as she slammed the door). His mood
uctuates wildly from terror to giddy mania to deep sadness.

Lester is as crazy as they come. But what happens next seems little
short of a miracle. It

is the late summer of 1952. One of the residents at Baptist Memorial has
just returned to

Memphis from a year in France. Before he left Europe, he had heard a
startling paper delivered in Luxembourg at the French Congress of
Psychiatrists and Neurologists.

Professor Jean Delay, chief psychiatrist at the Hôpital Sainte-Anne in
Paris, announced a breakthrough in the treatment of psychosis.

Psychosis: the most ferocious mental illness. In 1952, the back wards of
mental hospitals in Paris, New York, Moscow, and Memphis were lled
beyond their capacities with patients like Lester. These wards were
called "snake pits." The inmates were hallucinating and unreachable, or
mutely catatonic, or wild with delusions and straitjacketed, or giggling
out word salad, or simply broken, with their faces turned toward the
wall. Everything was tried on these schizophrenics: electroshock
therapy, arti cial hibernation, lobotomy, insulin shock, cocktails of
drugs. Nothing worked. The psychotic might have some remissions, but his
future was widely believed to be hopeless. Delay announced a cure. He
and Pierre Deniker had tested a new antihistamine, synthesized for hay
fever by the Rhone-Poulenc drug company two years earlier. Their
patients became amazingly calm:

Delusions dissolved in a matter of days, like shakos of snow melting
slowly o a tree after an ice storm on a warm winter morning. The
psychotics' contact with the real world resumed. At Lester's case
conference there is a heated quarrel. The psychoanalysts advocate

psychotherapy. They believe that his delusion is caused by homosexual
panic. All

schizophrenia is "latent homosexuality," they say. Drugging Lester will
only be cosmetic,

and, worse, it may impede his gaining insight into his underlying con
ict. But the resident fresh from Paris is dogged. He reiterates Delay's
ndings and he prevails. Lester is injected

with this new drug, chlorpromazine. He relaxes immediately. (The new
drug was described

as a "major tranquilizer.") By the weekend, Lester is aghast at his garb
and washes o all traces of the paint. The idea that he is a worm now
seems as crazy to him as it does to us. Within three weeks, Lester is
back at work as a stock boy.

The new drug exploded across the psychiatric world. At every major
medical center, chlorpromazine was used for psychotic patients, and, by
and large, it worked. Most got better in a few weeks. Many got
astonishingly better. Even some patients who had vegetated mutely in the
back wards for a decade or more recovered and were discharged within
months. The back wards emptied out, and psychiatric beds became readily
available for the rst time in years. Thus began the drug revolution,
dubbed "the third revolution" in psychiatry. The rst had been Pinel's
striking the shackles of the insane; the second was Freud's invention of
psychoanalysis. The premise of the drug revolution is that disordered
mood and emotion re ect disordered brain chemistry. Correct the
chemistry of the brain with drugs, and correct mood and emotion. The
drug revolution spread rapidly. Drugs were compatible with the venerable
disease model. Giving drugs rescued psychiatrists from the disdainful
skepticism of their more traditionally scienti c medical colleagues.
Drugs were cheap and quick. Drugs were very big business, and there was
a huge lobby to sell them to physicians, to Congress, to the media, and
to the public.

And drugs worked. Case histories poured in. Outcome studies of the new
antipsychotics were done, and the drugs were usually more

e ective than sugar pills given to control groups. Perhaps 60 percent of
the patients improved, though few recovered completely.2

Depression, mania, and anxiety. As the fervor for drugging psychotics
grew, new drugs were tried on patients su ering from other maladies. The
rst antidepressant was discovered by accident: A new drug had been tried
on tuberculosis. The patients improved. They were pleased. Enormously
pleased. They danced in the corridors and shouted in ecstasy. The
drug---iproniazid---was primarily a euphoriant. It also relieved
depression. The rst year it

was available, 1957, 400,000 patients were treated with it.3
Unfortunately, iproniazid is toxic, even occasionally lethal. It was
soon outsold by milder antidepressants, called tricyclics, as the drug
companies fell over each other to mint new, slightly di erent (and
therefore patentable) versions. These also worked, and their side e ects
were subtler. About 65 percent of patients became less depressed.4
Prozac, hyped as "A Breakthrough Drug for Depression" on the cover of
Newsweek in 1990, works at just the same rate as the

earlier medications, but milder side e ects were claimed.5 Prozac seized
the lion's share of the market.

The antidepressants were moderately helpful. In contrast, a true
"miracle" drug---lithium carbonate---was discovered for mania. John
Cade, an Australian physician, working alone and under primitive
conditions, found that the urine of his manic patients killed guinea
pigs: The rodents trembled, twitched violently, collapsed, and died. He
injected them with lithium, an element known to be a poison, and the
guinea pigs became calm and lethargic---and they survived injections of
the manics' urine. Cade then tried lithium on the manic humans whose
urine was so lethal. Within days their agitation, their racing thoughts,
their distractibility, and their euphoric excitement gave way to calm.6
By 1970, psychiatrists prescribed lithium routinely for manicdepression.
Before lithium, manic-depression was a crippling and

hopeless illness: 15 percent of manic-depressive patients killed
themselves, and most---many manic-depressives are very talented--- could
not hold jobs. So obnoxious are manics that their families were
universally miserable, and 60 percent of their marriages ended in
divorce (in the days when divorce was rare). With lithium, this is no
longer so. Roughly 80 percent of manic-depressives are helped by it,
most of them markedly.7

The biggest splash was made with the anti-anxiety drugs. Anxiety has
usually been thought of as an inevitable, if uncomfortable and
disorganizing, part of life we all face. Freud thought of it as the
fundamental emotion, and the rst half of this century was dubbed the age
of it. When extreme and out of control, however, anxiety is indisputably
a clinical problem. In the mid-1950s, Miltown (meprobamate) was rst used
with anxious patients, to phenomenal e ect: Frenzied patients relaxed
almost to jelly in a few minutes, but they remained conscious; and their
troubles, which moments before had overwhelmed them, now seemed
pleasantly far away. Sleep came easily.

Predictably, Miltown was used promiscuously. The industry race was on.
Librium (chlordiazepoxide) replaced Miltown and became the world's
number one prescription drug. Valium (diazepam), ve times stronger, soon
displaced Librium. These drugs presently rival alcohol in their everyday
use by Americans. If your troubles make you anxious and you can nd a
cooperative physician, taking Valium four times a day is quite
acceptable.8 Ours is no longer the Age of Anxiety. It is the Age of
Tranquilizers. The second principle of biological psychiatry seems rmly
in place. Drugs, claim their advocates, have conquered psychosis and
mania and eliminated the more commonplace moods of depression and
anxiety. Emotion and mood are nothing but brain chemistry. If you don't
like yours, you can change them with the right drug. The Seamy Side of
Drugs

I have tried to make as sympathetic a case as I can for drugs. I had to
restrain myself. Drugs do work on emotion. Mania can be greatly
dampened. Depression can be moderately relieved. Anxiety can be almost
instantly dispelled. Psychotic delusions can be chemically dissolved.

But there is another side to the story. Why in general do drugs work?
You might entertain the naïve image that the drug swoops down on the
invading foreign disease and kills it, like a falcon attacking a rabbit.
I have a di erent image of how a lot of drugs work, and while
controversial, it may help you understand the seamy side. In my image,
drugs are themselves foreign invaders, just like diseases. Your body
regards the drug as a toxin, and your natural defenses are mobilized to
ght it o . A side e ect is that these mobilized defenses happen to kill
o the disease. The true side e ect of a drug is to arrest the disease.
The main e ect of the drug is to produce the unwanted lesser illnesses,
euphemistically dubbed side e ects.

General paresis itself was rst arrested by just such a tactic. In 1917,
Julius Wagner von Jauregg, an Austrian psychiatrist, intentionally gave
paretics malaria. He reasoned that the "minor" disease of malaria,
producing high fever and marshaling other defenses, might kill the major
disease of paresis. So it did, and Wagner von Jauregg was awarded the
Nobel Prize in 1927, becoming the only psychiatrist ever so honored. In
my view, Wagner von Jauregg's tactic was not a peculiar medical tactic.
Drugs usually work the same way: by inducing a lesser malady to cure a
greater malady. Psychosis. Antipsychotic drugs seem to "work" about 60
percent of the time, although, surprisingly, well-done outcome studies
are

scarce. A large minority of patients do not bene t9 (though "bene t" is
not exactly a straightforward term, even when the drugs do work---the
drugs relieve the symptoms, but the patients do not recover completely).
Schizophrenics become more manageable--- quieter, less bizarre, more
docile---but they are still schizophrenics.

This is convenient for hospital sta and can easily be mistaken for a
cure. Lester still nds himself with strange thoughts, but they are not
as compelling as they

once were. He has also learned not to talk about being a worm, though he
often still thinks he really is one.

Sadly, Lester, plagued once again by delusions, has returned to the
hospital for

monthlong bouts of delusions six times since 1952.

Back-ward overcrowding was ended by the drugs, but it was replaced with
a "revolving door." Many of the people we see lying on grates in large
American cities got there by being released, again and again, from
mental hospitals by virtue of the antipsychotic drugs. Out on the
street, they deteriorate once more---either because they stop taking
their drugs or because their drugs lose e ect---and the police soon
bring them back to the hospital. Psychotics do not stop taking their
medication only because of confusion or absentmindedness. I once was a
"pseudopatient" and got myself admitted to the locked men's ward of
Norristown (Pennsylvania) State Hospital. I noticed a rush to the
bathroom at medication time and followed my fellow patients. There I
found a long line of patients who had hidden their pills under their
tongues and were, one by one, depositing their pills into the toilet
bowl.10

The antipsychotic drugs produce nasty side e ects. The most noticeable
are cardiac arrhythmia; low blood pressure; uncontrollable restlessness
and dgeting; immobility of the face, robbing the patient of the ability
to smile; tremor; and a shu ing gait. A few patients die. A devastating,
and especially hideous, side e ect is tardive dyskinesia, when the drugs
destroy something (as yet unknown) in the brain's control of movement.
Its victims suck and smack their lips uncontrollably. Lester's family
pretends not to notice. But Lester often looks like a frog catching ies.

Between one-quarter and one-third of drugged patients develop this
deformity. The longer you take the drug, the more likely it is that

tardive dyskinesia will develop. And once it starts, it is completely
irreversible.11

Depression. Antidepressant drugs work about 65 percent of the time. Like
the antipsychotics, they are cosmetic. Once you stop taking them, you
are just as likely to relapse or have a fresh attack of depression as
you were before. They do not alter the deep pessimism and helplessness
characteristic of depressives. When you recover from depression using a
drug, you have acquired no new skills and no new insights into how to
handle life's recurrent setbacks. You credit your recovery to a drug or
to a benevolent physician, not to yourself. Antidepressants, like
antipsychotics, have nasty side e ects. The monoamine-oxidase (MAO)
inhibitors, a once commonly used type of antidepressant, can be fatal.
The tricyclics are milder, but they can produce cardiac problems, mania,
confusion and memory loss, and extreme fatigue; a large minority of
patients cannot tolerate them. The newest entry---Prozac---produces less
drowsiness, dry mouth, and sweating than the older ones, but it produces
more nausea, nervousness, and insomnia. Eli Lilly, its maker, may now be
reaping the consequences of premature media hype, for there are case
histories suggesting that Prozac causes unprecedented suicidal
preoccupation. No controlled study has yet been done.12

Anxiety. Anti-anxiety drugs relieve anxiety. They relax you dramatically
and make life seem rosier. But like the antidepression and antipsychotic
drugs, they are cosmetic. Once you stop taking them, anxiety returns in
full force. Worse, when the anxiety stems from a real problem, you nd
you have done nothing in the meantime to surmount it. To the extent that
anxiety is a message to do something about your life, anti-anxiety drugs
prevent your getting the message. In addition, these drugs are overused
in anxiety disorders: They are probably useless for panic disorder and
for generalized anxiety disorder.13

Anti-anxiety drugs do not have the nasty side e ects that the
antipsychotics and antidepressants have. They probably won't kill you,
even in megadoses. But unlike the others, the antianxiety drugs become
less potent the longer you take them, and they probably are addictive.14

Mania. Lithium works well on mania. The main problem with lithium is
that many manics refuse to take it because they like staying manic. In
past centuries lithium had been used as a drug, but it was in disrepute
(because it produced heart attacks) when John Cade, the Australian
researcher, revived it by discovering its anti-manic property. Unlike
the rest of the aforementioned drugs, lithium therefore generated few
unpleasant surprises.15 The medical eld was forewarned, and from the
outset, patients who took lithium to relieve manic-depression were
carefully monitored by their physicians. Your Genes and Your Personality
The nal principle of biological psychiatry is that personality is
genetic. This is so contrary to the political sensibility of our times
that its rediscovery is a shock to the system. How did biological
psychiatry come to believe in such an "unenlightened" idea? Consider the
fashionable explanation of child abuse. Andy is a terrible two. Steven,
his father, beats him whenever Andy throws a tantrum---

not just a spanking: Black eyes and broken ngers result. Once Steven
starts, he can't stop. Andy's crying eggs his father on, and Steven
doesn't stop until Andy is whimpering quietly.

All this came out when Andy's mother took him, su ering from a "fall,"
to the emergency room. Steven was arrested.

Steven was mercilessly beaten by his own father through most of his
childhood, and

Steven remembers his father claiming to have been beaten by his own
father when he was a boy.

Social scientists tell us that this cycle of child abuse is learned.
Steven learned to beat Andy by being beaten by his father, and his
father learned it the same way. It is quite possible that the children
of abusers beat up their own children more often than do children who
were not beaten up by their parents. But this evidence is equally
compatible with another theory, one that is so unfashionable as to be
omitted as a possibility by the social scientists who discovered the
generational transmission of child abuse.16

What evolution works on. The alternative explanation is that aggression
is inherited, and that more aggressive people have "more aggressive
genes." People who beat little children are loaded with them, this
theory suggests. If these little children are the abusers' biological
children, they will, in turn, grow up aggressive---not because they
"learn" anything while being beaten, but because they inherit their
parents' aggressive tendencies. Does Steven beat Andy because he
inherited an aggressive disposition (which he has passed on to his
doubly unfortunate son), or did he learn to beat up children from his
own childhood beatings? How can this question be answered? We are used
to the idea of genes controlling simple characteristics like eye color.
But can something complex, like a personality trait--- aggression, for
example---be inherited? To approach this question, it is useful to think
about evolution: What does evolution work on and what gets selected?

I believe that genes, the particular molecular string of DNA, and simple
traits like eye color are selected only indirectly. These get selected
because their owner is more successful at reproducing and surviving than
the owners of di erent strings of DNA. What gets directly selected,
however, are the characteristics that cause their owner to outreproduce
and outsurvive the competition. It is complex, "molar" traits like
beauty, intelligence, and aggression that are the primary material of
natural selection, which cares only about "modules," the traits that
lead directly to reproductive

success. This means that complex trait selection is the normal mechanism
of evolution.

Molecular biology has it backward. This eld looks exclusively at simple
traits and molecular building blocks (DNA strings), which can be
measured---respectable, quantitative science. But this does not mean
that nature is at all interested in simple traits or their molecular
constituents, or that the inheritance of simple traits illuminates the
inheritance of the more fundamental, complex traits.

Evolution, for example, has certainly worked on the complex trait

of "beauty,"17 which is passed on from one generation to the next, as is
the propensity to be attracted to it. Natural selection sees to it that
attractive people have higher reproductive success than people less so.
Beauty in turn is made up of traits like eye color, and eye color in
turn has building blocks---for example, a particular chain of DNA. But
beauty, like automobiles, comes in many models, and its de nition
changes within limits over time and culture. There are many ways to be
attractive: many combinations of eye color, teeth, and hair. More
important, a greater number of combinations will be ugly and will thus
be eliminated from the gene pool. If there are myriad kinds of beauty,
then there are myriad molecular ways to construct "beauty," all of which
get selected. The upshot is that there is unlikely to be a molecular
biology of beauty. There will not be "beauty genes," or there will be so
many combinations of genes underlying beauty as to be scienti cally
unwieldy. But beauty will still be subject to natural selection and will
still be inherited. So too with intelligence, aggression, and all
complex traits.18 It follows that the notion of "aggressive genes" may
not make much sense, but that the notion of the heritability of
aggression makes good, scienti c sense.

How the inheritance o personality is studied. Beauty, aggression,
nervousness, depression, intelligence, and the ability to make up
limericks all run in families. But if you can't nd the genes underlying
a personality trait, how can you possibly nd out if it is

inherited rather than learned? This formidable question has a
surprisingly simple answer: Study twins and study adopted children.

Identical twins are genetically identical. They always have, for
instance, the same color eyes. Fraternal twins have, on average, half
their genes in common. Sometimes one twin is green-eyed and the other
blue-eyed. They are no more alike genetically than any other two
siblings. When identical twins are more similar for some trait than
fraternal twins, we say that the trait is heritable. This is true for
eye color, but how about more complex traits, like limerick composing?
Even if identical twins have the same limerickcomposing ability (or its
lack), and fraternal twins are not as similar, this talent could still
be the result of child rearing. Everyone knows that identical twins are
raised more similarly: Their parents dress them the same, they share the
same bedroom more often, they take the same classes, and so on.
Identical twins reared apart have the same genes, but they grow up in
vastly di erent environments. If they are similar for some personality
trait, it must be heritable and not learned. The study of identical
twins reared apart is the best way to untangle the e ects of child
rearing from the e ects of genetics.19

Indeed, if you want to attach a number for degree of heritability,
simply take the correlation for identical twins reared apart: When that
correlation is 1.00, the trait is completely determined genetically;
when it is lower, say .50, this means that the trait is half genetic and
half nongenetic in origin. Identical twins reared apart. Tony and Roger
were given up for adoption as infants. Tony grew up in a warm and

e usive working-class Italian home in Philadelphia. Roger was raised in
Florida by austere, highly educated Jewish parents. While in his
twenties, Tony, a traveling salesman, was eating at a restaurant in New
Jersey when he was accosted by a very insistent woman

diner. "Roger, how have you been? You haven't called." With e ort, Tony
was able to convince her that he wasn't Roger and that he knew no such
Roger. But he was intrigued

and tracked Roger down. When they traded birth dates, each discovered he
had a twin brother.

The similarity was spooky. Of course, they looked and sounded identical.
But their IQ

was also exactly the same. They used the same toothpaste. They had both
been atheists since grade school. Their school grades had been the same.
They both smoked Lucky

Strikes and wore Canoe after-shave. They had the same politics. They had
similar jobs and liked similar types of women. On their next birthday,
they sent each other surprise gifts by mail: identical sweater-and-tie
sets.

Over the last twelve years, a diligent group of University of Minnesota
psychologists led by Tom Bouchard, David Lykken, and Auke Tellegen has
studied the psychological pro les of twins. The group started with the
"Jim" twins (both were named Jim), a pair whose reunion was written
about in the press in the 1970s. The project snowballed. People who knew
they had a long-lost twin came to the University of Minnesota for help
in nding their twins. Minnesota has now accumulated no pairs of
identical twins reared apart and 27 pairs of fraternal twins reared
apart. Many of these twins' very rst reunions have taken place in the
Minnesota laboratory. The stories of spooky similarity are repeated over
and over (e.g., two identicals who each divorced a Linda to marry a
Betty; another pair who named their sons James Allen and James Alan,
respectively). Could it just be coincidence? Unlikely: These
"coincidences" do not seem to occur in the lives of fraternal twins
reared apart. To scientists, the degree of heritability and the range of
personality traits that are heritable are more impressive than the
anecdotes. All of the following are strongly related in identical twins
reared apart, and are much less related in fraternal twins reared
apart:20 • IQ • Mental speed

• Job satisfaction

• Neuroticism

• Actual choice of

• Amount of

jobs

television

• Perceptual

• Cheerfulness

viewing

speed and accuracy • Religiosity • Traditionalism • Alcohol and drug
abuse • Crime and conduct

(positive a ectivity) • Depression (negative

• Well-being • Self-acceptance

a ectivity)

• Self-control

• Danger-seeking

• Dominance

• Authoritarianism • Extraversion

These ndings have been duplicated in another massive study carried out
with ve hundred pairs of Swedish twins, identical and fraternal, reared
apart and reared together, and now middle-aged.21 The results are
similar, but you can add to the list: Optimism

Pessimism Hostility

Cynicism Adopted children. In addition to studying identical twins
reared apart, there is a second way to separate the e ects of genes from
those of child rearing: by comparing adopted children to their
biological parents versus comparing them to their adoptive parents.
Hundreds of adoption studies have been done: Denmark keeps complete
records of adoptions (and complete criminal records as

well), so the Danish Population Register is a gold mine for untangling
childrearing from biology. The criminal records (or their absence) for
the fathers, both biological and adoptive, of all the adopted boys born
in Copenhagen in 1953 and the criminal records of the sons have been
scrutinized. If neither the natural nor the adopted father had ever been
convicted of a crime, 10.5 percent of the sons turned out to be
criminals. If the adopted father was a criminal, but the natural father
was not, 11.5 percent of the sons were criminals, an insigni cant di
erence. So having a criminal rearing a child does not increase the
child's risk of himself becoming a criminal. If the natural father (whom
the child had not seen since he was, at most, six months old) was a
criminal, but the adopted father was not, 22 percent of the sons were
criminals. Crime rate is doubled by having "criminal genes." If both
natural and adopted fathers were criminals, the sons' crime rate was
36.2 percent---more than triple the rate of the sons of upstanding
fathers.

This means that there is a biological predisposition to commit crime
(and to get caught). If it is present and you are reared by a criminal
father, you are at very high risk. Merely having a criminal father rear
you, without the biological predisposition, does not increase your
risk.22

So crime, astonishingly, is heritable. Similar adoptive studies strongly
con rm the ndings of the twin studies: Most of human personality has a
strong genetic component. The other major nding of the adoption studies
is that two children raised in the same family are almost as di erent
from each other as any two random kids---on almost every measure of
personality and intelligence---once you take genes into account. There
is no similarity between two children adopted into the same family;
everyone who has raised two adopted kids knows this, but others who have
only ideology to guide them greatly overestimate the importance of the
family environment. This revolutionary

nding---which suggests that many of our labors in childrearing are
simply irrelevant---will be discussed later.

But for every one of these heritable traits, the degree of heritability
is much less than 1.00. Generally, it hovers a bit below .50. This means
that our personality is not utterly determined by our genes---far from
it---but it also means that much of what we are is contributed to by our
genes. Conclusion and evaluation. So the nal principle of biological
psychiatry is rmly in place: A massive body of research in the last ten
years has shown that personality is heritable. Add this to the
principles that mental illness is physical illness and that drugs change
our emotions and mood, and you arrive at a powerful view of human
nature. Biological psychiatry, as a philosophy of mental illness, must
be taken seriously. But I have three caveats---one for each principle.

First: That mental illness is physical illness has been demonstrated for
only one mental illness---general paresis. The claims for schizophrenia,
Alzheimer's, and manic-depression are plausible but unproven---no
biochemical causes have yet been located. The claims for depression,
anxiety, sexual problems, overweight, and posttraumatic stress disorder
are merely part of an ideological agenda, with very modest evidence to
back them up. Second: The claim that mood and emotion are just brain
chemistry and that to change you merely need the right drug must be
viewed with skepticism. The basic drug discoveries to date warrant only
modest enthusiasm. There are indeed drugs that alter mood for some---but
not all---people. All of these drugs are cosmetic, however, and all of
them produce unwanted side e ects, some of which are awful. Third: The
claim that personality is inherited has strong evidence behind it. But,
at most, personality is only partly genetic. The degree of heritability
hovers below .50 for all personality traits (except for IQ, which may be
around .75). Even by the most extreme estimates,

at least half of personality is not inherited. This means that, at most,

half of personality is xed.23 The other half of personality comes from
what you do and from what happens to you---and this opens the door for
therapy and self-improvement. Which half you can change and which you
cannot is what the rest of this book is about.

PART TWO

Changing Your Emotional Life: Anxiety, Depression, and Anger

The mind is a city like London, Smoky and populous: it is a capital

Like Rome, ruined and eternal, Marked by the monuments which no one Now
remembers. For the mind, like Rome, contains Catacombs, aqueducts,
amphitheatres, palaces,

Churches and equestrian statues, fallen, broken or soiled. The mind
possesses and is possessed by all the ruins Of every haunted, hunted
generation's celebration. Delmore Schwartz, "The Mind Is an Ancient and
Famous Capital," 1959

4 Everyday Anxiety

EVERY DAY WE EXPERIENCE, at least momentarily, three emotions we don't
like: anxiety, depression, and anger. These are the three faces of
dysphoria---bad feeling. These same three common emotions, when out of
control, cause most "mental illness." When we experience one, we want to
get rid of it. Indeed, that is their very point. In this chapter, I will
discuss what you can and cannot change about anxiety. In later chapters
in this part, I will discuss depression and anger. But before exploring
the exorcising of these emotions, we should rst ask what they are doing
in your life in the rst place. There are two kinds of "wisdom to
distinguish the one from the other" at issue here. One is what you can
and cannot change about dysphoria---a central topic of this book. The
other, however, comes rst. When should you not try changing? When should
you listen to the message of your negative emotions, as uncomfortable as
it may be, and change your external life rather than your emotional
life? Bad weather inside. People, by and large, are astonishingly
attracted to the catastrophic interpretation of things. Not just
"neurotics," not just depressives, not just phobics, not just explosive
personalities, but most of us, much of the time. Goethe said that in his
entire life he had only a couple of completely happy days. I am
astonished that when my own life is going smoothly---work, love, and
play all in place, which is not very often---I begin to fret about
anything I can nd that is wrong. What, the microwave is on the blink?
This disaster is followed by repeated,

angry calls to the appliance service; worrying at four a.m.; busy
signals, cursing, and blaming. I experience just about as much total
dysphoria over this triviality as I do when the big things, all of them,
go badly. I call this common irrationality conservation of dysphoria.

Why is dysphoria so common? Why is it conserved? Why do anxiety, anger,
and sadness pervade so much of our lives--- concurrent with so much
success, wealth, and absence of biological need in the lives of
privileged Americans? The Russian psychologist Blyuma Zeigarnik
discovered early in this century that we remember unsolved problems,
frustrations, failures, and rejections much better than we remember our
successes and completions. Why do we hurt on the inside so much of the
time? Here is an evolutionary approach: The last geological epoch save
one was the Miocene---tropical savannas, fruit on the trees, good
weather, a Garden of Eden. Peace of mind, satisfaction, and
optimism---all of which mirrored the good weather outside---being
adaptive were selected and ourished during this twenty-million-year-long
paradise. The last hundred thousand years, the Pleistocene epoch,
however, have seen bad weather: ice, ood, drought, famine, heat, more
ice, hurricanes, more ice; one catastrophe after another. Who survives
this ordeal? What kind of emotional life is selected by climatic
disaster? Perhaps one that broods, worries, is "futureoriented" (this
euphemism disguises the fact that future-orientation is not lotus-eating
contemplation of the future, but a state fraught with anxiety). A person
with this mentality always considered the catastrophic interpretations
and could always see the cloud that the silver lining hides behind; he
even woke up at four in the morning to make sure he hadn't overlooked
some subtle, awful portent. His brain endured because, by and large
during the Pleistocene, he was right---disaster was just around the
corner. This prudent neurotic passed his genes on. His blithe-spirited
Miocene-brained brothers and sisters were washed away in a ash ood,
froze under the apple tree, or were trampled by mastodons.

Here is a radical proposal: Homo dysphorus, our species, evolved during
the Pleistocene from Homo sapiens, our predecessor. It is fascinating
that the "big" brain (1,200-to 1,500-cubic-centimeter cranial capacity)
rst appeared about six hundred thousand years ago. But Homo sapiens sat
on the savanna, wrote no books, planted no corn, spoke little, and built
no cathedrals. Not until recent times, ten thousand or so years ago, did
progress---agriculture, civilization, the accumulation of knowledge---
rst dawn. Why the long delay? Maybe a big brain, sapience, is not
enough. Dysphoria, bad weather on the inside, is needed to galvanize
mere intelligence into action. Discontent, worry, depression, a
pessimistic view of the future (but, as we will see, one with the
underlying Miocene belief that a happy ending awaits), are necessary for
agriculture, for culture, for civilization. Each emotion of the
dysphoric triad bears---no, is---a message--- insistent, uncomfortable,
hurting---goading us to change our lives. With our daily dysphoria, we
are in touch with the very state that makes civilization possible, that
transforms berry-gathering into agriculture, cave painting into
Guernica, eclipse-gaping into astronomy, and, alas, ax handles into
Stealth bombers. Each emotion has speci c content and goads for speci c
action. Anxiety warns us that danger lurks. It fuels planning and
replanning, searching for alternative ways out, rehearsing action.

Depression marks the loss of something very dear to us. Depression urges
us to divest, "decathect," fall out of love, mourn, and ultimately
resign ourselves to its absence. Anger, highly opinionated, warns that
something evil is trespassing against us. It tells us to get rid of the
object, to strike out against it. In light of this speculation, how
should we regard our own everyday dysphorias?

Your mental tongue. Attend to your tongue---right now. What is it doing?
Mine is swishing around near my lower right molars. It has just found a
minute fragment of last night's popcorn (debris from Terminator 2). Like
a dog at a bone, it is worrying the rmly wedged ake. Now that I am
attending to the popcorn ake, it is hard to go back to writing. Attend
to your hand, the one not holding this book---right now. What's it up
to? My left hand is boring in on an itch it just discovered under my
left earlobe.

Your tongue and your hands have, for the most part, a life of their own.
You can bring them under voluntary control by consciously calling them
out of their "default" mode to carry out your commands: "Pick up the
phone," or "Stop picking that pimple." But most of the time they are on
their own. They are seeking out small imperfections. They scan your
entire mouth and skin surface, probing for anything going wrong. They
are marvelous, nonstop grooming devices. They, not the more fashionable
immune system, are your rst line of defense against invaders. You
thought your electric toothbrush was neat. It is Stone Age compared to
the preventative maintenance, cleaning, waste detection, and debris
removal that your tongue is so often carrying out on your teeth and
gums. Anxiety is your mental tongue. Its default mode is to search for
what may be about to go wrong. It continually, and without your
conscious consent, scans your life---yes, even when you are asleep, in
dreams and nightmares. It reviews your work, your love, your
play---until it nds an imperfection. When it nds one, it worries it. It
tries to pull it out from its hiding place, where it is wedged
inconspicuously under some rock. It will not let go. If the imperfection
is threatening enough, anxiety calls your attention to it by making you
uncomfortable. If you do not act, it yells more insistently---disturbing
your sleep and your appetites. Do you nd your tongue's swishy o
ciousness irritating now that I have called your attention to it? Do you
now nd twirling your hair as you read vexatious? There are behavioral
techniques for

reducing these activities, and there is even a drug that dampens

such "tics."1 Similarly, there are things you can do to reduce daily,
mild anxiety. You can numb it with alcohol, Valium, or marijuana. You
can take the edge o it with meditation or progressive relaxation. You
can beat it down by becoming more conscious of the automatic thoughts of
danger that often trigger anxiety, and then disputing them e ectively.
But do not overlook what your anxiety is trying to do for you. In return
for the pain it brings, it prevents larger ordeals by making you aware
of their possibility and goading you into planning for and forestalling
them. It may even help you avoid them altogether. Think of your anxiety
as the "low oil" light, ashing on the dashboard of your car. Disconnect
it, and you will be less distracted and more comfortable for a while.
But this may cost you a burnedup engine.2 Our dysphoria should, some of
the time, be tolerated, attended to, even cherished.

Guidelines for when to try to change anxiety. Enough praise for everyday
anxiety---much of anxiety is wasted and needs relieving. Few scientists
have researched the question of when we should try to change our anxiety
level rather than attend to its message. But I can give you my own
guidelines. What distinguishes most of the advice in the rest of this
book from that in self-help books generally is that mine consists of my
integration of vats of serious research leavened with a dollop of
clinical wisdom. My advice in this case, in contrast, has more fallible
backing some clinical lore and some common sense. Some of our everyday
anxiety, depression, and anger go beyond their useful function. Most
adaptive traits fall along a normal spectrum of distribution, and the
capacity for bad weather inside for everyone some of the time means that
some of us will have terrible weather all of the time. In general, when
the hurt is pointless and recurrent---when, for example, anxiety insists
we formulate a plan

but no plan will work---it is time to take action to relieve the hurt.
There are three hallmarks indicating that anxiety has become a burden
that wants relieving: First, is it irrational?

We must calibrate our bad weather inside against the real weather
outside. Is what you are anxious about out of proportion to the reality
of the danger? For some of you, living in the shadow of terminal
illness, violence, unemployment, or poverty, anxiety is often founded in
reality. But for most of you, daily anxiety may be a vestige of a
geological epoch you are no longer living in. Is your anxiety out of
proportion to the reality of the danger you fear? Here are some examples
that may help you answer this question. All of the following are not
irrational: A re ghter trying to smother a raging oil well burning in
Kuwait repeatedly wakes up at four in the morning because of aming
terror dreams. A mother of three smells perfume on her husband's shirts
and, consumed by jealousy, broods about his in delity, reviewing the
list of possible women over and over. A woman is the sole source of
support for her children. Her coworkers start getting pink slips. She
has a panic attack.

A student who has failed two of his midterm exams nds, as nals approach,
that he can't get to sleep for worrying. He has diarrhea most of the
time. The only good thing that can be said about your fears is that they
are well-founded. In contrast, all of the following are irrational, out
of proportion to the danger:

An elderly man, having been in a fender bender, broods about travel and
will no longer take cars, trains, or airplanes.

An eight-year-old child, his parents having been through an ugly
divorce, wets his pants at night. He is haunted with visions of his
bedroom ceiling collapsing on him.

A college student skips her nal exam because she fears that the
professor will look at her while she is writing and her hand will then
shake uncontrollably. A housewife, who has an MBA and who accumulated a
decade of experience as a nancial vice president before her twins were
born, is sure her job search will be fruitless. She delays preparing her
resume for a month. The second hallmark of anxiety out of control is
paralysis. Anxiety intends action: Plan, rehearse, look into shadows for
lurking dangers, change your life. When anxiety becomes strong, it is
unproductive; no problem-solving occurs. And when anxiety is extreme, it
paralyzes you. Has your anxiety crossed this line? Some examples: A
woman nds herself housebound because she fears that if she goes out, she
will be bitten by a cat. Consumed by the fear that his girlfriend is
unfaithful, a young swain never calls her again.

A salesman broods about the next customer hanging up on him and makes no
more cold calls.

A fourth-grader is often chosen last for teams and refuses to go to
school anymore because "everybody hates me." A writer, afraid of the
next rejection slip, stops writing.

The nal hallmark is intensity. Is your life dominated by anxiety?
Dr. Charles Spielberger, a past president of the American Psychological
Association, is also one of the world's foremost testers of emotion. He
has developed well-validated scales for calibrating how severe anxiety
and anger are. He divides these emotions into their state form ("How are
you feeling right now?") and their trait form ("How do you generally
feel?"). Since our interest is change in

personality, with Dr. Spielberger's kind permission I will use his trait
questions. SELF-ANALYSIS QUESTIONNAIRE3 Read each statement and then
mark the appropriate number to indicate how you generally feel. There
are no right or wrong answers. Do not spend too much time on any one
statement, but give the answer that seems to describe how you generally
feel.

Scoring. Simply add up the numbers under your answers to the ten
questions. Be careful to notice that some of the rows of numbers go up
and others go down. The higher your total, the more the trait of anxiety
dominates your life. Adult men and women have slightly di erent scores
on average, with women being somewhat more anxious generally. If you
scored 10--11, you are in the lowest 10 percent of anxiety. If you
scored 13--14, you are in the lowest quarter.

If you scored 16--17, your anxiety level is about average.

If you scored 19--20, your anxiety level is around the seventy- fth
percentile. If you scored 22--24 and you are male, your anxiety level is
around the ninetieth percentile.

If you scored 24--26 and you are female, your anxiety level is around
the ninetieth percentile. If you scored 25 and you are male, your
anxiety level is at the ninety- fth percentile. If you scored 27 and you
are female, your anxiety level is at the ninety- fth percentile.

THE AIM of this section is to help you decide if you should try to
change your general anxiety level. There are no hard-and-fast rules, but
to make this decision, you should take all three hallmarks---
irrationality, paralysis, and intensity---into account. Here are my
rules of thumb: If your score is at the ninetieth percentile or above,
you can probably improve the quality of your life by lowering your
general anxiety level---regardless of paralysis and irrationality. If
your score is at the seventy- fth percentile or above, and you feel that
anxiety is either paralyzing you or that it is unfounded, you should
probably try to lower your general anxiety level.

If your score is 18 or above, and you feel that anxiety is both
paralyzing you and that it is unfounded, you should probably try to
lower your general anxiety level. Lowering Your Everyday Anxiety
Everyday anxiety level is not a category to which psychologists have
devoted a great deal of attention. The vast bulk of work on emotion is
about "disorders"---helping "abnormal" people to lead "normal" emotional
lives. In my view, not nearly enough serious science has

been done to improve the emotional life of normal people---to help them
lead better emotional lives. This task has been left by default to
preachers, pro teers, advice columnists, and charismatic hucksters on
talk shows. This is a gross mistake, and I believe that one of the
obligations of quali ed psychologists is to help members of the general
public try to make rational decisions about improving their emotional
lives. Enough research has been done, however, for me to recommend two
techniques that quite reliably lower everyday anxiety levels. Both
techniques are cumulative, rather than one-shot xes. They require twenty
to forty minutes a day of your valuable time. The rst is progressive
relaxation, done once or, better, twice a day for at least ten minutes.
In this technique, you tighten and then turn o each of the major muscle
groups of your body, until you are wholly accid. It is not easy to be
highly anxious when your body feels like Jell-O. More formally,
relaxation engages a response system that competes with anxious arousal.
If this technique appeals to you, I recommend Dr. Herbert Benson's book
The Relaxation Response.4 The second technique is regular meditation.
Transcendental meditation (TM) is one useful, widely available version
of this. You can ignore the cosmology in which it is packaged if you
wish, and treat it simply as the bene cial technique it is. Twice a day
for twenty minutes, in a quiet setting, you close your eyes and repeat a
mantra (a syllable whose "sonic properties are known") to yourself.
Meditation works by blocking thoughts that produce anxiety. It
complements relaxation, which blocks the motor components of anxiety but
leaves the anxious thoughts untouched. Done regularly, meditation
usually induces a peaceful state of mind. Anxiety at other times of the
day wanes, and hyperarousal from bad events is dampened. Done
religiously, TM probably works better than relaxation alone.5

There also exists a quick x. The minor tranquilizers---Valium, Dalmane,
Librium, and their cousins---relieve everyday anxiety. So

does alcohol. The advantage of all these is that they work within
minutes and require no discipline to use. Their disadvantages outweigh
their advantages, however. The minor tranquilizers make you fuzzy and
somewhat uncoordinated as they work (a not uncommon side e ect is an
automobile accident). Tranquilizers soon lose their e ect when taken
regularly, and they are habit-forming--- probably addictive. The same is
true of alcohol, and it is even more clearly addictive. Alcohol, in
addition, produces gross cognitive and motor disability in lockstep with
its anxiety relief. When taken regularly over long periods, deadly liver
and brain damage ensue. I am, incidentally, no puritan about drugs or
about quick xes, so when I advise you against their use---as I do
here---it is not out of priggishness. If you crave quick and temporary
relief from acute anxiety, either alcohol or minor tranquilizers, taken
in small amounts and only occasionally, will do the job. They are,
however, a distant second-best to progressive relaxation and meditation,
which are each worth trying before you seek out psychotherapy or in
conjunction with therapy. Unlike tranquilizers and alcohol, neither of
these techniques is likely to do you any harm.6 The Right Treatment \*

ANXIETY SUMMARY TABLE

I urge you to weigh your everyday anxiety. If it is not intense, or if
it is moderate and not irrational or paralyzing, live with it. Listen to
its dictates and change your outer life, rather than your emotional
life. If it is intense, or if it is moderate but irrational or
paralyzing, act now to reduce it. In spite of its deep evolutionary
roots, intense everyday anxiety is often changeable. Meditation and
progressive relaxation practiced regularly can change it permanently.
But anxiety, when intense and unremitting, can be a sign of a disorder
that requires exorcising rather than just acknowledgment. The next three
chapters are about the three anxiety disorders we know the most
about---panic, phobia, and obsession---and what is changeable and not
changeable about them. \* Throughout this book, I will give my overall
evaluation of both psychotherapy and drugs for each problem in The Right
Treatment summary tables. I will use an upward and downward pointer
system, where

means the best and

means the worst.

5 Catastrophic Thinking: Panic

S. J. RACHMAN, one of the world's leading clinical researchers and one
of the founders of behavior therapy, was on the phone. He was proposing
that I be the "discussant" at a conference about panic disorder
sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). This
meeting would pit the established biological psychiatrists against the
Young Turk cognitive therapists. "Why even bother, Jack?" I responded.
"Everyone knows that panic is a biological illness and that the only
thing that works is drugs." "Don't refuse so quickly, Marty. There is a
breakthrough you haven't yet heard about." Breakthrough was a word I had
never heard Jack use before. Very British, he had recently immigrated to
Canada from England, where he had run Europe's premier anxiety clinic at
the University of London's Maudsley Hospital. Understatement and modesty
are Jack's strong suits. "What's the breakthrough?" I asked. "If you
come, you can nd out." So I went. I HAD KNOWN about and seen panic
patients for many years, and had read the literature with mounting
excitement during the 1980s. I knew that panic disorder is a frightening
condition that consists of

recurrent attacks, each much worse than anything experienced before.
Without prior warning, you feel as if you are going to die. Here is a
typical case history: The rst time Celia had a panic attack, she1 was
working at McDonald's. It was two

days before her twentieth birthday. As she was handing a customer a Big
Mac, she had the

worst experience of her life. The earth seemed to open up beneath her.
Her heart began to pound, she felt she was smothering, she broke into a
op sweat, and she was sure she was going to have a heart attack and die.
After about twenty minutes of terror, the panic

subsided. Trembling, she got in her car, raced home, and barely left the
house for the next three months.

Since that time, Celia has had about three attacks a month. She does not
know when

they are coming. During an attack she feels dread, searing chest pain,
smothering and

choking, dizziness, and shakiness. She sometimes thinks this is all not
real and she is going crazy. She always thinks she is going to die.

Panic attacks are not subtle, and you need no quiz to nd out if you or
someone you love has them. As many as 5 percent of American adults
probably do. The de ning feature of the disorder is simple: recurrent,
awful attacks of panic that come out of the blue, last for a few
minutes, and then subside. The attacks consist of chest pains, sweating,
nausea, dizziness, choking, smothering, or trembling. They are
accompanied by feelings of overwhelming dread and thoughts that you are
going to die, that you are having a heart attack, that you are losing
control, or that you are going crazy. The Biology of Panic There are
four questions that bear on whether a mental problem is primarily
"biological" as opposed to "psychological":2 Can it be induced
biologically?

Is it genetically heritable? Are speci c brain functions involved?

Does a drug relieve it? Inducing panic. Panic attacks can be created by
a biological agent. For example, patients who have a history of panic
attacks are hooked up to an intravenous line. Sodium lactate, a chemical
that normally produces rapid, shallow breathing and heart palpitations,
is slowly infused into their bloodstream. Within a few minutes, about 60
to 90 percent of these patients have a panic attack. Normal controls,
subjects with no history of panic, rarely have attacks when infused with
lactate.3 Genetics of panic. There may be some heritability of panic. If
one of two identical twins has panic attacks, 31 percent of the co-twins
also have them. But if one of two fraternal twins has panic attacks,
none of the co-twins are so a icted. More than half of panicdisorder
patients, moreover, have close relatives who have some anxiety disorder
or alcoholism.4 Panic and the brain. The brains of people with panic
disorders look somewhat unusual upon close scrutiny. Their
neurochemistry shows abnormalities in the system that turns on and then
dampens fear. In addition, PET scan (positron-emission tomography), a
technique that looks at how much blood and oxygen di erent parts of the
brain use, shows that patients who panic from the infusion of lactate
have higher blood ow and oxygen use in relevant parts of their brain
than patients who don't panic.5 Drugs. There are two kinds of drugs that
relieve panic: tricyclic antidepressant drugs and the anti-anxiety drug
Xanax, and both work better than placebos. Panic attacks are dampened,
and sometimes even eliminated. General anxiety and depression also
decrease.6 Since these four questions had already been answered "yes,"
when Jack Rachman called, I thought the issue had already been settled.

Panic disorder was simply a biological illness, a disease of the body
that could be relieved only by drugs. A few months later, I was in
Bethesda, Maryland,7 listening once again to the same four lines of
biological evidence. An inconspicuous gure in a brown suit sat hunched
over the table. At the rst break, Jack introduced me to him---David
Clark, a young psychologist from Oxford. A few moments later, Clark
began his address. "Consider, if you will, an alternative theory, a
cognitive theory." He reminded us that almost all panickers believe that
they are going to die during an attack. Most commonly, they believe that
they are having a heart attack. Perhaps, Clark suggested, this is more
than just a symptom. Perhaps it is the root cause. Panic may simply be
the catastrophic misinterpretation of bodily sensations.

For example, when you panic, your heart starts to race. You notice this,
and you see it as a possible heart attack. This makes you very anxious,
which means your heart pounds more. You now notice that your heart is
really pounding. You are now sure it's a heart attack. This terri es
you, and you break into a sweat, feel nauseated, short of breath---all
symptoms of terror, but for you, they're con rmation of a heart attack.
A full-blown panic attack is under way, and at the root of it is your
misinterpretation of the symptoms of anxiety as symptoms of impending
death.8 This psychological theory handles the biological ndings well.

Sodium lactate induces panic because it makes your heart race. It
creates the initial bodily sensations that you then misinterpret as
catastrophe.

Panic is partially heritable because having a particularly noticeable
bodily sensation, such as heart palpitations, is heritable, not because
panic itself is directly heritable. Brain areas that prevent the
dampening of anxiety are active because this activity is a mere symptom
of panic.

Drugs relieve panic because they quiet the bodily sensations that get
interpreted as a heart attack. I was listening closely now as Clark
argued that an obvious sign of a disorder, easily dismissed as a mere
symptom, is in fact the disorder itself. This kind of argument had been
made only twice before in history, and both times the argument had
revolutionized psychiatry. In the early 1950s, Joseph Wolpe, a young
South African psychiatrist, astounded the therapeutic world, and
infuriated his colleagues, by nding a simple cure for phobias.
Established thinking held that phobia---an irrational and intense fear
of certain objects, for instance, cats---was just a surface
manifestation of a deeper, underlying disorder. The psychoanalysts said
a phobia was the buried fear that your father would castrate you in
retaliation for lusting after your mother. The biological psychiatrists,
on the other hand, claimed that it was some as-yet-undiscovered
brain-chemistry problem. What both groups had in common was the belief
that some deeper disorder lay underneath the symptoms. Treating only the
patient's fear of cats would do no more good than it would to put rouge
over measles. Wolpe, however, claimed that the irrational fear isn't
just a symptom; it is the whole phobia. If the fear could be removed
(and it could be), this would extinguish the phobia. The phobia would
not, as the psychoanalytic and biomedical theorists claimed, return in
some displaced form. Wolpe and his followers routinely cured phobias in
a month or two, and the fears did not reappear in any form. For his
impertinence---for implying that there was nothing deep about this
psychiatric disorder---Wolpe was ostracized.

The other precedent for David Clark's assertion involved the founding of
cognitive therapy. In 1967, Aaron Beck, a University of Pennsylvania
psychiatrist, wrote his rst book about depression. Depressives, he
noted, think awful things about themselves and about their future. Beck
speculated that maybe that is all there is to depression. Maybe what
looks like a symptom of depression---

gloomy thinking---is the cause. Depression, he argued, is neither bad
brain chemistry nor anger turned inward (Freud's claim) but a disorder
of conscious thought. Lightening the gloom of conscious thought should
cure depression. This simple theory remade the eld of depression and
founded a new, e ective form of therapy. David Clark, unassuming of
demeanor and only thirty-two years old, was now making the same bold
argument for panic. My head was spinning. If he was right, this was a
historic occasion. All Clark had done so far, however, was to show that
the four lines of evidence for a biological view of panic could be t
equally well with a misinterpretation view. But Clark soon told us about
a series of experiments he and his colleague Paul Salkovskis had done at
Oxford. First, they compared panic patients with patients who had other
anxiety disorders and with normals. All the subjects read the following
sentences aloud, but the last word was presented blurred. For example:
If I had palpitations, I could be dying. excited. If I were breathless,
I could be

choking. un t.

When the sentences were about bodily sensations, the panic patients, but
no one else, saw the catastrophic endings fastest. This showed that
panic patients possess the habit of thinking Clark had postulated. Next,
Clark and his colleagues asked if activating this habit with words would
induce panic. All the subjects read a series of word pairs aloud. When
panic patients got to "breathlessness-su ocation" and
"palpitations-dying," 75 percent su ered a full-blown panic
attack---right there in the laboratory. No normal people had panic
attacks, no recovered panic patients (I'll tell you more in a moment

about how they got better) had attacks, and only 17 percent of other
anxious patients had attacks.

The nal thing Clark told us was the "breakthrough" that Rachman had
promised. "We have developed and tested a rather novel therapy for
panic," Clark continued in his understated, disarming way. He explained
that if catastrophic misinterpretations of bodily sensation are the
cause of a panic attack, then changing the tendency to misinterpret
should cure the disorder. His new therapy, as he described it, was
straightforward and brief:

Patients are told that panic results when they mistake normal symptoms
of mounting anxiety for symptoms of heart attack, going crazy, or dying.
Anxiety itself, they are informed, produces shortness of breath, chest
pain, and sweating. Once they misinterpret these normal bodily
sensations as an imminent heart attack, their symptoms become even more
pronounced because the misinterpretation changes their anxiety into
terror. A vicious circle culminates in a full-blown panic attack.
Patients are taught to reinterpret the symptoms realistically, as mere
anxiety symptoms. Then they are given practice right in the o ce,
breathing rapidly into a paper bag. This causes a buildup of carbon
dioxide and shortness of breath, mimicking the sensations that provoke a
panic attack. The therapist points out that the symptoms the patient is
experiencing---shortness of breath and heart racing---are harmless,
simply the result of overbreathing, not a sign of a heart attack. The
patient learns to interpret the symptoms correctly.

One patient, when he felt somewhat faint, would have a panic attack. He
became afraid that he would actually faint and collapse, and interpreted
his anxiety as a further symptom of imminent fainting. This escalated to
panic in a few seconds. "Why," Clark asked him, "have you never actually
fainted?" "I always managed to avoid collapsing just in time by holding
on to something," replied the patient.

"That's one possibility. An alternative explanation is that the feeling
of faintness you get in a panic attack will never lead you to collapse,
even if you don't control it. In order to decide which possibility is
correct, we need to know what has to happen to your body for you
actually to faint. Do you know?" "No." "Your blood pressure needs to
drop," said Clark. "Do you know what happens to your blood pressure
during a panic attack?" "Well, my pulse is racing. I guess my blood
pressure must be up," the patient responded.

"That's right. In anxiety, heart rate and blood pressure tend to go
together. So you are actually less likely to faint when you are anxious
than when you are not," said Clark. "But why do I feel so faint?"

"Your feeling of faintness is a sign that your body is reacting in a
normal way to the perception of danger. When you perceive danger, more
blood is sent to your muscles and less to your brain. This means there
is a small drop in oxygen to the brain. That is why you feel faint.
However, this feeling is misleading because you will not actually faint
since your blood pressure is up, not down." The patient concluded,
"That's very clear. So next time I feel faint, I can check out whether I
am going to faint by taking my pulse. If it's normal or quicker than
normal, I know I won't faint."9

"This simple therapy appears to be a cure," Clark told us. "Ninety to
one hundred percent of the patients are panic free at the end of
therapy. One year later, only one person had had another panic attack."
At this point in the meeting, Aaron Beck, the father of cognitive
therapy, spoke up. "Clark's results are not a uke. We have run the same
study with the same therapy in Philadelphia. We also nd complete
remission with almost no recurrence of panic attacks one year later."

This, indeed, was a breakthrough: a simple, brief psychotherapy with no
side e ects showing a 90-percent cure rate of a disorder that a decade
ago was thought to be incurable. In a controlled study of sixty-four
patients, comparing cognitive therapy to drugs to relaxation to no
treatment, Clark and his colleagues found that cognitive therapy is
markedly better than drugs or relaxation, both of which are better than
nothing. Such a high cure rate is unprecedented. I could not recall a
single instance in the annals of psychotherapy or drug therapy where a
treatment produced almost complete cure with almost no recurrence.
Lithium for manicdepression, at 80 percent e ectiveness (with dangerous
side e ects), was the closest I could remember.

How does cognitive therapy for panic compare with drugs? It is more e
ective and less dangerous. Both the antidepressants and Xanax produce
marked reduction in panic in most patients, but drugs must be taken
forever; once the drug is stopped, panic rebounds to where it was before
therapy for perhaps half the patients.10 The drugs also sometimes have
severe side e ects, including drowsiness, lethargy, pregnancy
complications, and addictions.

After this bombshell, my "discussion" was an anticlimax. I did make one
point that Clark took to heart. "Creating a cognitive therapy that
works, even one that works as well as this apparently does, is not
enough to show that the cause of panic is cognitive." I was niggling.
"The biological theory doesn't deny that some other therapy might work
well on panic. It merely claims that panic is caused at bottom by some
biochemical problem. Is there any di erential prediction that the
catastrophic-misinterpretation theory makes that the biological theory
must deny?" The Right Treatment 11

PANIC SUMMARY TABLE

Two years later, I had my answer. Clark carried out a crucial experiment
that tested the biological theory against the cognitive theory. The main
pillar of the biochemical theory is panic attacks produced with
infusions of lactate. Carbon dioxide, yohimbine (a drug that stimulates
the brain's fear system), and overbreathing all induce panic as well.
There is no known neurochemical pathway that all these have in common.
The cognitive theory, on the other hand, claims that the common element
is their production of bodily sensations that get misinterpreted as
catastrophe. The cognitive theory predicts that you should be able to
block lactate-induced panic attacks merely by countering the
misinterpretation. The biological theory, in contrast, predicts that
lactate is su cient to produce panic attacks. Clark gave the usual
lactate infusion to ten panic patients, and nine of them panicked. He
did the same thing with another ten patients, but added special
instructions to allay the misinterpretation of the sensations. He

simply told them: "Lactate is a natural bodily substance that produces
sensations similar to exercise or alcohol. It is normal to experience
intense sensations during infusion, but these do not indicate an adverse
reaction." Only three out of the ten panicked. This con rmed the theory
crucially. The therapy works very well, as it did for Celia:

Celia's story has a happy ending. She rst tried Xanax, which reduced the
intensity and

the frequency of her panic attacks. But she was too drowsy to work, and
she was still having about one attack every six weeks. She was then
referred to Audrey, a cognitive

therapist who explained that Celia was misinterpreting her heart racing
and shortness of breath as symptoms of a heart attack, that they were
actually just symptoms of mounting anxiety, nothing more harmful. Audrey
taught Celia progressive relaxation, and then she

demonstrated the harmlessness of Celia's symptoms by having her breathe
rapidly into a paper bag. Audrey pointed out that Celia's heart was
racing and that she felt she was su ocating, normal symptoms of
overbreathing. Celia then relaxed in the presence of the

symptoms and found that they gradually subsided. After several more
practice sessions, therapy terminated. Celia has gone two years without
another panic attack.

6 Phobias

BEFORE I DISCUSS PHOBIAS, I must lay the groundwork for the role of
evolution in what we can change about ourselves. Some of what resists
change does so because it was an adaptive trait for our ancestors and is
the product of natural selection. Phobias, and much else in our
emotional lives, are like this. The sauce béarnaise phenomenon. Sauce
béarnaise used to be my favorite sauce until one evening in 1966, when I
had a delicious meal of let mignon with sauce béarnaise. About midnight
I became violently ill, retching until there was nothing left to throw
up. After that, sauce béarnaise tasted awful to me; just thinking about
it set my teeth on edge. At the time, I was a edgling learning theorist.
I was familiar with Pavlovian conditioning, and this seemed like an
instance. Pavlovian conditioning is, of course, the science of how we
learn what signals what. A child hears a dog growl, but she is
undisturbed. Then the dog bites her. After that, she is afraid whenever
she sees a dog. She has learned, by Pavlovian conditioning, that
growling signals hurt, and she is now afraid of dogs. How can this be
explained? Pavlov's dogs, you will remember, rst had the conditional1
stimulus (CS) of the sight of Pavlov paired with their unconditional
response (UR) of salivating for the unconditional stimulus (US) of food.
After half a dozen such pairings, they began to salivate just on seeing
Pavlov. Salivating to Pavlov was the conditional response (CR).
Pavlovian conditioning worked because the dogs associated the sight of
Pavlov with the response of salivating to food.

Some events turn us o or turn us on the very rst time we encounter them:
Thunder is frightening the rst time it happens; stroking of the genitals
is exciting the rst time it happens. Other events have to acquire their
emotional signi cance. The emotional signi cance of the face of our
mother or of the words "Your money or your life" must be learned. All of
our emotional life that is not inborn might be Pavlovian conditioning.
This idea had placed Pavlovian conditioning among the most exciting elds
in all of psychology by the mid-1960s.

My sauce béarnaise aversion seemed to t. The taste was the CS, and
sickness was the UR. This pairing rendered future encounters with sauce
béarnaise nauseating. At any rate, this was what I mused about over the
next month. What focused my musings was a remarkable paper published a
month after this incident. John Garcia, a young radiation researcher,
published an experiment with ndings so anomalous that---once
accepted---they revolutionized learning theory. So hard to swallow were
these ndings for learning theorists that the leading textbook writer in
that eld said at the time that they were no more likely to be true than
that "you would nd bird shit in a cuckoo clock"!2 Garcia was an obscure
investigator studying radiation sickness in a government laboratory. He
noticed that when his rats got sick, they went o their food. After they
recovered, they still wouldn't eat their old chow. Otherwise, though,
they looked completely unperturbed. This was bewildering, but it also
looked like Pavlovian conditioning, with the taste of the chow the CS,
sickness the UR, and coming to hate their chow the CR. But if the rats
were conditioned by being sick, why only a taste aversion? Why not a
more widespread aversion---to their handlers, to lights going o , to
doors opening, to everything else that occurred with their illness?
Garcia was bewildered---for the same reason I was bewildered about sauce
béarnaise. Garcia then carried out a classic experiment, my candidate
for the most signi cant experiment conducted during my lifetime in the

psychology of learning: Every time his rats licked at their drinking
spouts, they tasted saccharin, and a burst of light and noise came on.
This is called a compound CS---bright, noisy saccharin water. Then a
burst of X rays occurred. Within a few hours the rats were sick to their
stomachs. When the rats recovered, Garcia tested the elements of the
compound CS separately to see what the rats had learned to fear. They
now hated saccharin, but they were completely unperturbed by the bright
noise. When they got sick, they blamed it on the taste and ignored
everything else.

Maybe they had just failed to notice the bright noise during
conditioning? So Garcia counterbalanced the experiment. Other rats were
given the same bright, noisy saccharin paired now with foot shock
instead of stomach illness. What did they learn? They now cringed in
fear of bright noise, but they still loved saccharin. When they su ered
pain, they blamed it on the bright noise and ignored the taste. So both
the bright noise and the saccharin were noticeable, but only the taste
became aversive when the rats became nauseated, and only the bright
noise became aversive when the rats su ered pain. How could this be?
Both the Garcia ndings and the sauce béarnaise aversion looked like
Pavlovian conditioning. But they did not t the

laws of conditioning. There were ve problems:3 First, Pavlovian
conditioning is not selective: Any CS that is present when any UR occurs
should get conditioned. Pavlov was there when the dogs were fed, and so
he became exciting (so, presumably, did his voice, his after-shave
lotion, and his white coat). But this didn't work for Garcia's rats.
Only the saccharin became aversive with stomach illness, and only the
bright noise became aversive with pain.

Similarly with sauce béarnaise; it had selectively absorbed the badness
of the incident---at the expense of other potential CSs. The sauce
béarnaise, and nothing else, became nauseating. There were plenty of
other stimuli present that should have been conditioned,

since conditioning works by sheer contiguity between co-occurring
events. But no other stimulus became aversive. I still liked beef. I
still liked my wife, who was there the whole time. The white plates I
ate the sauce o and the Danish stainless-steel silverware still looked
okay to me, though they were paired with illness. So, too, was the
toilet bowl I threw up into, and it didn't look unusually noxious to me
afterward, either. The second violation of known laws was that Pavlovian
conditioning bridges only very short time gaps. If you hear a burst of
noise and an electric shock follows it by one second, you will become
afraid of the noise. If the shock doesn't happen until a minute later,
however, you will not become afraid of the noise. A single minute's
delay between CS and US is too long for conditioning to bridge. The
delay between the saccharin and the radiation sickness was much longer,
just as was the delay between tasting the sauce béarnaise and getting
sick: not seconds, but hours--- hundreds of times longer than in any
successful conditioning experiment. The third problem was that Garcia's
rats hated saccharin after just one dose of X rays, and I came to
dislike sauce béarnaise with just a single experience. Normal Pavlovian
conditioning almost never takes in just one trial. It took Pavlov
repeated feeding of his dogs to get them to salivate to his presence. It
takes about ve noise-shock pairings to get someone sweating over noise.
This is true even when the shock is very painful.

The fourth problem was that ordinary Pavlovian conditioning is rational:
Its laws follow the growth and decline of conscious expectations.
Pavlov's dogs learned to expect food when Pavlov showed up, and so they
salivated. Once Pavlov stopped feeding them, they stopped salivating
when they saw him---this is called extinction. Sauce béarnaise didn't
work this way, however. The day after I got sick, I called my closest
collaborator to apologize for not showing up at the lab. He asked me if
I had come down with the stomach u that was sweeping the department.
After that I "knew" that the sauce was innocent; the stomach u, not the
sauce, had

caused the illness. I did not expect that I would throw up if I were to
eat sauce béarnaise once more. But knowledge didn't help; sauce
béarnaise still tasted bad.

The same irrationality is true of Garcia's phenomenon. Consciousness,
the whole elaborate apparatus that dominates much of our life, is
irrelevant to learning a taste aversion. In one experiment, rats tasted
saccharin and were then made unconscious with anesthesia. While asleep,
brief stomach illness was induced.

After the rats woke up, they hated saccharin.4 The last problem was that
Pavlovian conditioning extinguishes easily, a side e ect of its being a
conscious expectation. All Pavlov had to do was show up but not feed his
dogs a few times, and they stopped salivating when they saw him. But my
dislike of sauce béarnaise lasted a decade, and remained alive through a
dozen dinner parties in which skeptical psychologists gave me sauce
béarnaise to sample. I can eat it now, twenty- ve years later, but
still, I had to change from Craig Claiborne's recipe to Julia Child's.
The message from Garcia. All these problems can be reconciled with
Pavlovian conditioning, because evolution is at work. For millions of
years our ancestors repeatedly encountered, among their other woes,
stomach illness. Plants and animals they ate sometimes contained poison,
their food sometimes spoiled, the streams they drank out of sometimes
carried germs. Each of these challenges could have killed them; but if
they got sick and survived, they had to learn to avoid the toxin in the
future. The problem is: What to avoid? Toxins in nature are avoidable
only because they have distinctive tastes, as do the foods that carry
them. Those of our ancestors who after stomach illness learned rapidly
and well to hate the most distinctive taste that accompanied sickness
passed on their genes. Those who didn't died out. We are prepared by our
evolutionary history to learn some things well. We learn, as I did, that
sauce béarnaise goes with illness---in one trial and across long delays.
This learning occurs at levels

deeper and less fallible than rationality, is very strong, and is
illogical. It took years for me to start liking sauce béarnaise again.

We do not "know" any of these things when we are born---they are not
"instinctive." Garcia's rats loved saccharin, and I loved sauce
béarnaise the rst time I tasted it. If we have but a single aversive
experience with prepared associations, however, we absorb it immediately
and will not easily let it go. Evolution has shaped our sensory
apparatus, and it has shaped our response system. A keen sense of taste
and the response of retching are both the product of natural selection.
We have known this ever since Darwin. What Garcia told us that was new
is that how quickly we learn something or how slowly we learn it---or
whether we learn it at all---is subject to natural selection.
Learnability itself is shaped by evolution. In response to Garcia's
ndings, a long and bitter quarrel ensued in the journals, perhaps the
bitterest in the history of learning theory. It is still not over. Most
psychologists now accept the idea that our genes constrain learning, but
for the staunch hard core, this is still heresy, for two reasons: The
rst is a special-interest-group concern, and the second is a fundamental
concern. The guild of behaviorists had by 1965 painted itself into a
corner. We did experiments on pigeons pecking disks for grain, on rats
pressing bars for Purina pellets, on rats becoming afraid of tones, and
very little else. But we dubbed our ndings, grandly, "the laws of
learning"---not "the laws of hungry pigeon learning" or "the laws of rat
learning." We declared our laws to be as universal as Newton's gravity.
Garcia, very much not a member of the guild, told us that the kind of
stimulus (taste) and its evolutionary relation to the response (stomach
illness) mattered a lot. This, he contended, produced a violation of the
laws: one trial learning over long delays. This meant that all the years
that B. F. Skinner, Clark Hull, Ivan Pavlov, and their followers had put
in on rats, pigeons, and dogs might have yielded mere laboratory
curiosities---not general laws. All the work of the guild might be
unimportant. But the real reason the rest of psychology was glued to
this controversy was more basic. American psychology as a whole is

militantly environmentalistic, and Garcia challenged this premise. The
underpinnings of American environmentalism are very deep, both
intellectually and politically.

John Locke, David Hume, and the British empiricists began this tradition
by arguing that all knowledge comes through the senses. These sensations
are tied together by associations, they averred, and so everything we
know, everything a human being is, is simply the buildup of
associations. If you want to understand a person, all you need know is
the details of his upbringing. Behaviorism generally, and Pavlovian
conditioning in particular, captured the imagination of American
psychology because it was a testable version of Locke's
environmentalism. Environmentalism is not just at the heart of
behaviorism; it is the core of the dogma of human plasticity. And make
no mistake about the political side. It is no coincidence that Locke
fathered both the idea that all knowledge is associations and the idea
that all men are created equal. The behaviorists, scienti c Lockeans
all, dominated academic psychology from the end of World War I to the
Vietnam era. John Watson began the behaviorist movement in the era of
the melting pot. His popularity was in part the result of his covert
message: The new immigrants were not inferior to the people already in
America; they could be molded into the same high-quality stu that the
WASPs already were. The defeat of Hitler added fuel to American
environmentalism: The genocide of the concentration camps lled my
generation with determination never again to countenance genetic
explanations of human psychology. We may have been working on rats and
pigeons, but in doing so we were trying to show that human beings were
the product of their upbringing and their culture, not of their race.
The civil rights movement, feminism, the anti-Vietnam War protests
(white people killing yellow people), all fed into and fed on this
sacred, covert premise of American psychology. Militant environmentalism
allowed behaviorism to dominate American academic psychology. Garcia
denied its most basic premise: that we are wholly the creation of our
environment, not of

our genes. Viewed from afar, the message from Garcia does not seem very
earthshaking. He did not claim that we are a product of our genes or
that our upbringing was unimportant. He claimed only genetic
predisposition. He claimed that our genes limited what we could learn.
But this opened---just a crack---the door that environmentalists wanted
shut forever. The door has stayed open, and it has provided a fresh way
to look at the many things that are learned, among them birdsong,
aggression, language, imprinting, sexual-object choice, and, not the
least, phobias. Phobia and Fears A phobia is an intense fear that is out
of proportion to the real danger of the object that causes it. In its
milder form, phobia is common, a icting about 10 percent of the adult
population. In its extreme form, so intense as to keep su erers
housebound, it is rarer

---well under 1 percent of adults.5 The most common kinds of phobias are
agoraphobia (literally, fear of the marketplace), which is the fear of
crowded places, open spaces, and travel; social phobia, the fear of
humiliation and embarrassment while being observed by other people; and
nosophobia, the fear of a speci c illness, like AIDS or breast cancer.
Also common are the object phobias, which include the fear of animals,
insects, heights, airplanes, enclosure, or bad weather. There are rare
phobias, like fear of thirteens (triskaidekaphobia) or snow, and I even
once came across a patient who had trouble dealing with exhaust pipes
(mu erophobia). About half of the cases of phobia begin with a traumatic
incident, usually in childhood. Susan's severe fear of cats began with a
trauma. "Don't let Boycat in!" Susan, four years old, shrieked to her
mother, pointing to the

kitchen door. Outside sat the proud family cat, covered in rabbit blood
and gnawing a

partly eaten bunny. Susan cried hysterically for an hour. After this she
would never again stay in the same room with Boycat or any other feline.

As she grew up, her aversion to cats intensi ed. But this fall, at age
thirty-one, it

climaxed. She can't leave the house. The house next door was vacant for
the summer, and Susan glimpsed a cat in the unmown grass. She now fears
that if she goes out, she will be

attacked and mauled by a cat. Her rst thought on waking is of what cats
she might meet

today. Every sudden noise and movement in the house startles her---it
might be a cat. Her last thought as she falls asleep, exhausted, is
dread---of the cats she will meet in her nightmares.

Successful therapy. It is normal for four-and ve-year-old children to
"break out" in strong object fears, particularly of animals. Ninetyve
percent of these fears simply disappear as the child grows up. A few,
like Susan's, persist into adulthood, and when they do, they are
unremitting and will not wane of their own accord. But there is one
brand of therapy for phobias that works reliably: behavior therapy. Here
is the theory of why it works: A phobia is an instance of ordinary
conditioning with a particularly traumatic UR (unconditional response).
Some neutral object, like a cat, happens to be around when a trauma,
like Susan's terror on seeing a mangled bunny, occurs. The cat is the CS
(conditional stimulus), and Susan's trauma is the UR. By virtue of this
pairing, the CS becomes terrifying. If phobias are simply Pavlovian
conditioning, it should be easy to eliminate them. Therapy needs only to
accomplish Pavlovian extinction---by getting the patient to stay in the
presence of the CS, but arranging to have no UR occur. Until Joseph
Wolpe came along in the 1950s, no one had ever tried this
straightforward approach. Psychotherapy at that time was dominated by
psychoanalysis, whose practitioners tried, without success, to get
phobics to gain insight into the sexual and aggressive con icts that
allegedly caused their phobias. By the mid-1960s, however,
psychoanalysts knew that insight therapy on phobias was "never easy."6

Two behavior therapies, both of which are forms of extinction, are now
used with success on phobias.

The rst, systematic desensitization, is Wolpe's original. In it, the
patient rst learns progressive relaxation. The patient then

constructs a fear hierarchy, with the worst, full-blown phobic situation
at the top, and a situation that produces only the slightest phobic fear
at the bottom. Susan, for example, picked meeting someone named Katz for
the bottom rung, and seeing cat in the word catsup on a label on the
next rung. At the top was having a real cat sit on her lap---her
worst-imaginable situation.

Next, the patient goes into her practiced state of relaxation and
imagines vividly the situation on the bottom rung. So Susan lay there
accidly and imagined being introduced to an Ada Katz. She repeated this
until she felt no fear at all while visualizing this. In the subsequent
session, the patient once again relaxes and imagines the
next-most-fearsome scene---seeing the word cat, in Susan's case. She
visualizes this, while relaxing, until she feels no fear at all. In
about a dozen sessions, the patient will have reached the top of the
hierarchy---in her imagination---without feeling fear. Once the top rung
is achieved, most cat phobics nd they can go from imagining cats
fearlessly to actually facing real cats with little fear. What has
happened here is Pavlovian extinction. Susan repeatedly imagined the
feared CS in the absence of the UR (the bodily state of relaxation
precludes fear). This broke the association between cats and fear.

The other therapy, ooding, uses this same extinction principle. Flooding
is more dramatic, but briefer. Here the phobic is thrown into the phobic
situation: A claustrophobe will agree to be locked in a closet; a cat
phobic will sit in a room full of cats; the agoraphobe is dropped o , in
the company of the therapist, at a shopping center. In each case, the
patient waits an agreed-upon length of time---it may seem an eternity,
but it is actually usually around four hours--- without leaving. At rst
the patient is terri ed, but inevitably, after an hour or so, the fear
starts to dissipate when she sees that no harm comes to her. After about
four hours the patient is not in a state of fear anymore. She now is in
the presence of the CS, but in the absence of the UR. She is exhausted
and drained, but the phobic fear has extinguished.

The opposite of relaxation is used for blood phobias with marked
success. In this common phobia (about 3 percent of the population has
it), the victim's heart rate and blood pressure drop sharply, and she
faints at the sight of blood. Applied tension is taught to blood
phobics. They learn to tense the muscles of the arms, legs, and chest
until a feeling of warmth su uses the face. This counterconditions the
blood-pressure drop and fainting, just as relaxation counterconditions
anxious tension.7

These therapies work at least 70 percent of the time. After a brief
course of such therapy, usually about ten sessions, most patients can
face the phobic object. Applied tension with blood phobia works even
better: Remission is lasting; former phobics rarely come to like the
object, but they no longer fear it. Unsuccessful therapy. After
extinction therapy, symptoms do not manifest themselves elsewhere. This
lack of symptom substitution is important, since both psychoanalytic and
biomedical theories claim that eliminating the phobia directly is merely
cosmetic. The underlying con ict or the underlying biochemical disorder
still exists untouched, these schools of thought have it, and symptoms
must appear elsewhere. But, in fact, they do not.

Psychoanalysis does not work on phobias. Cognitive therapy, in which
patients look at the irrationality of their phobias ("What really is the
probability of an airplane crash?" or "Look here---no adult in
Philadelphia has ever been mauled by a cat") and learn to dispute these
irrational thoughts, does not seem to be of much use

for speci c phobias.8 Cognitive therapy for panic may be useful in
agoraphobia, however, when panic is a central problem.9 The Right
Treatment PHOBIA SUMMARY TABLE

Drugs are not very useful with object phobias. The anti-anxiety drugs
produce calm when taken in high doses in the phobic situation itself,
though the calm is accompanied by drowsiness and lethargy. So for an
airplane phobic who must suddenly y, a minor tranquilizer will help, but
only temporarily. The calm is cosmetic: Once the drug wears o , the
phobia is intact. The combination of drugs and extinction therapy for
object phobias is also probably not useful. For extinction to work, it
seems necessary to experience anxiety and then have it wane.
Anti-anxiety drugs block the experience of anxiety and so block
extinction of anxiety. The phobia therefore remains intact. Drugs do not
seem very useful with social phobia. MAO inhibitors (strong
antidepressants) have been used with some success. About 60 percent of
patients improve while on these drugs. But the success is temporary and
the relapse rate high once the drugs are discontinued. Remember also
that MAO inhibitors have dangerous side e ects (see chapter 3). Somewhat
lower improvement (around 50 percent) occurs with the strong
anti-anxiety agents, like Xanax, and with beta-blockers. But, again, the
relapse rate is very high and the drugs have marked side e ects. A high
relapse rate upon drug discontinuation suggests only a cosmetic e ect on
phobic anxiety.10

Agoraphobia, in contrast, is helped by antidepressant drugs, and in a
noncosmetic way. Antidepressants seem to work to almost the same extent
as extinction therapies, and they are particularly useful

in combination with extinction therapies.11 What is probably crucial is
that agoraphobia, unlike most other phobias, typically involves panic
attacks. Indeed, a panic attack is usually the precipitating incident in
agoraphobia. Antidepressants suppress panic attacks without sedating the
patient.

This is one drug e ect that makes Pavlovians happy. Pavlovian theory
tells us that agoraphobia starts when the CS of being in the
marketplace, the agora, coincides with the UR of the panic attack. This
conditions the agora to terror. When a patient is administered the
combination of drug and extinction therapy, she ventures out

and does not experience another panic attack, because she is drugged.
She is now exposed quite e ectively to the CS of the agora in the
absence of the UR of panic, so Pavlovian extinction occurs. Thus the
case for phobias resulting from Pavlovian conditioning looks quite
strong: Some innocent object conjoined to a terrifying trauma imbues
that object with terror. As predicted, extinction therapies work quite
well.

Phobias and evolution. There are too many loose ends, however: three, to
be exact. Each of these makes phobias look more like the sauce béarnaise
phenomenon and taste aversions than like ordinary Pavlovian
conditioning. First, ordinary Pavlovian conditioning is not selective.
Any CS that happens to coincide with any trauma gets conditioned. But
phobias are, in fact, highly selective: A seven-year-old on a picnic
sees a snake crawling through the grass. She is interested

but not disturbed by it. An hour later she returns to the family car and
has her hand smashed in the car door. She develops a lifelong
phobia---not of car doors, but of snakes!12

There are in fact only about two dozen common phobic objects, most
prominently open spaces, crowds, animals, insects, closed spaces,
heights, illness, and storms. By and large these are all objects that
were occasionally dangerous to our ancestors during the progress of
evolution. Even the exceptions, like airplanes, are usually traceable to
more primitive fear objects, like falling, su ocating, or being
trapped.13

Arne Ohman, one of Sweden's leading psychologists, decided to nd out if
phobias were more like taste aversions than like ordinary Pavlovian
conditioning. He performed the Garcia experiment with human fear, giving
student volunteers Pavlovian conditioning with electric shock as the
unconditional stimulus (US). The conditional stimulus (CS) was either an
evolutionarily prepared object, a picture of a spider, or an
evolutionarily unprepared object, a picture of a

house. A prepared phobic object is one that has actually been dangerous
to humans over evolutionary time; an unprepared object is one that has
not. The students were not afraid of the spider to begin with, but after
just one pairing of the spider and shock, they broke into a sweat when
the spider was shown. The picture of the house induced fear---and only
mildly so---only after many pairings. Unlike ordinary conditioning,
then, phobic conditioning in the laboratory, the sauce béarnaise
phenomenon, and human phobias in nature are all selective.14

The second problem with the Pavlovian view is that conditioning requires
short delays and explicit pairing of CS and US to work. Phobias don't.
There was an hour delay between the snake and the hand smashed in the
car door; yet the phobia bridged this gap. Even more telling, while
about 60 percent of phobics relate a story of explicit pairing of the
object with a trauma to explain how it started, 40 percent do not.
Rather, these phobics relate a much vaguer, more social story of the
origin of their phobia: for example, they had heard that their best
friend was bitten by a dog, and after that dogs always terri ed them.15

The Swedes again forged the link. Ohman showed his students the prepared
object, a slide of a scorpion, and they looked at it without any fear.
No explicit trauma followed. No electric shock came on. Rather, one of
the students, a confederate, jumped up and raced out of the room,
shrieking "I can't stand it!" After that, the subjects sweated when they
saw the slide of the scorpion.

With another group, Ohman then repeated the scenario, but with an
unprepared object, a slide of a ower. Again, a shrieking student ran out
in horror. But this time the subjects showed no fear at all of the ower.
Evolutionarily prepared objects---though not unprepared objects---become
fearful without pairing with trauma; merely seeing someone else
traumatized is enough to endow them with fear.16

The deepest problem is that ordinary Pavlovian conditioning is rational.
It produces a conscious expectation that the CS will be followed by the
US. But phobias are decidedly irrational. Telling a

phobic that her fears are irrational ("Flying is the safest way to
travel") doesn't dent a phobia. All of a phobic's relatives have told
her this for years, and she knows the statistics more accurately than
anyone. She knows that her fears are unfounded. Cognitive therapy,
unsurprisingly, does not extinguish phobias, because they are lodged in
less fragile housing than reason; their roots lie deep in the
unconscious. They are like my sauce béarnaise aversion, undented by my
knowledge that the sauce was innocent and the u guilty. Phobias can be
undone, but not by talk. Phobias, unlike panic disorders, are from
Missouri. Their extinction requires the presentation of the phobic
object without the UR of terror. Their extinction requires demonstration
of harmlessness--- ooding and desensitization.

I was a subject in one of Ohman's crucial experiments in Sweden, the one
demonstrating that prepared conditioning is irrational whereas ordinary
conditioning is rational. He strapped my hand to a shock electrode and
showed me a slide of a ower. Twenty seconds later, I felt a brief burst
of shock. He repeated this ve times. The next time the ower appeared, I
was calm during the rst few seconds. After about ten seconds, I began to
tense up. My unease mounted so that by the nineteenth second I was
sweating. I expected to be shocked after twenty seconds, and my fear had
timed the interval. I showed ordinary Pavlovian conditioning. Very
logical of me.

Ohman then showed me a picture of a python. Sort of repulsive, I
thought, but I felt no fear. Twenty seconds into the picture, the same
burst of shock came on. Just one pairing of shock and snake. A couple of
minutes later, Ohman ashed the slide of the python a second time and I
almost jumped out of my chair. So thanks to John Garcia and Arne Ohman,
we now have an accurate picture of what phobias are and what they are
not. They are not instances of ordinary Pavlovian conditioning, but
instances of prepared Pavlovian conditioning. They do not come about
when an innocent object happens to be around precisely when a trauma
befalls us. Phobias come about when certain evolutionarily prepared

objects coincide roughly with danger. They are not created culturally:
Man-made dangerous objects, which do not have an evolutionary
history---knives and guns, for instance---condition like houses and
owers, not like dangerous objects from evolution--- snakes, spiders, and
scorpions.17 Just as phobias select their objects, they also select
their victims. Some of us get phobias more easily than others; relatives
of people with anxiety disorders, for example, are more susceptible to
phobias. Phobias lurk in each of us. They are the rekindling of dark,
primordial fears.

There is a profound and global message in this account. Some of what we
are---our darkest fears, for example---originated early in the evolution
of our species. Often we nd that other parts of us resist change, even
though all that is rational in us insists we change. When this happens,
our evolutionary heritage is one place to nd the source of the
resistance. For we are not creatures of our upbringing and our culture
only.

Some of what is di cult to change ties us to the life-and-death
struggles of our ancestors. And it is not only our fears that are
prepared. The sexual objects that we spend our lives pursuing, the
aggression and competition we have such di culty suppressing, our
prejudice against people who look di erent from us, our masculinity or
femininity, and those recurring obsessions we can't get out of our minds
are all examples of psychological links to our biological past. Being
evolutionarily prepared does not justify something. Some of what our
evolution demands of us is just a vestige of pressures that no longer
exist. Some of it is morally repulsive. But closing our eyes to the
biological side of our nature is worse than useless. For when we work
against our evolutionary heritage, we had better be aware that we are
doing so. We should know that change in this arena is never easy.
Sometimes, as we will see, change is impossible, and so we must learn to
live with aspects of ourselves we don't like. Other times, change is
possible, but reason alone will not usually produce change. Aided by
techniques that work at levels more fundamental than reason, however, we
can sometimes succeed. We have just seen

two such examples. We will see more as we turn to obsessions, to
depression, to anger, and to post-traumatic stress.

7 Obsessions

What do we plant when we plant the tree?

We plant the ship that will cross the sea. . . . What do we plant when
we plant the tree? We plant the houses for you and me.1

This song is running through my mind now and has been for about two
hours. It began when I was singing this jingle from my childhood to my
two-year-old, Lara, as we were picking tomatoes. It won't go away. The
jingle channel. Everyone has a jingle channel. For some people there are
ditties on it, but not everyone has music. Others have phrases repeated
over and over. The words often rhyme, they sometimes have a beat, and
they are always simple: "Step on a crack and break your mother's back."
For others who are less verbally inclined, there is no audio, only
video; the same images recur repeatedly: the Little Mermaid swimming
toward Prince Eric, or Lee Harvey Oswald being shot by Jack Ruby. Some
people have a mixture of words, songs, and images. Left alone, the
content shifts slowly, but with an external prompt, like your roommate
humming a tune, it can jump. Your jingle channel is slightly below
consciousness, but once you know about it, it is easy to tune in and
listen. Some people have a louder channel than others. You can sometimes
tell how this hour's contents started: a radio ad, a phrase from your
boss, a new rock song on MTV.

Once you tune in, you will discover that the jingle channel has a life
of its own. It is very hard to change voluntarily. When it intrudes and
you can't turn it o , it becomes quite a vexation. Mark Twain discovered
this, over a century ago, when he heard this ditty for streetcar
conductors and could not rid himself of it for days. A blue trip slip
for an eight-cent fare. A bu trip slip for a six-cent fare.

A pink trip slip for a three-cent fare

Punch in the presence of the passenjare. Punch, brothers! punch with
care! Punch in the presence of the passenjare.2

Civilization has often taken advantage of the channel. Before the modern
media bombardment, poetry (epic poetry, no less), catechisms, and the
Bible were probably featured. I like to think that human mental
furniture was classier then. Astonishingly, psychological researchers
have shown no interest in this channel. It is broadcast by an unknown
and uninvestigated part of the brain. The nightmare channel. Much of
emotional life is carried on the jingle channel. For many, the jingle
channel is not a pleasant and elevating experience. Sometimes the lyrics
are about loss and hopelessness. "She's gone, she's gone, she's gone,
and she's never coming back" or "I'm a born loser" are the sort of
phrases that intrude when we are in a low mood. When these kinds of
jingles are dominant and recurrent, we call the listeners depressed, and
their thoughts have been named ruminations or automatic thoughts. For
others, the jingle channel is a nightmare channel, a production of
Stephen King that may feature ferocious animals or poisonous insects, or
scenes of humiliation. These people are called object phobics or social
phobics, respectively. For others, the channel features thoughts of a
heart attack or of going crazy or of losing control: These people's
problem is called panic disorder.

For still others, when they tune into their jingle channel, what they
hear is alien, repugnant, fearful, and depressing. Worse, they have a
loud channel that frequently intrudes unbidden on them during work and
play. Their most common themes are dirt and contamination, checking for
danger, and doubt. These people have a problem called
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), which is named for the two elements
that make it up. Their obsession is a thought or image that recurs, and
their compulsion is the ritual act performed to neutralize the thought.
When thoughts of dirt dominate the jingle channel, the person will wash
his hands for an hour, or scrub her baby's room from oor to ceiling
three times a day, or open doors only with her feet to avoid having her
hands contaminated by the germs on the doorknob. Howard Hughes was a
brilliant tycoon. Toward the end of his life he had such

severe obsessions about germs that he became a recluse. He wrote a
continual stream of memos to his sta

worrying about contamination and instructing them in

how to prevent "back transmission" of germs to him. Hughes was wealthy
and powerful enough to have an entire sta

to carry out his cleaning compulsions: In

one three page memo he instructed his sta in how to open a can of fruit
to prevent germ "fallout":

"The man in charge then turns the valve in the bathtub on, using his
bare hands

to do so. He also adjusts the water temperature so that it is not too
hot nor too cold. He then takes one of the brushes, and, using one of
the bars of soap, creates a good

lather, and then scrubs the can from a point two inches below the top of
the can. He should rst soak and remove the label, and then brush the
cylindrical part of the can over and over until all particles of dust,
pieces of paper label, and, in general, all sources of contamination
have been removed."3

Washing and cleaning rituals can take up large swaths of the day when,
unlike Hughes, you have to do them yourself. One fourteenyear-old had to
wake up at four-thirty every morning in order to clean herself
thoroughly and make the bed so that it was exactly right before she left
for school at eight. She was plagued with the severe skin rashes and
abrasions that result when you wash your hands for an hour or more at a
time.

"Checkers" nd themselves waking many times each night to make sure that
the gas in the kitchen is o , or that all the doors and windows are
locked. One man drove to a crossroads near his house ten times a day for
months to make certain that there was no corpse lying there that he had
run over and failed to notice on the last trip. Another woman always
peered down into the toilet bowl to make sure that there was no baby in
danger of being ushed away. Toilets, incidentally, are often featured on
the OCD jingle channel: One otherwise successful and healthy dentist
always had to ush in multiples of three---9, 27, 81, or 243
times---before carrying on. He wasn't much fun to go drinking with.

Do you or someone you love have obsessive-compulsive tendencies? How can
you tell if what you hear on your jingle channel is in the normal range
or if it is in need of changing? Selfdiagnosis is always hazardous, and
this book is not a diagnostic manual. Rather, my intention is to alert
you to a variety of problems, and if they seem to apply to you, I want
to point you in the right direction for help. Some problems don't
require a lot of sophistication for you to be aware of what they are:
Panic attacks and phobias are two examples. Other problems, like
obsessions, require an experienced professional to diagnose. There are
three problems that should alert you to a need for help: Are the
thoughts unwelcome and repugnant, and do they intrude?

Do they arise from within, with no external stimulus? Do you nd it very
hard to distract yourself or dismiss the thoughts? In addition to these
hallmarks, here is a validated test: THE MAUDSLEY OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE
INVENTORY Jack Rachman and Ray Hodgson, two of the world's experts on
obsessions, have developed a questionnaire that can tell you if you

have a problem you should act to get rid of. With their kind permission
I reproduce it here.4 Please answer each question by putting a circle
around the "TRUE" or "FALSE" following the question. There are no right
or wrong answers, and there are no trick questions. Work quickly and do
not think too long about the exact meaning of the question. 1. I avoid
using contamination.

public

telephones

because

of TRUE

possible FALSE

2.  I frequently get nasty thoughts and have di culty in getting rid of
    them. TRUE

FALSE

3.  I am more concerned than most people about honesty. TRUE

FALSE

4.  I am often late because I can't seem to get through everything on
    time. TRUE

FALSE

5.  I worry unduly about contamination if I touch an animal. TRUE

FALSE

6.  I frequently have to check things (e.g., gas or water taps, doors)
    several times. TRUE

FALSE

7. I have a very strict conscience. TRUE

FALSE

8.  I nd that almost every day I am upset by unpleasant thoughts that
    come into my mind against my will. TRUE

FALSE

9.  I worry unduly if I accidentally bump into somebody. TRUE

FALSE

10. I usually have serious doubts about the simple everyday things I do.
    TRUE

FALSE

11. At least one of my parents was very strict during my childhood. TRUE

FALSE

12. I tend to get behind in my work because I repeat things over and
    over again. TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

13. I use more than an average amount of soap.

14. Some numbers are extremely unlucky.

15. I check letters over and over again before mailing them. TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

16. I take a long time to dress in the morning.

17. I am excessively concerned about cleanliness.

18. One of my major problems is that I pay too much attention to detail.
    TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

19. I can use well-kept toilets only with hesitation.

20. My major problem is repeated checking.

21. I am unduly concerned about germs and diseases.

22. I tend to check things more than once.

23. I stick to a very strict routine when doing ordinary things. TRUE

FALSE

24. My hands feel dirty after touching money. TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

25. I usually count when doing a routine task.

26. I take quite a long time to complete my washing in the morning. TRUE

FALSE

TRUE

FALSE

27. I use a great deal of antiseptics.

28. I spend a lot of time every day checking things over and over again.
    TRUE

FALSE

29. Hanging and folding my clothes at night takes up a lot of time. TRUE

FALSE

30. Even when I do something very carefully, I often feel that it is not
    quite right. TRUE

FALSE

Each TRUE answer counts for 1 point. The most severe total score is 30.
There is a Checking Scale (questions 2, 6, 8, 14, 15, 20, 22, 26, and
28) with a maximum of 9, and a Dirt and Contamination Scale (questions
1, 4, 5, 9, 13, 17, 19, 21, 24, 26, and 27) with a maximum of 11. If
your total score exceeds 10, you are in the range of clinically
diagnosed obsessive-compulsives. If your Dirt and

Contamination score is 2 or greater or your Checking score is 4 or
greater, you are also within the clinical range. Scores this high mean
you should have professional help. Later in this chapter, I will discuss
what kind of professional help is best and how much change is likely to
ensue. There are two viable approaches to OCD: the biological and the
behavioral. Each has a theory and each has evidence in its favor. Each
has also generated a therapy that helps the majority of people with OCD.
Neither is wholly satisfactory. The Biological Viewpoint Biological
psychiatrists claim that OCD is a brain disease.

Their rst line of evidence is that OCD, once in a great while, develops
right after a brain trauma. Jacob, eight years old, was playing football
in the backyard. He collapsed and went into

a coma with a brain hemorrhage. When he came out of brain surgery, which
went very

well, he was plagued by numbers. He had to touch everything in sevens.
He swallowed in sevens and asked seven times for everything.5

Sometimes OCD begins with epilepsy, and after the great sleepingsickness
(a viral brain infection) epidemic of 1916--18 in Europe, there was an
apparent rise in the number of OCD patients. There is also some marginal
evidence for a genetic factor in OCD. It runs in families: 30 percent of
all adolescents with OCD have a parent or sibling with OCD. The second
line of biological evidence comes from brain-scan studies of patients
with OCD. Two areas of the brain show higher activity in OCD patients:
These two areas are related to ltering out irrelevant information and
perseveration of behavior. When patients improve with drugs or behavior
therapy, activity in these areas diminishes.6

The third line of evidence concerns the speci c content of the OCD
jingle channel. What goes on there is not arbitrary. Like the content of
phobias, which is mostly objects that were once dangerous to the human
species, the content of obsessions and of the compulsive rituals is also
narrow and selective. The vast majority of OCD patients are obsessed
with germs or with violent accidents, and they wash or they check in
response. Why such speci c and peculiar themes? Why not obsessions about
particular shapes, like triangles, or about socializing only with people
of the same height? Why no compulsions about push-ups, or about
handclapping, or about crossword puzzles? Why germs and violence; why
washing and checking? During the course of evolution, washing and
checking have been very important and adaptive. The grooming and
physical security of one's self and one's children are constant primate
concerns. Perhaps the brain areas that kept our ancestors grooming and
checking are the areas gone awry in OCD. Perhaps the recurrent thoughts
and the

rituals in OCD are deep vestiges of primate habits, run amok.7 This
would mean, as it does for phobias, that it would not be easy to get rid
of OCD, that we would not be able to talk people out of their obsessions
and compulsions. This is true: Neither psychoanalysis nor cognitive
therapy appears to work on OCD. E ective therapy is, indeed, the nal
line of evidence for the biological theory. Anafranil (clomipramine) is
a drug that has been used successfully with thousands of OCD su erers,
in more than a dozen controlled studies. Anafranil is a potent
antidepressant drug, a serotonin-reuptake inhibitor. When OCD victims
take Anafranil, the obsessions wane and the compulsions can be more
easily resisted.

It is not a perfect drug. A large minority of patients (almost half)
taking Anafranil do not get better, or they cannot take it because of
side e ects including drowsiness, constipation, and loss of sexual
interest. Those who bene t are rarely cured: Their symptoms are
dampened, but the obsessive thoughts are usually lurking and the
temptation to ritualize remains. When those who do bene t go o

the drug, many---perhaps most---of them relapse completely. But
Anafranil is decidedly better than nothing.8 The Behavioral Viewpoint
There is something magnetic about horrible thoughts and images (the
popularity of horror lms testi es to this). Some of us are better than
others at dismissing these thoughts or distracting ourselves from them.
When we are depressed or anxious (as most people inclined to OCD are),
such thoughts are even more di cult to stop. Indeed, when people are
shown lms of, for instance, gruesome woodworking accidents, those
viewers who are most upset are the ones who have the most trouble
discarding the images.9

Behavior therapists argue that people who are not very good at
distracting themselves or dismissing thoughts are most prone to OCD.
Once a horrible thought starts, if you cannot dismiss it, it makes you
upset. The more upset you get, the harder it is to dismiss the thought.
You get even more anxious, and a vicious circle is under way. If thought
stopping by ordinary means doesn't work for you, you can perform a
ritual, a compulsion, that relieves the anxiety. So if you have mounting
horrible thoughts about germs, you can wash your hands thoroughly; if
you are obsessed with burglars, you can check the locks. This relieves
the anxiety temporarily, but when the thought returns, the temptation to
perform the ritual will be even stronger because it has been reinforced
by anxiety reduction. This theory ts the subjective experience of OCD
quite well.

A therapy follows directly: exposure and response prevention. If you
expose the patient to the feared situation and then prevent her from
engaging in her ritual, she should become very anxious at rst. If she
continues to refrain, however, and nds out that the expected harm does
not befall her---that she does not become infected by germs, that a gas
explosion does not occur---the thoughts should

wane and the ritual should extinguish. Thousands of OCD patients have
been helped by this therapy. Here is a dramatic instance: Jackie had
obsessions about broken glass cutting her vagina. She kept her panties
in a

separate, locked drawer. She searched minutely for glass around chairs
before sitting

down. She could not use public toilets, and she would never wear ared
skirts. Her most awful thought was of having to wear a tampon.

She entered behavior therapy and agreed to a response-prevention
treatment. With her

therapist's help, she sat down on unfamiliar chairs without checking.
She used public toilets. After she was able to do these things with
increasing comfort, she sat on the oor

while bottles were broken around her. Finally, with her therapist's
encouragement, she was

able to use a tampon. Her obsessions and compulsions disappeared and
have not returned.10

Between half and two-thirds of patients improve markedly after exposure
and response prevention, and for most of those who improve, relief is
lasting. At the end of therapy, however, the patient is usually not
completely normal: The thoughts still lurk. A clear minority, it must be
said, fail to improve. OCD patients who are depressed, who have
delusions, or who secretly perform their rituals usually will not
improve.11 The Right Treatment OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER SUMMARY
TABLE

People with OCD have worry and depression as the dominant emotions on
their jingle channel. People with other emotional problems have a di
erent dominant emotion on their channel. People with object phobias have
terror accompanying horri c scenes of encounters with the feared object.
People with panic attacks have recurrent images of heart attack, stroke,
and death accompanied by incipient panic. People with agoraphobia feel
panic and terror as they tune in on scenes of going outside, of getting
sick and being helpless with no one coming to their aid. That we have a
jingle channel is a fact we cannot change. It is an aspect of mental
life so important that evolution wants to make sure it goes on
incessantly. It is too important to be left to any conscious decision of
whether or not to tune in. But its content may be

changeable, and its volume is surely changeable. Changing the content,
or at least adjusting the volume, can relieve some of our emotional
problems. Cognitive therapy for panic probably removes heart attacks and
dying as content on the jingle channel. Extinction therapy for any
phobia and antidepressant drug therapy for agoraphobia turn the volume
from loud to soft on the feared encounters. Both Anafranil and response
prevention turn the volume from very loud to moderate in OCD. Changing
the volume of the channel, while not simple, can now be e ectively done
with all these problems. My best guess, however, is that after
successful treatment for OCD---and probably for phobias, too---the old
jingles are still there---quieter and less insistent perhaps, but still
lurking.

8 Depression

WE LIVE in an age of depression. Compared with when our grandparents
were young, depression is now ten times as widespread in the United
States, and the rate is climbing. Nowadays, depression rst strikes
people ten years younger, on average, reaching into late childhood and
early adolescence for its youngest victims. It has become the common
cold of mental illness. Every age has a dominant emotion. The rst half
of this century was the Age of Anxiety, and its emotional tone was
captured by Sigmund Freud. Freud lived through the death throes of the
Hapsburg Empire and then through the horrors of World War I and its
chaotic aftermath. Freud watched a world order that had stood for
hundreds of years dissolve and a new one struggle to be born. Times when
old values crumble and the future is unpredictable are times fraught
with anxiety. Anxiety was the dominant emotion Freud saw in his
patients, and it was the dominant theme of contemporary writing, lm, and
painting. Small wonder that Freud believed that all neuroses and almost
all human action stemmed from anxiety. All the other
emotions---depression, awe, anger, embarrassment, shame, and
guilt---were just footnotes. Our age, in contrast, is an age of
uncontrollability and helplessness. Our values are stable, but the
struggle by individuals and groups never before enfranchised to emerge
from helplessness and achieve power dominates our politics, our
literature, what now passes as the humanities, and what therapists see
in the clinic. Depression is the emotion that comes in the wake of
helplessness, individual failure, and unrealized attempts to gain power.
For our

age, depression and sadness are the dominant emotions, and anxiety,
while more important than a footnote, has yielded center stage.1

TEST YOUR DEPRESSION To determine how depressed you are, take this
widely used test called the CES-D (Center for Epidemiological
Studies-Depression). It was developed by Lenore Radlo at the Center for
Epidemiological Studies of the National Institute of Mental Health.
Circle the answer that best describes how you have felt over the past
week. 1. I was bothered by things that usually don't bother me. 0 Rarely
or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the time
(1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days)
3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 2. I did not feel like eating; my
appetite was poor. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some
or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate amount
of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days)

3.  I felt that I could not shake o the blues even with help from my
    family and friends. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days)

4. I felt that I was not as good as other people. 0 Rarely or none of
the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days)

3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 5. I had trouble keeping my mind
on what I was doing. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days)

3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 6. I felt depressed.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4
days) 3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 7. I felt that everything I
did was an e ort. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some
or a little of the time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

8.  I felt hopeless about the future. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less
    than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days)

9. I thought my life had been a failure. 0 Rarely or none of the time
(less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days)

3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 10. I felt fearful.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

11. My sleep was restless. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1
    day) 1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

12. I was unhappy. 0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some
    or a little of the time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

13. I talked less than usual.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

14. I felt lonely.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

15. People were unfriendly.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

16. I did not enjoy life.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

17. I had crying spells.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days)

3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 18. I felt sad.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days)

19. I felt that people disliked me.

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day)

1 Some or a little of the time (1--2 days) 2 Occasionally or a moderate
amount of the time (3--4 days)

3 Most or all of the time (5--7 days) 20. I could not get "going."

0 Rarely or none of the time (less than 1 day) 1 Some or a little of the
time (1--2 days)

2 Occasionally or a moderate amount of the time (3--4 days) 3 Most or
all of the time (5--7 days)

This test is easy to score. It is simply an aggregation of the symptoms
of depression. The more you have, the more likely it is that you are
depressed. Add up the numbers you circled. If you couldn't decide and
circled two numbers for the same question, count only the higher of the
two. Your score will be someplace between 0 and 60. Before interpreting
your score, you should know that a high score is not the same thing as a
diagnosis of depression. A few people who get high scores are not in
fact depressed, and people with low scores can still have a "depressive
disorder." A full-blown diagnosis of depression depends on other things,
such as how long your symptoms have lasted and whether they have some
primary source other than depression. A diagnosis can be made only after
a thorough interview with a quali ed psychologist or psychiatrist.
Rather than giving a diagnosis, this test gives an accurate indication
of your level of depression right now. If you scored from 0 to 9, you
are in the nondepressed range, below the mean of American adults; 10 to
15 puts you in the mildly depressed range; and 16 to 24 puts you in the
moderately depressed range. If you scored over 24, you are probably
severely depressed.

If you scored in the severely depressed range, I urge you to seek
treatment. If you believe that you would kill yourself if you had a
chance, regardless of the rest of your answers, I urge you to see a
mental health professional right away. If you scored in the moderately
depressed range and, in addition, you often think about killing
yourself, you should see a professional right away. If you scored in the
moderately depressed range, take the test again in two weeks. If you
still score in that range, make an appointment with a mental health
professional. After you have read the rest of this chapter about what
treatments work for depression, and if you have trouble nding a quali ed
professional in your area, I welcome your writing me at the Department
of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104. I
will try to send you the names of some of the quali ed people in your
area who do the therapies that work. THE SYMPTOMS of depression in the
questionnaire fall into four clusters. First, the way you think when you
are depressed di ers from the way you think when you are not depressed.
When you are depressed, you have a dour picture of yourself, the world,
and the future. Your future looks hopeless, and you attribute this to a
lack of talent. Small obstacles seem like insurmountable barriers. You
believe that everything you touch turns to ashes. You have an endless
supply of reasons why each of your successes is really a

failure. A pessimistic explanatory style2 is at the core of most
depressed thinking. You see the causes of your tragedies and your
setbacks as permanent, pervasive, and personal ("It's going to last
forever, it's going to undermine everything I do, and it's me"), and you
see the causes of good events in the opposite way. The second group of
symptoms is a negative change in mood. When you are depressed, you feel
awful: sad, discouraged, sunk in a pit of despair. You may cry a lot, or
you may even be beyond tears. Life loses its zest. Formerly enjoyable
activities become at. Jokes are no longer funny, but unbearably ironic.
Sadness is not the only

mood of depression; anxiety and irritability are often present. And when
depression gets intense, anxiety and hostility drop away and the su erer
becomes numb and blank.

The third cluster of symptoms of depression concerns behavior:
passivity, indecisiveness, and suicide. Depressed people often cannot
get started on any but the most routine tasks, and they give up easily
when thwarted. A novelist can't get her rst word written. When she nally
does manage to get going, she quits writing when the screen on her word
processor ickers, and she doesn't return to her work for a month.
Depressed people cannot decide among alternatives. A depressed student
phones for a pizza, and when asked if he wants it plain or with a
topping, he stares paralyzed at the receiver. After fteen seconds of
silence, he hangs up. Many depressed people think about and attempt
suicide. In depression, even your body turns on you---the fourth cluster
of symptoms, somatic. The more severe the depression, the more bodily
symptoms. Your appetites diminish. You can't eat. You can't make love.
Even sleep is a ected: You wake up too early and toss and turn, trying
unsuccessfully to get back to sleep. Finally the alarm clock goes o ,
and you begin the new day not just depressed but worn out, too. To be
depressed, you needn't have symptoms from all four clusters, and it is
not necessary that any particular symptom be present. But the more
symptoms you have and the more intense each is, the more certain you can
be that the problem is depression.

For some of us, these symptoms are rare, descending on us only when
several of our best hopes collapse at once. For many, depression is more
familiar, a state that descends every time we are defeated. For still
others, it is a constant companion, souring even our sweetest times and
darkening the grayer times to an unrelieved black. Until recently,
depression was a mystery. Who is most at risk? Where does depression
come from? How do you make it lift? All were enigmas. Today, thanks to
thirty years of intensive scienti c

research by thousands of psychologists and psychiatrists in dozens of
laboratories and hundreds of clinics around the world, the shape of the
answers is known. If someone has severe symptoms of depression, that
person might have one of two very di erent disorders: unipolar or
bipolar depression. These provide everyday work for clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists. What determines the di erence between
them is whether mania is involved. Mania is a psychological condition
that looks like the opposite of depression: Its symptoms are unwarranted
euphoria, grandiosity, frenetic talk and action, little sleep for days
on end, and in ated self-esteem. Bipolar depression always involves
manic episodes; it is also called manic-depression (with mania as one
pole and depression as the other). Unipolar depressives never have manic
episodes. Another di erence between the two is that bipolar depression
is much more heritable. If one of two identical twins has bipolar
depression, there is a 72 percent chance that the other also has it.
(This is true of only 14 percent of fraternal twins.) Bipolar depression
is exquisitely responsive to lithium carbonate. In more than 80 percent
of cases, lithium will relieve the mania to a marked extent and the
depression to a lesser extent. Taken continually, it tends to prevent
new episodes. Manic-depression is an illness, appropriately viewed as a
disorder of the body and treated medically. It is similar to unipolar
depression only in appearance. Now, therapists are not usually sued for
malpractice when they use an outdated or ine ective therapy, and a poor
therapist can always nd some other guild member who does the same kind
of therapy to testify that their therapy is a "usual" procedure. But so
clear are the data that lithium usually works and that any form of
psychotherapy alone usually does not that manic-depressives who are not
treated with lithium should, I believe, be able to win malpractice
lawsuits. At any rate, if you have manic-depression and are being
treated with any form of psychotherapy only, drop your therapist. It is
simply wrong to do psychotherapy on bipolar depression, except as an
adjunct to drug therapy.

More common than manic-depression---probably ten to twenty times as
common---is unipolar depression. This is the disorder that so many of us
know well. It springs from the pain and loss that are inevitable parts
of being creatures who think about the future. We don't get the jobs we
want. Our stocks go down. We get rejected by people we love. Our spouses
die. We give bad lectures and write books that op. We age. When such
losses occur, what happens next is regular and predictable: We feel sad
and helpless. We become passive and lethargic. We believe our prospects
are bleak and that we lack the talent to make them brighter. We don't do
our work well, and we may not even show up. The zest goes out of
activities we used to enjoy, and we lose our interest in food, company,
sex. We can't sleep. But after a while, by one of nature's benevolent
mysteries, we start to improve. Mild forms of this depression (called
normal depression) are extremely common. I have repeatedly found that at
any given moment, approximately 25 percent of us are going through an
episode of mild depression.

There is sharp disagreement about whether unipolar depression (a certi
ed disorder) and normal depression are related. I believe they are the
same thing, di ering only in the number of symptoms and their severity.
One person may be diagnosed as having unipolar depression and be labeled
a patient, while another with just the same symptoms may be held to be
su ering from acute symptoms of normal depression and not be a patient.
The distinction between these two diagnoses is shallow, often no more
than a matter of how readily a person will seek therapy, or whether his
insurance policy covers unipolar depression, or how comfortably he can
bear the stigma of being labeled a patient. My view di ers radically
from prevailing medical opinion, which holds that unipolar depression is
an illness and that normal depression is simply passing demoralization
of no clinical interest. This view is the dominant one in spite of
strong evidence that unipolar depression is just severe normal
depression. No one has established the kind of distinction between the
two that has been

established between, for instance, dwarfs and short normal people--- a
qualitative distinction. Most crucial, I feel, is that normal depression
and unipolar depression are recognized in exactly the same way: Both
involve negative change in thought, mood, behavior, and the body.
Epidemic It is very important to know that this kind of depression is
rampant today and that its usual victim is a woman. In the late 1970s,
under the leadership of the visionary biological psychiatrist Gerald
Klerman, the United States government sponsored two major studies of
mental illnesses; the ndings were startling. In the rst, 9,500 people
were randomly picked as a cross section of adult Americans. Each was
given the same diagnostic interview that a troubled patient who walks
into a knowledgeable professional's o ce would get.

Because such a large number of adults of di erent ages were interviewed,
the study gave an unprecedented picture of mental illness over many
years and made it possible to trace the changes that had taken place
over the twentieth century.3 One of the most striking changes was in the
lifetime prevalence of depression, that is, the percentage of the
population that has had it at least once. Obviously, the older you are,
the more chance you have to get the disorder. The lifetime prevalence of
broken legs, for instance, goes up with age, since the older you are,
the more opportunities you have to break a leg.

It was expected that the earlier in the century a person was born, the
higher would be the person's lifetime prevalence for depression ---that
is, the more episodes of depression she would have had. Someone born in
1920 would have had more chances to su er depression than someone born
in 1960. Before the statisticians looked at the ndings, they would have
stated con dently that if you were twenty- ve years old at the time you
were interviewed for

the study---which meant that you were born around 1955---there was, say,
about a 6 percent chance that you had had at least one episode of severe
depression, and that if you were between twentyve and forty-four years
old, your risk of depression would have climbed---say, to about 9
percent---as any sensible cumulative statistic should.

When the statisticians actually looked at the ndings, though, they saw
something odd. The ndings showed that the people born around 1925 hadn't
su ered much depression; not 9 percent but only 4 percent had had an
episode. And when the statisticians looked at the ndings for people born
even earlier---before World War I---they found something even odder:
Again, the lifetime prevalence had not climbed; in fact, it had
nosedived to a mere 1 percent. This meant that people born in the second
half of the century were ten times likelier to su er depression than
people born in the rst half. One study, however---even one as well done
as this---does not entitle scientists to shout "epidemic." Fortunately,
another major study was done at the same time. This time, the people
were not randomly selected; they were chosen because they had close
relatives who had been hospitalized for depression.4

Again, the ndings turned expectations upside down. They showed a strong
increase in depression over the course of the century---again, more than
ten to one. For instance, when the women of the World War I generation
were thirty (the age women born during the Korean War now were), only 3
percent of them had ever su ered a severe depression, while by the time
the women born during the Korean War period had turned thirty, 60
percent of them had had an episode of depression---a twentyfold di
erence. The statistics for the men in the study showed the same
surprising reversal. Though the men su ered only about half as much
depression as the women (a crucial fact I'll discuss in a moment), they
also displayed the same strong percentage increase over the decades.

Not only is severe depression much more common now; it also attacks its
victims much earlier in their lives. If you were born in the 1930s and
at any point thereafter had a depressed relative, your own rst
depression, if you had one, would strike between the ages of thirty and
thirty- ve, on average. If you were born in 1956, your rst depression
would strike between twenty and twenty- ve---ten years sooner. Since
severe depression recurs in about half of those who have had it once,
the extra ten years of exposure to depression

amounts to an ocean of tears.5 This trend toward more depression at a
younger age continues into the 1990s. Dr. Peter Lewinsohn of the Oregon
Research Institute recently interviewed 1,710 adolescents, half born
between 1968 and 1971, the other half born between 1972 and 1974. The
older ones have an alarming rate of depression: By the time they were
fourteen, 4.5 percent had had a full-blown episode of depression. The
younger ones were even worse o : By fourteen, 7.2 percent had had an
episode. It is shocking that Americans, on average, may be victims of
unprecedented psychological misery in a nation with unprecedented
prosperity, world power, and material well-being.6

In any case, this is enough to warrant shouting "epidemic."

Women and Men Study after study has found that across the twentieth
century,

depression strikes women more often than men.7 The ratio is now two to
one. Is it because women are perhaps more willing to go to therapy than
men and thus show up more frequently in the statistics? No. The same
preponderance shows up in door-to-door surveys.

Is it because women are more willing to talk openly about their
troubles? Probably not. The two-to-one ratio manifests itself in both
public and anonymous conditions.

Is it because women tend to have worse jobs and less money than men do?
No. The ratio stays at two to one even when groups of women and men are
matched for the same jobs and the same income: Rich women have twice as
much depression as rich men, and unemployed women twice as much as
unemployed men. Is it some sort of biological di erence that produces
more depression? There may be some biological di erences that
contribute, but probably not enough to make for a two-to-one ratio.
Studies of premenstrual and postpartum emotion show that while hormones
do a ect depression, their e ect isn't nearly big enough to create so
large a disparity.

Is it a genetic di erence? Careful studies of how much depression occurs
among the sons versus the daughters of male and female depressives show
that there is substantial depression among the sons of male depressives.
Considering the way chromosomes are passed from father to son and from
mother to daughter, there is too much male depression in this study for
it to be true that genetics causes the lopsided sex ratio. While there
is some evidence of a genetic contribution to depression, genetics
probably does not cause the lopsided sex ratio. Is it sex-role pressure?
Probably not. There are more con icting demands on women than on men in
modern life, and a woman nowadays not only has the traditional role of
mother and wife but often must hold down a job as well. This extra
demand could produce more strain than ever before and therefore more
depression. Sounds plausible, yet like many ideologically congenial
theories, this one dashes against the rocks of fact. On average, working
wives are less, not more, depressed than wives who do not work outside
the home. So sex-role explanations do not seem to account for the female
preponderance. This leaves three plausible explanations:

The rst is learned helplessness. In our society, it is argued, women
receive abundant experience with helplessness over the whole of their
lives. Boys' behavior is lauded or criticized by their parents

and their teachers, while girls' is often ignored. Boys are trained for
self-reliance and activity, girls for passivity and dependence. When
they grow up, women nd themselves in a culture that deprecates the role
of wife and mother. If a woman turns to the world of work, she nds her
achievements given less credit than men's. When she speaks in a meeting,
she gets more bored nods than a man would. If despite all this she
manages to excel and is promoted to a position of power, she is seen as
being out of place. Learned helplessness manifests itself at every turn,
and learned helplessness reliably produces depression.8

The second explanation of why women are more depressed than men involves
rumination. This theory says that when trouble strikes, men act, whereas
women think. She gets red from her job and she tries to gure out why;
she broods and she relives the event over and over. A man, upon getting
red, goes out and gets drunk, beats someone up, or otherwise distracts
himself from thinking about it. He may even go right out and look for
another job, without bothering to think through what went wrong. If
depression is a disorder of thinking, rumination stokes it. The tendency
to analyze feeds right into it; the tendency to act breaks it up---at
least in the short run. In fact, depression itself sets o rumination
more in women than in men. When we nd ourselves depressed, what do we
do? Women try to gure out where the depression came from. Men play
basketball or head for the o ce to work in order to distract themselves.
It is a fascinating fact that men have more alcoholism and drug abuse
than women do, perhaps even enough for us to be able to say: Men drink,
women get depressed. Women, ruminating about the source of the
depression, will only get more depressed, whereas men, by taking action,
may cut depression o at the knees. The rumination view might explain the
depression epidemic as a whole, as well as the lopsided sex ratio. We
now live in an age of rationality and self-consciousness. We are
encouraged to take our problems more seriously and analyze them
endlessly rather than act.

Since depression is ampli ed by negative thinking, more depression might
well be the result.9

The third possible explanation is the pursuit of thinness. To a much
greater extent than men, women in our society have been caught up in the
notion that being very thin is beautiful. The thin ideal is biologically
almost impossible to achieve, however. If you are one of the
majority---constantly to achieve the ideal---you are set up for
depression. Either you will fail to keep the extra pounds from coming
back, like 95 percent of women (and then failure and frequent reminders
that you are "too fat" will depress you), or you will succeed and become
a walking anorexic, starving constantly (see chapter 12) and su ering
one of the major side e ects of starvation---depression. Around the
world, every culture that has the thin ideal has more depression in
women and also has eating disorders. All cultures that do not have the
thin ideal do not have eating disorders, and they do not have more women
depressed than men.10

In a study of several hundred seventh-graders I participated in, we
tried to predict which girls, as they came into puberty, would be at
risk for depression. We found discontent with developing body shape to
be a major risk factor. When boys go through puberty, they become more
muscled and more like the "ideal" man. But when girls go through
puberty, they develop soft fat, which fashion dictates is unsightly.
They have been brainwashed into thinking that voluptuous is ugly. Before
puberty, boys are more depressed than girls, but as puberty sets in, the
girls become more depressed.11 So there are three factors that make
women more depressed than men: more training in helplessness, more
rumination, and the vain pursuit of thinness. These are all changeable.
Changing the thin ideal is largely a matter of changing societal
practices. Changing rumination and changing the indoctrination of girls
into helplessness is a matter of changing childrearing and of therapy.

Treatments for Depression That Work Most of the time, depression can be
markedly shortened in duration and considerably relieved in intensity by
treatment. There are four therapies that work: two biological, drugs and
electroconvulsive shock (ECS); and two psychological, cognitive therapy
(CT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT). All four have been subjected to
rigorous testing involving tens of thousands of depressed people. They
all work to about the same extent---moderately well. Beware of any other
form of treatment o ered for unipolar depression.

Drugs. The main kinds of drugs are tricyclics (for instance, Elavil,
Tofranil, and Sinequan), MAO inhibitors (Marplan, Nardil, and Parnate),
and serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (Prozac). All of these drugs take
between ten days and three weeks to start working. When they do work,
they relieve depression markedly about 65 percent of the time. That is
the good news.

Here is the bad news: First, about a quarter of depressed people cannot
or will not take drugs, usually because of side e ects. Second, once you
go o the drug, your risk for the relapse, or recurrence, of depression
is considerable, probably just the same as your risk was before taking
the drug. In order to prevent further depression or relapse, you should
keep taking the drug---maybe for the rest of your life.12

ECS. Electroconvulsive shock is scary. It has worse press than it
deserves, but it is far from innocuous. Most of the time it is rapid and
highly e ective. It relieves severe depression about 75 percent of the
time, usually in a series of ECSs that take a few days. Many lives have
undoubtedly been saved by its use, particularly the lives of acutely
suicidal people. The bad news is identical to that for drugs. Many
people will not agree to ECS because of its considerable side e
ects---memory loss, cardiovascular changes, and confusion---and because
it is a major

medical procedure. Even more important, there is no evidence that it
cuts down the recurrence of depression. Rather, it provides acute
relief.13

So both biological treatments bring quite e ective relief. Both also
have serious side e ects, and both are only cosmetic---they don't solve
the underlying problems, and depression is likely to return unless you
keep taking medication. Cognitive therapy (CT). Cognitive therapy, which
seeks to change the way the depressed person consciously thinks about
failure, defeat, loss, and helplessness,14 employs ve basic tactics.

First, you learn to recognize the automatic thoughts---the very quick
phrases, so well practiced as to be almost unnoticed and
unchallenged---that it through consciousness at the times you feel
worst. A mother of three children sometimes screams at them as she sends
them o to school.

She feels very depressed as a consequence. In CT, she learns to
recognize that right after

these screaming incidents she always says to herself "I'm a terrible
mother---even worse than my own mother." She learns to become aware of
these automatic thoughts.

Second, you learn to dispute the automatic thoughts by focusing on
contrary evidence. The mother reminds herself that when the kids come
home from school, she plays

football with them, tutors them in geometry, and talks to them
sympathetically about their problems. She marshals this evidence and
sees that it contradicts her rst thought that she is a bad mother.

Third, you learn to make di erent explanations, called reattributions,
and to use them to dispute your automatic thoughts. The mother learns to
say: "I'm ne with the kids in the afternoon and terrible in the

morning. Maybe I'm not a morning person."

That is a much less permanent and pervasive explanation for screaming at
the kids in the morning. As for the chain of negative explanations that
goes "I'm a terrible mother, I'm not t to have kids, therefore I don't
deserve to live," she learns to interrupt it by inserting the new
explanation: "It's completely illogical to infer that I don't deserve to
live because I'm not a morning person." Fourth, you learn how to
distract yourself from depressing thoughts. Rumination, particularly
when one is under pressure to perform well, makes the situation even
worse. Often, in order to do your best, it is better to put o thinking.
You learn to control not only what you think but also when you think it.
Fifth, you learn to question the depression-sowing assumptions governing
so much of what you do: "I can't live without love."

"Unless everything I do is perfect, I'm a failure." "Unless everybody
likes me, I'm a failure."

"There is a perfect right solution for every problem. I must nd it."
These kinds of premises set you up for depression. If you choose to live
by them---as so many of us do---your life will be lled with blue days
and weeks. You can, however, choose a new set of more forgiving premises
to live by: "Love is precious but rare." "Success is doing my best."

"For every person who likes you, one person doesn't like you." "Life
consists of putting my dam."

ngers in the biggest leaks in the

CT works quite well, bringing considerable relief to about 70 percent of
depressed people. It is roughly as e ective as the typically prescribed
drugs, but somewhat less e ective than ECS. It

takes about a month to start working, and therapy is brief---usually a
total of a few months, once or twice a week. In one way, CT is clearly
superior to a single course of drugs or ECS: It lowers your future risk
of depression by teaching you new skills of thinking that you can use
the next time really bad things happen to you. While CT lowers future
risk more than drugs, it does not lower your risk of recurrence even
close to zero.15

My main reservations about CT are, rst, that it may work better on
moderate depression than on severe depression---for which drugs should
probably be tried rst; second, cognitive therapy has mostly been used
with educated people who are "psychologically minded"---aware of their
thoughts and how thinking a ects their emotions. Little is known about
how well it works for less educated and less sophisticated people;
third, there is so much recurrence of severe depression, even with CT,
that there is a long way to go before anything more than "moderate
relief" can be claimed. Interpersonal therapy (IPT). Interpersonal
therapy focuses on social relations. It has become important because in
the major NIMH-sponsored outcome study of depression, it was intended to
be a placebo treatment but proved just as e ective as tricyclics and at
least as e ective as CT in relieving depression.16 This therapy has its
origins in the long-term psychoanalytic treatments devised by Harry
Stack Sullivan and Frieda FrommReichmann. But IPT is decidedly not
psychoanalytic. In contrast, it does not deal with the childhood
underpinnings, the decades-old defenses. IPT is also not long-term;
rather, it consists of twelve to sixteen sessions, usually once a
week.17

IPT sees depression in a medical model, asserting that depression has
many causes, biological as well as environmental. Salient among the
causes are interpersonal problems. IPT hones in on the here-andnow
problems of getting along with other people. Current disputes,
frustrations, anxieties, and disappointments are the main material of

this therapy. IPT looks at four problem areas in the current life of the
patient: grief, ghts, role transitions, and social de cits.

When dealing with grief, IPT looks for abnormal grief reactions. It
brings out the delayed mourning process and helps the patient nd new
social relationships that can substitute for the loss. When dealing with
ghts, the IPT practitioner helps determine where the disrupted
relationship is going: Does it need renegotiation? Is it at an impasse?
Is it irretrievably lost? Communication, negotiation, and assertive
skills are taught. Role transitions include retirement, divorce, and
leaving home. When dealing with these, the IPT practitioner gets the
patient to reevaluate the lost role, to express emotions about the loss,
to develop social skills suitable for the new role, and to establish new
social supports. When dealing with social de cits, the IPT practitioner
looks for recurrent patterns in past relationships. Emotional expression
is encouraged. Both abiding social strengths and weaknesses are
uncovered. When weaknesses are found, role playing and enhanced
communication skills are encouraged. The main virtues of IPT are that it
is brief (a few months) and inexpensive, it has no known adverse side e
ects, and it has been shown to be quite e ective against depression,
bringing relief in approximately 70 percent of cases. Its main drawback
is that it is not very widely practiced (it is very hard to nd an IPT
practitioner outside of New York City). This means that little research
has been done to nd its active ingredients and to replicate its bene ts
for depression. The Right Treatment UNIPOLAR DEPRESSION SUMMARY TABLE

Everyday Depression Your score on the depression test was probably below
the moderateto-severe range; most people score between 5 and 15. If that
is true for you, you are probably not in need of therapy for depression.
It may be true that you are sad quite a bit, that most of your life is
not lled with gusto, that you get fatigued pretty easily, that setbacks
hit you pretty hard, that you suck up energy from social gatherings
rather than adding life, and that you are not optimistic about your
future. But you probably do not have a depressive disorder. If the last
paragraph describes your state, you should try to do something to change
this state of a airs, for even mild depression poisons everyday life.
The same four groups of symptoms---sadness, pessimism, passivity, and
muted physical appetites---occur when

depression is mild, only with less force. When mild depression has
become a life-style, it is pointless, and it should be changed.

Mild depression is usually caused by pessimistic habits of thinking. The
pessimist sees the causes of failure and rejection as permanent ("It's
going to last forever"), pervasive ("It's going to ruin everything"),
and personal ("It's my fault"). These habitual beliefs are just that,
mere beliefs. They are often false, and they are often inaccurate
catastrophizings. The main lesson of cognitive therapy is that this way
of thinking can be permanently changed---even in severe depressions.
Mild depressives can usually change it without therapy.

The main skill of optimistic thinking is disputing. This is a skill
everyone has, but we normally use it only when others accuse us wrongly.
If a jealous friend tells you what a lousy executive or bad mother you
are, you can marshal evidence against the accusation and spit it back in
his or her face. Mild depressives make the same sorts of accusations to
themselves, about themselves, many times a day. You walk into a party
and you say to yourself, "I have nothing to say. No one is going to like
me. I look terrible." When these accusations issue from inside, you
treat them as if they were unimpeachable. But the automatic pessimistic
thoughts you have are just as motivated and irrational as the ravings of
a jealous rival. They originate not in hard fact but in the criticisms
your parents made of you in anger, your big sister's jealous mocking,
and your priest's unbending rules, all absorbed passively when you were
much younger. You can, with some discipline, learn to become a superb
disputer of pessimistic thoughts. I wrote a book about this, Learned
Optimism (1991). It has exercises in it that should prove useful to you.
This is not the place to repeat its contents, but I commend it to you.
Once you acquire the skills of optimism, they stay. This regimen is not
like dieting, which, as we shall see in chapter 12, almost always undoes
itself after a time. Staying on a diet, continuing to refuse the food
you love, is no fun. Disputing your own negative thoughts, in contrast,
is fun. Once you are good at it, it makes you feel better

instantly. Once you start doing it well, you want to keep doing it. If
you have a low mood almost every day, you can choose to change the way
you think. When you do so, you will nd that your life is more worth
living.

9 The Angry Person

For some of the large indignities of life, the best remedy

is direct action. For the small indignities, the best remedy is a
Charlie Chaplin movie. The hard part is knowing the di erence.

Carol Tavris, Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion

THE DISHWASHER FIGHT Akron, Ohio, 8:15 p.m. KATE: Scrape the gunk o the
plates before you hand them to me, puhllease. JONAH: Look, I'm rinsing
them o

rst.

KATE: Rinsing isn't enough. I've told you a hundred times: Dishwashers
don't scour plates. JONAH: Yeah, I have to wash the dishes before you
wash the dishes. KATE: Can't you just be a little help around here
before you start complaining? JONAH: You don't seem to realize that I've
had a hard day at work. I don't need this shit when I come home! KATE:
You've had a hard day! What do you think two teenagers and a
six-month-old to take care of are? May Day at Bryn Mawr? I need a man
who pitches in, not a black hole. JONAH: Black hole, eh? Who went to my
promotion party last week and did nothing except scowl? You ungrateful
bitch. \[Jonah storms out. Kate bursts into tears of helpless rage.\]

The dishwasher ght is an all-too-common experience. This couple lives a
balance of recriminations. All it takes is some

innocent issue, like the dishwasher, to bring the simmering resentments
to the surface. The underlying issues don't seep out then; they emerge
in volcanic form. Because they explode, both Kate and Jonah are taken by
surprise, and neither can be coolheaded enough to be anything but
aggressive and defensive. Nothing gets resolved, and now, yet another
incident is added to the evermounting mass of things to ght about next
time. Do you often nd yourself in "dishwasher ghts" with people you care
about? Do the issues mount with nothing getting resolved? Are you a
grudge collector? Let's nd out if you are an angry person--- relatively
speaking. I want you to take an anger inventory. There is nothing tricky
or deep about this quiz. Your score will tell you where you stand
relative to other adults. ANGER INVENTORY1 Read each statement and then
mark the appropriate number to indicate how you generally feel There are
no right or wrong answers. Do not spend too much time on any one
statement, but give the answer that seems to describe how you generally
feel.

Scoring. Simply add the numbers attached to your answers for the ten
questions. The higher your total, the more anger dominates your life.

If you scored 13 or below, you are in the least angry 10 percent of
people. If you scored 14--15, you are in the lowest quarter. If you
scored 17--20, your anger level is about average. If you scored 21--24,
your anger level is high, around the seventyfth percentile.

If you scored 29--30 and you are male, your anger level is around the
ninetieth percentile. If you scored 25--27 and you are female, your
anger level is around the ninetieth percentile. If you scored above 30
and you are male, your anger level is at the most hotheaded ninety- fth
percentile. If you scored above 28 and you are female, your anger level
is at the ninety- fth percentile. People mellow as they age. If you are
under twenty-three years old, a score of 26 or more puts you in the most
angry 10 percent. But if you are over twenty-three years old, a score of
only 24 or more puts you in the top 10 percent. If you scored in the top
half of the anger inventory, anger is an emotion you know well. ANGER
has three components: There is a thought, a very discrete and particular
thought: "I am being trespassed against." Often, events get out of hand
so quickly that you will not be conscious of this thought. You may
simply react ---but the thought of trespass is lurking there
nonetheless. Kate's underlying thought was "Jonah never helps; he just
bitches." Jonah's was "Kate doesn't appreciate me."

There is a bodily reaction. Your sympathetic nervous system and your
muscles mobilize for physical assault. Your muscles tense. Your blood
pressure and heart rate skyrocket. Your digestive processes stop. Brain
centers are triggered and your brain chemistry goes into an attack mode.
All this is accompanied by subjective feelings of anger. Third---and
this is what the rst two phases ready you for---you attack. Your attack
is directed toward ending the trespass--- immediately. You lash out.
What you are doing is nothing less than trying to wound or kill the
trespasser. If you are well socialized, you will attack verbally, not
physically; and if you are very well

socialized, you will usually be able to control the attack somewhat. You
will mute it, or suppress it, saving it for a more opportune moment. You
might even turn the other cheek altogether.

The question of what happens to anger when you control the attack phase
is an area of major controversy. It is fundamental to Freudian
psychology that emotion is hydraulic (the very meaning of dynamic in
Freudian psychodynamics). Emotion is like a liquid in a closed system:
If anger is dammed up or pushed down in one place, it will inevitably
push its way up in some other, unwelcome place. If you don't vent your
anger when you are angry, it will increase your blood pressure, or eat
an ulcer into your stomach, or cause self-hate, or be displaced until
you come across a less dangerous victim---like your three-year-old
daughter. Anti-Freudians claim that anger unexpressed simply dissipates.
If you count to four hundred or turn the other cheek, before you know it
the anger will be muted. Then it will be gone. Before this chapter is
over, we will have a better idea of which view is correct. What Anger
Does for You Your anger has a long history, one that goes back before
your childhood and before your parents' childhoods. It goes back to the
life-and-death struggles of your early human ancestors, and further
still to our primate ancestors and their forebears. Nature "red in tooth
and claw" is a popular view of survival of the ttest. And while not
completely accurate, the human capacity for anger is one of the
principal reasons we---and not some other primate line---are the
dominant species on earth. Robert Ardrey, a theorist of human evolution,
argued that our primate ancestors were not the peaceful vegetarian apes
whose big brains were adaptive because they made tools, a sentiment so
dear to the politics of most anthropologists. Rather, our forebears
succeeded because they were carnivorous apes, selected because they made
weapons and had the explosive anger to wield them well. Ardrey's school
of thought holds that we are descended from a line

of nonpareil killers. In the two poles of the evolution of intelligence
postulated in the musical, cooperative spacemen of Close Encounters of
the Third Kind versus the supreme predators in Alien, Ardrey's theory
claims that the human species embodies the latter.2

This kind of anger is most e ectively aroused in defense of our own
territory, and this is the principal thing---never to be forgotten
---that anger does for us. The focal thought is, after all, "My domain
is being trespassed against." It is a military postulate that people
attacked on their own territory will defend themselves with vigor---
nay, with astonishing ferocity. When we defend our children, our land,
our jobs, our privileges, or our lives, we are transformed from
shepherds, teachers, accountants, and mothers into street ghters and
terrorists and Amazons. When we are drafted to ght on somebody else's
turf, we are just doing a job, weighing the likely outcome of each move,
quite ready to cut and run when the ght seems lost. Not so when it is
our domain and we are desperate and angered. Vietnam, Algeria, the
Warsaw ghetto, and Ireland are memorable lessons of this postulate.

Another bene t is that anger aims for revenge and restitution---for
justice as we see it. It helps to right wrongs and to bring about needed
change. When we ght with our spouse, for example, we usually think, "I
am right and he is wrong." Anger, unlike fear or sadness, is a moral
emotion. It is "righteous." It aims not only to end the current trespass
but to repair any damage done. It also aims to prevent further trespass
by disarming, imprisoning, emasculating, or killing the trespasser. When
someone advises us to turn the other cheek, to "acknowledge it and let
it go," or to weigh the cost versus the bene ts of ghting, we may resist
this advice. We think that it would be wrong, that if we didn't ght, we
would be sacri cing justice. We would be cowards, and evil would triumph
again. There is another moral aspect to anger. We deem it honest to
express our anger. We live in an age that tells us to "let it all hang
out." If we feel anger, we should not suppress it.

It is important to recognize that this doctrine is not universal. The
rituals that submissive baboons go through in the presence of an alpha,
that is, dominant, male, the trouble Americans have discerning whether a
Japanese is furious, the subtle way in which one Englishman cuts another
to the core, all testify to the fact that the expression of anger is
malleable. Time and place and custom enormously in uence whether it is a
virtue to show naked anger or a virtue to hide it. Our "ventilationist"
view is no more than a fashion, a fashion that has several sources: a
reaction to the global censoring of emotion by Victorian society, the
social homogenization of American life urging us to "get down to the
nitty-gritty," and the Electronic Age taste for headlines and sound
bites, allowing us to dispense with the mannerly and timeconsuming
rituals of masked emotions. So anger helps us defend threatened
territory---it is just, and it is honest. Not only that---it is healthy.
It is widely believed that bottling up anger can kill us, slowly and in
three di erent ways.

First, if we suppress our anger, it turns inward against us. Anger
turned against the self produces self-loathing, depression, and,
ultimately, true self-destruction in the form of suicide.

Second, anger bottled up produces high blood pressure and heart disease.
So compelling is this theory that we can almost feel it at work. Imagine
yourself insulted by someone you hate. Force yourself to take it and
remain in this uncomfortable state. Grit your teeth, clench your sts, go
red in the face. You can almost feel your blood pressure surge. Indeed,
in experimental studies, blood pressure subsides faster after insult
when you retaliate against the person who insulted you. In eld studies,
the Type A personality--- hostile, competitive, and time-urgent---has
more heart attacks than the more relaxed Type Bs do.3

Finally, anger suppressed is said to cause cancer. There is a
"cancer-prone personality," a Type C. Type C people control their
emotional reactions because they believe that it's useless to express
their needs. They do not express anger, but su er silently and

stoically; they do not kick against cruel fate. Type C women,
particularly, have a higher rate of malignant breast cancer than do

women who express their emotions.4 Moreover, when women with malignant
breast cancer receive psychotherapy in which they are encouraged to
ventilate their emotions, they live for somewhat

longer periods.5 No wonder we have become a people who anger easily. We
protest, we shout, we litigate. We do not su er trespass stoically. The
heroes of many of our movies are Rockys, Rambos, and Dirty Harrys who
explode violently: "Go ahead, make my day." Anger is the e ective
defense of what belongs to us, the springboard to justice, the emblem of
honesty, the path to rosy health. What a splendid emotion! The Pros of
Anger Revisited Not so fast. In spite of anger being so deeply enshrined
in our culture, many of its virtues are myths based on Freudian ideology
or on distortions of evidence. Anger: the unhealthy emotion. Is it true
that anger unexpressed leads to more cancer, more heart disease, and
more depression?

Cancer. The evidence that suppression of anger leads to cancer is very
weak. The Type C personality, allegedly a predisposer to cancer, is made
up of several characteristics confounded with one another. The Type C
woman, for instance, fails to express her anger. But she is also more
helpless and hopeless, has more anxiety and more depression, is more
fatalistic, and has little ghting spirit. Which of these is the active
ingredient? Lack of anger expression is one possibility, but
hopelessness, helplessness, and depression are more likely to be the
real culprits. Each of these last three has been linked to tumor growth,
but anger suppression has not. Indeed, the inventors of Type C theory
also found that "exploders," people who have frequent outbursts of
temper, also have more cancer than

normal people.6 Examining the cancer evidence, I cannot determine if
anger expression is worse, or better, or of no account in cancer.

Heart disease. The Type A personality---heart-attack prone---is also
made up of three confounded traits: hostility, time urgency, and
competitiveness. Type A researchers, unlike Type C researchers, have
tried to separate the components. Hostility, the overt expression of
anger, is probably the real culprit. Time urgency, competitiveness, and
the suppression of anger do not seem to play a role in Type As getting
more heart disease. In one study, 255 medical-school students took a
personality test that measured overt hostility. The angriest of them
went on---twenty- ve years later---to have roughly ve times as much
heart disease as the least angry ones. In another study, men who had the
highest risk of heart attacks were the ones with especially explosive
voices, more irritation when forced to wait, and more outwardly directed
anger. In an exploration of the mechanism by which anger expression
might damage the heart, the eighteen men in this study angrily recounted
incidents that annoyed them. The pumping e ciency of their heart dropped
by 5 percent on average, suggesting a drop in blood ow to the heart
itself. Pumping e ciency was not changed by other stressors.7

Studies nd that blood pressure stays high when anger is bottled up only
among male students bottling up their anger at other male students, that
is, only males of the same status. When a student bottles up his anger
against a professor, blood pressure goes down, and it goes up if he
decides to express his anger. And anger expression does not lower blood
pressure for women; expressing hostility raises female blood pressure.
In contrast, friendliness in

reaction to trespass lowers it.8 I have a very simple theory of how
emotion a ects heart disease. It may well be wrong, but it is compatible
with most of the facts. Your heart is a pump, and like any mechanical
pump, there is a limit, or rating, on how many times it can beat before
it wears out. So, for example, your heart might be rated at 100 million
beats.

Once your rating is exceeded, you are very likely to have a heart
attack---if something else hasn't killed you rst. Ratings vary from
person to person and from family to family, with the limit set by such
factors as constitutional strength, exercise, and childhood diseases.

Some emotions, the ones that raise your heart rate and blood pressure,
use up your allotted beats more quickly than others. Anger and fear are
two such emotions: They mobilize the sympathetic nervous system in just
this way. Relaxation and calm have the opposite e ect. People who often
get angry use up their allotted beats faster. Several times a day, they
go into a rage; their heart races and their blood pressure soars. On a
bad day, they may use up two days' allotment. Fearful and paranoid
people who see the world as a threatening place get triggered into
massive sympathetic activity more often and so also use up their
allotment faster. The habit of ventilating your anger---as opposed to
suppressing it---uses up your allotment and so contributes to heart
disease.9

The evidence is clear: Overt anger, contrary to popular belief, is bad
for your heart.

Depression. The view that depression is anger turned inward is false.
Freud spun this theory out of whole cloth some eighty years ago.
Unsupported as it was, his theory of depression, along with his theory
of repressed sexuality, was among the main forces that legitimized our
present ethic of promiscuous emotional expression.

By the 1950s, therapists were having a eld day with this ethic. One of
the main treatments for depression was to encourage patients to get
angry. Therapists helped depressed people to shout about the times they
had been victimized and to rage over how bad their lives were. When I
rst learned how to treat depression, in the early 1970s, this was one of
the techniques I was taught. But something quite shocking occurred when
we prodded depressed people into getting angry and remembering
long-forgotten abuse. Keep in mind that depressed people are often
quiet, shy, and withdrawn. They are often reluctant to talk about their
troubles.

With our Freudian-oriented prodding, we got them to talk, and talk, and
talk. They began to complain. They remembered how bad life was. They
wallowed. Encouraged, they dredged up more and more tragic material.
They wept. Not infrequently, they would unravel, and then we had a great
deal of trouble getting them together again. What might have started as
an ordinary case of mild depression sometimes escalated into a severe
case---with a suicide attempt thrown in.

Put another way, there is simply no evidence that depression is anger
turned inward. Getting the anger out of depressives, who are often well
defended against many of the bad things that have happened to them,
sometimes worsens depression. Contrary to the Freudian theory, when you
measure anger during depression, hostility increases during the
depression and continues after the depression is gone.10 So I conclude
that venting your anger is not good for your health. It has no clear
relation to cancer, it may increase---rather than decrease---your risk
for coronary heart disease, and it can exacerbate depression.

Anger: honest? just? e ective? We deem it honest to tell the object of
our anger just what we think. This is, after all, the truth, and we
should tell the truth. But there is a di erence between honesty and
truth. Anger, speci cally, and emotion, generally, color evidence. This
may be one of emotion's reasons for existing. By biasing the evidence,
emotion readies us to act in certain ways that may be highly adaptive
when we are in the right niche. Emotion places colored lenses on the
spectacles through which we usually view the world. Anxiety makes the
world look more frightening than it is; fear lowers our threshold for
seeing danger, and makes us more apt to ee. When we are watching a
horror movie on the VCR, a real cat leaping from behind a desk
momentarily terri es us. Depression colors the world, too, and so gets
us to give up, turn inward, and sit in our cave conserving our energy
until happier times materialize. To a depressed person, the world often
seems

bleaker than it actually is (one of the most objectionable aspects of
the latest best-selling suicide manual is that it fails to recognize
that wanting to kill yourself may be based on a temporary distortion of
the evidence, not on rational evaluation). Anger readies us to attack
---innocent actions seen through its lens appear to be trespass. Our
perceptual threshold for a ront lowers. When a clumsy fth-grader
accidentally drops his lunch tray on a bully, the bully interprets the
action as aggressive and intentional. This "hostile-attribution bias"
characterizes the way aggressive boys think all the time, and the way
normal people think when they are angry.11 So while it may be honest to
be angry, it is not truthful. The judgments we make when we are angry
are often far o the mark, coloring evidence in a hostile and threatening
manner.

The same can be said for justice. Anger moves us toward justice--- as we
see it. Anger is not an emotion that helps us see things from our
attacker's point of view. Rather, it imposes a protective,
selfinterested lens of trespass on the world. Sometimes it is correct,
and it punishes the trespasser most ttingly. Other times it wreaks
revenge on innocent people or demands overly severe punishment for minor
transgressions. When in the heat of anger you make the mistake of
punishing a small child severely, you may create excessive damage. An
accurate description of the moral tone of redhot anger is
"self-righteous" rather than "righteous." Finally, the e ectiveness of
anger is not all it is cracked up to be. Certainly, in a desperate,
back-against-the-wall, physical ght on our own territory, anger gives us
the strength of many. But we are almost never in that situation. A rival
insults us. A co-worker slights our e orts. Our spouse irts with another
man. Our two-year-old disobeys us. A voyeur peeks at us. How e ective is
an outburst of temper in these situations? Anger galvanizes some people
into clever repartee and resourceful argument---they become masters of
the "last word." For most of the rest of us, anger is a very
disorganizing emotion. We fume and we sputter. We forget our most
important points. We are reduced to

shouting epithets. We regret what we said when the argument is over. We
wish we hadn't gotten angry. The Cons of Anger If you are patient in one
moment of anger, you will escape a hundred days of sorrow.

Chinese proverb

First and foremost, anger is the emotion that fuels violence. A society
like ours, which urges the expression of anger, sanctions it, and makes
movies about its virtues, is a violent society. It should be sobering to
"ventilationists" that America has ve times the rate of violent crime as
Japan, an anti-ventilationist society. Murder, assault, and violent rape
occur in unprecedented numbers in America. Child abuse and spouse
battering are rampant. Strangely, though there are disorders of anxiety
and depression, the nosologists have seen t to designate no certi ed
disorders of anger. The outmoded category "explosive-personality
disorder" and the rare category "paranoid disorder (without
schizophrenia)" are as close as the taxonomy of mental problems now
comes. But out-of-hand anger ruins many lives. More, I believe, than
schizophrenia, more than alcohol, more than AIDS. Maybe even more than
depression. A second impact of anger is subtler, but almost as
shattering: Serious turmoil between parents is the most depressing
ordinary event that children witness. We have followed the lives of some
400 children for the last ve years, focusing on children whose parents
ght (20 percent) and those whose parents divorce or separate (15
percent).12 We watched these 140 children carefully and contrasted them
to the rest of the children. What we saw has important implications for
our society at large and for how married couples should deal with anger.

The children of ghting families look the same---that is, just as
bad---as the children of divorce: These children are more depressed

than the children from intact families whose parents don't ght. We had
hoped the di erence would diminish over time, but it didn't. Three years
later, these children were still more depressed than the rest of the
children. Once their parents start ghting, these children become
unbridled pessimists. They see bad events as permanent and pervasive,
and they see themselves as responsible. Years later this pessimism
persists, even after they tell us their parents are no longer ghting.
Their worldview has changed from the rosy optimism of childhood to the
grim pessimism of a depressed adult. I believe that many children react
to their parents' ghting by developing a loss of security so shattering
that it marks the beginning of a lifetime of dysphoria.

It is important to realize that these are averaged results. Some of the
children do not become depressed, some of the children do not become
pessimists, and some of the children recover over time. Divorce or
ghting does not doom a child to years of unhappiness; it only makes it
much more likely. Many more bad life events occur to children whose
parents divorce or ght. This continued disruption could be what keeps
depression so high among such children. Among these bad events are
Classmates act less friendly Parent hospitalized

Child fails a course at school Parent loses job

Child himself hospitalized A friend dies

This adds up to a nasty picture for the children of parental turmoil.

Parents' ghting may hurt children in such a lasting way for one of two
reasons.

The rst possibility is that parents who are unhappy with each other ght
and separate. The ghting and separation directly disturb the child,
causing long-term depression and pessimism.

The second possibility is the traditional wisdom: Fighting and
separation themselves have little direct e ect on the child, but
awareness of parents' unhappiness is the culprit---so disturbing as to
produce long-term depression. Only future research can clarify this, but
although there is nothing in our data to tell us which of these two is
right, I lean toward the rst. I don't believe that children are subtle
creatures with "unhappiness in parents" detectors; in fact, I think that
most children see their parents in a very positive light and that it
takes real upheaval or deprivation to make a child notice how rotten
things are. Fighting and violence between the two people the child most
depends on for his or her future is just such upheaval.

Many people are, of course, in rocky marriages, lled with strife and con
ict. Less dramatic, but more common, is this situation: After several
years of marriage, many people don't like their spouses anymore, which
breeds resentment and is fertile ground for ghting. But at the same
time, both marriage partners are often overwhelmingly concerned with the
well-being of their children. It seems to be a plain fact---at least
statistically---that either separation or ghting in response to an
unhappy marriage is likely to harm children in lasting ways. If future
research tells us that it is parents' unhappiness and not the overt
ghting that is the culprit, then I would suggest marital counseling
aimed at coming to terms with the shortcomings of the marriage. This
sometimes works. But if future research determines that it is the act of
ghting and the choice to separate that are responsible for children's
depression, very di erent advice would follow. All of us save money for
our children. We put o the trip to Hawaii now, and perhaps forever, so
that our children might lead better lives than we do. Are you willing to
forgo separation from a spouse you don't like anymore? An even harder
challenge: Are you willing to choose to refrain from ghting---on just
the same grounds---for the sake of your children?

There may be something to be said for couples' ghting. Sometimes justice
is achieved for you. But as far as your children are concerned, there is
very little to be said in favor of parents' ghting. Therefore, I choose
to go against the prevailing ethic and recommend that it is not your
well-being, as much as it is your child's, that is at stake.13

Physical violence and childhood depression are the two major costs of
venting anger, but there is a third---milder but much more commonplace.
It is the most persuasive, however, because it is so obvious: Anger
damages relationships.

Anger is hot and quick. Its content, uncensored, is destructive. An
angry person never sees things from his target's point of view.
Judgment, in contrast, is cool and long. Because there is such weak
restraint nowadays on expressing anger, because our society is no longer
"well mannered," we often do and say things we regret. Words and brash
acts, unlike thoughts, cannot be erased. In a lifetime, most of us wreck
dozens, even hundreds, of relationships in the heat of anger. Examples
are legion: In his last tantrum of childhood, an eleven-year-old boy
screams "I hate you" at his doting father. Wounded, and unskilled at
handling anger or rejection himself, the father never again expresses
warm a ection to his son. A shy woman, used to her husband taking the
sexual lead, makes her rst direct advance. He, however, is preoccupied
with his income-tax forms and gru y rejects her advances. She never
tries again. A brilliant psychology undergraduate bursts excitedly into
his professor's o ce, interrupting an important phone call, to tell her
his new theory of anger management. With obvious irritation, the
professor says, "Go make an appointment with my secretary." Hurt, he
switches his major to physics instead. A woman slaps her ancee,
infuriated by his irting at a party. Rejected and furious himself, he
storms o , and the irtation

becomes a bedding. The engagement is broken o . Both regret it for years
to come. Some say that telling the other person o clears the air, or
that blowing o steam makes you feel less angry. This is the "catharsis"
theory of anger expression, and it is one of the pillars of the
ventilationist ethic. Catharsis may happen once in a while, but
statistically, the opposite is more often the case. Seymour Feshbach, an
early pioneer of experiments on anger, explored catharsis by working
with a group of young boys who were not aggressive or destructive. He
encouraged them to kick furniture and play with violent toys. They did
so---exuberantly. Did this drain the boys of aggression? No, it ampli ed
it. The boys became more hostile and destructive, not less. The same
holds with adults: Telling someone o typically makes you feel more
hostile, not less hostile, toward the target.14

Can Anger Be Changed? I'm not sure. Concerted research and clinical e
orts have been mounted to relieve the two other major negative emotions,
anxiety and depression. Because each of these is a certi ed disorder,
millions of dollars have been spent and tens of thousands of patients
treated with an adventurous variety of tactics. Control groups have been
run, and major outcome studies performed. I am therefore entitled to
claim, as I did in the last several chapters, that panic is curable,
that depression can usually be relieved and shortened, and that
obsessions can often be alleviated. Anger, however, is not a certi ed
disorder. Pitifully little research has been focused on it. There are
only a few hundred patients who have been treated, and only a handful of
tactics have been tested. There is not a single major outcome study on
how to change anger. So my advice about anger mixes what is known with
more than a dollop of the clinical wisdom.

Let us assume you scored in the upper 10 percent of the anger inventory.
Your short fuse is a vexation to others around you and to your spirit as
well. After reading this chapter, you are now convinced that the cost of
venting your anger clearly outweighs the gain. What should you do? A
good rst step is to keep an "anger diary" for a week.15 Divide it into
ve columns. Here is what an entry might look like:

Doing this will allow you to see patterns in your anger. What kind of
incidents set it o ? Trivial ones? Threats to income? Romantic
thwarting? Interruption at unimportant tasks? Does shouting make it
worse or better? Do you feel guilty? Does it go away quickly even if you
don't do anything? Do people seem to like you less afterward? Do you
accomplish the goal?

Once you are on top of some of your patterns, you should learn about how
clinicians dampen anger. All of their tactics are simple, and you can
use them yourself. Anger consists of three aspects: the
thought---trespass; the feeling---fury, blood pressure up, heart racing,
muscles tensing; and the behavior---attack. There are separate tactics
for dampening each of the three. Thought. When we are provoked, the time
interval between the trigger and our attack is often terribly brief.
This is as it should be, since it re ects the evolutionary need for
instantaneous defense. It is an old saw to "count to ten." This is very
sensible advice---as far as it goes. Such advice attempts to buy time
between the provocation and the response.

But time for what? The count-to-ten advice assumes that time itself
dampens the impulse to hit back. There is some truth in that, but we can
do more than just count---the thought "I am being trespassed against"
can be directly modi ed during the lengthened interval. By all means,
count; count not to just ten but through twenty breaths. (Better yet:
Sleep on it.) But during that time, challenge and reinterpret the
thoughts of trespass and a ront. Imagine yourself as a sh swimming
along. Numerous shhooks, in the form of insults, appear in your path.
Each o ers you the choice of whether or not to bite.16 Ask yourself: Is
this actually a trespass? Try to see yourself from the provoker's point
of view. Try to reframe the provocation: Maybe he's having a rough day.

There's no need to take it personally.

Don't act like a jerk just because he is. He couldn't help it.

This could be a testy situation, but easy does it. Use humor if you can.
For example: You have just been cut o by a reckless driver who did not
signal his sudden change of lane. You think, "What an ass!" Visualize a
pair of buttocks steering the car ahead of you. Decorate them with some
feathers. Get into the image.

Above all, during the interval, change from "ego orientation" to "task
orientation." Think: "I know this seems like a personal insult, but it
is not. It is a challenge to be overcome that calls on skills I have."
Visualize yourself as a bomb disposer. Your job is to slowly and coolly
defuse the bomb. Make a plan for defusing the attacker. Feelings. Use
the lengthened time interval to become aware of your feelings. Conscious
awareness of arousal makes it easier to regulate anger. Use the feelings
as a signal to remind you to cope without antagonism.

My muscles are tense. Time to relax.

My breath is coming fast. Take a deep breath.

He would probably like me to explode. Well, I'm going to disappoint
him.17 These techniques will help once you are trapped in the situation.
But if you nd yourself in these situations all too frequently, you need
to prevent anger. There are two long-term ways of doing this:
progressive relaxation and meditation. Practiced regularly (twice a
day), relaxation or meditation prevents angry arousal. (A review of
these techniques can be found.) The techniques are just as useful for
angry persons as for anxious persons. Action. Once the interval is over,
you must do something. There are alternatives to attacking. Turning the
other cheek is one. A huge smile with a humorous story is another ("You
know, there's an old Jewish proverb about . . ."). Creating a rich
defusing repertoire is another; it's a splendid alternative to a
repertoire of clever putdowns. In her book Anger: The Misunderstood
Emotion, Carol Tavris quotes a telephone operator who is able to bypass
the rude ventilation of some of her customers: "I just say, in my most
genuine way, 'Boy, you must be having a rough day.' They immediately
calm down, realize how they must have sounded, and apologize." Write
down and use sets of two good "defusing" lines, each pair tailored for
your spouse, your boss, a di cult co-worker, or your children. In many
anger situations, you want to get your own way in the face of a
roadblock. There are technologies for how to overcome such roadblocks
more e ectively than by attacking. They are called "negotiation
training" and "assertiveness training." There are courses and books on
these skills, and they work. My preferred book

is Sharon Bower's Assert Yourself.18 Bower breaks down assertion into
four manageable steps---she calls them D, E, S, and C---which should be
done in order.

D-Describe. Describe---with no emotion and no evaluation--- exactly what
is bothering you. Don't exaggerate. Don't say always when you mean
twice. This bloodless step must come rst. E-Express. Express how this
makes you feel. Don't accuse, don't evaluate the other person, just
identify which emotion you feel. S-Specify. Specify exactly what you
want your target to do.

C-Consequence. End by saying just what you will do if your target does
not comply. Be accurate. Don't threaten, don't menace, and don't blu .
Recall the ght between Kate and Jonah. Neither had the DESC skills. But
if either had, the ght would not have gotten out of hand. KATE: Scrape
the gunk o the plates before you hand them to me, puhllease. JONAH:
Look, I'm rinsing them o

rst.

KATE: Rinsing isn't enough. I've told you a hundred times . . .

Here's the place where DESC would help. Kate should do it right here,
when she rst feels her muscles tense and her anger rise. KATE
\[describing\]: The last two times we did the dishes, you said you
didn't want to rinse and scrape the dishes. I said that if the dishes
weren't scraped, they wouldn't come out

clean, \[expressing\] Your saying this again now makes me feel that you
don't listen to me. And that makes me sad and angry, \[specifying\] Next
time we do the dishes, I want you to scrape them o before you hand them
to me---without comment. \[Consequence\] If you don't, I'd prefer to do
them alone.

Or Jonah could have done it. KATE: Rinsing isn't enough. I've told you a
hundred times: Dishwashers don't scour plates. JONAH: Yeah, I have to
wash the dishes before you wash the dishes. KATE: Can't you just be a
little help around here before you start complaining? JONAH: You don't
seem to realize that I've had a hard day at work. I don't need this shit
when I come home!

The crucial spot. His temper is aring. Jonah should now use this as a
signal to deploy his DESC skills. JONAH \[describing\]: The last time we
did the dishes we got into a ght. \[expressing\] This makes me feel sad
and hopeless. It also makes me feel angry. \[specifying\] Next time we
do the dishes, I want you to rub my shoulders while I scrape and rinse
them. \[consequence\] If you don't want to do this, I'll just do the
dishes alone next time.

A nal bit of advice, concerning ghting in front of your children: I am
not naive enough to think that even if you take this chapter to heart,
you will never again ght in front of your children. Fights happen. There
is one solid piece of research on the subject of ghting in front of your
children---if you must. It concerns resolution. Children who watch lms
of adults ghting are much less disturbed when the ght ends with a clear
resolution. When you ght, go out of your way to resolve the ght,
unambiguously and in front of your child.

10 Post-traumatic Stress

I want to live so that my life cannot be ruined by a single phone call.

Federico Fellini, La Dolce Vita

THIS IS the saddest chapter of all. "How's your son, Tommy, doing?"
inquired an old customer of Hector's. Hector had

sold him an insurance policy a few years before, and they hadn't run
into each other since. Hector burst into tears.1 Although it had been ve
years since that awful October evening, the memory and the

pain were ever fresh. Tommy, fourteen, had been the center of Hector's
and Jodi's lives. The family ate breakfast together every morning, and
Hector and Jodi included Tommy in almost everything they did. Every
Saturday was Tommy's special day with Hector: just Tommy and Hector all
day long.

Norma Sue, Tommy's seventeen-year-old cousin, was always in trouble in
her

hometown of Chicago, so her parents sent her to live with Hector and
Jodi in their small Iowa town to straighten her out. Tommy was
particularly enthused about helping Norma Sue, and tried to get her
active in the church youth group.

One Monday evening, Tommy persuaded Norma Sue to go to a youth-group
meeting

with him. She drove. About an hour later, Jodi dropped by her o ce and
took a call from Hector. Hector said that there had been a small car
accident, but that both kids were

okay. To put her mind at ease, Jodi called the hospital and was told to
come right over.

Jodi went there and waited, and when Hector arrived with the police, she
saw that he was hysterical. She knew immediately that Tommy was dead.

The

ve years since have been an unending hell for Jodi and Hector. Jodi,
formerly

ebullient, has been suicidally depressed ever since. She has lost all
motivation to do anything. She never went back to her o ce, and now
barely keeps house. Once or twice a

week she wakes up from terrifying nightmares, which often depict Tommy
surrounded by "bad" kids, pleading with his mother to protect him. She
relives that Monday evening every day of her life.

Hector has barely hung on to his sales job. He used to be a regular
member of the

million-dollar club, but he hasn't come close since Tommy died. Weekends
are even worse

for him because that was the time he always devoted to Tommy. Every time
the phone rings, Hector almost jumps out of his skin. He can't talk to
anyone---especially Jodi--- about Tommy because it would hurt too much.

Last month, Hector moved out and Jodi led for divorce.

Tragedy used to be a part of everyone's life---the human condition.
Until this century in the West, more than half the population thought
life was a vale of tears. Not so now. It is not unusual to go through an
entire lifetime without tragedy. Bad things still happen to us all too
frequently: Our stocks go down, our aged parents die, we don't get the
job we had hoped for, people we love reject us, we age and die. But we
are usually prepared for many of these losses, or at least we know ways
to soften the blow. Once in a while, however, the ancient human
condition intrudes, and something irredeemably awful, something beyond
ordinary human loss, occurs. We are then reminded how fragile the
upholstered cubicles we dwell in really are. So devastating and
long-lasting are the e ects of extraordinary loss that it has nally been
given a name and a diagnostic category of its own: post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). No jargon, no euphemism, no psychobabble, can camou age
that this is the saddest disorder of them all. Distress is universal.
Many---but, assuredly, not all people---display the hallmarks of PTSD
for months or years afterward: Reliving: The victim persistently relives
the trauma in dreams or in intrusive ashbacks (or has the opposite
reaction: He can't

recall the event). Not a day went by for years afterward when Hector and
Jodi did not ruminate about Tommy's death. They both repeatedly dreamed
variations on Tommy's death. Anxiety: The victim avoids anything
connected with the trauma. He has di culty falling asleep and staying
asleep. He can't concentrate. He startles easily. He becomes passive and
continually anxious. Hector couldn't bear to talk to anybody about
Tommy, and he jumped whenever the phone rang. Numbness: The victim
becomes numb to life. She may feel detached and estranged from people.
She may lose the ability to love anybody. Jodi quit her job, Hector lost
his ambition, and their marriage fell apart. The worst of the common
tragedies is, by all statistics, the death of a child. Each year in the
United States, 150,000 people are killed accidentally. Accidents are the
number one killer of children. Thus there are hundreds of thousands of
parents in our country today bereaved by the worst loss of all.
Unexpected death of a spouse is a close second. Bereavement: Common lore
tells us that it is di cult, but that time heals all wounds. Doesn't it?
Only some wounds, it turns out. When your spouse of many years dies,
bereavement takes a predictable course: six months to two years of
mourning, sadness, even depression, and an elevated risk of death
yourself. And then, your life poorer, you pick up and go on. Not so for
extraordinary losses. It used to be thought that victims recovered
briskly. Among the rst psychiatric studies of the aftermath of disaster
was one that focused on the Cocoanut Grove nightclub re of 1942.
Interviews with the survivors and the families of the dead led to an
optimistic picture. An "uncomplicated grief reaction" was supposed to
dissipate in four to six weeks.2 This has remained the lore ever since.
When people take longer than a few weeks to adjust after their lives
have been devastated, it is considered "abnormal." In

order to qualify for a certi ed diagnosis of PTSD, the symptoms have to
last at least one month. Dr. Camille Wortman, a social psychologist, has
single-handedly changed the lore. She went through the micro lm records
of every auto fatality in Michigan between 1976 and 1979. She randomly
chose thirty-nine people who had lost a spouse and forty-one couples who
had lost a child. She interviewed them at length and compared them to
matched controls.

The parents and the spouses were in decidedly poor shape four to seven
years later: They were much more depressed than the controls, were less
optimistic about the future, and did not feel good about their lives.
They were more "worn-out," "tense," and "unhappy." More of them had died
than had the controls. While they had not di ered from the controls in
income before their child died, the bereaved parents now earned 25
percent less. Twenty percent were divorced (versus 2 percent of the
controls). The bereaved people were just as bad o seven years later as
four years later, so there did not seem to be a natural healing process
at work. Almost everyone asked "Why me?" Sixty percent could nd no
answer to this wrenching question.3 There are some clear cases of what
counts as a loss "outside the normal range of human experience":
spending years in a concentration camp where you are forced to aid in
the killing of fellow prisoners, watching your child be tortured, being
the only survivor in your family of a collision with a truck, living
through a catastrophic ood that decimates your community, being pinned
down in a foxhole for days surrounded by corpses, being kidnapped and
held hostage. Such horri c experiences routinely produce PTSD. Dora, a
Polish Jew, was sent to Auschwitz with her husband and three sons after
the

uprising in the Warsaw ghetto. Her husband and her baby perished in the
rst few hours, but she lived on until the end of the war, watching her
two other sons worked to death;

she survived by giving sexual favors to camp guards. Dora found her way
after the war to distant relatives in Pittsburgh.

An old lady now, she has not recovered. She has never worked, and she
stays in her

attic room listening to classical music most of the time. When she goes
out, the sight of

men in uniform---policemen, even mailmen---frightens her. She thinks
constantly of her

dead family and feels guilty that she lived and they died. Her contact
with the present is minimal. Every night she dreams of her baby burning
to death in an oven. It has been forty- ve years of life in Auschwitz.

Prisoners of war can show lifelong symptoms of PTSD. Forty years after
captivity, 188 World War II POWs underwent diagnostic interviews in
Minneapolis. Sixty-seven percent had su ered PTSD during some of the
previous forty years. Of these, nearly 35 percent still had moderate or
severe symptoms, and 40 percent still had mild symptoms.4

If PTSD were only about the clear cases, like Dora's and like the POWs',
it would be of interest only to specialists and to voyeurs. But PTSD, I
believe, is much more widespread and is set o by more commonplace losses
than the diagnostic criteria allow. I believe that the objective de
nition of "extraordinary" loss masks what takes place in the minds of
the victims; what takes place does not reside in the objective awfulness
of the event.

Bad things, though maybe not as objectively awful as the horrors above,
happen to most of us. Some of us react to our losses with resilience.
After a few weeks we go about our lives, look for a new family, a new
job, a new country, or a new reason for living. Many others of us are
more brittle. Major loss changes our way of looking at ourselves and the
world forever. We nd ourselves beyond consolation. Most people, living
through what Dora did, would su er PTSD. But many people endure the same
symptoms when a child dies suddenly. Some people su er it when they are
mugged or raped. And a few surfer it when they are abandoned by a spouse
or, merely, sued. The Rape-Trauma Syndrome

Rape is distressingly frequent in our society. About 100,000 rapes are
reported every year, and possibly seven times as many go unreported. As
many as one out of every three to ve women will be raped in her
lifetime.5 Rape is even more frequent in poorer societies. Using
"extraordinary" as a criterion, rape, and the death of a child as well,
would not qualify for PTSD. But it is clear that the death of a child
usually, and rape sometimes, set o just the same symptoms as war,
torture, and earthquake almost always do. Ms. T., twenty-eight, was
asleep in her apartment when she was awakened by a man

with a knife. He told her not to turn oyer and look at him, and
threatened to kill her if she fought. He then raped her and ed. Ms. T.
reported the crime, accepted physical help and psychological counseling,
and even volunteered for work at a rape-crisis hot line.

She showed full-blown PTSD. She was afraid to fall asleep and for a
month could only

sleep at friends' homes---even then, only in daylight. She had
nightmares in which she relived the rape. She had a pervasive fear of
being watched by the rapist whenever she

went outside. Her relationship with her boyfriend deteriorated and
ended. She felt numb to

love and sex. Eighteen months later, she still had sleep di culties and
nightmares. She felt that her career and her love life had been ruined
by the rape.6

When a woman is raped, her rst reaction is called the phase of
disorganization. She shows one of two emotional styles: expressive---
fear, anger, crying; or controlled---a calm exterior. The symptoms of
PTSD usually soon follow. As many as 95 percent of the victims may

show PTSD within two weeks.7 The victim relives the rape time and again,
in waking life and in dreams. Sleep disturbance, both trouble getting to
sleep and sudden awakening, sets in. Ms. T. woke up screaming out of
deep sleep for months after the rape (in which, you will recall, her
assailant woke her out of deep sleep). Rape victims startle easily.
Ms. T., a year and a half later, still startled when male strangers
talked to her. Normal sexual activity is hard to resume, and a total
phobia about sex sometimes develops. Most victims go through the phase
of disorganization and, in time, enter reorganization. They change their
phone numbers and

where they live. They read about rape, write about their experience, and
become active in helping other victims.

Four to six years later, about 75 percent of rape victims say they have
recovered. More than half of these say that recovery occurred in the rst
three months, the rest say within two years. Victims with the least fear
and the fewest ashbacks in the week following the rape recover more
quickly. The very distressed or benumbed victims have a poor outcome.
The degree of violence of the assault and how life-threatening it was
also predict long-term outcome. The worst news is that 25 percent of
rape victims say they have not recovered, even after four to six years.
Seventeen years later, 16 percent still

had PTSD.8 Severity of the objective circumstances is not that good a
predictor of PTSD in either rape or physical injury. In a study of
forty-eight victims of severe physical injuries, the severity of the
injury did not predict who got PTSD, and it did not predict the amount
of distress. Rather, how much psychological distress they felt after the
injury predicted PTSD.9 PTSD should, I believe, be de ned by the
reaction of the victim and how long it lingers, not by the objective
"extraordinariness" of the loss. A better criterion is "Do they believe
it ruined their lives?" Vulnerability As you read this chapter, your
reaction is probably like mine as I wrote it: "Please, God, not me."
Your risk of enduring some truly catastrophic event is very small. But
your risk of experiencing rape or a child dying or the death of your
spouse is larger. And even if you escape these, a few people succumb to
PTSD from lesser traumas like lawsuits, divorce, mugging, prison, and
job loss. There are expert opinions as to who among us is particularly
at risk. Psychologists comb disasters looking for the people who survive
them well, without signs of PTSD, and those who crumble most readily.
Here is what they have found:

A prior life history free of mental problems predicted who did best
after a catastrophic factory explosion in Norway.

Among 469 re ghters caught in a disastrous Australian brush re, those
most at risk for getting chronic PTSD scored high on neuroticism and had
a family history of mental disorders. These were better predictors than
how much physical trauma each one experienced.

After the Lebanon war, Israeli combat casualty veterans who were the
children of Holocaust survivors (called "secondgeneration casualties")
had higher rates of PTSD than control casualties. Among Israeli combat
veterans of two wars, those who came down with PTSD after the second war
had more combat-stress reactions during the rst war. What can be
concluded from this is that people who are psychologically most healthy
before trauma are at least risk for PTSD. This may be of some
consolation---if you are lucky enough to be one of those people. But if
the bad event is awful enough, previous good psychological health will
not protect you.10 A Hard-Hearted Caution What I have presented so far
is grim. Extreme trauma reliably produces devastating symptoms that last
for years. Lesser trauma produces devastation, but in a smaller
percentage of victims. Even minor trauma can produce devastation in some
people.

Some are skeptical about these "facts." Almost all PTSD victims have an
ax to grind, critics contend. The "victims" stand to gain from prolonged
symptoms. PTSD, interestingly, got its name and diagnostic status in the
wake of the Vietnam War. Veterans came home complaining of all sorts of
ills and ruin; not only the veterans who were physically wounded, but
even the veterans who participated in atrocities---on the delivery, not
the receiving, end. A

sample of men interviewed six to fteen years after violent combat in
Vietnam now led lives full of problems. They had more arrests and
convictions, more drinking problems, more drug addiction, and more
stress than veterans who did not see combat. (Before Vietnam, these two
groups did not di er.) Men who took part in atrocities

were now in particularly bad shape.11 All these veterans receive
compensation for combat-related disability, and PTSD is now a
reimbursable disability. It is in the victims' interests, the skeptics
say, to prolong their symptoms. Given our litigious society, this is not
only true of veterans. Hector and Jodi are involved in a lawsuit against
Norma Sue's parents. The survivors of the 1972 Bu alo Creek ood in the
mountains of Appalachia, from whom some of the most extensive data on
chronic PTSD were gathered, were suing the Pittston Company---whose dam
had burst and ooded their valley---for many millions as they narrated
their stories to social scientists.12

There is probably something to this skepticism. It is hard to estimate
the true duration and severity of symptoms among survivors who stand to
gain by displaying a severe, prolonged, and ruinous picture. But a
similar picture also emerges from victims who have little or nothing to
gain: Concentration-camp survivors and rape victims have little more
than sympathy to gain, and that hardly seems worth the price of living
the life of a PTSD victim. Therapy Can there be a therapy for people who
have had their lives ruined by "one phone call"? Therapists have tried
drugs. In the best controlled study, forty-six PTSD Vietnam veterans
were administered antidepressants or a placebo. Some of the symptoms of
PTSD relented: Nightmares and ashbacks decreased, but not into the
normal range. Numbing, a sense of distance from loved ones, and general
anxiety did not decrease. More than a quarter of the veterans refused to
take the drugs, and it is not known what

happened to the improvement of those who agreed to take the drugs when
they were withdrawn. In another study, antidepressant drugs produced
some relief, but at the end of treatment 64 percent of the drugged group
and 72 percent of the placebo group still had PTSD. Relapse is frequent.
Overall, antidepressants and anti-anxiety agents produce some symptom
relief for some patients, but drug researchers have concluded that drug
treatment alone is "never

su cient to relieve the su ering in PTSD."13 Several brands of
psychotherapy have been tried, one growing from James Pennebaker's
important work on silence. Pennebaker, a health psychology researcher,
has found that Holocaust victims and rape victims who do not talk about
their trauma to anyone afterward su er worse physical health than those
who do con de in somebody. Pennebaker persuaded sixty Holocaust
survivors to open up and describe what had happened to them. They
related to others scenes that they had relived in their heads thousands
of times over the previous forty years. They were throwing babies from
the second- oor window of the orphanage. I can

still see the pools of blood, the screams, and the thuds of their
bodies. I just stood there, afraid to move. The Nazi soldiers faced us
with their guns.

The Right Treatment POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER SUMMARY TABLE

The interviewers had nightmares after hearing these long-buried stories,
but the health of the disclosers improved. Similarly, Pennebaker
persuaded students to narrate their secret traumas--- sexual abuse by a
grandfather, the death of a dog, a suicide attempt ---in writing. The
immediate consequence was increased depression. But in the long run,
these students' number of physical illnesses decreased by 50 percent,
and their immune system strengthened.14

Prolonged exposure is the therapy that follows. In exposure treatment,
victims relive the trauma in their imagination. They describe it aloud,
in the present tense, to their therapist. This is repeated session after
session. In the best-executed study of exposure treatment, Edna Foa, a
pioneering behavior therapist, and her colleagues treated forty- ve rape
victims who had PTSD. They

compared this treatment to stress-inoculation training, which includes
deep muscle relaxation, thought stopping for countering ruminations, and
cognitive restructuring. Another group received supportive counseling,
and a fourth group received no treatment.

All groups, including the no-treatment control, improved. Immediately
after the ve weeks of treatment, stress-inoculation training relieved
PTSD symptoms most, but after another four

months, exposure had shown the most lasting e ects.15 Psychological
treatment, then, produces some relief. But one-third of all PTSD
patients refused treatment or dropped out, and the PTSD and depression
symptoms were still well above normal after treatment.16

But there is hopeful news from an ongoing study of Foa's. She is nding
that the combination of stress inoculation and prolonged exposure
produces very good results. After ve weeks of treatment (nine sessions),
80 percent of the victims were no longer showing PTSD, and symptoms were
markedly reduced. No signi cant relapse was found. These new ndings are
the best outcome yet for rape patients. If replicated, they should
encourage victims, who are usually quite reluctant to pursue treatment
because they want to avoid thinking about the rape, to seek out this
treatment promptly.17

Overall, the results for both drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapies
are encouraging and call for more research, but with the exception of
new cognitive-behavioral treatments for rape victims, these gains are
very modest: some symptom relief, but many dropouts, and almost no
cures. Of all the disorders we have reviewed, PTSD is the least
alleviated by therapy of any sort. I believe that the development of new
treatments to relieve PTSD is of the highest priority.

PART THREE

Changing Your Habits of Eating, Drinking, and Making Merry

11 Sex

OUR EROTIC LIFE has ve layers, each grown around the layer beneath it.
The core is sexual identity.1 Do you feel yourself to be a man or a
woman, a boy or a girl? Sexual identity is almost always consistent with
our genitals: If we have a penis, we feel ourselves male; if we have a
vagina, we feel female. But scientists know that sexual identity has a
separate existence of its own because of the rare and astonishing
dissociation of sexual identity and sexual organs. Some men (we call
them men because they have penises and 46XY chromosomes) are utterly
convinced that they are women trapped in men's bodies by some cosmic
mistake, and some women (with vaginas and 46XX chromosomes) are utterly
convinced that they are men trapped in women's bodies. Both are called
transsexuals, and they provide the key to understanding the deepest
layer of normal sexual identity. Laying just over our core sexual
identity is our basic sexual orientation. Do you love men or women? Are
you heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual? To answer this question, we
need not explore our sexual history but, instead, should look to our
fantasy life. If you have had erotic fantasies only about the opposite
sex, you are exclusively heterosexual. If you have had masturbatory
fantasies only about members of your own sex, you are exclusively
homosexual. If you have often masturbated to both fantasies, you are
bisexual. The third layer is sexual preference. What parts of the body
and what situations turn you on? What scenes do you masturbate about?
What is on your mind at the moment of orgasm? For most men, the

most erotic parts of the body are the female face, breasts, buttocks,
and legs. For most women, the preferred body parts are the male chest
and shoulders, arms, buttocks, and face. Caressing a member of the
opposite sex, seeing him or her naked, dancing, intimate conversation,
subdued lighting, and music are common arousing situations.

But these are not---by any means---universal. Many people crave
nonstandard objects and situations: Common ones are feet, hair, ears,
the belly button; silken and rubbery textures, panties, stockings,
jeans; peeping, ashing, receiving and in icting pain. Animals, children,
urine, and even an amputee's stumps are rarer and more bizarre.
Lust-murder and arranging one's own death are the most erotic acts for
the extremely rare person. If any of these are your turn-ons, forget the
bizarreness of the object for a moment, and ask yourself this important
question: "Does the object of my passion get in the way of an a
ectionate, erotic relationship between myself and another consenting
human being?" When the panties or the pain become more important than
your partner, you have crossed a line. The fourth layer, the one next to
the surface, is our sex role. Do you do what most men do or what most
women do? Most people who feel they are male adopt male sex roles, and
most females adopt female roles. But we know of the separate existence
of sex roles by the not-uncommon dissociations of identity and role. For
example, some women become truck drivers---dominant, aggressive, and
tough. Some men become nurses---caring, gentle, and compassionate. The
term sex role makes role sound arbitrary, a mere costume that can be
shed at will and easily replaced with one more suitable to the moment.
In this view, sex roles are creations of fashion: The macho male and
bimbo female stereotypes are just accidents of the way Americans now
happen to be raised. And as accidents of socialization, they can be
changed simply by altering the way we raise our children or by some
other act of will. We shall see if this is really so or if this is just
ideological fantasy.

The surface layer is sexual performance, how adequately you perform when
you are with a suitable person in a suitable erotic setting. Normal
performance consists of arousal and orgasm. Do you have problems in
either of these areas? Frigidity and impotence (what pejorative words!)
are common problems, as are premature ejaculation for men and absence of
orgasm for women.

I have ordered your erotic life into ve layers for one basic
purpose---to answer the questions of what changes and how easily it
changes. Lack of change, I believe, corresponds to depth; the deeper the
layer, the harder it is to change. (This is a preview of the global
theory I will put forward in chapter 15.) My theory of sex is that
transsexuality is a problem at the identity level and simply will not
change; sexual orientation, the next deepest layer, very strongly
resists change; sexual preference, once acquired, is strong, but some
change can be wrought; sex role can change quite a bit, but change is by
no means as easy as feminist ideologues contend, nor as di cult as
antifeminists would like; correcting sexual performance is painful, but
because performance problems are at the surface layer, you should be
very hopeful that they will change. Layer I: Sexual Identity and
Transsexuality: What Are You? Transsexuals are biologically normal. An
average transsexual man has a penis in good working order, 46XY
chromosomes, hair on his face and body, lots of testosterone, and a deep
voice. An average transsexual woman has a vagina, working ovaries, 46XX
chromosomes, breasts, and all the rest of the female physical features.
Transsexuals are physically indistinguishable from average men or women.
Yet psychologically, they are as abnormal as anyone can be. By the three
major criteria of abnormality---irrationality, su ering, and
maladaptiveness---transsexuals top the chart. They
believe---irrationally, it seems---that they are trapped in the body of
the wrong sex. They are miserable: depressed, suicidal, and
selfmutilating---some try to cut o their sex organs. They almost never
marry or reproduce.

Transsexuals have had their "wrong sex" belief for as long as they can
remember. And they are doomed to have it for the rest of their lives.
Every kind of psychotherapy has been tried on transsexuals. So rare is
any success that the single clear case in the archives of successful
change calibrates just how intractable this problem is.2 John was born
in 1952 and always thought of himself as a girl. He was the baby of the

family, frail and delicate beside his tomboy older sister. When he was
four, he started to

wear makeup and was delighted when his sister started school because she
got lots of new

clothes for him to dress up in. \[Transsexuals always cross-dress. But
they are transvestites only by a technicality. A transvestite male wears
women's clothes to get turned on sexually; a transsexual male wears them
because he believes he is a woman.\]

John envied his mother and sister, and loathed his maleness. He went to
school, but did

badly. Isolated and lonely, he occupied himself with cooking and
housekeeping. As a

teenager, he read about transsexualism and about the important
discoveries being made at

the Johns Hopkins Medical School. He took estrogen and felt tranquil and
calm for the

rst time in his life. He was also delighted that he no longer got
erections. He took a job at

a fried-chicken stand and started to save up for sex-change surgery. It
was at this time that he was seen by a psychiatric team and formally
diagnosed as a transsexual.

He took the name "Judy" and began to live as a woman, preparing for
surgery. He

passed well as a woman, and with hormone treatment wore bikinis to the
beach. Just as surgery was to begin, Judy disappeared.

Several months later, Judy reappeared at the chicken stand. But not as
Judy---as John.

When he subsequently presented himself to the psychiatric team, he wore
a three-piece suit and short hair, had clipped enthusiastically:

ngernails, and strutted manfully. He related his story

On his way to surgery, he kept a promise to the stand owner to check in
with a local

physician who was a member of a fundamentalist religion (John was a
lapsed Baptist with no religious interest). The physician told John that
he could make it as a woman, but that his real problem was possession by
evil spirits. The physician performed a three-hour exorcism with
prayers, exhortations, incantations, and the laying-on of hands. John

fainted several times, but when it was over, the physician said he had
removed twenty-two evil spirits, and John was free of the delusion of
being a woman for the rst time in his

life. He was followed closely for the next two and a half years by the
psychiatric team and

was clearly male---psychologically as well as physically. He did well in
his job, was promoted, and was looking forward to marrying---a woman.

Sex change. Psychotherapy changes sexual identity rarely, if ever.3 The
only thing that reliably works is to change the body to conform to the
unshakable sexual identity. This is why sex-change operations were
developed. Once a headline-making novelty, these operations are now
routine. Tens of thousands have been done. Once the patient convinces
the diagnosticians that his or her transsexual identity is unshakable,
the long process of changing the body to conform begins. In the more
common male-to-female (MF) case, the person rst lives for a few months
in the female role, changing his name, and dressing and acting like a
woman. Hormonal treatment is begun, and breasts grow, the voice changes,
and facial hair disappears. Surgery itself is then undertaken. The
testicles are removed and the penis is cut o ---though its skin is
preserved to line the new vagina, making pleasurable intercourse and
even orgasm possible. In the female-to-male (FM) transformations,
hormone treatment and multiple surgery (breast removal, ovary removal,
and, ultimately, the construction of a penis) are done over several
years. The penis cannot naturally become erect, however, and prosthetic
devices must be used for intercourse.

As radical as surgery is, long-term follow-up of hundreds of patients
suggests that while far from ideal, it is the treatment of choice. Most
patients are much happier and adapt fairly well to their new lives,
living comfortably in their new bodies, dating, having intercourse, and
marrying. Any children, of course, are adopted, since no surgery can
transplant viable internal sex organs. Those patients who do poorly
psychologically are the ones who have had the poorest surgical results.4

The origin of sexual identity. Of the entire nosology, transsexualism is
the deepest disorder. I know of no other psychological problem so
intractable. We do not know how to

change the psyche to conform to the body, so as a last resort we change
the body to conform to the psyche. The depth of this disorder re ects
the fact that sexual identity is the core layer of sexuality, and
perhaps the very core of all of human personality. Why is sexual
identity so deep? I want to go well beyond the data to present a theory
of the origin of sexual identity. My speculation is that most of sexual
identity---both normal and transsexual---comes from an unknown hormonal
process in the second to fourth months of pregnancy. I start with a
simpli ed version of how a fetus becomes male or female. The embryo has
both potentials. Very early, both sets of internal organs---male and
female---are present. The fetus would always go on to become female but
for the next, crucial step: Two masculinizing hormones are secreted from
the male fetus's testes. The female internal organs then wither, the
male internal organs grow, and the external male organs develop. In the
absence of the masculinizing hormones at this stage, the male internal
organs wither, and female internal and external organs develop. All this
happens roughly at the end of the rst trimester.5

I want to speculate that there is something else happening at this
stage: The masculinizing hormones have a psychological e ect. They
produce male sexual identity (or, in their absence, female sexual
identity). They also guide the development of the corresponding sexual
organs, but this is a separate process. In this theory, sexual identity
is present in the fetus. There is no way of asking a fetus if he feels
like a male or a female, however, so this is not an easy theory to test.
But there are four startling "experiments of nature" in which sexual
identity is dissociated from sexual organs ---all of which support my
thesis. You already know about two of them: MF transsexuals and FM
transsexuals. In this theory, some as-yet-unknown disruption of the
sexual-identity phase, but not the organ-development phase, takes place.
For the MF transsexual, the psychological phase of masculinization does
not occur, but the other phase---the

masculinization of the sexual organs---goes normally. For the FM
transsexual, the psychological phase goes awry, and masculinization
occurs; the other phase---feminization of the sexual organs---goes
normally, and herein may lie the tragedy.

There are two mirror-image conditions that show remarkable parallels to
the two transsexualisms and that are much better understood---the
adrenogenital syndrome (AGS) and the androgeninsensitivity syndrome
(AIS). They may be the key to understanding transsexualism.

The adrenogenital syndrome has a profound e ect on the 46XX fetus (a
chromosomally normal female): It bathes her in masculinizing hormones.
As a result, she is born with the internal organs of a female (since
they were di erentiated before the bath), but she is also born with what
seems to be a penis and scrotum. The penis and scrotum look convincing,
but they are actually an enormously enlarged and penile-shaped (foreskin
and all) clitoris. The scrotum contains no testicles. Many AGSs are
declared boys and raised as boys. Since the hormonal bath continues,
their voice deepens, and face and body hair sprout at puberty. These
AGSs grow up as normal men. They feel like they are male, they pursue
women romantically, they have intercourse as men, and they become good
husbands and fathers (by adoption or arti cial insemination). There is a
complete absence of bisexual fantasy or action. In contrast, when an AGS
is surgically feminized and then reared as a girl, as sometimes happens,
problems often ensue: She may feel and act like a man; bisexual fantasy
and action are common.6

In my theory, AGSs reared as males are " rst cousins" of FM
transsexuals. Both are 46XX fetuses who are masculinized
psychologically. But the transsexual misses the next phase---the
masculinization of her external organs. She is therefore born
psychologically male but with a vagina, and so is declared and raised as
a girl. Her life is a constant misery thereafter. It gets even worse
after puberty, because unlike her AGS cousin, she sprouts breasts and
has periods. Her AGS cousin is psychologically male, but was fortunate
enough also to be born with the appearance of a penis

and scrotum and so is declared a boy. His life works out because what
everyone thinks he is (by virtue of the appearance of a penis at birth
and, later, by his deep voice and facial hair) is the same as he thinks
he is---a man. The tragic di erence between an AGS reared as a male and
an FM transsexual is that only one phase---psychological masculinization
as a fetus---goes awry for the transsexual. All the other phases go
correctly, locked unfortunately to the chromosomal sex and not to sexual
identity. For the AGS, all phases---fortunately---go awry, and so
everything corresponds not to her chromosomal sex, but to his sexual
identity.

The other disorder is AIS, the androgen-insensitivity syndrome. AISs are
chromosomally male: 46XY. They are insensitive to masculinizing
hormones, however. So AISs are born with male internal organs (which di
erentiate before the ine ective masculinizing bath) and with a vagina,
though the vagina is actually a dead end. All AISs are declared girls
and raised as girls. They all grow up feeling female, pursue men, and
have intercourse as women. In my theory, they don't get masculinized
psychologically, and, fortunately, their external organs don't look
masculine. Like AGSs, they have an added piece of good fortune: When
puberty arrives, they grow breasts under the in uence of the normal male
amount of estrogen secreted by the testes (which they have deep inside),
and so they look like women.7

AISs are the rst cousins of MF transsexuals. Both are 46XY fetuses with
male internal organs who are feminized psychologically at the end of the
rst trimester. But the transsexual has a normal next phase---the
external organs get masculinized. Therefore, though he is
psychologically female, he is born with a working penis and so is
declared and raised as a boy. He is miserable ever after---or until he
loses his penis surgically. His AIS cousin is psychologically female,
and was fortunate enough to be born with the appearance of a vagina and
so is declared a girl. Her life works out because what everyone thinks
she is (by virtue of her vagina and, later, her breasts) is the same as
she thinks she is---a woman.

Again, the tragic di erence between an AIS female and an MF transsexual
is that only one phase---psychological feminization--- goes awry for the
transsexual. All the other phases proceed correctly, locked to the
chromosomal sex and not to sexual identity. For the AIS, all phases go
awry and wind up corresponding not to his chromosomal sex but to her
sexual identity.

My theory speculates that sexual identity---both normal and
abnormal---is so deep because it has its origin in a fundamental
hormonal process that occurs around the end of the rst trimester of
fetal development. Fetal hormones are not the only in uence on sexual
identity. Rearing, pubertal hormones, sex organs, and being mocked also
play a role. But at most, these later in uences can reinforce---or
disturb---the core identity with which we are stuck from well before the
moment of our birth. Layer II: Sexual Orientation: Do You Love Men or
Women? Sexologists use the term object choice to denote how we come to
love what we love. Gay activist groups, on the other hand, say we have
no choice at all. I think the truth is in between, although much closer
to the gay activists than to the sexologists. I therefore call this
layer sexual orientation rather than sexual object choice. The basic
sexual orientations are homosexual and heterosexual.8 When does a person
become heterosexual or homosexual? How does it happen? Once sexually
active, can he or she change?

Exclusive homosexuality. We must distinguish between exclusive
homosexuals on the one hand and bisexuals (optional homosexuals) on the
other. Most men who have sex with other men are bisexuals. About 15
percent of American men report that they have had orgasms with members
of both sexes, but the gure may now be lower in the wake of AIDS. A
large minority of men who are homosexual, in contrast to bisexuals, are
exclusively homosexual. They number between 1 and 5 percent of all men.
As far back as they can remember, they have been erotically interested
only in

males. They have sexual fantasies only about males. They fall in love
only with males. When they masturbate or have wet dreams, the objects
are always males. The orientation of the exclusive homosexual---and that
of the exclusive heterosexual---are rmly made and deep. Sexual
orientation may even have its origin in the anatomy of the brain. In a
highly publicized and technically well done study, brain researcher
Simon Levay looked at the brains of newly dead homosexual men,
heterosexual men, and heterosexual women. Most had died of AIDS. He
focused his autopsies on one small area, the middle of the anterior
hypothalamus, which is implicated in male sexual behavior and where men
have more tissue than do women. He found a remarkably large di erence in
tissue: Heterosexual men have twice as much as homosexual men, who have
about the same small amount of tissue as women. This is fascinating
because this is just the area that controls male sexual behavior in
rats; this area develops when the brains of male rats are hormonally
masculinized before birth.9

So it is possible to speculate that exclusive homosexuality in males is
an attenuated form of MF transsexuality, which is in turn an attenuated
form of AIS. In this theory, the sexual organs, sexual identity, and
sexual orientation for the 46XY male may each have its own separate
masculinizer, and so three separate levels of hormonal

failure can occur.10 It might be three di erent hormones, or it might be
a matter of how much hormone. So, for example, with complete hormonal
failure, no masculinization occurs: The baby is a chromosomal male with
external female organs, female identity, and whose sexual orientation
will be toward men---AIS. With grossly insu cient masculinizing hormone,
the baby is a chromosomal male, with male organs, but whose sexual
orientation will be toward men and whose sexual identity will be female
as well---an MF transsexual. With somewhat insu cient hormone, a
chromosomal male results, with male organs and male identity but whose
sexual orientation will be toward men---an exclusively homosexual male.

In this speculation, the subsequent hormonal events (as yet
undiscovered) occur commonly during gestation: A 46XY (normal) male is
insu ciently masculinized. He is masculinized enough, however, to have a
male identity and to have male external organs. The main e ect is to
prevent the growth of the medial anterior hypothalamus and so to change
just one aspect of erotic life: Sexual orientation is prevented from
ever being toward women.

It is important to note that identical twins are more concordant for
homosexuality than fraternal male twins, and that male fraternal twins
are more concordant than nontwin brothers: Out of fty-six pairs of
identical twins in which one was established as homosexual, 52 percent
turned out both to be homosexual, as opposed to 22 percent of male
fraternal twins. Only 9 percent of nontwin brothers were concordant for
homosexuality. The di erence between the identical twins and the
fraternal twins means that there is a genetic component to
homosexuality. But nontwin brothers and male fraternal twins share
exactly the same percentage (50 percent) of genes. That male fraternal
twins, who share the uterine world, are more concordant than nontwin
brothers points to fetal hormones as an additional cause. What they all
might be concordant for, in any case, is a withered medial anterior
hypothalamus.11

It is tempting to put forward the same theory for female homosexuality,
viewing it as slight masculinization of a 46XX female fetus. I will
resist the temptation for now. Too little research has been done on
lesbians to know. It is possible, but still uncertain, that lesbianism
is the mirror image of male homosexuality. There is evidence for a
sizable genetic contribution to lesbianism: Out of a sample of more than
one hundred female twins, one of whom was lesbian, the second twin was
lesbian in 51 percent of the identical twins, but only in 10 percent of
the fraternal twins. There is no evidence as yet, however, that the
anterior hypothalamus is larger in lesbians than in straight women. No
one has looked because lesbians, fortunately, are not dying in great
numbers from AIDS. Even the rat evidence is clearer for male than for
female rats.

Finally, there are no outcome studies of change of sexual orientation in
therapy with lesbians.12 Homosexuality and therapy. Can exclusive male
homosexuality change? Many homosexuals are happy with their sexuality
and don't want to change. In contrast, a man who is unhappy with his
homosexuality is called an ego-dystonic homosexual, and he typically
comes to therapy depressed, desperately wanting to change his sexual
orientation. He wants to have children, he can't bear the stigma of
being "queer," and he despises the promiscuity he perceives in the
single, homosexual world. Twenty- ve years ago, behavior therapists gave
this problem their best e ort, ignoring the clinical lore declaring that
psychotherapy has no e ect on homosexuality. They tried using sexually
arousing pictures of naked men ashed on a screen followed by a long,
painful electric shock. When the shock went o , the picture of an
attractive woman appeared. The idea was to make sex with men aversive
and sex with women more attractive by pairing women with relief.
"Hopelessly naive," you're probably thinking. Actually, it worked
surprisingly well. Around 50 percent of men so treated lost interest in
men and began having sex with women. A great burst of enthusiasm about
changing homosexuality swept over the therapeutic community. On closer
inspection, the ndings turned out to be awed---but revealingly so. When
a man was bisexual--- sometimes had sexual fantasies about
women---therapy usually worked. But when a man was exclusively
homosexual, therapy usually failed.13

Exclusive homosexuality and exclusive heterosexuality are very deep.
Lack of change in therapy, lifelong fantasies of one sex only, anterior
hypothalamus withered, high concordance of identical twins, and fetal
development all point to an in exible process. Homosexuality is not
quite as deep and unchangeable as transsexuality, however. MF
transsexuals almost never marry

women and have natural children, whereas homosexual men sometimes marry
and have children. They manage this feat by a trick of fantasy. During
sex with their wives, they manage to stay aroused and climax by having
fantasies about homosexual sex (just as heterosexual men restricted to
homosexual release in prison do). So some measure of exibility is
available to exclusively homosexual men---they can choose whom they
perform with sexually, but they cannot choose whom they want to perform
with. Layer III: Sexual Preference: Breasts, Buttocks, and Bisexuals Do
you remember the rst time you saw an oyster, glistening slimily on half
its shell, and somebody suggested that you eat it? "What, put that
repulsive thing in my mouth?" you probably thought, and shriveled
inwardly. Yet once you were cajoled, pressured, or shamed into trying
one, you discovered that oysters taste good. Eating oysters, like many
forms of human activity, has on its face a disgusting aspect that
prevents most people from indulging too casually---until social
pressure, curiosity, or sheer bravado get them to try it out. Once
tried, however, all the good things about eating oysters---its
reinforcers---become apparent, and you may well become an oyster addict.
This important phenomenon, inhibitory wrapping, is not con ned to human
practices. There are two kinds of rats: mouse-killers and nonkillers.
When natural mouse-killers---about half of all rats---see a mouse for
the rst time, they jump on it and kill it. The other half--- the
nonkillers---either pay no attention to the mouse or even run away. But
an experimenter can induce a reluctant rat to kill, by starving the rat
and then parading a mouse in front of him. When this happens, a
nonkiller will, out of desperation, kill. Once a nonkiller has killed
for the rst time, once he loses his mouse-killing virginity, he becomes
a habitual killer. Thereafter, whenever he sees a mouse, hungry or not,
he will jump on it and kill it.14

Now remember when you were a child and you rst found out about sexual
intercourse or, later, about oral sex. "What a disgusting thing to do,"
you probably thought. "My mother and father don't do that. I know I
never will." But as the hormones of adolescence began to seep through
your body, or as peer pressure built, or out of bravado or curiosity or
rebellion, you found yourself prodded into such acts. You discovered, in
doing them, all the good things about them. You soon sought them out and
even began to crave them. Most human sexual preferences are like this: a
strong inhibitory wrapping around a delicious core. So too with what we
eat, with substance abuse, and---I sadly suspect---with violence.

The oyster-eating and mouse-killing stories warn us that there once
might have lurked inside us the potential to become erotically attached
to any of a large variety of things. That we are breast men, or willing
spankees, or women turned on by cheek-to-cheek dancing and sympathetic
listening is, while not wholly an accident, a product of what we
happened to sample when we were young. I suspect that if we had sampled
peeping or rubber clothes, for example, we might have come to crave
these instead. There are two morals to the oyster tale. The rst comes
from knowing that the potential for arousal by almost anything in the
whole gamut of erotic objects lies in each of us: This moral is sexual
tolerance. The second moral is caution: The early sexual decisions we
make---or are cajoled, seduced, pressured, or forced into making ---are
matters of real moment for us; more moment, for example, than whom we
marry or where we go to college. For once the inhibitory wrapping is
torn open, we want the sweet core again and again. What we start doing
sexually as teenagers will, by and large, be what we want for the rest
of our lives. Yet we make these decisions almost accidentally. As a
young person, you should be armed to answer the question "Why not?" with
"Do I really want to live my whole life this way?"

Sexual orientation---heterosexual or homosexual---is a close neighbor of
sexual identity in its depth and in exibility, and it is deeper than
sexual preference. Once orientation is dictated, the

sexual preferences are elaborated around it: breasts or bottoms,
peeping, lace panties, calves or feet, rubber textures, the missionary
position or sixty-nine, sadism, blond hair, bisexuality, spanking, or
high-heeled shoes. These preferences, like mouse-killing, are not, once
acquired, easily shelved. Unlike exclusive heterosexuality or
homosexuality, they surely do not arise in the womb (the fetus may
"know" men from women, but he doesn't know from spiked heels). Rather,
our sexual preferences have their beginnings in late childhood as the
rst hormones of puberty awaken the dormant brain structures that were
laid down in the womb.

At this time, play begins to lose its innocence and becomes tinged with
sex. Dreams and fantasies do, too. In a survey of third-graders, I found
that only about 5 percent could recall having a "love" dream (e.g.,
dreaming that they are cuddling a boy or girl their own age), though
they all recalled monster dreams. On the other hand, the vast majority
of sixth-grade children had love dreams, and the monster dreams were on
the wane. Most sexologists believe that the intense dreams and fantasy
and play at this age are just coincidental with sexual development, or
that they simply re ect what the facts of underlying sexuality are. I
have a di erent view: I believe that these events are the crucible out
of which our sexual preferences are forged. I believe that the content
of dreams, play, and fantasy has a causal role in creating our sexual
preferences. Leopold was eight when his half sister taught him to
masturbate while they were playing

"doctor." As he came, she accidentally touched his penis with her
slipper. Within a year, he began masturbating regularly. His
masturbatory fantasies revolved around girls' feet

and shoes. He got in trouble at school for caressing his teacher's
shoes. He eventually married, but was unable to have intercourse unless
he was caressing his wife's feet or fantasizing about shoes. Leopold
took a job as a shoe salesman in an expensive boutique, and spent his
days in a constant state of arousal as he assisted female customers with
their footwear.

Sammy was ten when he had his rst wet dream. In this
never-to-be-forgotten event, his

playmate Susan had taken o

her bathing-suit bottom and let him rub his penis between

her buttocks. It felt great and he came. He woke up gooey, confused, and
shocked. Up

until that dream he had not the slightest intimation that his penis was
for anything except

peeing. When he began to masturbate three years later, he found that his
fantasies focused on girl's bottoms, particularly as climax neared. As a
thirty- ve-year-old, he ejaculates only during intercourse from behind.
Everything else is foreplay.

These two stories are typical of the histories men give when asked how
they come by their sexual preferences. The stories t the prepared
conditioning theory we used to explain why phobias are selective and so
resistant to change. Like phobias, the objects of sexual preference are
selective. Panties, feet, hair, breasts, velvet, spanking, and about a
dozen other objects are the common ones. Phrases like "whatever turns
you on" and "polymorphous perversity" miss the mark. Almost all objects
of male sexual preference are somehow related to female body parts and
to intercourse. Colors, sounds, owers, and food are never fetishes.
Occasionally, as with phobias, a truly bizarre proclivity sneaks in:
dead bodies or feces, for example. But these are usually the fetishes of
psychotic people. Also like phobias, the sexual preferences, once
acquired, endure. The prepared conditioning view holds that there is a
"short list" of evolutionarily signi cant stimuli that are potential
sexual objects for men. Once there happens to be a pairing of one of
these conditional stimuli (feet for Leopold, buttocks for Sammy) with a
sexual unconditional stimulus (masturbation for Leopold, wet dream for
Sammy), conditioning begins. Late-childhood sex play and wet dreams
provide ample opportunity for pairing of the prepared objects with
sexual excitement. Once this happens, the objects themselves become
imbued with sexual excitement. Masturbation is the answer to why your
sexual preferences continue for a lifetime once they start. After these
objects have become arousing, you start to masturbate about them.
Masturbation in men is always accompanied by fantasy. You are again in
the presence of the conditional stimulus, and you have an orgasm. This
is yet another conditioning trial---and it happens a dozen times a week
in the lives of most adolescent males. That's a lot of practice.

Usually, intercourse for men is either accompanied by variations on the
core fantasy, or it actually enacts the fantasy. That's a lot more
practice. In my view, evolution has selected masturbation and its
concomitant, fantasy, for the purpose of investing men, lastingly, in
the erotic practices of their tribe, their race, and their culture.
Females and fetishes. Evidence suggests that women acquire sexual
preferences by a subtler process. The major di erence between the sexes
is that almost all men are "fetishists." When the preference is frowned
upon, intrusive, illegal, or hurts others, we label it a "fetish." When
the preference is socially acceptable, practiced between consenting
adults, and legal, it has no name ("behind closed doors"?). But the
process is just the same. Both fetishists and "normal" men harbor highly
speci c erotic images. These images are the core of their masturbatory
fantasies and of their actual sexual pursuits. Many of the preferences
are acceptable, and so, with reasonable impulse control, men who are
turned on by large breasts or sleek buttocks or being spanked or ripping
lace panties or wearing rubber underthings don't get into trouble. Those
men whose preferences are socially unacceptable, immoral, illegal, or
injurious (or are otherwise acceptable but are pursued by men with
little impulse control) get labeled with the nasty name "fetishist." In
my view, these men have the same process of sexual preference as normal
men, but they di er in the peculiarity or unacceptability or hurtfulness
of their preferences, or in their inability to delay grati cation, or in
getting caught. Nearly two-thirds of a random sample of rural Oregon
college men admitted (under conditions of anonymity) to sexual
misconduct: sex with children, forced sex with women, peeping, or
frottage (rubbing up against a stranger in a crowd). Even more of

them wanted to commit improper acts.15 These gures testify to the social
de nition of "fetish" and to the stereotyped, concrete nature of male
sexual preferences. It is not just that almost all men are fetishists
that distinguishes male preferences from female ones. Rather, it is that
almost no

women are fetishists. Clinical lore has it that absolutely no women

are fetishists.16 I think this is an overstatement. There are rare
reports of fetishism in women in the journals, and at least one
systematic exploration.17 In this study, a group of enterprising
academics advertised in an S-M magazine, soliciting sadists and
masochists. There were 182 responses, 25 percent of them from
women---excluding professional dominatrixes. The respondents took a sex
questionnaire. Some important average di erences emerged between the men
and women of the "velvet underground." The men said they acquired their
preference when they were boys; the women said their preference took
hold when they were adults. The women said they were introduced to S-M
by another person, but the men said it was a natural, spontaneous
interest from childhood. The men were heterosexual, while the women
tended to be bisexual or homosexual (androgenized women?).

I believe that men and women are vastly di erent in their erotic
preferences and maybe even in the process of getting their preferences.
Men easily---perhaps universally---acquire very strong arousal to speci
c, concrete objects. It is the look, the feel, and the smell of these
objects that turns men on. Many a man centers his whole life on pursuing
them. The objects of male preference are at a lower level than a whole
person (Cher's legs are more of a turn-on than Cher). This happens
rarely---perhaps never---to women. Women, rather, acquire erotic
preferences for subtler scenarios, involving plot lines, intimacy, and
character. The essence is that female sex objects are not objects at
all; they are at the level of the whole person, and they focus on
personal relationships. I don't know why this is so. The proposed
theories are little short of silly. One claims that men know when they
are aroused (because the hard penis protrudes), and so they can easily
nd out that something has turned them on. Women, in contrast, have no
external signal to tell them they are aroused, and so they cannot easily
be conditioned. This theory explains neither why the objects that come
to arouse men are so selective nor why women select very di erent, more
social situations.

Another theory---unsatisfying but not silly---says that women, having to
bear and raise children, must, if they wish to pass on their genes, be
very selective as to the character and prospects of men (with regard to
fathering). Muscular forearms, swarthy complexion, shapely calves---in
short, appearance---are very poor predictors of successful fathering and
sheltering. Sympathetic conversation, wealth, success, social rank
(remember Henry Kissinger's aphorism: "Power is the world's greatest
aphrodisiac"), love songs, vows, and poetry about eternal devotion augur
better that the man will help parent the children and not abandon them
when the woman's childbearing is over. Women who adopt this reproductive
strategy are more likely to pass on their genes than women who get
aroused by super cial appearance. Men, so this theory continues, merely
want to spread their sperm around as far as it will go, and being guided
by a pretty face, wide hips, nubility, and large breasts ensures the
most o spring.18 This explains the facts, but provides no mechanism.
Changing sexual preference. In the natural course of life, the sexual
preferences of adolescence abide, though new ones can be added.
Bisexuals, for example, often start out having heterosexual experience
only. In their twenties or thirties, however, they begin to act on their
secret fantasies, happen into a homosexual encounter, and become
actively bisexual. Married couples are introduced to group sex by other
"swingers" and sometimes acquire a taste for it. The old preferences,
however, which rarely die of their own accord, can---with explicit
therapy---sometimes be altered. There have been extensive studies on the
power of therapy to change sexual preference, but their subjects are
mostly atypical men: sex o enders. An exhibitionist ( asher) or a
pedophile (child molester) may be arrested and then have therapy
mandated in addition to, or instead of, jail. Similarly, men who are
overcome with guilt and shame or who want to undo their preferences to
avoid jail seek out such therapy. In all these cases, there is strong
external pressure to change.

The treatment of ashers is typical, and all of the following are used
extensively, alone or in combination: electric shock or chemical
nauseants: The patient reads aloud, in the rst person, an exciting
sequence of vignettes about ashing. When he gets to the
climax---exposing his erect penis ---painful shock, or smells that are
so bad they produce retching, are delivered. As the climactic act
becomes aversive, the aversive stimulus is now delivered earlier and
earlier in the sequence. orgasmic reconditioning: The man masturbates,
narrating his fantasies aloud. As he comes, he substitutes a more
acceptable scene for the ashing fantasy. masturbatory satiation: He
continues to masturbate for half an hour after ejaculation---a deadly
and humiliating task---while rehearsing every variation of ashing aloud.

These are mildly e ective. In one study with a six-year follow-up, only
40 percent of treated men continue to ash, whereas 60 percent of
untreated men reo end. More recently, therapists have started to treat
this problem cognitively. For example, the patient carries cards with
exciting vignettes about ashing. On the back of each card is a horrible
consequence of ashing and getting caught. Whenever the asher is tempted,
he reads a sequence, turns the card over, and then ruminates on the
awful consequences. This may drop

reo ending to about 25 percent.19 Patients report changes both in their
overt behavior and in their desire to ash. I believe, however, that what
they want is largely unchanged. But what they do is substantially
changed. It is very much in the interest of the o ender to tell the
therapist, the judge, his probation o cer, and the world that he no
longer wants to ash, and so his reports are not completely believable.
But the objective record documents that he actually ashes less. I
suspect the o ender learns in therapy to restrain himself from acting on
his wants. While not a cure, this is all to the good. It also suggests
that some change

---perhaps not in desire but in action---can occur in sexual
preferences.

There is a substantially more e ective way to curtail sex o enders:
castration. It is used in Europe for very serious o enses--- brutal rape
and child molesting. Castration is done surgically--- cutting o the
testicles---or with drugs that neutralize the hormone produced by the
testicles. In four studies of more than two thousand o enders followed
for many years, the reo ense rate drops from around 70 percent to around
3 percent. Drug castration, which is reversible, works as well as
surgical castration.20 In America, castration is called "cruel and
unusual punishment" and is not done. When I consider all the wasted
years in prison, the high likelihood of repeating the o ense, and the
special hell that other prisoners reserve for child molesters,
castration seems less cruel to me than the "usual" punishment. Layer IV:
Sex Role: Social Behavior, Personality, and Ability Are men di erent
from women? Are boys di erent from girls? Can sex di erences be
narrowed?

These are loaded questions, fraught with political overtones. To the
feminist, they evoke impatience. They are just scienti c code for
attempts to claim that women are inferior and to justify continued male
oppression. To the sexist, also, they evoke impatience---for the
opposite reason: They are part of the long history of left-leaning
scientists' manipulating evidence to bolster their pet social theories
---touting whatever congenial evidence they can muster, for example,
against capital punishment, for abortion on demand, against IQ testing,
or for school busing, while ignoring uncongenial evidence. In this
incarnation they are attempts to justify narrowing the huge di erences
between men and women that do exist and should exist, because these di
erences are at the very foundation of the social order.

Whatever these questions are politically, substantively they are
questions about sex role. There are a large number of sex di erences:
anatomy, health, brain makeup, and life span, to name a few. But only
three kinds of di erences are directly relevant to sex role: the social
di erences, the personality di erences, and the ability di erences. The
existence or nonexistence of some of these alleged di erences is too
shrouded by con icting evidence for me to foist o on you my own opinion.
Other di erences, however, are clear---based on hundreds of studies and
thousands of subjects. So I will present those that are clear and about
which most workers, male and female, in these elds agree---however
uncongenial to someone's politics the di erences might be. There is, in
fact, surprising consensus about sex di erences. One point of agreement
is that there are huge sex-role di erences between very young boys and
girls:

By age two, boys want to play with trucks and girls want to play with
dolls.

By age three, children know the sex stereotypes for dress, toys, jobs,
games, tools, and interests. By age three, children want to play with
peers of their own sex.

By age four, most girls want to be teachers, nurses, secretaries, and
mothers; most boys want to have "masculine" jobs.21 In most cultures,
young children categorize the world according to sex and organize their
lives around the categories. No one has to teach them sex-role
stereotypes: They invent them spontaneously. This is hardly a surprise,
and the pat explanation is that they learn sex roles from their parents.
After all, parents behave di erently with daughters than with sons. For
example, parents decorate the rooms of girls in pink and put dolls in
their cribs. Boys get blue cribs and toy guns. What is surprising is
that kids reared androgynously retain their stereotypes as strongly as
kids not so reared. Young kids'

preferences bear no relationship to their parents' attitudes or to their
parents' education, class, employment, or sexual politics. Kids' play is
strongly sex-stereotyped, regardless of their parents' attitudes or
their parents' own sex-role behavior. It is not that boys are simply
indi erent to their parents' lessons about androgyny (from the Greek for
"both male and female"). Boys don't just ignore their parents' telling
them it's okay to play with dolls; they actively resist. Having a
teacher try to persuade a child to give up a "sex-appropriate" toy
produces resistance, anxiety, and backlash, particularly among boys.
(Remember how devastating the label "sissy" or, worse, "queer" was?)
Watching videotapes of other kids playing joyfully with
"sex-inappropriate" toys doesn't work. Intensive home programs of
androgynous toys, songs, and books with mother as the teacher produce no
changes. Extensive classroom intervention produces no movement toward
androgyny---outside the classroom.22

These ndings should be particularly disturbing to those of you who
staunchly hold that social pressure creates sex roles in the rst place.
If social pressure creates them, intense social pressure by committed
parents and teachers should diminish them. But it doesn't.

Since social pressure does not play a measurable role in creating sex
roles, the determinant might just be fetal hormones, at least in part.
There are two lines of evidence: In one study, conducted in the 1970s,
seventy-four mothers had taken prescription drugs during their
pregnancies to prevent miscarriage. These drugs had the common property
of disrupting the masculinizing hormone androgen. The games their o
spring liked to play were compared to those preferred by matched
controls when the children were ten years old. The boys' games were less
masculine and the girls' more feminine. Similarly, there is a disease
(congenital adrenal hyperplasia \[CAH\]) that bathes girls with extra
androgen as fetuses. As young children, these girls like boys' toys and
rough-and-tumble play, and they are more tomboyish than matched
controls. These ndings are tantalizing. They suggest that one source of
boys'

wanting to play with guns and girls' wanting to play house reaches into
the womb.23

You might be tempted to conclude that sex roles are deep and
unchangeable. You would be wrong. As children grow up, stereotypes
weaken and are easier to defy. In late childhood, children begin to have
stereotypes about crying, dominance, independence, and kindness. But
they are much weaker than the early-childhood toy and job stereotypes.
In fact, the only really consistent di erence between the behavior of
boys and girls as they mature is aggression, with boys much more
aggressive than girls. As children grow up, even the di erence in
aggression gets smaller. The greater aggression in boys may come from
socialization (boys are more rewarded for aggression and competition
than girls are). But it might also have its origin in fetal hormones:
Both the sons and daughters of mothers who took the androgenizing
antimiscarriage drugs are more contentious and combative than their
unexposed sibs.24

Ironically, while pressuring kids to become androgynous does not work
immediately, it may have a delayed e ect. As children mature into
adults, sex-role stereotypes begin to disappear. When children grow up,
those raised by androgynous parents tend to become androgynous
themselves. Supporting intellectual interests for daughters and warmth
and compassion for sons, exposing children to a range of roles, may
work, but only in the long run. This is important, it makes sense, and
it is good news. Young children see the world in black-and-white terms:
"I'm either a boy or a girl. There's nothing in between. If I like
dolls, I'm a sissy. Everyone hates a queer." These are deeply held
convictions. Young kids seem to play out a sex-role program fueled by a
drive to conform that may have its roots in the fetal brain. As a child
matures, however, considerations of morality, of justice, of fairness,
come into play, and tolerance can start to displace blind conformity. He
or she now chooses how to behave. Decisions about androgyny, about
unconventionality, about rebellion, are conscious decisions

based on a sense of what is right and what an adolescent wants for the
future. As such, the choice of androgyny requires a mature mind and a
conscience; it is not a product of simple training. Spatial, math, and
verbal abilities. In addition to the clear personality and
social-behavior di erences between males and females, there are ability
di erences. The huge amount of information about scholastic ability has
yielded three generalities upon which all investigators agree: Males are
better at spatial and math tasks.

Females are better at emotional tasks and, perhaps, at verbal tasks.
There are more males with extreme (very low or very high) scores.

There have been at least two hundred studies of sex di erences in these
three basic components of "intelligence." The spatial score derives from
rotating three-dimensional objects mentally, and the like; the math
score from arithmetic, algebra, and geometry; the verbal score from
vocabulary, analogies, and reading comprehension. There is near
unanimity about spatial and math scores: Males do better on average, but
the di erence is only moderate. To calibrate what a "moderate" di erence
is, assume that to become an engineer you should rank in the top 5
percent of spatial ability. The scores show that 7.4 percent of men and
3.2 percent of women rank this high. This means that there should be
about two male engineers for every female engineer in the real world.
The actual ratio is twenty to one.25

Females might be better than males on verbal tests. Based on 165 recent
studies, there is a small but fairly consistent di erence. Twenty years
ago, there was a clear female advantage, but based on recent SATs, males
have closed the gap. On average, females are clearly better at emotional
problems than males are. They judge emotion in the face more accurately,
they

decode nonverbal cues better, they recognize faces better, and they
express emotion with nonverbals better. They also have more expressive
faces. All of these di erences are moderate in degree (the degree is
somewhat bigger than that between males and females in spatial
abilities). You should keep in mind that even the largest sex di erences
in ability are smaller than the average height di erence between the
sexes. Those who believe that the superior math and spatial scores of
men suggest that men should dominate engineering and science must be
prepared to accept the reverse argument for psychiatry, psychology, and
personnel management.26 Perhaps the most intriguing di erence between
the abilities of men and women is a subtle but, I believe, important
one. Usually, when scholars compare ability di erences, they look at
average di erences: for example, the average woman is better than the
average man at decoding emotion. For the most part, average sex di
erences are not large. How about the extremes, however? If you want to
know who is likely to be very good or very bad---a great scientist or a
great poet or a violent criminal or a person profoundly
retarded---average di erences won't tell you. Extreme scores will, and
there is a startling di erence between the sexes in extreme scores. The
ability scores of men tend to lie at the extremes more often than do the
scores of women. The distribution of ability scores is bell-shaped for
both sexes, but the women's scores bunch up in the middle, while the
men's scores spread out with long tails at each end. Put another way,
the average score for reading comprehension on the California
Achievement Test, for example, is quite similar for girls and boys, with
a small female advantage. But if you look way out in the tails, there
are many times the number of boys at both ends.27

People often puzzle over why there are so many more men who are math
geniuses, CEOs, Nobel Prize winners, champion chess players, great
violinists, and world-class chefs. The answer may be that there are more
men at the extremely high end of the relevant skill distribution. When
we wonder why there are so many more

retarded boys than girls and more male school dropouts, the answer may
be because there are many more males at the extreme low end.

This answer, while describing the facts accurately, hardly ends the
debate, however. Some say there are more men at the extremes because of
social learning, with talented men receiving more special attention from
mentors while talented women have competing domestic responsibilities or
are ignored or discouraged. This may be, but it doesn't explain why
there are more retarded men. Others say biological evolution can explain
the di erence: Women have been selected to be stable and reliable,
whereas men have been selected for the potential of being di erent. This
explanation collapses when one looks across cultures, however. There is
more male variability in the United States, but more female variability
in such countries as the Philippines and South Africa.28 If variability
is an evolutionary trait, it should be the same worldwide. I believe the
explanation for this di erence at the extremes remains the single most
important unanswered question in the study of sex di erences.

Can these ability di erences change? My answer is a quali ed yes. At an
individual level, verbal, mathematical, and spatial skills are
trainable. This is what school, as well as Sesame Street, is about. Any
girl's spatial skill can be boosted with good teaching, as can any boy's
verbal skill. Emotional skill is trainable also. This is what I do as
director of training in clinical psychology at the University of
Pennsylvania. Our aim is to take talented young psychologists and train
them to be much better at emotional problem solving---for their own bene
t and for that of their future patients.

But can group sex di erences be shrunk? Will women, on average, catch up
with men at rotating three-dimensional objects in their head? Will men
catch up with women at detecting masked anger? I don't know. But there
is a hint of change. Many of the skill di erences between the sexes have
narrowed in the last twenty- ve years, and this coincides with our
society's treating boys and girls more similarly.29

To summarize Layer IV: Sex roles can change---within limits. The sex
roles young boys and young girls adopt di er radically. They are xed and
stereotyped. Raising boys to be more like girls, and vice versa, is
fruitless---in the short run. In the long run, however, it may work.
When they mature, children raised with parental examples of tolerance
for a range of sex roles become more androgynous. There are some clear
ability di erences between the sexes: On average, girls are worse at
spatial and mathematical tasks, but better at emotional tasks. With
teaching, however, all these skills can be markedly upgraded, and there
is some evidence that the group sex di erences shrink when we treat boys
and girls more similarly. Layer V: Sexual Performance: Correcting Sexual
Dysfunction Assume that the rst four layers of your sexuality are in
good working order: You have an identity, a xed orientation, set
preferences, and a clear sex role. You are with someone who ts with your
desires and you are in an erotic situation. Tonight's the night. What
can go wrong now? Plenty. Your sexual performance can falter. If you are
a man, you might fail to maintain an erection (impotence)

climax within the rst few seconds (premature ejaculation) If you are a
woman, you might fail to get aroused (frigidity) not reach orgasm

These problems are called sexual dysfunctions. They are agonizing and
quite common problems. Until twenty years ago, they were largely
unsolvable: People endured them. Marriages were strained

to the breaking point. Love soured. Self-loathing and deep depression
ensued. When quiet desperation became unbearable, people sought therapy,
which usually failed. But thanks to a major breakthrough, these problems
are, today, for the most part, curable. Adequate sexual performance is
exactly parallel in men and women. It consists of two phases: arousal
and orgasm. During female arousal, a woman feels excited. Her vagina
lubricates and swells to just the size to "glove" a penis. Her clitoris
erects. Her uterus enlarges. Her nipples swell. During male arousal, a
man feels excited. The penis hardens (the blood vessels of the penis
widen dramatically, blood ows in, and a set of valves close to block it
from leaving). Arousal is the natural prelude to orgasm. In men, after
enough penile stimulation a plateau of orgasmic inevitability is
reached. If no interruption occurs, semen is soon released (emission)
and is immediately pumped out by a set of rhythmic (at o.8-second
intervals) contractions by powerful muscles at the base of the penis
(ejaculation). This is accompanied by extremely intense, spasmodic
pleasure. Orgasm in women is triggered by the clitoris and is then
expressed by a series of rhythmic (you guessed it: o.8-second intervals)
contractions of the muscles around the vagina. It is accompanied by
ecstatic and rhapsodic feelings. As we ponder the "unbridgeable" chasm
between the sexes, I nd it powerfully consoling to know that the
underlying biology of sexual arousal and orgasm is completely parallel
for men and women. He is probably feeling what you are feeling.

Men and women can break down at either phase, and where you break down
de nes your particular sexual dysfunction. Whatever the speci c problem,
it is always complicated by spectatoring. When things go wrong, or when
you worry that things will go wrong, you start to watch your own
lovemaking---from the outside. This gets in the way of losing yourself
in the act, and so worsens the speci c problem. Spectatoring creates
additional anxiety, thereby starting a vicious circle. This is a clue as
to what goes on in every sexual dysfunction. Arousal and orgasm are the
result of biological systems

that can get shut o by negative emotion. Anxiety, anger, and depression
all interfere with arousal and orgasm, and spectatoring worsens all the
sexual dysfunctions because it heightens anxiety.

If a woman is frightened or angry during sex, her arousal or her orgasm
may be blocked. There are many commonplace sources. She may fear she
will not reach orgasm, she may feel helpless and exploited, she may be
ashamed of her excitement, she may expect physical pain during
intercourse, she may fear pregnancy, she may nd her partner
unattractive, or she may think he is the wrong man. The sources of
sexual blocking are parallel for men.

In the late 1960s, William Masters and Virginia Johnson invented direct
sexual therapy for these then intractable problems. Their therapy was
revolutionary, and it di ers in three ways from the sex therapies that
had gone before: It does not label you "neurotic" or otherwise deeply
troubled because you are frigid or a premature ejaculator. Rather, it
formulates the problem as local (my Layer V), not global.

It treats the problem as the problem of a couple, not just of an
individual: People are seen in pairs. (In some variations, if no partner
shows up, there is a surrogate.)

The couple directly practices sex with the advice and instructions of
the therapist. Typically, you spend one or two weeks in daily therapy.
Instruction occurs during the day, and then the couple retires to the
privacy of a hotel to practice what is prescribed. They report their
progress the next morning. Direct sex therapy is not a do-it-yourself a
air, and therapists can now be found in almost all major American
population centers. Ask your prospective therapists if they use Masters
and Johnson techniques. The treatment of all the dysfunctions is
similar, so I will illustrate only one. Cindy has never had an orgasm,
and her marriage to Bob is starting to unravel. They

travel to Philadelphia to work with two therapists at the Marriage
Council. In the second

session, Cindy is taught how to masturbate with a vibrator. Afterward,
alone, she has her rst orgasm. This builds her con dence and dissolves
some of her fear of the unknown.

Next, Bob is instructed to start participating---gradually. That night,
he just watches Cindy

climax. The following night, he holds the vibrator. The night after
that, he touches her clitoris lightly with his lubricated nger while she
masturbates. Cindy begins to spectate at

this phase and is encouraged to have wild sexual fantasies to distract
herself. That hurdle past, Cindy and Bob go on to sensate focus, a
graduated sequence of reciprocal caresses in which giving and receiving
is emphasized. This culminates in nondemand intercourse--- intercourse
with no expectation or pressure to have orgasm. Cindy has two orgasms
during

the rst session of nondemand intercourse. Six years after therapy, Cindy
almost always has orgasms during intercourse.

Direct sexual therapy treats all of the major sexual dysfunctions,
except for retarded ejaculation in men, with high success rates---70 to
95 percent. Once successful treatment is accomplished, not much relapse
occurs.30 Conclusion The idea of depth organizes our erotic life and a
ects how changeable it is. Sexual identity and sexual orientation are
very deep and don't change much, if at all. Sexual preference and sex
role are of middling depth and, accordingly, change somewhat. Sexual
dysfunction is a surface problem that with proper treatment can change
readily. This is the beginning of a global theory, and what depth really
means and how it applies across all of our lives is the topic of chapter
15.

I want to end here with the most common and least understood sexual
problem. So ordinary is this problem, so likely are you to su er from
it, that it usually goes unnoticed. It doesn't even have a name. The
writer Robertson Davies dubs it acedia.31 Acedia used to be reckoned a
sin, one of the seven deadly sins, in fact. Medieval theologians
translated it as "sloth," but it is not physical torpor that makes
acedia so deadly. It is the torpor of the soul, the indi erence

that creeps up on us as we age and grow accustomed to those we love,
that poisons so much of adult life.

As we ght our way out of the problems of adolescence and early
adulthood, we often notice that the defeats and setbacks that troubled
us in our youth are no longer as agonizing. This comes as welcome
relief, but it has a cost. Whatever bu ers us from the turmoil and pain
of loss also bu ers us from feeling joy. It is easy to mistake the indi
erence that creeps over us with age and experience for the growth of
wisdom. Indi erence is not wisdom. It is acedia.

The symptom of this condition that concerns me is the waning of sexual
attraction that so commonly comes between lovers once they settle down
with each other. The sad fact is that the passionate attraction that so
consumed them when they rst courted dies down as they get to know each
other well. In time, it becomes an ember; often, an ash. Within a few
years, the sexual passion goes out of most marriages, and many partners
start to look elsewhere to rekindle this joyous side of life. This is
easy to do with a new lover, but acedia will not be denied, and the
whole cycle happens again. This is the stu of much of modern divorce,
and this is the sexual disorder you are most likely to experience. I
call it a disorder because it meets the de ning criterion of a disorder:
like transsexuality or S-M or impotence, it grossly impairs sexual, a
ectionate relations between two people who used to have them.
Researchers and therapists have not seen t to mount an attack on acedia.
You will nd it in no one's nosology, on no foundation's priority list of
problems to solve, in no government mental health budget. It is
consigned to the innards of women's magazines and to trashy "how to keep
your man" paperbacks. Acedia is looked upon with acceptance and indi
erence by those who might actually discover how it works and how to cure
it. It is acedia I wish to single out as the most painful, the most
costly, the most mysterious, and the least understood of the sexual
disorders. And therefore the most urgent.

12 Dieting: A Waist Is a Terrible Thing to Mind

I JUST HAD LUNCH. A really classy bu et---twenty-two dollars for all I
could eat---my nemesis. I can't resist trying everything and then going
back for more of the things that taste especially good. I realized after
the very rst plateful---shrimp, sashimi, and potato salad---that my
stomach was full and I didn't need any more. But I kept going back: a
plate of the cold cuts, rolls and butter, then some more shrimp and some
smoked salmon, then the hot dishes---duck and onions, and blackened
chicken with sausage---and a token bit of vegetable. Then the salads
(the avocado-and-bacon was great) and the fresh fruit. Then I topped it
o with three desserts: the white chocolate mousse, the carrot cake, and
the cherry pie. How do I feel now? Stu ed, certainly. But fat, ugly,
unhealthy, and ashamed as well. I have been watching my weight and
restricting my intake--- except for an occasional binge like
this---since I was twenty. I weighed about 175 pounds then, maybe 15
pounds over my o cial "ideal" weight ("big-boned and barrel-chested," I
told myself). I weigh 199 pounds now, thirty years later, about 25
pounds over the "ideal." "I've had a sedentary adulthood: writing, doing
research, seeing patients, teaching," I tell myself, "and I only started
exercising---a half-mile swim every day---last year." I have tried about
a dozen regimes---fasting, the "Beverly Hills Diet," no carbohydrates,
Metrecal for lunch, 1,200 calories a day, low fat, no lunch, no
starches, skipping every other dinner. I lost 10 or 15 pounds on each in
about a month.

I lied: I had to quit the Beverly Hills thing---all the pineapple and
watermelon I could eat---because I got such bad diarrhea. The pounds
always came back, though, and I have gained a net of about a pound a
year---inexorably. This is the most consistent failure in my life. It's
also a failure I can't just put out of mind, like the failure to get rid
of my slice at golf. There are too many reminders, every time I look in
the mirror and every time I look at a tempting dish. In thirty years of
dieting, this is what I've been trying to achieve:

I want to be more attractive. I hate this two-inch spare tire. I want to
stay healthy. My father had a stroke at just my age. I want to feel
zestier. I am often tired and irritable. I want to feel that I am in
control, not that I'm a grown man defeated by a carrot cake. Pretty
sound reasons. I think I should keep at it. Okay, no dinner tonight,
only co ee (with saccharin) tomorrow morning, no dessert for the rest of
the week. Not so fast. I have spent the last few years reading the
scienti c literature, not the parade of best-selling diet books or the
ood of women's magazine articles on the latest way to slim down. The
scienti c ndings look clear to me, but there is not yet a consensus. I
am going to go out on a limb in this chapter, because I see so many
signs all pointing in one direction. What I have concluded will, I
believe, soon be the consensus of the scientists. The conclusions
surprise me. They will probably surprise you, too, and they may change
your life. Here is what the picture looks like to me:1 Dieting doesn't
work.

Dieting may make overweight worse, not better. Dieting may be bad for
health.

Dieting may cause eating disorders---bulimia and anorexia.

Are You Overweight? Here is an "ideal weight" chart. Are you above the
"ideal" weight for your sex, height, and age? If so, you are
"overweight." What does this really mean? "Ideal" weight is arrived at
simply. Four million people, now dead, who were insured by the major
lifeinsurance companies of America were once weighed and had their
height measured. At what weight on average do people of a given height
turn out to live longest? That weight is called "ideal," or "desirable."
Anything wrong with that? You bet. The real use of the table, and the
reason your doctor takes it seriously, is that an "ideal" weight implies
that, on average, if you slim down to yours, you will live longer. This
is the crucial claim. Lighter people indeed live longer, on average,
than heavier people, but how much longer is hotly debated.

1983 METROPOLITAN LIFE INSURANCE HEIGHT AND WEIGHT TABLES2

But the crucial claim is unsound because weight (at any given height)
has a normal distribution, normal both in a statistical sense and in the
biological sense. Why is there a distribution of weights at all? Why
don't all 64-inch-tall thirty- ve-year-old women weigh 130 pounds? Some
women fall on the heavy side of 130 pounds because they are heavy-boned,
or buxom, or have slow metabolisms. Others fall there because they
overeat and never exercise. In the biological sense, the couch potatoes
can legitimately be called overweight, but the buxom, heavy-boned, slow
people deemed overweight by the "ideal" table are at their natural and
healthiest weight. If you are a 155-pound woman and 64 inches in height,
you are "overweight" by around 15 pounds. This means nothing more than
that the average 130-pound, 64-inch-tall woman lives somewhat longer
than the

average 155-pound woman of your height. It does not follow that if you
slim down to 125 pounds, you will stand any better chance of living
longer.

Here is an analogy. Imagine that fty-year-old men who are grayhaired die
sooner than fty-year-old men who are not. If you are a gray-haired
fty-year-old, should you dye your hair? No, and for two reasons: First,
whatever causes grayness may also cause dying sooner, and coloring your
hair will add no time to your life because it doesn't undo the
underlying cause of dying sooner. Second, health damage caused by
repeatedly coloring your hair with chemicals might itself shorten your
life. In spite of the insouciance with which dieting advice is
dispensed, no one has properly investigated the question of whether
slimming down to "ideal" weight produces longer life. The proper study
would compare the longevity of people who are at their "ideal" weight
without dieting to people who achieve their "ideal" weight by dieting.
Without this study, the common medical advice that you should diet down
to your "ideal" weight is simply unfounded.3

This is not a quibble, for there is evidence that dieting damages your
health and that this damage may shorten your life. Myths of Overweight
The advice to diet down to your "ideal" weight in order to live longer
is one myth of overweight. Here are some others: Overweight people
overeat. Wrong. Nineteen out of twenty studies show that obese people
consume no more calories each day than non-obese people. In one
remarkable experiment, a group of very obese people dieted down to only
60 percent overweight and stayed there. They needed one hundred fewer
calories a day to stay 60 percent overweight than normal people needed
to stay at normal weight. Telling a fat person that if she would change
her eating habits and eat "normally" she would lose weight is a lie. To
lose

weight and stay there, she will need to eat excruciatingly less than a
normal person, probably for the rest of her life.4

Overweight people have an overweight personality. Wrong. Extensive
research on personality and fatness has proved little. Obese people do
not di er in any major personality style from nonobese people. They are
not, for example, more susceptible to external food cues (the fragrance
of garlic bread, for example) than nonobese people.5

Physical inactivity is a major cause of obesity. Probably not. Fat
people are indeed less active than thin people, but the inactivity is
probably caused more by the fatness than the other way around.
Overweight shows a lack of willpower. This is the granddaddy of all the
myths. When I am defeated by that piece of carrot cake, I feel like a
failure: I should be able to control myself, and there is something
morally wrong with me if I give in. Fatness is seen as shameful because
we hold people responsible for their weight. Being overweight equates
with being a weak-willed slob. We believe this primarily because we have
seen plenty of people decide to lose weight and do so in a matter of
weeks. But almost everyone returns to the old weight after shedding
pounds. Your body has a natural weight that it defends vigorously
against dieting. The more diets tried, the harder the body works to
defeat the next diet. Weight is in large part genetic. All this gives
the lie to the "weak-willed" interpretation of overweight. More
accurately, dieting pits the conscious will of the individual against a
deeper, more vigilant opponent: the species' biological defense against
starvation. The conscious will can occasionally win battles--- no carrot
cake tonight, this month without carbohydrates---but it almost always
loses the war. The Demographics of Dieting

We are a culture obsessed with thinness. How many times a day do you
think about your weight? Each time you catch a glimpse of your naked
body or your double chin in the mirror? Each time you touch your midri
bulge? Each meal? Each time you eat something tasty and want more? Every
time you're hungry? My guess is that the average overweight adult (the
large majority of us) thinks discontentedly about his or her body more
than ve times a day. By contrast, how many times a day do you think
about your salary? My guess is once a day, or, if you are really
strapped, about ve times a day. Is being overweight as important as
going broke?

You and I, and about 100 million other Americans, share this nagging
discontent. In 1990, Americans spent more than \$30 billion on the
weight-loss industry, almost as much as the federal government spent on
education, employment, and social services combined. These billions are
poured into hospital diet clinics and commercial weight-loss programs,
into health spas and exercise clubs, into 54 million copies of diet
books. Ten billion dollars went for diet soft drinks. There were 100,000
jaw-wiring and liposuction operations at \$3,500 each. More than \$500
was spent on weight loss by each overweight adult in America. We would
save this much if we could be convinced that we were not overweight or
that there was nothing we could do about being overweight.6

The fashion industry, the entertainment industry, and women's magazines
bombard us with female models of beauty and talent so thin as to
represent almost no actual women in the population. We have gotten
heavier and heavier, but the models have gotten thinner and thinner.
From 1959 to 1978, the average Playboy centerfold became markedly more
gaunt, and the average Miss America contestant dropped almost one-third
of a pound a year. During the same twenty years, the average young
American woman gained about the same amount. Both these trends have
continued into the 1990s.7 The purveyors of weight loss are the children
of those pioneering advertising campaigners who in the rst half of this
century created

and then preyed upon insecurity ("He said that she said that he had
halitosis"). The weight-loss industry's clout should not be
underestimated. It has cornered the bulk of the self-improvement market
and a sizable percentage of the American medical dollar. It is
self-interested and powerful. It is pleased that the "ideal weight"
tables put so many of us in the overweight category. It is delighted
that Americans believe minor overweight is a serious health risk. It is
ecstatic that men now nd thin women sexier than voluptuous women. It
thrives on the fact that Americans are so insecure in themselves and so
desperately unhappy with their bodies. It has on its payrolls some of
the most prominent scientists of appetite, who publish journal articles
touting new, improved diets and exaggerating the health risks of
overweight. All this has created a general public that is discontent,
even despairing, about their bodies, and willing---even eager---to spend
a substantial portion of their earnings in the belief that they can and
should become much thinner than they are. It is time for this to end.
The Oprah E ect There is a professional consensus about two facts: You
can lose weight in a month or two on almost any diet. You will almost
certainly gain it back in a few years. The American public watched in
hopeful fascination as a daytime TV host, Oprah Winfrey, went on
Optifast, which is, technically, a VLCD (very-low-calorie diet). She
became slimmer and slimmer before our eyes: 180, 160, 150, 140, 120. In
a matter of months, she lost 67 pounds and looked trim and petite. Oprah
praised the diet, and Optifast's business soared. Over the next year,
the viewing public watched in morbid fascination as Oprah went from no
to 120 to 130, all the way back to 180. Embittered, Oprah condemned the
diet, and Optifast's business shrank.

The "Oprah e ect" was no surprise to the scienti c community. Even
before Oprah went on her VLCD, a de nitive study of her diet had been
published. Five hundred patients on Optifast began at an average of 50
percent over their "ideal" weight. More than half of these patients
dropped out before treatment was complete. The rest, like Oprah, lost a
great deal of weight---an average of 84 percent of their excess weight.
An excellent result. Over the next thirty months, the patients, like
Oprah, regained an average of about 80 percent. In another follow-up of
VLCD, only 3 percent of the patients were considered successes after ve
years. In yet another study of VLCDs, 121 patients were followed for
years after they lost 60 pounds on average. Half were back at their old
weight after three years, 90 percent after nine years. Only 5 percent
remained at their reduced weight. The best result I can nd is a study in
which 13 percent of subjects remained thin after three years.8 No other
diet has been shown to work in the long run. There are about a dozen
well-executed long-term studies involving thousands of dieters, and all
of them show basically the same dismal result: Most people gain almost
all their weight back in four to ve years, with perhaps 10 percent
remaining thin. The longer the follow-up, the worse the outcome. The
trajectory points to complete failure after enough time elapses.9 More
telling than what is published is what is not published. There has been
dead silence from the commercial programs. They have long-term weight
gures on tens of thousands of their clients, but they have kept their
ndings secret. It doesn't take a Sherlock Holmes to gure out why. A few
diet experts take the view that enough is enough: Dieting is a cruel
hoax, and it is time for Congress to intervene. Many sit glumly on the
fence, perhaps awaiting the day of reckoning. But some respected experts
call for new and more innovative diets with far more attention paid to
maintenance. Drs. Kelly Brownell and Tom Wadden, two leading obesity
researchers, have called for a national obesity campaign with the goal
of a ten-pound loss by all overweight Americans.10 These optimists have
one plausible

argument: Almost all the long-term failures are patients---obese people
who go to hospital clinics. These may be the most hopeless cases, the
terminally fat. Maybe diets will work better on the slightly overweight,
the people who don't need to go to clinics, the people who have not
repeatedly tried and failed.

I doubt it. Workplace and home-correspondence interventions

have fared just as poorly as hospital clinics.11 Maybe someone will
discover a way to screen overweight people so that only the ones likely
to succeed will be accepted for dieting programs. Maybe someone will
have that new insight into maintenance that has thus far eluded
everyone. But in the meantime, the clearest fact about dieting is that
after years of research, after tens of millions of dieters, after tens
of billions of dollars, no one has found a diet that keeps the weight o
in any but a small fraction of dieters.12 Yo-yo Dieting Rats permanently
change the way they deal with food after they have been starved once.
After they regain the weight, their metabolism slows. They like fatty
foods more. They accumulate larger fat deposits. The more cycles of
famine and feast, the better they get at storing energy. They may even
rebound from starvation to a higher weight than ever before once food is
abundant again.13

It looks as if people do the same thing. After dieting, people radically
change the way they deal with food. Dieters become intensely preoccupied
with food, thinking about it all day long, even dreaming about it. The
body changes, hoarding energy. Normal activities---sitting and
exercising---use up fewer calories in formerly obese women who have
slimmed down than in matched controls who have never dieted. Even
sleeping burns 10 percent fewer calories in the onetime obese. Less
energy is given o in heat. Lethargy, a real energy saver, is common.
Buttercream frosting tastes better than it used to. It may even take
fewer calories for a dieter to put on a pound than for a normal person.
So a sizable

number of patients don't simply relapse, but wind up heavier than they
were in the rst place.14

In one study, the "lucky" 10 percent of formerly fat people who dieted
and stayed thin ate an average of 1,298 calories a day to stay at their
new weight, whereas normal controls ate 1,950 calories to stay at that
same weight. This demonstrates that dieters may never again be able to
eat normal amounts of food if they want to stay thin. Yo-yo
dieting---taking weight o , putting it all on again, and then trying to
take it o once more---is a Sisyphean battle. The second time obese
patients go on a VLCD, they lose weight more slowly, yet they take in
exactly the same number of calories as the rst time.15

This makes biological sense. Imagine a species only recently emerged
from 100,000 years of famine. During this epoch, weeks or even a whole
season go by with almost nothing to eat. Then there is a big kill or a
bumper crop. Everyone gorges and then rations what is left until the
next big kill. An epoch of famine and feast produces strong evolutionary
pressure for a creature who gorges and stores up a lot of fat during
periods of plenty, but releases fat's life-sustaining energy with
reluctance during shortages. The more the creature goes through the
feast-famine cycle, the better it gets at storing fat and conserving
energy. Now imagine that this epoch suddenly ends and food is abundant.
This creature eats a great deal and gets fat. Someone conceives a scheme
to limit fat, and the creature voluntarily undereats. But its body can't
tell the di erence between self-imposed starvation and actual famine. So
the hoary survival defenses kick in: The body defends its weight by
refusing to release fat, by lowering its metabolism, and by insistently
demanding food. The harder the creature tries not to eat, the more
vigorous these defenses become.16

This creature is Homo sapiens, the departed epoch is the Pleistocene,
the time is now, and the doomed scheme is dieting.

Bulimia and Natural Weight A concept that makes sense of your body's
vigorous defense against weight loss is natural weight. When your body
screams "I'm hungry," slows its metabolism, makes you lethargic, stores
fat, craves sweets and renders them more delicious than ever, and makes
you obsessed with food, what it is defending is your natural weight. It
is signaling that you have dropped into a range it will not accept.
Natural weight prevents you from gaining too much weight or losing too
much. When you eat too much for too long, the opposite defenses are
activated and make long-term weight gain di cult. A group of prisoners
was paid to add 25 percent to their body weight by eating twice their
usual calories for six months. The rst few pounds came on easily, but
then there was no weight gain.17

There is also a strong genetic contribution to your natural weight.
Identical twins reared apart weigh almost the same throughout their
lives. When identical twins are overfed, they gain weight and add fat in
lockstep and in the same places. The fatness or thinness of adopted
children resembles their biological parents---particularly their
mother---very closely, but does not at all resemble their adoptive
parents. This suggests that you have a genetically given natural weight
that your body wants to maintain. I don't know a formula for assigning a
number to your natural weight, but it is probably considerably higher
than your "ideal" weight. The average middle-aged American man, for
example, weighs 16 percent more than his "ideal" weight.18

The idea of natural weight may help cure the new disorder that is
sweeping young America. Hundreds of thousands of young women have
contracted it. More than 5 percent of the young women to whom I teach
Abnormal Psychology every fall complain of it. Two

percent of adult women may have it in severe form.19 It consists of
bouts of binge eating and purging alternating with days of undereating.
These young women are universally concerned with their body image. They
are usually normal in weight or a bit on the

thin side, but they are terri ed of becoming fat. So they diet. They
exercise. They take laxatives by the cup. Twice a week they nd
themselves at a bu et or in an ice-cream parlor. They gorge: four
hot-fudge sundaes topped o with a banana split. Then they vomit and take
more laxatives. This malady is called bulimia nervosa ("bulimia" for
short). Therapists are puzzled by bulimia, its causes and treatment.
Debate rages about whether it is an equivalent of depression, or an
expression of a thwarted desire for control, or a symbolic rejection of
the feminine role. Almost every psychotherapy has been tried.
Antidepressants and other drugs have been administered with some e ect,
but---with one exception, which I'll discuss shortly---little success
has been reported.20

I don't think that bulimia is mysterious, and I think that it will be
curable. I believe that bulimia is caused by dieting. The bulimic goes
on a diet, and her body attempts to defend its natural weight. With
repeated dieting, this defense becomes more vigorous. Her body is in
massive revolt---insistently demanding food, storing fat, craving
sweets, and lowering metabolism. Periodically, these biological defenses
will overcome her extraordinary willpower (and extraordinary it must be
even to approach an "ideal" weight, say, twenty pounds lighter than her
natural weight). She will then binge. Horri ed by what this will do to
her gure, she vomits and takes laxatives to purge calories. Thus bulimia
is a natural consequence of self-starvation to lose weight in the midst
of abundant food.21

Every bulimic I have met is dieting. Systematic surveys of bulimics show
that at least 80 percent are on diets immediately before bulimia starts.
The epidemic is sweeping America right now because the thin ideal has
become thinner and thinner over time as the average female body has
gotten heavier and heavier. The ideal has so far outstripped the
capacity to achieve it that the discrepancy between natural weight and
"ideal" weight is so great as to produce binge eating on a massive
scale. Women whose natural weights are most discrepant from their
"ideal" weights will be most vulnerable.

One study observed twenty bulimics who binged an average of three times
a week. Ten received a nutritionally adequate treatment diet for eight
weeks consisting, unbeknownst to them, of at least 1,400 calories a day.
All of them stopped binging. A control group of ten others ate a sham
diet that was the equivalent of what they had been eating. They
continued to binge, but when they were switched to the nutritionally
adequate diet, all of them stopped binging completely. This suggests
that dieting is a cause of bulimia and suggests a major strategy for
therapy.22

The therapist's task is to get the patient to stop dieting and become
comfortable with her natural weight. He should rst convince the patient
that her binge eating is caused by her body's reaction to her diet. Then
he must confront her with a question: Which is more important, staying
thin or getting rid of bulimia? By stopping the diet, he will tell her,
she can get rid of the uncontrollable binge-purge cycle. Her body will
now settle at her natural weight, and she need not worry that she will
balloon beyond that point. For some patients, therapy will end there
because they would rather be bulimic than "loathsomely fat." For these
patients, the central issue---ideal weight versus natural weight---can
now at least become the focus of therapy. For others, defying the social
and sexual pressure to be thin will be possible, dieting will be
abandoned, weight will be gained, and bulimia should end quickly. These
are the central moves of the cognitive-behavioral treatment of bulimia.
There are more than a dozen outcome studies of this approach, and the
results are good. There is about 60 percent reduction in binging and
purging (about the same as with antidepressant drugs). But unlike drugs,
there is little relapse after treatment. Attitudes toward weight and
shape relax, and dieting withers. Two studies explicitly compared drugs
and cognitivebehavioral treatment, and in both studies, drugs were less
e ective.23 The dieting theory cannot fully explain bulimia. Many people
who diet don't become bulimic; some can avoid it because their natural

weight is close to their "ideal" weight, and therefore the diet they

adopt does not starve them.24 In addition, bulimics are often depressed,
since binging-purging leads to self-loathing. Depression may worsen
bulimia by making it easier to give in to temptation. Further, dieting
may just be another symptom of bulimia, not a cause. Other factors
aside, I can speculate that dieting below your natural weight is a
necessary condition for bulimia, and that returning to your natural
weight and accepting that weight will cure bulimia. There is a new and
disheartening development in "eating disorders."Dr. Robert Spitzer, a
New York City psychiatrist who organized the writing of that useful
document the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American
Psychiatric Association (DSM-3 and DSM-3-R), is now trying to have
"binge-eating disorder" added to DSM-4. He discovers this new malady in
as many as 30 percent of those dieting in hospital weight-loss programs.
They binge occasionally, but they don't purge, so they gain weight. From
my point of view, many of these poor people are trying to slim down to
weights far below their natural weight. Their bodies, like bulimics',
are screaming for food. Perhaps their disorder is not binge eating but
inappropriate dieting.25 The Right Treatment BULIMIA NERVOSA SUMMARY
TABLE

In fact, we should consider a new category for DSM-4, "dieting
disorder," de ned as being within 20 percent of your "ideal" weight and
ruining your life and health by dieting.

The idea of natural weight has another huge practical implication. Right
now I'm drinking my morning co ee with three packets of arti cial
sweetener in it. I love sweet co ee, but I hate the nearly 50 calories
in a tablespoon of sugar in each cup. I have been assuming ---until
now---that for each dose of arti cial sweetener I consume, I will take
in that many fewer calories each day. I am also afraid that if I stop
drinking arti cially sweetened beverages, I will gain weight. This is
the hidden logic of the army of consumers that supports the \$10 billion
diet-soft-drink industry. With arti cial sweetener in three cups of co
ee, the savings is about 150 calories; two diet soft drinks means
another 400 or so calories saved: That's around 550 calories a day I
avoid; almost 4,000 calories a week, more than the equivalent of one
pound of weight. But why haven't I

lost a pound a week since I started using arti cial sweeteners? (I
calculate that I should now weigh less than zero and go oating o like a
helium balloon.)

The answer, I suspect, is natural weight. I probably eat an extra 550
calories elsewhere each day to make up for the sugar I avoid. Those
calories aren't in sugar, so my teeth aren't rotting out, but they might
be in fat. I don't know if this is so, but I'm going to nd out.26

Diet Pills Diet pills suppress appetite, and they have one virtue:
Unlike diets, taking pills requires no discipline. But pills create the
same problem as dieting---rapid regaining of weight---and are more
dangerous: In 1973, the Federal Drug Administration severely limited
their use because the weight loss they produce (about two pounds per
week) is small, and the health risks, including psychosis, addiction,
heart attack, and death, are substantial.27

New drugs are developed every so often. The latest ones, fen uramine and
phentermine, show more promise. They produce substantial weight loss,
and unlike their predecessors, they may readjust the "set point" of
natural weight rather than just suppress appetite.

Michael Weintraub, an obesity researcher, coordinated a well-

done study of these two drugs.28 One hundred twenty-one participants,
mostly women, started the study at over two hundred pounds. The study
lasted four years: Those women receiving the drugs (coupled with
behavior therapy and exercise) lost an average of thirty pounds and kept
the weight o for as long as they took the drugs. As soon as they ceased
taking the drugs, however, the weight returned.

These two drugs have some side e ects---dry mouth, nervousness,
sedation, vivid dreams, and depression---which are milder than the

early appetite-suppressing drugs. The side e ects are not trivial,
though, and because of them, more than one-third of the patients dropped
out without much bene t. Overall, however, one-third of the patients
lost a good bit of weight and kept it o ---a much better result than any
diet has achieved. Future research on these drugs should determine the
long-term e ects of taking them, and how to reduce the side e ects and
therefore the dropout rate. The development of these drugs is promising,
but until more research is completed I regard them as experimental.
Overweight vs. Dieting: The Health Damage Being heavy carries some
health risk. There is no de nitive answer to how much, because there is
a swamp of inconsistent ndings. Distilling these ndings is hazardous,
but here is my best guess:29

Enormous obesity (double "ideal" weight or more) may well cause
premature death.

Substantial obesity (30 to 100 percent above "ideal" weight) possibly
causes health damage and may be associated with somewhat increased
mortality.

Mild to moderate overweight (10 to 30 percent above "ideal" weight) may
possibly be associated with a marginal increase in mortality,
particularly for those at risk for diabetes. Underweight is clearly
associated with substantially greater mortality.

If you are overweight, you should ignore scare tactics like Optifast's
desperate "Obesity is a death sentence" ad. Even if you could just wish
pounds away, never to return, it is not certain you should. Being
somewhat above your "ideal" weight may actually be your healthiest
natural condition, best for your particular constitution and your
particular metabolism. Of course, you can't wish pounds away, but you
can diet them away with any popular

diet, chosen at random. But the odds are overwhelming that most of the
weight will return, and that you will have to diet it away again and
again. From a health and mortality perspective, should you diet? There
is, probably, a serious health risk from losing weight and regaining it.

There have been three large-scale studies of weight cycling and death.
The rst, a study of one million Americans, is often overlooked since it
shows increased mortality with increased weight. But it also shows that
men and women who lose more than ten pounds in ve years have
substantially more heart attacks and strokes than expected. This is true
of the people who lose weight voluntarily (dieters) as well as the
people who lose weight involuntarily because they are ill. In the second
study, men who had at least one cycle of loss and regain are at double
the risk for death from heart disease than men who progressively gain
weight over twenty- ve years. In the third study, more than ve thousand
men and women from Framingham, Massachusetts, were observed for
thirty-two years. People whose weight uctuated over the years had 30 to
100 percent greater risk for death from heart disease than people whose
weight was stable. When corrected for smoking, exercise, cholesterol
level, and blood pressure, the ndings became more convincing, suggesting
that weight uctuation (the primary cause of which is presumably dieting)
may itself increase the risk of heart disease.30

Being overweight is risky. But dieting is risky as well. Which risk is
bigger? From a health perspective alone, should you diet or not?

I suspect, but I am not yet certain, that the weight- uctuation hazard
may be larger than the hazard of staying overweight. In the only study
that directly compared the two risks, the Framingham study, the
weight-cycling risk was shown to be markedly bigger than the overweight
risk. If this result is replicated, and if dieting is shown to be the
primary cause of weight cycling, it will convince me that you should not
diet to reduce your risk of heart disease.

If you are coming into middle age and have gradually gained weight since
your early twenties, you are probably tempted to diet for health
reasons. Resist the temptation. Two exemplary studies show that you may
have less health risk than those who have not gained weight. The
Framingham people who gradually gained some weight over the years were
at lower risk even than people whose weight was stable, and at much less
risk than the yo-yoers. In a study of seventeen thousand Harvard alumni,
men who gained fteen pounds or more after graduating were at one-third
less risk of death than everyone else. No one knows why, but a gradual
gain in weight across your middle years seems normal and healthy.31
Depression and Dieting Depression is yet another cost of dieting,
because two root causes of depression are failure and helplessness.
Dieting sets you up for failure. Because the goal of slimming down to
your "ideal" weight pits your fallible willpower against untiring
biological defenses, you will often fail. At rst you will lose weight
and feel pretty good about it. Any depression you had about your gure
will disappear. Ultimately, however, you will probably not reach your
goal; and then you will be dismayed as the pounds return. Every time you
look in the mirror or vacillate over a white chocolate mousse, you will
be reminded of your failure, which in turn brings depression. On the
other hand, if you are one of the fortunate few who can keep the weight
from coming back, you will probably have to stay on an unsatisfying
low-calorie diet for the rest of your life. A side e ect of prolonged
malnutrition is depression. Either way, you are more vulnerable to it.

If you scan the list of cultures that have a thin ideal for women, you
will be struck by something fascinating. All thin-ideal cultures also
have eating disorders. They also have roughly twice as much depression
in women as in men. (Women diet twice as much as men. The best estimate
is that 13 percent of adult men and 25 percent of adult women are now on
a diet.) The cultures without the

thin ideal have no eating disorders, and the amount of depression in
women and men in these cultures is the same. This suggests that around
the world, the thin ideal and dieting not only cause eating disorders
but also cause women to be more depressed than men.32

The problem of fat consciousness and depression starts shortly before
puberty. Earlier, boys have at least as much depression as girls. When
puberty starts, boys go from abby to muscular, but girls, whose weight
gain is primarily fat, go from lean to voluptuous. Boys move toward
their ideal body, but girls move away from it. Soon after puberty, girls
are twice as depressed as boys, and the girls who are most depressed are
the ones most upset about their body.33

In a culture that glori es being thin and young, many of us who are
neither are discontents, vulnerable to continual messages that we are
failures. It is just a few short steps from constantly feeling like a
failure to becoming a depressed patient. The Bottom Line I have been
dieting o and on for thirty years. I diet because I want to be more
attractive, healthier, zestier, and more in control. How do these goals
stack up against the facts? Attractiveness. Losing weight will make me
look more attractive. I am, however, a married man with four children,
and I have pretty much gone out of the attracting business. If I were a
twenty- veyear-old woman, however, this goal would loom much larger. In
this society, the closer a young woman is to her "ideal" weight, the
more attractive she is deemed. I do not approve, but these are the
facts.

If your attractiveness is a high-enough priority to convince you to
diet, keep three drawbacks in mind: First, the attractiveness you gain
will be temporary. All the weight you lose and maybe more will likely
come back in a few years. This will depress you. Then you will have to
lose it again---and it will be harder the second time.

Or you will have to resign yourself to being less attractive. Second,
when women choose the silhouette gure they want to achieve, it turns out
to be thinner than the silhouette that men label most attractive.34
Third, you may well become bulimic, particularly if your natural weight
is substantially more than your "ideal" weight. On balance, if
short-term attractiveness is your overriding goal, diet. But be prepared
for the costs.

Health. If I diet, I am probably at increased risk for death. Losing and
regaining weight probably increases my mortality risk, perhaps more than
staying overweight or even allowing myself to gain more weight
gradually. No one has ever shown that losing weight will increase my
longevity.35 On balance, the health goal does not warrant dieting.

Zest. If I diet, I will have less bulk to carry around. I should be able
to run and swim faster. But this advantage will vanish when I regain the
weight. In addition, my metabolism will slow down in defense of my
natural weight, and this is often manifested as lethargy. Worse, I may
still be lethargic after the diet ends and the weight is regained. I now
wonder if my lack of zest as I have gotten older isn't the consequence
of dieting, not a consequence of the extra pounds. Is it possible that
the celebrated "chronic fatigue syndrome" may stem in part from a
history of dieting? My desire for more energy will probably not be well
served by dieting. Control. I want to be in control, but the second
dessert tells me I am not. Wrong. I have simply been too quick to
condemn myself on this score, because I didn't know the facts. I thought
that my weight was under my control. But now I see that for thirty years
my vacillating willpower has been pitted against an unceasing biological
defense of my natural weight.

I would get a lot more done if I could sleep only six hours a night. But
when I try this and nd that I feel exhausted two hours earlier the next
evening, I do not feel ashamed or weak of will. I know it is

just my body insisting on making up the two hours' lost sleep. For many
people, getting to an "ideal" weight and staying there is just as
biologically impossible as going with much less sleep. This fact tells
me not to diet, and defuses my feeling of shame. My bottom line is
clear: I am not going to diet anymore.

Of course, there is something other than dieting that can help you
achieve your goals. Advice to the Overweight Fitness vs. fatness. I just
returned from my daily half-mile swim. I am really proud of myself today
because I was able to sprint the last fty yards. I have been swimming
laps religiously for about a year. I have not lost any weight (in fact,
I've gained a few pounds). But my hips are slimmer, my mood is less
irritable, I sleep better, and I have more energy. I have also read the
scienti c literature on exercise. Achieving tness is clearly more
sensible than ghting fatness.

A surprisingly small amount of exercise may lower death risk signi
cantly. In one study of ten thousand men and three thousand women, the
least- t 20 percent were shown to have far and away the highest death
risk. Moving out of the least- t fth markedly lowered risk. This
suggests that even modest exercise, as opposed to becoming fanatical,
will produce the biggest reduction in risk. Con rming this, the death
rate of the sedentary men in the Harvard alumni group I mentioned
earlier is 30 percent higher than that of the men who exercise
moderately. Statistically, moderate exercise--- burning o 2,000 calories
per week---produces two extra years of life. (Perhaps God does not
subtract the time spent exercising from your allotted time on earth.)
"Moderate exercise" translates into an hour of normal walking or a half
hour of slow running or a half hour of swimming each day. Exercise also
ghts depression and increases self-esteem. Exercise seems to be a much
bigger factor in mortality than overweight, and it is probably easier to
keep doing over the years than dieting, since it is (almost) fun.36

Exercise alone will probably not take o weight. Coupled with a diet
program, it may produce a bit better long-term weight loss. Whatever,
exercise has its bene cial e ects on health, whether or not you lose
weight. But there is a danger that coupling exercise with the
discouraging enterprise of dieting may cause you to give up on exercise,
too---once the weight starts to come back.37

The makeup of your diet. It may be useless to try to eat less food, but
it is useful to eat less unhealthy food: Fat and alcohol are to be
watched. In this century, what Americans eat has become about 25 percent
fattier, and fat in our food gets converted into fat on our bodies. Fast
food, chocolate bars, and ice cream are high in fat. There is little to
be said for any but modest drinking of alcohol, and lots to be said
against it. Alcohol is very high in calories, addicting, and
brain-damaging.38

Changing the composition of your diet may or may not take o weight. It
is not known if the body will, in the long run, make up for the calories
lost by a low-fat or a low-alcohol diet, but the chances are that
cutting back on both is healthful anyway. Eating only when hungry.
Overeating, consuming more food than you need to sate your hunger, is
more of a problem than overweight. Unlike overweight, you can curtail
overeating. Most of us are out of touch with hunger. We eat when the
clock tells us it is time to, not when we are hungry. We clean our
plates, hungry or not. We gorge when things taste especially good,
hungry or not.

Overeating may be yet another untoward consequence of dieting. Recall
that Pleistocene ancestor after a famine. Eating only when hungry is a
luxury he cannot a ord. He becomes a hoarder, an overeater. His
surviving the next famine might depend on his stu ng himself after a big
kill. He eats as much as he can whenever the opportunity presents
itself. Former dieters become overeaters for just this reason. All the
body knows is that it has once been starved. You change your approach to
food, and overeat whenever lots of

good food is available, even if you are not hungry. You have learned to
ignore hunger in the interest of survival. The Right Treatment WEIGHT
LOSS SUMMARY TABLE

Here are a few steps for how you can stop overeating and get

back in touch with hunger:39

When you see something really tasty, ask yourself, "Do I need something
in my stomach, or do I only want a taste in my mouth?" If just the
taste, refuse.

Halfway through the main course, stop for a full minute. Ask yourself,
"Am I full?" If you are, wrap the rest of the food and end the meal. If
not, repeat this three-quarters of the way through. Eat slowly and sip
water frequently to slow down eating. Put your fork down between bites;
this gives you a chance to consider if any more food is necessary to ll
you up.

Finally, if you are an overeater, you probably eat all the food put
before you. This is a very strong habit that must be broken. Excess food
is essentially being thrown down the toilet or poured onto your midri .
I want you to do the ushing exercise to break this habit. Halfway
through the main course of the next big meal you have at home, stop. Cut
the rest of your food into pieces. Get the dessert, and cut it up too.
Now ush it all down the toilet---this is where it will wind up, and this
exercise allows you to skip the middleman. Surgery for the very obese.
Dieting has a poor outcome for the very obese. Most patients regain most
of their weight in a few years,

and this weight uctuation itself carries a signi cant death risk. If you
are very obese (double your "ideal" weight or more), you should consider
surgery. The most successful operation is a stomach bypass (technically,
a "Roux-en-Y gastric bypass"). This four-hour operation hooks your lower
intestine to the top of your stomach. This is major surgery with a fair
number of complications that must be corrected by more surgery. The
mortality rate from the surgery is very low, below 1 percent, but do
note that patients have a subsequent suicide rate of around 1 percent.
The food you eat for the rest of your life must be soft, for it passes
through your body less well digested. Appetite decreases, weight loss is
dramatic, and, most important, the weight tends to stay o . In three-and
ve-year follow-ups of several hundred patients, the majority have done
well. The patient who weighed three hundred pounds before surgery weighs
only two hundred pounds ve years later. Heart function also improves.
Only about 15 to 20 percent fail completely and end up weighing close to
their original weight. Gastric bypass is the only treatment of obesity
with a documented satisfactory long-term outcome. The e ect of this
surgery on overweight people who are less than enormously obese is
presently unknown, but given their desperation about overweight, I will
not be surprised if moderately overweight Americans start to seek it out
in the near future.40 A Word to the Professional I intend this book for
two audiences. It is primarily for the consumer. Millions of people are
trying to make rational decisions about how to cope with their problems
and what to do about their shortcomings. They consume self-improvement
regimens, psychological treatment, and psychiatric treatment to the tune
of many billions of dollars annually. There is presently no consumer's
guide, nothing comprehensive and scienti cally grounded, to tell the
public which treatments work and which treatments fail, which problems
can be conquered and which are intractable, which

shortcomings can be improved and which cannot. Creating such a guide is
my primary aim. My second audience is the professional: the clinical and
counseling psychologist, the psychiatrist, the social worker, the
physician, the deliverer and designer of self-improvement programs.
Dieting is a special case for us. It a ects about half our clients, and
it dwarfs all the rest of the problems we deal with by its sheer scale.
For a half century we have been advising our clients to diet. Initially,
our justi cation was sound: The "ideal weight" tables pointed to
increased health risk with overweight. The situation has changed in the
last twenty years. It is now clear that weight is almost always regained
after dieting

dieting has a number of destructive side e ects including repeated
failure and hopelessness, bulimia, depression, and fatigue

losing and regaining weight itself presents a health risk comparable to
the risk of overweight When we encourage dieting, we are in danger of
violating our oath to "do no harm." Help-givers should change their
advice. We should tell our overweight clients that unless their only
concern is shortterm attractiveness, dieting is unlikely to work.
Commercial weight-loss plans, diet books, and magazine diets are under a
more urgent obligation: They should warn their clients and their readers
emphatically that any weight lost is likely to be regained. If
commercial programs will not do this voluntarily, disclosure of their
long-term success (or failure) rates and of their side e ects should be
a matter of law. These steps will go a long way toward making our
profession a more responsible one.

13 Alcohol

Poetry is the lie that makes life bearable. R. P. Blackmuir (from a
poetry lecture, Princeton University, spring 1959)

FIFTEEN YEARS AGO two pioneering graduate students at the University of
Pennsylvania---Lauren Alloy and Lyn Abramson---conducted an experiment
that yielded the most annoying results I have seen in my scienti c
lifetime. For a decade I kept hoping their ndings would be overturned,
but subsequent studies con rmed them. Subjects were given di ering
degrees of control over the lighting of a light. For some, the action
they took perfectly controlled the light: It went on every time they
pressed a button, and it never went on if they didn't press. The others,
though, had no control whatsoever: The light went on regardless of
whether or not they pressed the button; they were helpless. The people
in both groups were asked to judge, as accurately as they could, how
much control they had. Depressed people were very accurate. When they
had control, they assessed it accurately, and when they did not have
control, they said so. The nondepressed people astounded Alloy and
Abramson: These subjects were accurate when they had control, but when
they were helpless, they were undeterred---they still judged that they
had a great deal of control. The depressed people knew the truth. The
nondepressed people had benign illusions that they were not helpless
when they actually were.

Alloy and Abramson wondered if maybe lights and button pushing did not
matter enough, so they added money: When the light went on, the
participants won money; when the light did not go on, they lost money.
But the benign illusions of nondepressed people did not go away; in
fact, they increased. Under one condition, where everyone had some
control, the task was rigged so that everyone lost money. Here,
nondepressed people said they had less control than they actually had.
When the task was rigged so that everyone won money, nondepressed people
said they had more control than they actually had. Depressed people, on
the other hand, were rock solid, accurate whether they won or lost.
Supporting evidence con rms that depressed people are accurate judges of
how much skill they have, whereas nondepressed people think they are
much more skillful than others judge them to be (80 percent of American
men think they are in the top half of social skills). Nondepressed
people remember more good events than actually happened, and they forget
the bad events. Depressed people are accurate about both. Nondepressed
people believe that if it was a success, they did it, it is going to
last, and, moreover, that they are good at everything; but if it was a
failure, someone did it to them, it is going away quickly, and it was
just this one little thing. Depressed people are evenhanded about
success and failure. "Success has a thousand fathers, and failure is an
orphan" is only true of the beliefs of nondepressives. In a follow-up
study, Alloy found that nondepressed people who are realists go on to
become depressed at a higher rate than nondepressed people who have
these illusions of control.1 Realism doesn't just coexist with
depression, it is a risk factor for depression, just as smoking is a
risk factor for lung cancer. It is a disturbing idea that depressed
people see reality correctly while nondepressed people distort reality
in a self-serving way. As a therapist I was trained to believe that it
is my job to help a depressed patient to both feel happier and see the
world more clearly. I am supposed to be the agent of happiness as well
as the agent of truth. But maybe truth and happiness antagonize each
other. Perhaps what we have considered good therapy for a

depressed patient merely nurtures benign illusions, making the patient
think that her world is better than it actually is. This possibility is
more than just disturbing when you esh it out. It is downright
subverting of one of our most cherished beliefs about therapy: that the
therapist is the agent of both reality and health. For what other
problems does good mental health depend on deluding oneself? For what
other problems does cure depend on nurturing illusions rather than
facing facts? Maybe the tactics that relieve a problem and the truth
about the problem are not the same.

Nowhere is the antagonism between the tactics of recovery and the truth
better seen than in problems of substance abuse. This chapter is about
alcohol. I will not discuss other recreational drugs or cigarettes at
any length, but all of what I have to say applies to the abuse of these
substances as well. Alcohol and Alcoholism There is a disease called
alcoholism.

An alcoholic is powerless before this illness. Alcoholism is a physical
addiction. Alcoholism is a progressive disease. Once an alcoholic,
always an alcoholic. There is an addictive personality. One drink, and
relapse is inevitable.

All of these statements are commonly believed. All of them are probably
useful. People who abuse alcohol are better o believing them. People who
try to help alcohol abusers can be more e ective if they believe the
statements to be true. Indeed, these beliefs are at the cornerstone of
many self-help groups, including the granddaddy of all self-help groups,
Alcoholics Anonymous. Strangely, however, none of them is clearly true.
At the very least, each is controversial; many scientists view these
"truths" skeptically.

Some view them as excusing misbehavior by relabeling it as a medical
symptom (as psychopathic is substituted for evil, kleptomaniac for
thief, sexual deviant for rapist, pedophile for child molester,
temporary insanity for murder), others view them as political slogans,
and others say they are blatant falsehoods. My primary job is to see if
alcohol abuse is curable. Along the way, however, I cannot avoid looking
at these beliefs. I will not be able to settle the controversies about
alcoholism as a disease, an addiction, a bad habit, or a sin. I do not
have the nal word about the addictive personality, nor about controlled
drinking. I will give you my opinion about these issues, but opinion is
all it is. No false modesty here: While I am an authority on emotion,
and an active researcher on sex and dieting, I am only an educated
reader in the substance-abuse literature. I can give you the latest
word, but my clinical and research experience in this eld is limited.
Are You an Alcoholic? First the man takes a drink, then the drink takes
a drink, then the drink takes the man.

Japanese proverb

Do you have a problem with alcohol? Is it "abuse," or, worse, do you
"depend" on drinking to get through the day? It will not surprise you to
nd out that the lines between handling liquor well, abusing alcohol, and
being dependent on it are far from clear. As a rule of thumb, the more
symptoms you have, the worse your problem. Take the following quiz:
MICHIGAN ALCOHOLISM SCREENING TEST (adapted from Melvin Selzer, M.D.)
POINTS

YES

NO

0

0.  Do you enjoy a drink now and then?
1.  Do you not feel you are a

2

normal drinker? (By normal, I mean you drink less than or as much as
most other people.) 2. Have you ever awakened the

2

morning after some night before and found that you could not remember
part of the evening? 3. Does your wife, husband, a

1

parent, or another near relative ever worry or complain about your
drinking? 4. Can you not stop drinking

2

without a struggle after one or two drinks?

1 2 2 5

5.  Do you ever feel guilty about your drinking?
6.  Do friends or relatives think you are not a normal drinker?
7.  Are you not able to stop drinking when you want to?
8.  Have you ever attended a meeting of Alcoholics

Anonymous? 1

9.  Have you ever gotten into physical ghts when drinking?
10. Has your drinking ever

2

created a problem between you and your wife, husband, parent, or other
relative? 11. Has your wife, husband, or

2

other family member ever gone to anyone for help about your drinking?

2

12. Have you ever lost friends because of your drinking?
13. Have you ever gotten into

2

trouble at work or school because of your drinking?

2

14. Have you ever lost a job because of your drinking?
15. Have you ever neglected your obligations, your family, or your

2

work for two or more days in a row because you were drinking?

1

16. Do you drink before noon fairly often?

2

17. Have you ever been told you have liver trouble? Cirrhosis?
18. After heavy drinking have you ever had delirium tremens (d.t.'s)

- 

*(5 points) or severe shaking* (2 points) or seen things that weren't
really there \*(2 points)?

5 5

19. Have you ever gone to anyone for help about your drinking?
20. Have you ever been in a hospital because of drinking?
21. Have you ever been a patient in a psychiatric hospital or the

2

psychiatric ward of a general hospital where drinking was part of the
problem that resulted in hospitalization? 22. Have you ever been
arrested for drunk driving, driving while

2

intoxicated, or driving under the in uence of alcoholic beverages (2
points for each arrest)?

2

23. Have you ever been arrested, or taken into custody for a few hours,
    because of other drunk

behavior (2 points for each arrest)? Scoring. The scoring is simple.
Total your points. There is no sharp cuto , but a total of 5 points or
more places you in the alcoholic--- dependent on alcohol---category.
Four points suggests that you abuse alcohol. Three points or less
suggests no major alcohol problem. This test is conservative, a
screening test, so it tends to call more people alcoholic than you would
expect. If you score more than 3 points, you should attend very
carefully to the sections that follow on recovery from alcoholism. Is
Alcoholism a Disease? Is alcoholism a disease? There is no question
about substance abuse that has produced more passionate controversy than
this one. Alcoholics Anonymous insists that alcoholism is a disease and
that the alcoholic is "powerless" before it. But for more than a hundred
years, others have insisted that "drunkenness is a vice, not a disease,"
and that "alcoholism is no more a disease than thieving or lynching."2

For the scholar, this debate is a matter of truth and the sanctity of
language. For the helper, this is a matter of helping tactics. Whatever,
this is a subject that inevitably lends itself to give-andtake exchange:
Attack: Alcoholism, unlike a real disease, is not physical. If someone
tells you there is a known metabolic de ciency, a known gene, or a known
biochemical weakness that alcoholics have, hold on to your wallet. There
is no such thing. Alcoholism is a social, economic, and interpersonal
problem, not a physical pathology. Rejoinder: Alcoholism is not a
disease like malaria, with a speci c germ or chemical abnormality as its
cause; it is more like high blood

pressure. Hypertension is bound up with social, interpersonal, and
economic factors, and most hypertension is essential---it has no known
physical cause. But it does have known physical consequences---heart
attack and stroke---just as alcoholism brings cirrhosis of the liver and
brain damage in its wake. Alcoholism, like many diseases, has strong
heritability. Identical twins are more concordant than fraternal twins,
and the o spring of biological parents who are alcoholic are several
times more likely to become alcoholic, even if they are raised by
teetotalers.3

Attack: Heritability does not cut much ice: Stupidity, ugliness, and
criminality are inherited, but that does not make them diseases. You
either have a real disease, like syphilis or schizophrenia, or you
don't. But with alcoholism there is merely a continuum of alcohol
consumed, with heavy drinkers at one extreme. So calling this extreme a
disease is like calling very short people (midgets as opposed to dwarfs)
diseased. Rejoinder: Just as there is no clear dividing line with
hypertension, there is none with alcoholism. All we can say is the more
of it, the worse the problems tend to be. Attack: This is an egregious
instance of victimology, the art of transforming failures into victims.
We are a society that does not take kindly to failure. Failures are felt
to be vaguely immoral---lazy, stupid, mean, or obnoxious. But we have
also become a gentler society in recent years---no longer are our
classrooms appointed with dunce caps or our children's report cards
replete with Fs (we now have "Unsatisfactory" and "Incomplete" instead).
No longer can our kids go unpunished for taunting a retarded child as
the "village idiot." We now deal with failures in a manner that tries to
save them from the humiliations of the past. We relabel them victims,
and of victims no ill can be said. Alcoholics are, in truth, failures,
and their failure is a simple failure of will. They have made bad
choices, and they continue to do so every day. By calling them victims
of a disease, we magically shift the burden of the problem

from choice and personal control, where it belongs, to an impersonal
force---disease. This move erodes individual responsibility and even
lends an aura of moral legitimacy to drunkenness. It magni es the
problem, making change less likely. Rejoinder: Recall the Japanese
proverb cited earlier. As alcoholism worsens, voluntary control gets
weaker. Calling alcoholism a disease highlights how little control its
victims come to have. Choice mattered at rst, but in its later stages,
alcoholics have almost no choice. A driver who chooses to speed down a
freeway in a car with defective brakes and winds up spending years in
casts made some bad early choices that had long-term disastrous
consequences. But his broken neck and useless arm are now illnesses.4

AND so the dispute continues through another half dozen attacks and
rejoinders. There is a decent argument on each side: There are good
reasons to call alcoholism a disease, but there are almost equally good
reasons not to. The dispute is roughly a draw.

But a disease, unlike a triangle or a benzene ring, is not an object of
science. Disease is not well de ned; rather, it is a label that lies
outside science itself and is used to introduce speci c topics. It is a
term like cognition as opposed to short-term memory in psychology, or
life as opposed to gene in biology, or cure as opposed to spinal-cord
damage in medicine. There is some latitude about whether or not to
attach the label disease to alcoholism, and therefore I believe that
other considerations come into play. Primarily, we should ask if people
who label themselves diseased with alcoholism are better o . Are helpers
of alcoholics more e ective if they think they are treating a disease?
Is change more likely? Tactics. The way we explain our failures to
ourselves, unlike the truth of the disease concept of alcoholism, is not
merely academic. In fact, how we label our troubles has sweeping
consequences. When we believe an explanation that is permanent,
pervasive, and personal, we do much worse than when we explain our
problems in

temporary, local, and impersonal terms. For example, if we explain our
unemployment as "I have no talent" (permanent, pervasive, and personal),
we get depressed, we feel helpless, we don't look for a job, and our
failure bleeds into the rest of our lives. If, on the other hand, we
believe that the cause is the recession (temporary, local, and
impersonal), we soon try to nd another job, we ght o depression, we
don't feel worthless or helpless, and we go on in the other domains of
living. This is the main concern of my book Learned Optimism, and it
applies directly to the disease concept of alcoholism. When someone nds
himself dependent on alcohol, and it nally dawns on him that his life,
his family, his career, and everything else he values is in danger, how
should that man explain this to himself? As it turns out, he doesn't
have many choices. He can explain it as a disease. The other
possibilities are to explain it as a vice, a result of bad choices and
bad character, or as sin. Compare disease to vice. Disease is more
temporary (it is often curable), whereas vice is more permanent (it
stems from bad character, and character changes little if at all). A
disease is more speci c (it comes from an accidental biology and
environment), whereas vice is global (it comes from being a bad person).
A disease is impersonal, whereas a vice indicts you because you chose
it. The upshot is that a disease is a more optimistic explanation than
vice, and optimism is about changeability. Pessimistic labels lead to
passivity, whereas optimistic ones lead to attempts to change. It
follows that alcoholics who label themselves as ill will be less
depressed, less helpless, have higher self-esteem, and, most important,
will try harder to change or be changed than alcoholics who label
themselves bad people. There is another bene t of the disease label: It
is a ticket into the medical care system.

I come down on the side of the disease concept of alcoholism. Not
because it is unimpeachably true (I doubt that), but because it is more
hopeful than the alternative explanations available until recently.
Alcoholics who see themselves as ill, and professionals who see their
alcoholic clients as ill, are more likely to try to change this

state of a airs than if they see immorality. The "disease" of alcoholism
is one of the therapeutic illusions that can help make life bearable for
alcoholics.

Alcoholics Anonymous, in my view, only gets it half right. By calling
alcoholism a disease, AA makes change more likely than if it let its
members believe they were vice-ridden or sinful---the main alternative
explanations when AA was founded. But the modern era has invented some
gentler alternatives: A "habit disorder," a "behavioral problem," even a
"human frailty" are ways a sophisticated alcoholic could explain his
failures now. Each of these is a markedly more optimistic label than
"vice" or "sin," and probably more optimistic than "disease." Habits can
change, behavioral problems are speci c, and frailties come and go.
These ways of looking at alcoholism promote more change than either the

vice and sin views or the disease model.5 This contrast becomes sharper
when you consider some of AA's famous twelve steps. Step one, for
instance, has the alcoholic "powerless" before his disease. The disease
is genetic and beyond his control. Only by relinquishing control to a
"higher power" can recovery take place. The disease is always there,
rendering him ever susceptible to relapse. This framework cuts both
ways. On the one hand, powerlessness is sometimes the stu of religious
conversion. The dark night of the soul can steel people to quit drinking
in the face of enormous temptation and stick with this decision. On the
other hand, a belief in powerlessness tends to undo the main virtue of
the disease view, which is to move people out of sloth toward trying to
change themselves. A sense of powerlessness often leads to passivity,
helplessness, and hopelessness. Is There an Addictive Personality?
Alcoholics are depressed, anxious, dependent, oral, lled with selfdoubts
and self-loathing, and they harbor a sense of inferiority. They

are also pessimistic, self-defeating, paranoid, aggressive, and
psychopathic, to name just a few of their worst personality
characteristics. These facts have led investigators to claim that there
is an addictive personality: some constellation of these traits. This
means that people with such personalities are easy targets for addictive
substances or behaviors. Take away the alcohol, and they will turn to
crack, to sex, to gambling, or to cigarettes. It also implies that such
people turn to alcohol to numb their emotional torments. You may be
worried that you or someone close to you--- displaying this
constellation---is at risk.

This is a matter that has been dealt with de nitively, though it took
many years of work and a major methodological advance: longterm studies
of the life span of alcoholics---prospective, "longitudinal" studies.
The idea of an addictive personality is rooted in looking at alcoholics
for only a short time, say a year, or even ve years. When this is done,
you see many of these so-called addictive traits. But it is absolutely
crucial that these people are studied while they are abusing alcohol.
Which comes rst, the addictive traits or the abuse of alcohol? It could
be that watching helplessly as alcohol destroys your life brings about
anxiety, depression, crime, dependency, pessimism, inferiority feelings.
Alternatively, it might also be that these traits bring about
alcoholism. Two landmark studies have looked at groups of men6 over a
period of forty or more years: from childhood---before any
alcoholism---until late middle age. Both have been conducted by George
Vaillant, a Harvard researcher, and my candidate for the most important
psychoanalyst since Freud. In one study, the Harvard classes of 1939--44
were combed for their healthiest members. Five percent were chosen on
the basis of extraordinarily good physical and mental health, as well as
intellectual prowess. As undergraduates they were endlessly interviewed
and took scores of psychological tests. These men have since been
followed closely to this very day. Of the 252 men, 30 became abusers of
alcohol.

Vaillant asked how these 30 men di ered, before they became alcoholic,
from the other 222 men.

Before I report what he found, I want to mention his second study, whose
subjects came from the opposite end of the American spectrum of
opportunity: Boston's inner city. These men, too, were followed for
forty years. Seventy-one of them became alcoholic; 260 did not. Again,
Vaillant asked how the alcoholics di ered from the rest before their
alcoholism. The results of the two studies were identical. There is no
sign of an alcoholic personality. The men who became alcoholics di ered
in only two ways from the men who did not: They had more alcoholic
relatives and they were more likely to be Northern European
(particularly Irish). Emotional insecurity, depression, dependence,
criminality while young, and the rest of the addictive panoply (in the
absence of alcoholic parents) did not predict alcoholism.7

These results are a breath of fresh air. Before Vaillant's discovery,
clinicians who looked at alcoholics only during the disease felt free to
make such alarmist pronouncements as "The development of the disease
process of alcoholism is inconceivable without underlying

psychopathology."8 Vaillant's discovery is that such pronouncements are
simply wrong: It is alcoholism that produces the traits of depression,
dependence, criminality, and so on. The only thing alcoholics have in
common prior to their alcoholism is a dangerous susceptibility to
alcohol, not underlying bad character or mental illness that merely
displays itself in the guise of drunkenness.

The good news is that once alcohol abuse ends, so do these undesirable
traits. The recovered alcoholic is no more depressive, psychopathic,
pessimistic, or sel sh than any of the rest of us. Since he may have
missed two decades of his life, however, he is often less grown up in
work, in emotional life, and in relationships than other men his age. As
my closest childhood friend told me after recovering from twenty- ve
years of drug abuse, "Marty, I'm fty going on twenty- ve."

Is Alcoholism Progressive? It is a central tenet of AA that alcoholism
is not only a disease but a progressive disease. Like syphilis, which
unchecked progresses from a sore on the penis to weakness of the limbs
to insanity to death, alcoholism unchecked progresses from social
tippling to abuse to addiction to death. Once someone genetically
inclined to be alcoholic starts abusing alcohol, there can be only one
of two outcomes: death from alcoholism or total abstinence. Is this
picture true? There is one sense in which alcoholism is certainly
progressive. Alcohol produces tolerance---you need more and more of it
to give you the same high. Tolerance, along with withdrawal---the
craving that abstinence produces---is what it means to have an
addiction. When someone claims that alcohol or heroin produces a
physical addiction, they are wrong if they believe that there is some
known chemical or biological pathology. Rather, "physical" addiction is
a misnomer. All it refers to are behavioral facts: It takes more and
more of the substance to work, and if you stop taking it, you will su er
withdrawal.9

But needing more and more alcohol is not what AA means by the claim that
alcoholism is progressive. This claim means that the symptoms get worse
with more alcohol. First come blackouts and frequent intoxication, then
arrests, complaints from friends and relatives, and morning drinking.
This is followed by repeated failures to stop drinking. Then come job
loss and benders. Finally, after three to ten years, come convulsions,
hospital treatment, and AA. This ends either with successful abstinence
or with death.10 The same landmark study that answered the question of
whether there is an addictive personality tells us whether alcoholism is
progressive. Because the study provides an entire lifetime picture of
the alcoholic---before, during, and after (if there is an after)---it
maps out the whole course of alcoholism.

Here, AA gets it mostly right. Alcoholism is not inevitably progressive,
but it usually is. Of the no inner-city alcoholics looked at over forty
years, 73 followed a progressive course ending either in abstinence
(about half) or extreme abuse and death (the other half). The remaining
3 7 did not show a progressive disease. These men recovered from
alcoholism to social drinking or periodic heavy drinking without much in
the way of adverse symptoms. Vaillant has just obtained the fty-year
follow-up of these men. He now paints an even more complete picture:
Early in life, alcoholism progresses. Drinking gets heavier and heavier
from age 18 to age 30 to age 40. Then it begins to stabilize. Few
alcoholics are worse at age 65 than they were at age 45. Middle age, if
you manage to live that long, is usually self-correcting. Crime,
obesity, schizophrenia, manic-depression, and alcoholism all tend to
burn out in middle age. Vaillant states a "One-Third" rule for
alcoholism: By age 65, one-third are dead or in awful shape, one-third
are abstinent or drinking socially, and one-third are still trying to
quit.11

Can you tell in advance if an alcoholic is headed for the progressive
course or the rarer nonprogressive course? Those men headed for the
progressive disease had the worst symptoms once they started drinking,
they smoked more (two packs a day), and they spent more years feeling
"out of control" of their drinking ( fteen versus four years). Recovery
What are your chances of recovering from alcoholism? Does treatment
work? Does AA work?

These are very di cult questions to answer. I know of no other area of
treatment research in which so much money has been spent and so little
has been accomplished. To my mind, the lack of knowledge is a scandal.
The right way to determine if treatment X (say, AA or a

medication or an inpatient program) works is simple, in principle. Give
a group of alcoholics treatment X. Give a control group, matched for
factors relevant to recovery (like employment, emotional stability,
severity, and social class), everything except treatment X. Then wait
and see who shows a better outcome. This has been done for most of the
problems we have looked at in this book. It has not been done for
alcoholism. There is one obstacle to good outcome studies of alcoholism:
Researchers are dealing with a problem in which a cycle of recovery and
relapse is repeated for years in its natural history. Illumination as to
why relapse is so common begins with what does not protect you against
relapse. George Vaillant, for instance, compared the childhoods of those
alcoholics who relapsed time and again with the childhoods of those who
became securely abstinent. All of the following do not predict who will
become securely abstinent: good mothering

high boyhood competence

not coming from a multiproblem family high IQ

good education

no family alcoholism This should shock those of you who believe in the
importance of childhood experience (chapter 14 will shake your belief in
this dogma further). So many factors that seem to protect people against
devastation by other psychological troubles fail to protect people
against alcoholism because this problem, unlike other diseases, destroys
three of the most important factors that facilitate recovery from any
disease: ego strength, willpower, and social support. Alcohol damages
the brain: Strong people with tenacious willpower are rendered weak and
pliant. Alcohol renders "kings and geniuses no di erent from paupers and
imbeciles." It is the "great leveler of

human di erences." Further, alcohol systematically destroys your loves
and friendships. It robs you of social support by rendering you sel sh,
irresponsible, and out of control over anger and sadness. Without
friends and family, the su erers of any chronic disease have a worse
course.12

If all these childhood factors fail to make recovery more likely, what
succeeds? First, the fewer symptoms you have on the alcoholism quiz, the
more likely it is that you will recover. After that, being married,
having a job, being middle-aged, being welleducated, being white, and
being middle-class all predict recovery. In short, social stability
helps enormously. People who are in this category, rather than the "skid
row" category, have twice the

chance of recovering.13 Paradoxically, extreme severity helps recovery
as well. When people are very badly threatened---with death, dis
gurement, bankruptcy---they are ripe for conversion. Hitting bottom can,
unmistakably, be a powerful force for dramatic change and recovery.
Having a middling case of alcoholism, being a "heavy drinker," has the
worst outcome. It is not mild enough to make recovery easy and not
extreme enough to threaten life, family, and livelihood so shockingly as
to jolt you into abstinence. Vaillant's Harvard men who were moderately
alcoholic at forty still are as they enter old age. The mild cases and
the extreme cases do better.14

What are the overall chances of recovery from severe alcoholism in the
natural course of events? First, one major caveat: The chronic relapses
of alcoholism mean that when researchers look for only a short
time---say, for six months after any treatment---they will see a rosy
picture. Perhaps as many as 65 percent of people treated are on the
wagon for this long after treatment. Every alcoholic has gone on the
wagon time and again. Trying to give it up and repeatedly failing is
part of what it means to be alcoholic. But the real picture starts to
emerge after a minimum of eighteen months. Studies that

reveal true chances of recovery from alcoholism are the few very
long-term studies.

Here are some representative statistics: Of no alcoholic men from the
inner city whom George Vaillant followed for their lifetime, 49 (45
percent) became abstinent for at least a year. Of these 49, 21 (19
percent) became securely abstinent---on the wagon for at least three
years. Of 100 clinically treated alcoholics Vaillant followed for twelve
years after hospital discharge, 25 percent were stably abstinent, 21
percent were uncertain, 3 7 percent were dead, and 17 percent were still
alcohol-dependent. Similar percentages emerge from a ten-year follow-up
of British alcoholics. So the best estimates I can venture about the
long-term chances of recovery from alcoholism are:15

A substantial minority of alcoholics recover.

About one in ve will recover completely. About half will die prematurely
or remain alcohol-dependent.

Socially stable alcoholics have about double the chances of recovery.
Very severe and very mild symptoms most suggest recovery. When Vaillant
compared the men who became abstinent with the men who died or remained
alcoholic, he found four natural healing factors among those who
recovered. First, the abstinent found a substitute dependency to sustain
themselves: candy binges, compulsive eating, Librium, prayer and
meditation, chain smoking, work, or a hobby. Second, the abstinent men
were threatened with painful and disastrous medical consequences:
Hemorrhaging, a fractured hip, seizures, and ghastly stomach problems
all brought these men face-to-face with physical destruction (painless
liver disease was not enough to drive the point home). Third, the men
found a source of increased hope: Religious conversion and Alcoholics
Anonymous (of which more in a moment) were typical. Finally, the men
often found new love relationships, un-scarred by

the guilt and the devastation they had already in icted on their wives.
The more of these four healing factors the men were able to incorporate,
the better their chances.

It is against this background of a natural healing process that formal
treatment must be compared. Sadly, formal treatments work only
marginally better than the natural rate of recovery.

Your rst impulse, if you have the means, is probably to enter one of the
many elaborate inpatient medical-treatment units for alcoholics. These
programs are expensive and usually involve a team of helpers. The best
ones o er a wide range of services: drying out (detoxi cation),
counseling, behavior therapy, medical treatment for complications,
aversion therapy, a comfortable setting, and AA-type groups. You can
have all or some of these. Long-term outcome sometimes seems quite good:
For example, one unit points with pride to a recent ten-year follow-up
of two hundred former patients. Sixty-one percent were "completely" or
"stably" remitted.16 But the patients from this study were not from skid
row---they were socially stable, and so could be expected to have
roughly this good an outcome anyway. To determine if such programs do
any better than natural recovery, a matched control group is required.
This study lacked one, and, indeed, controlled-outcome studies of
inpatient units are rare. The patients are usually paying customers,
they don't want to be randomly put into a control group, and they will
go elsewhere for treatment if so assigned.

However, there have been some attempts to do controlled studies. A
particularly dramatic one was done in London fteen years ago. One
hundred married male alcoholics were randomly given either of two
treatments. The rst treatment was elaborate: a year of counseling and
social work, an introduction to AA, aversion therapy with drugs, drugs
to alleviate withdrawal, as well as free access to inpatient medical
treatment. The second treatment was merely one session of advice,
involving the drinker, his wife, and a psychiatrist. The psychiatrist
told the couple that the husband had alcoholism and that he should
abstain from all drinking. Further, he should stay in his job, and the
couple should try to stay together. The theme was

that recovery "lay in \[the couple's\] own hands and could not be taken
over by others." Twelve months later, the two groups looked the same:
About 25 percent from each group were doing better.17

George Vaillant found the same result when he compared his own program
of intensive clinic treatment at the Cambridge (Massachusetts) Hospital
to no treatment. His one hundred patients dried out, received medical
and psychiatric consultation, halfway housing, an alcohol-education
program, and twenty-four-hour walkin counseling for themselves and their
relatives. Two years later, one-third were improved and two-thirds were
doing poorly. Vaillant pooled four more similar treatment studies and
had roughly the same results: one-third improved, two-thirds doing
poorly. Then he compared all these treatment outcomes to three pooled
notreatment studies. With no treatment, one-third improved and twothirds
did poorly.18

One study of 227 union workers newly identi ed as alcoholic contradicts
these results. The workers were randomly assigned to either inpatient
hospital treatment, or compulsory attendance at AA for a year without
hospitalization (or they could choose no treatment). The hospital
treatment, which lasted about three weeks, included drying out and AA
meetings, and was aimed toward abstinence; afterward, these workers were
required to attend AA three times a week for a year and to be sober at
work. The compulsory AA group had the same constraints, but without
hospitalization. Two years later, the hospitalization group was doing
much better than the other two groups: It had twice as many abstainers
(37 percent versus 17 and 16 percent), almost twice as many men who were
never drunk, and only half as many who needed to be hospitalized
again.19

Putting all this information together, I can recommend inpatient
treatment, but only marginally. It is expensive, and there is only one
decent study showing that it improves on the natural course of recovery;
many studies, admittedly of lesser quality, contradict that study.

As for outpatient psychotherapy, there is no evidence that any form of
talking therapy---not psychoanalysis, not supportive therapy, not
cognitive therapy---can get you to give up alcohol. There has been only
one small-scale study of behavior therapy. In it, alcoholics learned
skills of how to control their drinking. The study had promising
results, but little follow-up of this treatment has taken place.20 Once
abstinence has taken hold, however, talking therapy might help ease the
di cult adjustment back into sobriety, responsible family life, and
steady employment. Overall, recovery from alcohol abuse, unlike recovery
from a compound fracture, does not depend centrally on what kind of
inpatient or outpatient treatment you get, or whether you get any
treatment at all.21

With regard to medications, the most widely used drug is Antabuse (disul
ram). Antabuse and alcohol don't mix: When an alcoholic takes a dose of
Antabuse and then drinks alcohol, he becomes horribly nauseated and
short of breath. This discourages alcohol drinking; but the alcoholic
can always decide to eliminate Antabuse rather than alcohol. To avoid
this, Antabuse is surgically implanted under the skin. In controlled
studies, however, there is no di erence in later drinking between
alcoholics who have implanted Antabuse or a placebo. Both groups
continue heavy drinking when the implantation ends.22

The use of Antabuse is but one in the larger portfolio of treatments
that aim to produce an aversion to alcohol. In electrical aversion,
shock is paired with taking a drink in the hope of making the taste of
alcohol aversive; this treatment does not seem to work. In chemical
aversion, drugs that make alcoholics sick to their stomach are paired
with the taste of alcohol. There is better theoretical rationale for
this move (recall the potency of the sauce béarnaise e ect discussed in
chapter 6, on phobias). Over thirty thousand alcoholics have received
such treatments, but without clear e ect---the treated groups do about
as well as matched controls would be expected to do. Astonishingly,
there has been only one study with random assignment to aversion or
control.

Overall, then, I cannot recommend aversion therapy for alcoholism. There
is simply no scienti cally worthy evidence that aversion treatment
improves on the natural course of recovery.23

Naltrexone provides new hope for the successful medication of
alcoholics. Joseph Volpicelli, an addiction researcher at the University
of Pennsylvania, proposed that alcohol drinking stimulates the body's
opiate system and so causes a high. By blocking the brain's opiate
system chemically, the high should be blocked. In a twelve-week study of
seventy male alcoholics, half got naltrexone (an opioid blocker) and
half got a placebo. Fifty-four percent of the placebo-treated men
relapsed, but only 23 percent of the naltrexone-treated men did. Most of
the men had at least one drink during the study; the placebo-treated men
went on to binge, but most of the naltrexone-treated men stopped after
one drink--- just what you'd expect if naltrexone had indeed blocked the
high. A second study, at Yale, has replicated these e ects. Caution is
in order because of the lack of long-term follow-up, but this is the
most promising development to date in the otherwise fruitless history of
medication for alcoholics.24

THE SINGLE most frustrating question is whether Alcoholics Anonymous and
the self-help groups that have spun o from it work. Alcoholics Anonymous
cannot be evaluated with any certainty for several reasons. First, AA
cannot be scienti cally compared to the "natural course of recovery," my
criterion for all the comparisons above, because the group itself is
such a ubiquitous part of the natural course of recovery in America. Try
to create a control group of alcoholics whose members do not already go
to AA. When you do, you will nd that they are usually less severely
alcoholic than those who enter AA, and thus a useless control. Second,
AA does not welcome scienti c scrutiny. It promises anonymity to its
members and inculcates loyalty to the group---two conditions that make
longterm follow-up di cult and disinterested self-reporting unusual. AA
bears more resemblance to a religious sect than to a treatment, a

fact that is not irrelevant to its success. Third, the people who stay
in AA and attend thousands of meetings tend to be the people who stay
sober. This does not necessarily mean that AA is the cause. The causal
arrow may go the opposite way: Drunkenness causes people to slink away
in guilt, and being able to remain sober allows people to stay. Finally,
AA is a sacred cow. Criticism of it is rare, and testimonial praise is
almost universal. The organization has been known to go after its most
trenchant critics as if they were heretics, and so criticism, even in
the scienti c literature, is timid. The Right Treatment ALCOHOLISM
SUMMARY TABLE\*

Given this mine eld, I will hazard an evaluation anyway. My best guess
is that AA is only marginally e ective overall, but that it may be quite
e ective for certain subgroups of alcoholics. I start with the sad fact
that there has not been a single, sound, controlled study of AA. This is
unfortunate because AA is the most widespread treatment for alcoholism,
and current practice among clinicians, ministers, and family doctors is
to send most of their alcoholic clients directly to AA. Advocates
publish glowing numbers from uncontrolled studies, but their methodology
is so awed that I am forced to dismiss them. George Vaillant's
inner-city men provide a sample---with no control group---followed for a
very long time. Among the men who were ever abstinent and the 20 percent
who became securely abstinent, more than one-third rated AA as
"important." Indeed, AA was second only to "willpower" on this score. In
another of his studies, Vaillant followed a clinic sample for eight
years, and 35 percent became stably abstinent: Of these, two-thirds had
become regular AA attenders. I cannot tell which causes which, but it is
an often-repeated nding that of the one-third of alcoholics who have a
good long-term outcome, many participate religiously in AA, attending
hundreds of meetings a year.25

AA is not for everyone. It is spiritual, even outright religious, and so
repels the secular-minded. It demands group adherence, and so repels the
nonconformist. It is confessional, and so repels those with a strong
sense of privacy. Its goal is total abstinence, not a return to social
drinking. It holds alcoholism to be a disease, not a vice or a frailty.
One or more of these premises are unacceptable to many alcoholics, and
these people will probably drop out. For those who remain, however, my
best guess is that many of them do bene t. It would be a mistake to be
formulaic about who will nd AA congenial. All sorts of unlikely types
show up and stay---poets and atheists and loners. AA changes the
character of some of those who stick with it. After all, it lls two of
Vaillant's four criteria for bolstering recovery: It provides a
substitute dependency, and it is a source of hope.

Total Abstinence One of my closest friends, Paul Thomas, is a bartender.
Paul is nothing if not fanatical. When he took up bridge, he became a
Life Master in under two years. When he took up golf, he became a
scratch golfer in a summer. When he fathered a Down's syndrome child, he
became president of the Philadelphia chapter for helping Down's
children. When he took up drinking, he drank for ten solid years. He has
not touched a drop in the last fteen years. When asked how he does it,
he says he doesn't need reminders of hitting bottom because he sees them
every day among his customers. When I read the intensely passionate
literature on whether total abstinence or a return to social drinking
should be the goal of recovery, I decided to get his opinion. I had
dinner with him at his bar. I told him that the literature showed, quite
de nitively, that a fraction of recovered alcoholics can return to
social drinking. His view was uncomplicated. "I hope they keep this a
secret from the rest." Paul's reaction makes a good deal of sense to me.
First, the facts: Some fraction of recovered alcoholics are able to
return to drinking without major problems like binges, blackouts, and
violence. Just how small this minority is is a matter of debate. George
Vaillant found that between 5 and 15 percent of his alcoholics returned
to social drinking. In a twenty-year follow-up of Swedish alcoholics, 25
percent had become social drinkers and only 20 percent were abstainers.
Fewer than this percentage of severe alcoholics are likely to become
social drinkers, and only the alcoholics with the fewest major problems
seem able to take this route. When the most severe alcoholics recover,
they do so by total abstinence. By Paul's logic, the possibility of
social drinking should be kept secret from them.26

Controversy still reigns about whether---in the long run--- controlled
drinking works as well as abstinence. In 1972, two bold alcohol
researchers, Mark and Linda Sobell, published successful results of a
controlled-drinking program. Numerous defenders of AA scorched the
Sobells. Mary Pendery and her colleagues, for example,

argued that the Sobells' results, looked at more closely ten years
later, were grim: For example, a number of the "successes" had died,
probably of alcoholism. But in turn, Pendery has been attacked for
failing to mention that in the Sobells' abstinence control group, a
number had died in the ten intervening years. And so it goes. The issue
is still unsettled.27

Surely, the goal of total abstinence has one main virtue. Believing in
it keeps severe alcoholics on the path most likely to lead to recovery.
Even if it is true that some alcoholics can recover and still drink a
little, the goal of total abstinence, like the disease label, is
probably a good tactic. The goal of abstinence has one disadvantage,
however. When the alcoholic believes that taking a single drink means he
has fallen back into his old habit, one lapse can bring down his house
of cards. A binge becomes very likely. In one study, the
total-abstinence goal was compared to the controlled-drinking goal.
After a year, the two groups had the same rate of abstinence---about
one-third. But among the nonabstinent (the "failures"), the abstinence
treatment resulted in three times as much drinking as the
controlled-drinking approach.28

Many people who eventually recover from alcoholism slip occasionally
along the way. Rather than viewing this as "I'm in relapse," "My disease
has won," or "I've lost it," there is a more optimistic way of thinking.
A slip can instead be seen as a temporary setback triggered by external
events, not as a lack of willpower. Lapses are opportunities to learn
better how to cope, not signs that the alcoholic is once more powerless
before his disease.29

The abstinence goal accords with the myth that alcoholics su er from
uncontrollable drinking. But in the natural course of alcoholism,
alcoholics frequently control their drinking---in the short run:
Sometimes one drink leads to the next and the next, but on some
occasions the alcoholic chooses to stop. Alcoholics frequently control
how much they drink---not drinking right before a job interview, for
example. Most alcoholics have gone on the

wagon several times but have eventually fallen o . The problem is not
that one drink always leads to loss of control, but that in the long
run, most alcoholics start drinking again---even after repeated
successful control of drinking. Alcoholism has immense momentum, but
total loss of control is not an accurate description. Change: Alcohol,
Cigarettes, Drugs Alcohol presents a picture similar to that of most
commonly abused drugs: cigarettes, cocaine, and opiates. First, some
people are very vulnerable to any one of these appetites, probably for
genetic reasons. There is no evidence, however, of an "addictive"
personality that is vulnerable to all of them. Second, in the natural
course of things, if the abuse is severe, fewer than half (only a third
for alcohol) will be able to give it up. This means the problem is
certainly not incurable, but the outlook is not rosy. Third, no medical
or psychological treatment yet devised much improves on the natural
recovery rate. If your rst impulse is to get expensive hospital
treatment, psychotherapy, or medication, think again. There is no secret
expertise about alcoholism. Family, friends, and support that provides
pressure and hope---not the least being AA, religion, and work---and,
crucially, the individual himself are the site of the cure. Heavy
drinking, it must always be remembered, is a way of life. When, for
example, the alcoholic goes to a party, he sees the party in di erent
terms than the rest of us do. "How well stocked is the bar?" "Isn't that
my neighbor's brother-in-law? He will surely snitch." "I wonder if my
old crony Tom is coming, so we can make the rounds afterward?" Heavy
drinking is no less a way of life than bookishness for an intellectual,
politics for a senator, or love of Jesus for a fundamentalist Christian.
Giving it up is not a matter of doing without a hobby. It is closer to
doing without the self.30

In America, slavery was once part of the southern way of life. It was
believed to be constitutional, and southerners felt their sense of

self violated when abolitionists tried to take it away. Yet slavery is a
terrible institution. Wife beaters and their battered spouses have a way
of life, one that is also terrible. Being a way of life does not make
something right or good or benign.

Heavy drinking is a bad way of life. It destroys the individual and
those he loves. There is nothing to be said in its favor. These are old
saws. But what is new is the emerging fact that individuals cannot do
all that much about this way of life once it has taken hold. After a
lifetime of trying, about one-third of alcoholics escape it. Onethird
escaping such a debilitating condition is a real accomplishment, but it
is the other two-thirds that constitute the major tragedy. Drugs (with
the possible new exception of naltrexone), psychotherapy, AA, inpatient
treatment, and willpower all show only the slightest victories---at
best---for that two-thirds. When a destructive institution like slavery
or wife beating will not be overthrown by the individuals it most hurts,
we are justi ed in appealing to something more powerful than the self to
overthrow it. Just as there is a higher morality than individual choice
that makes slavery and wife beating wrong, so too with alcoholism. Few
of our problems cry out more clearly for social control.

Social control has been tried, you say, and it failed. I agree:
Prohibition, although it decreased alcohol-related illness, was a
tremendous failure, and I do not propose reviving it. But how much
alcohol is consumed and the rate of alcoholism are very sensitive to
less-sweeping social control. Liquor taxes, for example, are low. They
have not kept up with in ation over the last forty years. It is
estimated that doubling the present federal tax would cut cirrhosis
deaths by six thousand per year, to say nothing of the number of lives
it would save on the highways. Reducing the number of liquor stores and
bars, restricting advertising, raising age limits, and curtailing pro ts
from the sale and manufacture of alcohol would all cut heavy drinking.31
When individuals are powerless to change a problem of the magnitude of
alcoholism, it falls nally to the society to act.

IT HAS become fashionable to blame alcoholism on the way your parents
raised you or on other misfortunes of childhood. The very
unchangeability of alcoholism, in this view, testi es to the power that
childhood events exert over adult life. In fact, all of the problems of
adulthood examined in this book have been attributed to such events. In
the next and nal part, we look at whether your childhood exerts such a
hold on your life today. At stake is nothing less than whether you are a
prisoner of the past or are free to change.

PART FOUR

Growing Up---At Last

Freud considered that after age 45, psychoanalysis

could do nothing for a neurotic: Jung was convinced

that 45 was roughly the period of life when its immensely important
second development began, and that this second period was concerned with
matters which were, in the broadest sense, religious.

Many people are put o by this attitude. They want

nothing to do with religion and are too lazy or too frightened to accept
the notion that religion may

mean something very di erent from orthodoxy. They attach themselves to
the notion that Man is the center

of all things, the highest development of life, and that when the
individual consciousness is closed by death,

that is, as far as they are concerned, the end of the

matter. Man, as the instrument of some vastly greater

Will, does not interest them, and they do not see their refusal as a
limitation on their understanding.

Robertson Davies, "The Essential Jung"1

14 Shedding the Skins of Childhood

WHEN DOES TIME stop for you? Does it happen when you are making love,
playing with your children, speaking at a meeting, looking at a
masterpiece, or when you yourself are painting? Where are you truly at
home---on a golf course in Maui, reading in your study, planting
delphiniums, at a Springsteen concert, serving co ee in a shelter for
the homeless? These questions are not trivial. You must ask them and
listen to your own answers. For they are pivotal in a transition that
many of you are now making: the transition from the rst season to the
second season of your life. There are, I believe, only two great seasons
in life: the season of expansion and the season of contraction. This
chapter is about these two seasons. The season of expansion begins at
birth. Your overriding task in this season is to discover the demands of
the world as you nd it and to t yourself to those demands: schooling,
nding a mate, having children, embracing the values of your place and
time, embarking on your life's work, and, if you are lucky, mastering
it. Evolution has ensured that this will be an extrinsic season, your
time for learning what is expected of you and then doing what is
mandated from the outside. I suspect that the average reader of this
book is between the ages of thirty and forty- ve. You, average reader,
are now coming into "the height of your powers." You are roughly halfway
through life.

You are at the time when the season begins.

rst season ends and the second

In the second season, your life will be de ned not so much by the
outside world as by certain realities that have been coalescing inside
you. Your task during the season of contraction centers around what you
learned during the season of expansion. You discovered then the
activities, objects, and people you love, things that were not means to
any end but ends in themselves. When you sensed them and suspected what
they meant, you probably postponed pursuing them. Their song has become
more insistent lately. The second season allows you to postpone no
longer. You will rearrange your life to t what you have discovered you
are. From now until very late in life, when so many of your options will
narrow, you will pursue what your inner world demands. What drives the
transition from one season to the next can be--- but rarely is---the
sense of completion that comes from total success. Sometimes it is
"topping out"---going as high as you can or want to. It can be your
children grown to independence. But completions need not be the motive
force: Failure, frustration, or sheer boredom can be marvelously
productive in thrusting you from one stage to the next. Either way, the
upheaval comes. You slowly and subtly stop doing what you used to do,
stop being what you used to be, stop salivating to the old stimuli: You
nd an excuse to miss a party so that you can sit home in front of a re
with your spouse; you start wearing sneakers to work; you stop going to
movies with subtitles; you let your New Yorker subscription lapse; you
go to church for the rst time since childhood. You become less and less
what others expect.

Responding at last to what is intrinsic can mean self-indulgence,
frivolity, or even emptiness. But it need not. An astonishingly large
part of what is truly you coincides with old notions like duty, service,
generosity, and nurturance: helping to build a community center---by
both laying bricks and raising funds; running for o ce; guiding young
people---your grandchildren---to maturity; giving back much of what you
have so arduously won.

It is perilously easy to fail at making this transition---to allow what
happened to you in the rst season to cripple you in the second. But
success is common, contrary to those who would have us believe we are
prisoners of childhood. Growth---even huge leaps ---occurs throughout
adulthood. I dedicate what follows to your change and to your growth.
The Inner Child The centerpiece of my discussion here is the philosophy
of the "recovery movement," the widely popular view that adult problems
are caused by childhood mistreatment. I criticize this view on both
factual and moral grounds, though I am addressing it in order to be
constructive. I want to underscore the theme of this book: that you can
make major changes all throughout adulthood if you know the ways of
changing that actually work.

Many failings of adult life are currently blamed on the misfortunes of
childhood. Depression in mid-life is blamed on the punishment meted out
by parents decades before. In her 1991 bestseller, Patti Davis, Ronald
and Nancy Reagan's daughter, blames her current troubles on her parents.
She highlights being slapped in the face by her mother when she was
eight, and she blames both her mother and her father for not giving her
enough love because they were too much in love with each other (this is
the First Family, no less). In the larger society, inability to love is
blamed on sexual abuse by an uncle, a father, or a brother. The talk
shows buzz with tearful recountings of childhood incest and sexual
molestation. Your beating up on your kids is blamed on your father
beating up on you. Indeed, the basic premise of the recovery movement is
that bad events in childhood cripple adult life. But, the movement
promises us, this is curable. By coming to grips with those early
traumas, we can restore our health and sanity.1 Farquhar is a troubled
thirty-year-old; angry, depressed, and guilt-ridden. He

remembers a time when he was three: He refused to go to bed and screamed
"I hate you"

to his mother. His father, enraged, grabbed him and shouted, "You have
violated God's

Fifth Commandment: 'Honor thy father and thy mother.'" Little Farquhar
felt guilt and shame, and now grown-up Farquhar, wounded, still carries
this "toxic guilt" around. By doing "inner child" exercises, Farquhar
rids himself of this burden. He phones his father (now seventy-two) and
discharges his anger. He relives all the pain and guilt, and in his mind
he divorces his father and mother.2

Here are the twin premises of the inner-child recovery movement: Bad
events in childhood exert major in uence on adulthood. Coming to grips
with those events undoes their in uence.

These premises are enshrined in lm and theater. The biggest
psychological hit of 1991 was the lm version of Pat Conroy's lyrical
novel The Prince of Tides, in which Tom Wingo (Nick Nolte), an alcoholic
football coach, has been red from his job, and is cold to his wife and
little girls. He and his sister were raped twenty- ve years before as
kids. He tearfully confesses this to Dr. Susan Lowenstein (Barbra
Streisand), a New York psychoanalyst, and thereby recovers his ability
to feel, to coach, and to control his drinking. His sister, presumably,
would also recover from her suicidal schizophrenia if she could only
relive the rape. The audience is in tears. The audience seems to have no
doubt about the premises. But I do.

The Power of Childhood It is an easy matter to believe that childhood
events hold sway over what kind of an adult you become. The evidence
seems to be right before your eyes. The kids of smart parents turn out
to be smart; it must be all those books and good conversations. Kids
from broken homes often divorce; they must have lacked good "role
models" for how to love enough. Kids who were sexually abused often
become frightened pessimists; little wonder, they found the world a
frightful

place. Kids of alcoholics often turn out alcoholic; they learned
uncontrolled drinking at their father's knee. The kids of authoritarian
parents turn out authoritarian. The kids of basketball players and
musicians turn out to have these talents. Kids who were beaten by their
parents beat up their own kids.

As persuasive as they seem, these observations are hopelessly
confounded. Yes, these people did grow up in worlds in which they were
nurtured in their parents' image, but they also have their parents'
genes. Each of these observations supports a genetic interpretation as
much as a childhood interpretation: smart genes, unloving genes, anxious
genes, pessimistic genes, alcoholic genes, authoritarian genes, athletic
and musical genes, violent genes. Why do the genetic interpretations
sound so farfetched to the modern ear while the childhood
interpretations sound so comfortably true? The appeal of the
child-rearing explanations has a theoretical dimension and a moral
dimension. Freud assumed both that childhood events create adult
personality and that their consequences can be undone by reliving---with
great feeling---the original trauma. Sound familiar? It should, because
the premises are just the same as those of the inner-child movement.
Freud's premises may have undergone a steady decline in currency within
academia for many years, but Hollywood, the talk shows, many therapists,
and the general public still love them. The recovery movement marries
Freud's basic premises to the confessional method of AA. The result is
the most popular self-help movement of the 1990s.

Childhood trauma and catharsis do make good theater. But the appeal of
the inner-child movement goes much deeper, for there is here a
sympathetic moral and political message as well. Its appeal has its
modern beginning with the defeat of the Nazis. The Nazis used the
respectable science of genetics to bolster their theory of Aryan
superiority. Genetically "inferior" people---Jews, Gypsies, Slavs, the
retarded and deformed---were deemed subhuman and were sent to the death
camps. In the wake of our victory over the Nazis, anything they used or
misused was tainted. Nietzsche's

philosophy, Wagner's operas, and authoritarianism all became suspect.
American psychology, already environmental, now shunned genetics
completely and became wedded to explanations of childhood personality
and the dogma of human plasticity.

When stoked by this reaction to Nazism, the logic of the dogma of human
plasticity is: Once we allow the explanation that Sam does better than
Tom because Sam is genetically smarter, we start our slide down the
slippery slope to genocide. After World War II, genetic explanations
became explanations of last resort, for they had the fetid odor of
fascism and racism about them. All this accorded well with our basic
democratic ideal that all men are created equal.

The second aspect of the moral appeal of the inner-child movement is
consolation. Life is full of setbacks. People we love reject us. We
don't get the jobs we want. We get bad grades. Our children don't need
us anymore. We drink too much. We have no money. We are mediocre. We
lose. We get sick. When we fail, we look for consolation, one form of
which is to see the setback as something other than failure---to
interpret it in a way that does not hurt as much as failure hurts. Being
a victim, blaming someone else, or even blaming the system is a powerful
and increasingly widespread form of consolation. It softens many of
life's blows.

Such shifts of blame have a glorious past. Alcoholics Anonymous made the
lives of millions of alcoholics more bearable by giving them the dignity
of a "disease" to replace the ignominy of "failure," "immorality," or
"evil." Even more important was the civil rights movement. From the
Civil War to the early 1950s, black people in America did badly---by
every statistic. How did this get explained? "Stupid," "lazy," and
"immoral" were the words shouted by demagogues or whispered by the white
gentry. Nineteen fty-four marks the year when these explanations began
to lose their power. In Brown v. Board of Education, the Supreme Court
held that racial segregation in schools was illegal. People began to
explain black failure as "inadequate education," "discrimination," and
"unequal opportunity."

These new explanations are literally uplifting. In technical terms, the
old explanations---stupidity and laziness---are personal, permanent, and
pervasive. They lower self-esteem; they produce passivity, helplessness,
and hopelessness. If you were black and you believed them, they were
self-ful lling. The new explanations--- discrimination, bad schools,
lean opportunities---are impersonal, changeable, and less pervasive.
They don't de ate self-esteem (in fact, they produce anger instead).
They lead to action to change things. They give hope.

The recovery movement enlarges on these precedents. Recovery gives you a
whole series of new and more consoling explanations for setbacks.
Personal troubles, you're told, do not result as feared from your own
sloth, insensitivity, sel shness, dishonesty, selfindulgence, stupidity,
or lust. No, they stem from the way you were mistreated as a child. You
can blame your parents, your brother, your teachers, your minister, as
well as your sex and race and age. These kinds of explanations make you
feel better. They shift the blame to others, thereby raising self-esteem
and feelings of selfworth. They lower guilt and shame. To experience
this shift in perspective is like seeing shafts of sunlight slice
through the clouds after endless cold, gray days. We have become
victims, "survivors" of abuse, rather than "failures" and "losers." This
helps us get along better with others. We are now underdogs, trying to
ght our way back from misfortune. In our gentle society, everyone roots
for the underdog. No one dares speak ill of victims anymore. The usual
wages of failure---contempt and pity---are transmuted into support and
compassion. So the inner-child premises are deep in their appeal: They
are democratic, they are consoling, they raise our self-esteem, and they
gain us new friends. Small wonder so many people in pain espouse them.
Do Childhood Events In uence Adult Personality?

Flushed with enthusiasm for the belief that childhood had great impact
on adult development, many researchers eagerly sought support. They
expected to nd massive evidence for the destructive e ects of bad
childhood events such as parental death, divorce, physical illness,
beatings, neglect, and sexual abuse on the adulthood of the victims.
Large-scale surveys of adult mental health and childhood loss were
conducted. Prospective studies of childhood loss on later adult life
were done (these take years and cost a fortune). Some evidence
appeared---but not much. If your mother dies before you are eleven, you
are somewhat more depressive in adulthood---but not a lot more
depressive, and only if you are female, and only in about half the
studies. A father's dying had no measurable impact. If you are rstborn,
your IQ is higher than your sibs---but by less than one point, on
average. If your parents divorce (we must exclude the studies that don't
even bother with control groups of undivorced families), there is a
slight disruptive e ect on later childhood and adolescence. But the
problems wane as children grow up, and they may not be detectable in
adulthood.3

The major traumas of childhood, it was shown, may have some in uence on
adult personality, but the in uence is barely detectable. These reports
threatened one of the bulwarks of environmentalism. Bad childhood
events, contrary to the credo, do not mandate adult troubles---far from
it. There is no justi cation, according to these studies, for blaming
your adult depression, anxiety, bad marriage, drug use, sexual problems,
unemployment, beating up your children, alcoholism, or anger on what
happened to you as a child.4

Most of these studies were methodologically inadequate anyway. They
failed, in their enthusiasm for human plasticity, to control for genes.
It simply did not occur to their devisers, blinded by ideology, that
criminal parents might pass on criminal genes, and that both the
felonies of criminals' children and how badly criminals mistreat their
children might stem from genes rather than mistreatment. There are now
studies that do control for genes: One kind looks at the adult
personalities of identical twins reared apart; another looks

at the adult personalities of adopted children and compares their
personalities with those of their biological parents and of their
adoptive parents.

All of these studies nd massive e ects of genes on adult personality,
and only negligible e ects of any particular events. Identical twins
reared apart are far more similar as adults than fraternal twins reared
together for the qualities of authoritarianism, religiosity, job
satisfaction, conservatism, anger, depression, intelligence, alcoholism,
well-being, and neuroticism, to name only a few. In parallel, adopted
children are much more similar as adults to their biological parents
than to their adoptive parents.

These facts are the latest, if not the last, word in the renascent
nature-nurture controversy. They come from a convergence of largescale
studies using up-to-date measures. These studies nd ample room for
non-genetic in uences on adult personality because less than half the
variance is accounted for by genes. But researchers have not found any
speci c nongenetic in uences yet (nongenetic in uences can include fetal
events, child rearing, childhood trauma, schooling, adolescent and adult
events, and measurement error, among others). Some of these speci c
factors may yet emerge as important to adult personality, but to date,
none have.5

If you want to blame your parents for your own adult problems, you are
entitled to blame the genes they gave you, but you are not entitled---by
any facts I know---to blame the way they treated you. Childhood Sexual
Trauma There is one childhood trauma that is often singled out as a
special destroyer of adult mental health: sexual abuse. What I am about
to say on this subject can easily be misinterpreted, misquoted, and
wrenched out of context. So this preface: I believe sexual abuse is
evil. It should be condemned and punished. Abused children and adult
survivors need help, but help that works---not "pop psychology" help.

Today I would be labeled a sexually abused child. Myron "molested" me
every weekday for about a year when I was nine. I walked four blocks to
School 16. On the corner, Myron sold the Times Union for a nickel. He
dressed in dun-colored rags, was unshaven, and stammered badly. Today my
colleagues would label him "a retarded adult with cerebral palsy." In
the early 1950s, people in Albany, New York, labeled him a "bum" and a
"dummy." But he and I had a special friendship. He kissed me and we
hugged for a few minutes. He told me his troubles and I told him mine.
Then I went o to fourth grade. One day, Myron disappeared from his
corner. I looked for him frantically, and a policeman on the beat nearby
told me that Myron had "gone away." I was heartbroken. He hadn't even
said good-bye. Five years later, I saw Myron as I got o a bus to go to
the Palace Theatre way downtown. "Myron!" I shouted joyously. He took
one look at me and ran away as fast as his limp allowed. A pile of
unsold newspapers, apping in the cold winter wind, remained.

Today, of course, I can ll in the gaps. A passing neighbor must have
seen Myron "molesting" (i.e., hugging and kissing) me. She told my
parents. My parents told the police. The police told Myron that if they
ever saw him with me again, they would send him to prison---or worse
(Albany was not a gentle place in the 1950s). No one told me any of
this. I forgot about it until ten years ago, when child molesting became
a much discussed topic. First came reports on incest among the poor,
then alarming statistics on the middle class. There were warnings about
uncles and stepfathers---since the molester was usually found to be a
friend or a relative. Then one celebrity after another revealed that her
father had abused her and left hideous psychological scars. Then
therapists began to probe routinely for forgotten sexual abuse in
therapy---and usually found it. Then, in lawsuits, grown-up children
began to claim that they now remembered the parental abuse thirty years
earlier that had ruined their lives.

A body of research grew up to bolster the public alarm. In a typical
study, the mental health of adult women who are incest survivors is
checked. The results are uniform: These women are more depressed,
anxious, suicidal, drug-abusing, lonely, guilty, and

sexually troubled than members of control groups.6 The published
interpretation is that sexual abuse in childhood caused the adult
problems. The curmudgeon speaks: In their zealotry, the authors of these
articles abandon methodological niceties like adequate control groups
and consideration of rival explanations. Often, the survivors in the
studies are very self-selected. They are recruited because they are
troubled adults: They are in therapy or in self-help groups, or they
even, literally, answered an ad for "incest victims." It is no surprise
that they have more problems than the control group. And the control
groups are suspect, too (when there even is one); they fail to match the
incest victims for the most obvious, critical variables. What these
studies fail to control for (this is the unmentioned alternative) are
genetic di erences and other environmental di erences confounded with
incest. The kind of fathers, brothers, and uncles who abuse young
children are men with major problems of their own. Incest victims, more
often than not, come from very troubled families with much more mental
illness than the control groups have. Some of the mental illness and
some of the family problems are probably genetic. So it remains entirely
possible that the depression, anxiety, anger, and sexual problems in the
incest survivors do not come from incest. They may stem from some of the
other nasty events so frequent in a dysfunctional family, or they may be
genetic. Once the ideology is stripped away, we still remain ignorant
about whether sexual abuse in childhood wreaks damage in adult life and,
if so, how much. Often forgotten is the child herself. What can we do to
best contain the damage? What can we do that will best help the adult
who was abused years before as a child?

In talking about post-traumatic stress disorder, my main conclusion was
that awful events have lasting ill e ects that therapy

seems to do little to alleviate. Concentration camps, torture, brutal
rape, all leave lasting scars. This is true when the event occurs in
adulthood, and this is also true when the event occurs in childhood. But
contrary to the inner-child premises, I know of no data that childhood
trauma has more power than adult trauma.

My impression is that the natural healing of children is, on the whole,
better than for adults. There have been several follow-up studies of
sexually abused children, and each shows surprisingly good recovery.
More than half the kids improve markedly within a year or two, and the
number of kids with severe problems diminishes markedly. A few,
tragically, get worse.7

Child sexual abuse varies in objective severity from brutal rape at one
extreme to erotic fondling at the other. In post-traumatic stress
disorder, objective severity, short of violence and life threat, does
not determine how long the symptoms last and how intense they are. Su
ering identical traumas, some adults are scarred for life while others
are unchanged. A few are even strengthened. ("What doesn't kill me makes
me stronger," says Nietzsche.) This is also true of children.
Consistently, a quarter to a third of sexually abused kids show no
symptoms, and contrary to theories of "repression" and "denial," these
children stay symptom free. Our job as therapists and parents is to
contain the damage. With our help, brutal assault need not get
translated into full-blown PTSD, and mild fondling need not get
escalated into PTSD. If we do things to magnify the trauma in the
child's mind, we will amplify the symptoms; if we do things to mute the
trauma, we will reduce the symptoms. Natural healing occurs, but
well-meaning parents, therapists, and courts of law can slow healing.
Sometimes they even repeatedly rip the protective scar tissue o the
wound. Children involved in lengthy criminal cases are ten times more
likely to remain disturbed than children whose cases are resolved
quickly.8

This is the message of my story about Myron. My parents and the
police---in those unenlightened days---lowered the volume. They

quietly got Myron o my street corner and scared him badly. If they got
enraged or hysterical, I didn't know about it. They did not interrogate
me about the intimate details. No emergency-room doctor probed my anal
sphincter. I did not go to court. I was not sent to therapy to undo my
"denial." I was not, years later, encouraged to rediscover what I had
"repressed" and then to relive the trauma to cure my current troubles.

If your child is abused or if you were abused, my best advice is to turn
the volume down as soon as possible. Reliving the experience repeatedly
may retard the natural healing.

Thus the rst inner-child premise---that childhood events have a major in
uence on adult personality---does not stand up to scrutiny. Only a few
childhood events, like the death of your mother, have any documented in
uence on adult emotional life. And their in uence is surprisingly small,
particularly when compared to the e ect of genes on adult personality.
"Toxic shame" and "toxic guilt" in adulthood, instilled by parental
abuse, are inventions of the recovery movement. When careful
investigators look closely and analyze the route, they do not nd
evidence that shame and guilt cause the adult problems. There is some
evidence that parental abuse leads to troubles in adulthood---bad
marriages, for example--- but not via guilt or shame. The cause is more
drastic, as in the statistically well documented scenario in which bad
parental abuse leads to a little girl's placement in a residential
nursery. When she reaches puberty, she has no place to go. She escapes
by teenage pregnancy or by an early, impulsive marriage, the sort that
usually don't last. Then there are those instances in which a di cult
girl causes ill-tempered parenting. That also results in her becoming a
di cult grown-up. Such women marry mousy men, who withdraw from them.
Their marriages then fall apart.9

Another fashionable candidate for major in uence on adult personality is
childhood sexual abuse. This case is, at best, unproven.10 Traumatic
events, like brutal sexual abuse, exert destructive e ects on later
life. But childhood trauma is not more

destructive than adult trauma. If anything, children heal better than do
adults. Put simply, the case for childhood trauma---in anything but its
most brutal form---in uencing adult personality is in the minds of the
inner-child advocates. It is not to be found in the data. The Flashbulb
or the Snowball Here is the single most surprising fact about child
rearing and childhood events: Study after study has shown that the
interfamilial variance in personality is about the same as the
intrafamilial variance---once you control for genes. (Practice saying
this and you can take the life out of any cocktail party.) Translated
into English, this means that, on average, the personalities of any two
children from the same family turn out to be about as di erent from each
other as they are from the personality of any random child---once you
control for genes.11 Childhood events seem so important because we have
one and only one model in mind: the ashbulb. We have long assumed that
these episodes explode brightly and so are foundational because they are
so vivid. This model does not t the facts. Here is a model that ts
better: the snowball. When two rocks start rolling o the top of a snowy
hill, very small initial di erences get bigger and bigger as the
snowballs gather momentum. A small depression on the hill can also alter
the trajectory enormously. Small, early variations in direction and
small deviations along the path develop into big di erences by the time
the snowballs have bumped their way to the bottom of the hill.12

Take Joan and Sarah, two little sisters, six and seven, growing up in
the Marquez household. They share 50 percent of their genes and seem
quite similar. They are slightly di erent in athletic ability. Joan is a
bit stronger than Sarah. When it comes to choosing teammates for
tug-of-war in the rst grade, Joan always gets picked before Sarah. Sarah
comes away from gym day after day feeling disheartened. But she is
slightly more talented in music, and so she

tries hard in choir. Joan skips choir to play softball. By the end of
high school, Joan will be a star gymnast with Olympic ambitions and
Sarah the lead soprano in local summer stock. Similar snowballing could
eventuate from small di erences in optimism, or in looks, or in how much
the third-grade teacher liked them, or in how much they liked gardening
with Daddy.13

In spite of their being taken to the opera once a month, learning to eat
chèvre, gardening with Daddy, and taking tuba lessons, Joan and Sarah
are no more likely both to like opera, chèvre, the tuba, or gardening
than any two random kids---once you take genetic similarity into
account. So even though they start with similar personalities and are
raised in practically the same way---same parents, same teachers, same
strict discipline, same church, same allowances---Sarah and Joan turn
out to be very di erent adults. Freedom and Depth Childhood
events---even childhood trauma---and childrearing appear to have only
weak e ects on adult life. Childhood, contrary to popular belief, does
not seem, empirically, to be particularly formative. So, contrary to
popular belief, we are not prisoners of our past. How we were
raised---by martinets swatting our little ngers with rulers or by
permissive parents of Spock (the pediatrician, not the Vulcan)
persuasion; how we were fed---on demand or on schedule, on breast or on
bottle; even mother's death, parents' divorcing, and being second-born
exert, at most, small in uences on what we are like as adults. We do not
need to go through elaborate exorcisms, like ceremonially divorcing our
parents, to change our lives. As adults, we are indeed free to change. I
believe that most of the hoary free-will controversy has been empty,
full of false dichotomies and rei cations: "Is all action strictly
determined by the past, or is it sometimes a product of free choice?"
"Do we have a faculty of free

will?" "Can human beings participate in their own salvation, or is it a
gift of God?"

I believe that these questions stem in large part from a
misunderstanding about words. With opposites, we sometimes understand
both words fully. Both members of the pair can be known separately.
Sweet and sour, smart and stupid, are examples. Sweetness, sourness,
smartness, and stupidity all exist, and have meanings de nable without
reference to their opposites. But sometimes we understand and can de ne
only one member of a pair fully, and the other means nothing more than
the absence of the rst. We know what embarrassed means, but
unembarrassed means nothing more than "not embarrassed." There is such a
thing as embarrassment, but there is no such thing as unembarrassment.
Embarrassed can be de ned without reference to unembarrassed, but the
reverse is not true. Colored and colorless, nitude and in nity, are like
this. Insanity and sanity, disease and health, abnormality and
normality, have generated disputes, with scholars manufacturing
qualities of sanity or health or normality, when all these concepts
amount to is the absence of insanity, the absence of disease, and the
absence of abnormality.14 The attempt to de ne free will is the
granddaddy of these pointless quests. We understand what it is to be
coerced. It is to be a prisoner frog-marched down a hill. Coercion is
something tangible. Freedom is the absence of coercion, nothing more.

Events from childhood do not coerce our personalities in adulthood. We
are not frog-marched by parental spankings at age six into being
guilt-ridden thirty-year-olds. Our genes do not coerce our adulthood.
Unlike spankings, they have a substantial statistical e ect on our
personality, but we are not frog-marched into being alcoholics even if
our biological parents are alcoholics. Even having the genetic
predisposition, there are tactics we can adopt to avoid alcoholism. We
can, for example, shun drinking altogether. There are many more teetotal
people with alcoholic parents than you would expect there to be by
chance alone.

Absent coercion, we are free. Freedom of the will, choice, the
possibility of change, mean nothing more---absolutely nothing more
---than the absence of coercion. This means simply that we are free to
change many things about ourselves. Indeed, the main facts of this
book---that depressives often become nondepressives, that lifelong
panickers become panic free, that impotent men become potent again, that
adults reject the sex role they were raised with, that alcoholics become
abstainers---demonstrate this. None of this means that therapists,
parents, genes, good advice, and even dyspepsia do not in uence what we
do. None of this denies that there are limits on how much we can change.
It only means that we are not prisoners. Catharsis The rst inner-child
premise---that childhood events determine adult personality---is false.
Now I want to turn to the second innerchild premise---that coming to
grips with childhood abuse cures adult problems.

John Bradshaw, in his best-seller Homecoming: Reclaiming and Championing
Your Inner Child, details several of his imaginative techniques: asking
forgiveness of your inner child, divorcing your parent and nding a new
one, like Jesus, stroking your inner child, writing your childhood
history. These techniques go by the name catharsis, that is, emotional
engagement in past trauma-laden events. Catharsis is magni cent to
experience and impressive to behold. Weeping, raging at parents long
dead, hugging the wounded little boy who was once you, are all stirring.
You have to be made of stone not to be moved to tears. For hours
afterward, you may feel cleansed and at peace---perhaps for the rst time
in years. Awakening, beginning again, and new departures all beckon.
Catharsis, as a therapeutic technique, has been around for more than a
hundred years. It used to be a mainstay of psychoanalytic treatment, but
no longer. Its main appeal is its afterglow. Its main

drawback is that there is no evidence that it works.15 When you measure
how much people like doing it, you hear high praise. When you measure
whether anything changes, catharsis fares badly. Done well, it brings
about short-term relief---like the afterglow of vigorous exercise. But
once the glow dissipates, as it does in a few days, the real problems
are still there: an alcoholic spouse, a hateful job, early-morning
blues, panic attacks, a cocaine habit. There is no documentation that
the catharsis techniques of the recovery movement help in any lasting
way with chronic emotional problems. There is no evidence that they
alter adult personality. And, strangely, catharsis about ctitious
memories does about as well as catharsis about real memories. The
inner-child advocates, having treated tens of thousands of su ering
adults for years, have not seen t to do any follow-ups.16 Because
catharsis techniques are so super cially appealing, because they are so
dependent on the charisma of the therapist, and because they have no
known lasting value, my advice is "Let the buyer beware." The Moral
Dimension of Recovery Re-examined I can nd no support for the two basic
assumptions of the recovery movement: that childhood abuse in uences
adult personality, and that cure by catharsis works. Even if the
movement has no foundation, however, the appeal of taking on the victim
label is still great. It is democratic, it is consoling, it raises our
self-esteem, and it transforms others' contempt into compassion. Or does
it? It depends on the alternatives. If you are alcoholic, the disease
label may once have helped you a great deal. The only alternative label
used to be "bad person." Disease is curable, limited, and impersonal.
Bad character is permanent, pervasive, and personal. Believing you are
bad leads to helplessness, hopelessness, and selfhate. Believing you
have a disease can lead to action, seeking out a cure, renewed hope, and
some measure of self-esteem. If you are a black teenager, unemployed and
facing jail, explaining your troubles

as discrimination or bad schools may help for the same reason. The
alternative labels, "stupid," "lazy," and "criminal," should you believe
them, are self-ful lling.

Depression, sexual troubles, anxiety, loneliness, and guilt are the main
problems that drive consumers into the recovery movement. Explaining
such adult troubles as being caused by victimization during childhood
does not accomplish much. Compare "wounded child" as an explanation to
some of the other ways you might explain your problems: "depressive,"
"anxiety-prone," or "sexually dysfunctional." "Wounded child" is a more
permanent explanation; "depressive" is less permanent. As we saw in the
rst section of this book, depression, anxiety, and sexual
dysfunction---unlike being a wounded child---are all eminently
treatable. "Wounded child" is also more pervasive in its destructive e
ects: "Toxic" is the colorful word used to describe its pervasiveness.
"Depression," "anxiety," and "sexually dysfunctional" are all narrower,
less damning labels, and this, in fact, is part of the reason why
treatment works. So "wounded child" (unless you believe in catharsis
cures) leads to more helplessness, hopelessness, and passivity than the
alternatives. But it is less personal---your parents did it to
you---than "depressive," "anxiety-prone," and "sexually dysfunctional."
Impersonal explanations of bad events raise self-esteem more than
personal ones. Therefore "wounded child" is better for raising your
self-esteem and for lowering your guilt.

Self-esteem has become very important to Americans in the last two
decades. Our public schools are supposed to nurture the selfesteem of
our children, our churches are supposed to minister to the self-esteem
of their congregants, and the recovery movement is supposed to restore
the self-esteem of victims. Attaining self-esteem, while undeniably
important, is a goal that I have reservations about. I think it is an
overin ated idea, and my opinion was formed by my work with depressed
people. Depressed people, you will recall, have four kinds of problems:
behavioral---they are passive, indecisive, and helpless; emotional---
they are sad; bodily---their sleeping, eating, and sex are disrupted;

cognitive---they think life is hopeless and that they are worthless.
Only the second half of this last symptom amounts to low selfesteem. I
have come to believe that lack of self-esteem is the least important of
these woes. Once a depressed person becomes active and hopeful,
self-esteem always improves. Bolstering self-esteem without changing
hopelessness or passivity, however, accomplishes nothing. To put it
exactly, I believe that low self-esteem is an epiphenomenon, a mere re
ection that your commerce with the world is going badly. It has no power
in itself. What needs improving is not self-esteem but your commerce
with the world. So the one advantage of labeling yourself a
victim---raised self-esteem ---is minimal, particularly since victimhood
raises self-esteem at the cost of greater hopelessness and passivity,
and therefore worsens commerce with the world. This is indeed my main
worry about the recovery movement. Young Americans right now are in an
epidemic of depression. I have speculated on the causes in the last
chapter of my book Learned Optimism, and I will not repeat my
conjectures here. Young people are easy pickings for anything that makes
them feel better---even temporarily. The recovery movement capitalizes
on this epidemic. When it works, it raises self-esteem and lowers guilt,
but at the expense of our blaming others for our troubles. Never mind
the fact that those we blame did not in fact cause our troubles. Never
mind the fact that thinking of ourselves as victims induces
helplessness, hopelessness, and passivity. Never mind that there are
more e ective treatments available elsewhere. It is more important to
focus on responsibility and being forward-

looking.17 Seeing ourselves as victims of childhood makes us prisoners
of the past and erodes our sense of responsibility. All successful
therapy has two things in common: It is forward-looking and it requires
assuming responsibility. Therapy that reviews childhood endlessly, that
does not focus on how to cope in the here and now, that views a better
future as incidental to undoing the past, has a century-long history of
being ine ective. All therapy that works for depression, anxiety, and
sexual problems focuses on

exactly what is going wrong now and on how to correct it. All this
requires a heightened sense of responsibility for our problems and a
commitment to hard work (and even homework) to make the future better.
The past is touched upon, but usually to get insight into patterns of
problems, not as a way to shuck o the blame.18

So I worry that the second season of people in "recovery" will be
crippled---not by what actually happened to them in the rst season, but
by their seeing themselves as prisoners of their childhoods--- victims
helpless to begin anew in a new season. The Uses of Childhood I can
endorse the goal of the recovery movement---mobilizing troubled adults
to change problems they thought were unchangeable. But I cannot endorse
either its premises or its methods. To me, these get in the way of my
positive message: Growth and change are the rule, not the exception,
throughout adult life. As you enter your second season, many of you are
troubled--- depressed, anxious, angry, or lonely. You may have become
accustomed to your pain, but that does not make it an acceptable feeling
to live with the rest of your life. And you need not. There are
alternative and e ective ways to change, and they have been detailed in
Parts 2 and 3 of this book. They are not quick xes, nor are they
emotionally orgiastic, but they are worthwhile and they do last. There
is a third premise of the recovery movement that I do endorse
enthusiastically: The patterns of problems in childhood that recur into
adulthood are signi cant. They can be found by exploring your past, by
looking into the corners of your childhood. Coming to grips with your
childhood will not yield insight into how you became the adult you are:
The causal links between childhood events and what you have now become
are simply too weak. Coming to grips with your childhood will not make
your adult problems go away: Working through the past does not seem to
be

any sort of cure for troubles. Coming to grips with your childhood will
not make you feel any better for long, nor will it raise your
selfesteem.

Coming to grips with childhood is a di erent and special voyage. The
sages urged us to know ourselves, and Plato warned us that the
unexamined life is not worth living. Knowledge acquired on this voyage
is about patterns, about the tapestry that we have woven. It is not
knowledge about causes. Are there consistent mistakes we have made and
still make? In the ush of victory, do I forget my friends---in the
Little League and when I got that last big raise? (People have always
told me I'm a good loser but a bad winner.) Do I usually succeed in one
domain but fail in another? (I wish I could get along with the people I
really love as well as I do with my employers.) Does a surprising
emotion arise again and again? (I always pick ghts with people I love
right before they have to go away.) Does my body often betray me? (I get
a lot of colds when big projects are due.) You probably want to know why
you are a bad winner, why you get colds when others expect a lot of you,
and why you react to abandonment with anger. You will not nd out. As
important and magnetic as the "why" questions are, they are questions
that psychology cannot now answer. One of the two clearest ndings of one
hundred years of therapy is that satisfactory answers to the great "why"
questions are not easily found; maybe in fty years things will be di
erent; maybe never. When purveyors of the evils of "toxic shame" tell
you that they know it comes from parental abuse, don't believe them. No
one knows any such thing. Be skeptical even of your own "Aha!"
experiences: When you unearth the fury you felt that rst kindergarten
day, do not assume that you have found the source of your lifelong
terror of abandonment. The causal links may be illusions, and humility
is in order here. The other clearest nding of the whole therapeutic
endeavor, however, is that change is within our grasp, almost routine,
throughout adult life. So even if why we are what we are is a mystery,
how to change ourselves is not.

Mind the pattern. A pattern of mistakes is a call to change your life.
The rest of the tapestry is not determined by what has been woven
before. The weaver herself, blessed with knowledge and with freedom, can
change---if not the material she must work with---the design of what
comes next.

15 Depth and Change: The Theory

IT IS TIME for a review and for the theory. When we survey all the
problems, personality types, patterns of behavior, and the weak in uence
of childhood on adult life, we see a puzzling array of how much change
occurs. From the things that are easiest to those that are the most di
cult, this rough array emerges: Panic

Curable

Speci c Phobias

Almost Curable

Sexual Dysfunctions

Marked Relief

Social Phobia

Moderate Relief

Agoraphobia

Moderate Relief

Depression

Moderate Relief

Sex Role

Moderate Change

Obsessive-Compulsive

Moderate /Mild

Disorder

Relief

Sexual Preferences Anger

Moderate/Mild Change Mild /Moderate

Relief Everyday Anxiety Alcoholism Overweight Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) Sexual Orientation Sexual Identity

Mild/Moderate Relief Mild Relief Temporary Change Marginal Relief
Probably Unchangeable1 Unchangeable

Clearly, we have not yet developed drugs or psychotherapies that can
change all these. I believe that success and failure stems from
something other than inadequate treatment. Rather, it stems from the
depth of the problem. Depth, an old but elusive notion, is, I believe,
the key. We all have experience of psychological states of di erent
depths. Sometimes when I have been on the road for weeks and I come home
fatigued, something strange happens to me in the middle of the night. It
is called depersonalization. I wake up and can't remember. I don't know
where I am. I can't remember what year it is, or even the season. I
don't know what kind of car I drive. I don't know who is sleeping next
to me. When the phenomenon is really extreme, I don't know how old I am.
(But I always know that I am male.) This state passes in a few seconds,
and my memories come ooding back to me---at least they have so far. If
you ask someone, out of the blue, to answer quickly "Who are you?" they
will usually tell you---roughly in this order---their name, their sex,
their profession, whether they have children, and their

religion or race. Underlying this is a continuum of depth from surface
to soul---with all manner of psychic material in between. Lest the
purists among you be put o by my using the word soul, let me remind you
of Freud's terminology. Freud's word for his subject matter was not
psyche (as it has been rendered in English by his medical translators),
or mind (as the modern cognitivists prefer), but die Seele, the
soul---an entity connoting much more than cold cognition. I believe that
issues of the soul can barely be changed by psychotherapy or by drugs.
Problems and behavior patterns somewhere between soul and surface can be
changed somewhat. Surface problems can be changed easily, even cured.
What is changeable, by therapy or drugs, I want to speculate, varies
with the depth of the problem. What exactly does depth mean? How do we
know if we are dealing with a deep issue or a super cial one? Depth, as
I intend it, has three aspects. The rst is biological. The second has to
do with evidence. The third concerns power. The biological aspect of
depth is evolutionary. Is the state prepared? Prepared learning, you
will recall from the sauce béarnaise phenomenon, occurs with but one
experience, is not rational, is not conscious, is resistant to change,
and is selective only for objects of adaptive signi cance. Phobias about
animals and insects display these hallmarks and are, therefore,
prepared. So are obsessions about infection or violence, fetishes about
female legs or breasts, and depression over the death of a child.
Biologically deep problems are prepared or even innate. Therefore they
are represented genetically, and, as adaptive traits, they are
heritable. There has been a long evolutionary history operating to
promote the state. Manic-depression is an example. The cycling of energy
with the seasons, from summer activity to winter hibernation, may be its
evolutionary basis, and it is highly heritable.2 That identical twins
are more concordant for manic-depression than are fraternal twins
provides evidence for the adaptive value of mood cycling.

The rst claim of my theory is: To the extent that a psychological
condition has biological underpinnings because it is prepared or
heritable, it will be harder to change; to the extent that it is
unprepared---simply a learned habit---it will be easier to change. The
evidentiary aspect of depth is about con rmation and discon rmation: How
easy is it to get evidence for the belief underlying the problem? The
other side of the coin of evidencegathering is even more important: How
di cult is it to get evidence that will disabuse you of the belief? It
is perilously easy to live our lives noticing only evidence in favor of
our deep beliefs and to shun testing whether those beliefs are false.
The thought underlying posttraumatic stress disorder---"The world is a
miserable, unjust place, with no solace for me"---is easy to con rm.
Just read the front page of this morning's newspaper. The thought
underlying obsessivecompulsive problems---for example, "If I don't wash
my hands thoroughly, I will contaminate my child"---will not get discon
rmed by someone who avoids testing it. The person with this thought
washes her hands two hours a day. Her hands are always clean, and her
child never gets contaminated. She will never get discon rming evidence
because she performs the ritual so frequently. So she will never nd out
that not washing her hands does not lead to contamination of her child.
So the second claim of my theory is: The easier a belief underlying a
problem is to con rm and the harder it is to discon rm, the harder it
will be to change.

The third aspect of depth is the power of the belief underlying the
problem. I use power in the sense of the power of a theory. A theory is
said to have high power when it is general and so explains many of the
facts about the world. Relativity theory---applicable to all of time and
space---has high power. A theory has low power when it applies to only a
few isolated facts. "There are a lot of ticks this year because it has
been a dry summer" does not apply much beyond ticks and humidity, and so
is of low power. Everything else being equal, we cling to a powerful
theory more tenaciously than to a less

powerful theory when we are confronted with exactly the same contrary
evidence disputing both.

Some of our personal beliefs are powerful in just the same way a theory
is powerful---they make sense of a great deal of our world. Being a
socialist or believing in a benevolent God are but two of many possible
examples. These beliefs permeate our understanding of what happens to
ourselves and to others. They are deeply entrenched. Stalin's purges did
not shake the beliefs of socialists very much, nor did the Black Death
make God seem evil or indi erent to most believers. Other personal
beliefs have low power. Believing that cars made in Detroit on Fridays
have more defects because the workers are looking forward to the weekend
explains only your windshield-wiper problem and little else in your
life. The thoughts underlying our problems can be of high or low power.
The belief that spiders are very dangerous is of low power, whereas the
belief that I am an unlovable person or that I need to drink to get
through the day has high power. So the third claim of my theory is: To
the extent that the belief underlying a problem has high power, it will
be hard to change; to the extent that it has low power, it will be
easier to change.

Added together, these claims may explain when a problem will change
easily and when it will resist change. Let us reconsider the problems
and see. Transsexualism, the inversion of sexual identity, is, by these
criteria, the deepest problem. It is biologically laid down in
gestation. It is virtually undiscon rmable and pervades all of life. It
is also totally unchangeable. Sexual orientation (homosexuality and
heterosexuality---not, to my way of thinking, problems, but simply
patterns of behavior) is almost as deep. Part of its basis is probably
laid down during gestation, and it probably has speci c underpinning in
the brain. Once orientation is adopted, evidence steadily mounts for
it---you enjoy it and it ts. That a woman is attracted to members of her

own sex is easy for her to con rm and hard for her to discon rm, and
this attraction is of high power---pervading much of what she does.
While the desire itself resists change mightily, whom you perform with
is a bit exible. Post-traumatic stress disorder is a disorder of the
soul. It probably has little evolutionary basis and is not known to be
heritable, but the underlying belief is powerful and readily con rmed.
If, for instance, your child dies, you have been robbed, by a stroke of
cruel fate, of what you hold most precious. Your worldview changes: This
world is cruel, there is no justice, I have no future, there is no hope,
and I wish I hadn't survived. There is pervasive reality to what you now
believe, since your child is never coming back. All you have to do to
con rm your new philosophy is turn on the eleven o'clock news. The
cascade of bad events that usually follows in the wake of a tragedy
further con rms your pessimism. Sometimes surprisingly good things
happen and your view softens, but only reluctantly. Therapy and drugs
might make you less afraid of the speci c place of the tragedy. Little
more, except for rape victims, has so far been accomplished in
alleviating PTSD. You now know just how fragile all happiness is. Weight
is quite a deep matter. Dieting works only temporarily for more than 90
percent of "overweight" people. Your weight is defended by powerful
biological and psychological processes that served your ancestors well
through famine and hardship. Appetite and weight have layers of
biological and psychological defense: brain centers ring, blood-sugar
level dropping, metabolic slowdown, fatigue, fat storage, changing
number and size of fat cells, intense food cravings, stomach rumbling,
and binge eating. Natural selection has assured that we will be able to
starve ourselves voluntarily only with the greatest of di culty. The
evidentiary criterion is not applicable to overweight, but the power
criterion is. Your habits of eating are part of your way of life. Your
styles of working, loving, and playing are often tied up with what,
where, and how much you eat.

Alcoholism has some biological underpinnings. It is moderately
heritable, and part of what it means to have a biological addiction is
that cells living in an alcohol-laden environment become dependent on
the presence of alcohol to function well. That I need a drink to get
through this interview, or this class, or this date is hard to discon
rm---particularly when I don't abstain and nd out that the date goes
well anyway. Usually, I drink and it goes tolerably well, or I don't
drink and I have the shakes. Alcoholism has power. It is a way of life.
Like the intellectual who goes to a party and sees it in terms of her
interests ("Isn't that guest politically naive? How many books does the
host have in the living room?"), so, too, the alcoholic ("How well
stocked is the bar? Who will make the rounds with me afterward? Who
knows my boss and might report my drinking heavily?"). Alcoholism is
therefore not easy to change. Everyday anxiety is not as deep as
alcoholism. Fear and courage are basic facts of personality and
genetics. They have a strong evolutionary basis ("It is safer in the
cave"). Those of us born fearful and timid lead, for the most part,
fearful and timid lives. We are assailed with frightening thoughts.
These thoughts are hard to discon rm if we manage to avoid the feared
circumstances, and they are frequently con rmed (muggers do come out at
night). That the world is a frightening place is a fairly powerful
theory. This can be changed, but not easily. With discipline, drugs, and
clever tactics in therapy, we can be steeled, at least a bit. Pervasive
anger is probably somewhat less deep than pervasive anxiety. It has a
clear evolutionary value, and there is some evidence for its
heritability. If you believe you are being trespassed against, you can
usually nd evidence for it: The targets of your anger are sometimes out
to get you. But you will also get some discon rmation too, since
sometimes the targets of your anger turn out to be manifestly innocent.
The belief in trespass is powerful when it is a general belief like
"Others are out to get me" or "The world is full of people who only care
about themselves." It is of low

power when it is only a speci c ("My boss is a jerk!") belief. The
therapy evidence is far from conclusive, but anger seems somewhat
---although not sweepingly---modi able. Sexual preferences (called
paraphilia when disordered) are at middling depth. They seem to be
evolutionarily prepared. They are easy to obtain con rming evidence for
once adopted---they are great fun---but they are narrow beliefs in
uencing only your erotic life. Once adopted, they do not wane
spontaneously, but they can be modi ed somewhat in therapy.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder also has middling depth. The thoughts and
rituals seem to be evolutionarily prepared (cleaning and checking, dirt
and violence, were all issues for pretechnological humans), and there is
some evidence for heritability. The obsession is extremely hard to
discon rm: An e cient ritual ensures that you don't sit around to nd out
if your ritual---unperformed---results in disaster. But the obsessions
are not powerful: They are limited to germs, violence, explosions, and
the like. Therapy helps quite a bit but usually does not cure. Sex role
may have some brain and fetal-hormone contribution. When you are a
child, evidence pours in to support your stereotyped beliefs, and they
are powerful beliefs, organizing much of childhood. But the evidence and
their power wanes dramatically with maturity, when you can better
appreciate the virtues of tolerance, justice, and individuality. Sex
roles are in exible for young children, but increasingly exible as
children grow up. Depression is also of middling depth. Sometimes the
beliefs are distortions and are easy to discon rm: for example, the
belief of a

wealthy woman that she is a bag lady.3 But often the beliefs are based
in reality; indeed, depressives are more accurate at judging

their success and failure than nondepressives.4 Sometimes depressive
beliefs are of low power: "She doesn't love me;" "I'm a hopeless
golfer." Sometimes they are powerful and pervasive: "I'm

not worth loving;" "I'm a total failure." There is some mild
heritability and possibly an evolutionary basis for staying in the cave
and conserving energy for a while after a loss. At any rate, with
therapy or drugs, moderate relief ensues, but your battle against
depression---even then---can still be life-long. Social phobia and
agoraphobia lie nearer the surface. They make some evolutionary sense,
and there is some evidence of mild heritability. The underlying beliefs
are easy to con rm since they are not wildly inaccurate: Shy people do
get embarrassed by others; if you have one of your panic attacks in
public, it may very well be that you will be sick as a dog and no one
will help you. If you avoid social gatherings or do not leave your
apartment, these beliefs will not get discon rmed. The social-phobic
beliefs have moderate power: Seeing yourself as socially unskilled or
unlikable may explain a fair amount of what happens to you. The
agoraphobic belief that you will get ill and no one will help you has
relatively low power. With therapy and drugs, some relief ensues for
both, but not a complete cure. Problems of sexual performance change
quite easily with the right therapy, and I consider them problems near
the surface. There is no biological basis for the sexual dysfunctions,
but in the throes of one it is quite hard to discon rm the belief "I am
sexually inadequate," particularly during the vicious circle of
spectatoring. These problems are not powerful beliefs, since they are
con ned to erotic and family life. Speci c phobias also lie near the
surface. Spiders, for example, are dangerous: They bite, and very rare
ones might even kill you. There is an evolutionary history pushing you
to feel this way, but while prepared, the speci c content of phobias is
not heritable. The belief that spiders are dangerous is hard to discon
rm if you avoid spiders altogether and never nd out that if endured,
spiders are much more scared of you than you are of them. The belief is
of low power

---it explains only spiders. With therapy, this fear can be extinguished
almost completely---but the phobia may reappear when rekindled by other
troubles. DEPTH OF THE DISORDERS AND BEHAVIOR PATTERNS (

= maximal contribution per factor)

Panic lies at the surface. It turns out merely to be a mistaken belief
that your heart racing is a symptom of heart attack, or that gasping for
breath is a symptom of stroke. Very little else hinges on this belief,
and so it is of low power. It is quite easy to discon rm by showing a
hyperventilating patient that his symptoms are symptoms of anxiety or
overbreathing, not of heart attack. It does not seem to have a strong
evolutionary history, and it is not heritable. When changed by therapy
or evidence, panic is almost always cured. A theory is de ned not only
by what it claims, but also by what it omits. Most theories of
personality claim that childhood is powerful

and that emotional traits are likewise strong. My theory denies both of
these assumptions. There is no premise here about early learning being
strong. My theory says that it does not matter when problems, habits,
and personality are acquired; their depth derives only from their
biology, their evidence, and their power. Some childhood traits are deep
and unchangeable, but not because they were learned early and therefore
have a privileged place. Rather, those traits that resist change do so
either because they are evolutionarily prepared or because they acquire
great power by virtue of becoming the framework around which later
learning crystallizes. My theory also makes no claim about emotional
learning being deep, and therefore traumatic learning has no privileged
place in it. When emotional traits resist change, their unchangeability
derives from either their biology, their evidence, or their power---not
from trauma. I have spent the last thirty years investigating what we
learn under trauma, and I am impressed by how very exible such learning
is. The omissions of early and traumatic learning are central to my
theory, and t well with the fact that the in uence on adult life of
childhood and its traumas is weak. In this way, the theory of depth
carries the optimistic message that we are not prisoners of our past. So
I intend to revive an idea long neglected by scientists other than the
Freudians: the idea of depth. I believe it is the key to change.
Changing that which is deep requires mighty e ort--- massive doses of
drugs or interminable therapy---and the attempt is likely, in the end,
to fail. That which is near the surface changes much more readily. When
you have understood this message, you will never look at your life in
the same way again. Right now there are a number of things that you do
not like about yourself and that you want to change: your short fuse,
your waistline, your shyness, your drinking, your glumness. You have
decided to change, but you do not know what you should work on rst.
Formerly you would have probably selected the one that hurts the most.
Now you will also ask which attempt is most likely to repay your e orts
and which is most likely to lead to further frustration. You now know
that your glumness,

your shyness, and your anger are much more likely to change than your
drinking, which is more likely to change than your waistline.

Some of what does change is under your control, and some is not. You can
best prepare yourself to change by learning as much as you can about
what you can change and how to make those changes. This has been the
purpose of my book. Like all true education, learning about change is
not easy; harder yet is surrendering some of our hopes. There are few
shortcuts and no quick xes to be had. You have heard the exhortations of
the multibillion-dollar selfimprovement industries and the therapy and
medication guilds. Much of what you have heard from them has been false
promises. Much of the optimism they have engendered has been
unwarranted. I have spent the last twenty- ve years investigating
optimism, and it is certainly not my purpose to destroy your optimism
about change. But it is also not my purpose to assure everybody that
they can change in every way. That would be yet another false promise.
Optimism, the conviction that you can change, is a necessary rst step in
the process of all change. But unwarranted optimism, the conviction that
you can change what in fact you cannot, is a tragic diversion. Years of
frustration, self-reproach, giving up, and, ultimately, remorse follow.
My purpose is to instill a new, warranted optimism about the parts of
your life you can change and so help you focus your limited time, money,
and e ort on making actual what is truly within your reach. Recall the
"Serenity Prayer" that opened this book: the courage to change what you
can change, the serenity to accept what you cannot change, and the
wisdom to know the di erence. Life is a long period of change. What you
have been able to change and what has resisted your highest resolve
might seem chaotic to you; for some of what you are never changes no
matter how hard you try, and other aspects change readily. My hope is
that this book has been the beginning of wisdom about the di erence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book has been twenty- ve years in its birthing. I began to worry
about the collision between biological and environmental views of change
when I was a graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania in the
mid-1960s. Three people brought the importance of the issue home to me.
The rst was Dick Solomon, the very embodiment of the nurture side of the
issue---an in uential learning theorist who spent his career looking
into the tabula rasa for the roots of emotion and emotional change. He
was my Ph.D. adviser and my teacher. The second was Paul Rozin, then a
young upstart with the unheard-of combination of a Ph.D. in biology and
one in psychology. He thought the tabula rasa approach to learning made
no sense. He was my teacher, too. The third person, John Garcia, put
learning theory into evolutionary perspective. In a brilliant set of
experiments, John had the temerity to propose that learnability itself
has been the subject of natural selection. For John, the tabula rasa
came with many instructions, defaults, and biases. I thought John was
right, and began back then to write books and articles espousing this
view.

Then the issue lay dormant within me for almost twenty years, as I
myself evolved from learning theorist to clinical psychologist to social
scientist. I read the burgeoning literature on change and watched the
gulf grow wider between environmentalists and biological psychiatrists.
As the gulf widened, however, there came the rst major discoveries of
methods of markedly changing many of the psychological disorders.
Disorders that had resisted change now yielded to a variety of drugs and
psychotherapies. There seemed to be a pattern in what changed and what
did not change, in what changed with drugs as opposed to what changed
with

psychotherapy. This pattern seemed to be the same one I saw in the work
of John Garcia.

The idea for writing a book on this topic was born in Kona Village,
Hawaii, in the winter of 1990--91. It came out of conversations about
our children with my wife, Mandy, and then with Michael Crichton, the
novelist and essayist. Crichton and I both had two-year-old daughters
(Taylor and Lara, respectively) and were caught up in the day-to-day
tribulations of childrearing. We wondered about what things actually in
uenced our daughters and what elements of childrearing were wholly
without e ect. I reeled o my opinions about biological preparedness,
sexual identity, phobias, and the sauce béarnaise phenomenon. Michael
encouraged a book (we have the same publisher, Sonny Mehta of Alfred A.
Knopf), and my agent, Richard Pine, was aglow with enthusiasm. And so
was my editor, Jonathan Segal, who is not easily kindled. I sought and
received the advice and comments of many people ---experts in the wide
range of the disorders, drugs, psychotherapies, and self-improvement
schemes---and I have tried to integrate that wisdom into this book. I
extend my thanks to them now, with the customary absolution for the
results. First, the people who read and commented on entire chapters or
even longer swaths: Kelly Brownell (dieting), David Clark of Oxford
University (anxiety), Michael Crichton (all), Edna Foa (PTSD and depth),
Alan Kors (booters and bootstrappers), Alan Marlatt (alcoholism), John
Money (sex), Robert Plomin (childhood), Jack Rachman (obsessions), Sandy
Scarr (childhood), Amanda Seligman, my oldest daughter (all of Part 1),
Joseph Volpicelli (alcoholism), George Vaillant (alcoholism), Fred Van
Fleteren (booters and bootstrappers), and Terry Wilson of Rutgers
University (dieting and alcoholism). Several people have allowed me to
reprint their questionnaires in the book: I thank Lisa Friedman Miller,
Lenore Radlo , Melvin Selzer, and Charles Spielberger.

Jonathan Segal and Richard Pine each gave the manuscript several
readings and improved it each time, not only sentence by sentence but in
substance. Heather Smay read the manuscript as it evolved and was my
tireless research assistant. My secretaries, Elise McMahon and Terry
Silver, were helpful in ways too diverse to number.

So many conversations, so many constructive comments, so many memos and
letters, so much time freely given, so much exchange of ideas---I am
sure I have inadvertently omitted some who helped, but my thanks to Je
Albert, Lauren Alloy, Lori Andiman, Mike Bailey, Paul Baltes, Jon Baron,
Aaron Beck, Mary Bell, Beth Brezner, Kevin Brownlee, Greg Buchanan,
David Buss, Dan Chirot, Billy Coren, Paul Crits-Cristoph, Rob DeRubeis,
Harold Dibble, Ken Dodge, Maureen Eisenberg, Albert Ellis, David
Featherman, Alan Feingold, Pamela Freyd, Alan Fridlund, Lisa Friedman,
Jim Fries, Don Fusting, Judy Garber, Joan Girgus, Henry Gleitman, Lila
Gleitman, David Goldberg, Ruben Gur, T. George Harris, Peter Herman, Tom
Hirst, Steve Hollon, Janet Hyde, Lisa Jaycox, Charlie Jesnig, Martin
Katahn, Gerald Klerman, John LaRosa, Bruce Larsen, Lester Luborsky,
David Lykken, Alan Mann, Isaac Marks, Jack Maser, Dennis McCarthy, Nigel
McCarthy, Je Meckstroth, Shirlee Meckstroth, Bob Miller, Sue Mineka,
Paul Monaco, Peter Muehrer, Susan NolenHoeksema, Gabriele Oettingen, Dan
Oran, James Pennebaker, Chris Peterson, Arthur Pine, Chris Pro-kop,
Judith Rapoport, Karen Reivich, Richard Rende, Bob Rescorla, Sam
Revusky, Chris Risley, Judy Rodin, Dave Rosenhan, Mollie Rosenhan, Julie
Rubenstein, Marvin Sachs, Harold Sackeim, Robert Schuller, Peter
Schulman, Barry Schwartz, David Seligman, Irene Seligman, Paul Soloway,
David Spiegel, John Stickney, Mickey Stunkard, Paul Thomas, Lou Tice,
Joseph Volpicelli, Peter Whybrow, George Wilson, Camille Wortman, and
the students in Psychology 709 in the spring semesters of 1992 and 1993.
The most special thanks go to my wife, Mandy McCarthy Seligman, not only
for reading and commenting on all of this

book (except this part), but for her un agging good cheer and boundless
love. And to Nicole Seligman, my two-year-old. The writing of the book
began on or about the day of her conception, and the rst draft was
nished the day she took her rst steps. Her buoyancy and the sunshine she
radiates made even the hardest parts easier. M.E.P.S. July 1993

NOTES

A serious scholar writing for the general public walks a tightrope
between

readability and responsibility. My way of presenting the scholarship
underlying the book is to o er these endnotes. These are intended for my
scholarly audience and those of you who want to read further.

CHAPTER

1 What Changes? What Doesn't Change?

1.  M. Seligman and J. Hager, eds., The Biological Boundaries of
    Learning (New York: Apple-ton-Century-Crofts, 1972).
2.  M. Seligman, Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death
    (San Francisco: Freeman, 1975); M. Seligman, Learned Optimism (New
    York: Knopf, 1991).
3.  Copyright by Lisa Friedman Miller. I thank her for her generosity in
    letting me use it here.

CHAPTER

2 Booters and Bootstrappers

1.  This version is taken from the Passover Haggadah, distributed by
    Maxwell House Co ee, 1981.
2.  Even the more psychological books of the Bible---Job and Psalms, for
    example---are peculiar, seen from a modern perspective, in what
    mental states are present and what mental states are absent. There
    is some emotion---anger, grief, and joy; but less
    cognition---expectation, belief, inference, problem solving; and
    almost nothing of human will---decision, intention, choice, and
    preference. What Aristotle called conation is almost absent from the
    Scriptures (see Deuteronomy 30:19 and Isaiah 65:12 for two rare
    exceptions). I used a concordance to bear out this impression. Since
    I am a far cry from a biblical scholar, I am not sure my observation
    would bear closer scrutiny. If it is true, however, I take the
    question of why this might be so to be a great historical question.
3.  The skeptical reader should spend some time with the stark account
    of Abraham's sacri ce in Genesis 22: 1--13. Abraham's absence of
    mentation is striking.
4.  Pico's Oration (1486), translated by D. Brooks-Davies and S. Davies,
    quoted in S. Davies, Renaissance Views of Man (Manchester:
    Manchester University Press, 1978), 62--82. I have been unable to nd
    a history of free will. I hope that a scholar will someday be moved
    to undertake such a history. A history of free will, unlike, say,
    the history of empiricism, would be more than an airy exercise in
    the history of a philosophical notion. If I am right, what a given
    historical period believes about free will re ects, and may even a
    ect, how active or passive that culture is, how helpless and how
    despairing that culture is.

This section of my book, along with this note and the note below on
human participation in grace, is my bare sketch of such a history. Pico
was far from the rst to articulate the concept of free will. Dante
wrote, "A light is given you to know good and evil, and free will ("e
libero voler"), which if it endure fatigue in its rst battles with the
heavens, afterwards, if it is well nurtured, it conquers completely"
(canto 16, Purgatory). Before Dante, Aquinas endorsed it, more than
halfheartedly. It was clearly put forth one thousand years before Pico
by Pelagius in his lost work De Libero Arbitrio. Unfortunately for
Pelagius, he had the most towering of opponents, the luminescent Saint
Augustine. Augustine, for most of his life, held that humans could
indeed will evil, but that when they will good, it is merely by the
irresistible action of divine grace. Augustine's conception traces back
to the Stoic Seneca's view that fate and human freedom are compatible.
And Seneca's view, in turn, traces back another century to Cicero. The
Golden Age Greeks had a lively interest in free will versus fate, and
this contrasts instructively with the debate's absence from the Bible.
The issue of free will is Greco-Roman in origin, not JudeoChristian. At
any rate, Augustine's opposition to Pelagius may have set back the idea
of free will for a millennium or so, since save for Aquinas and Dante,
it did not seem to reemerge with any force until Pico. See Marianne
Djuth's "Stoicism and Augustine's Doctrine of Human Freedom After 396,"
in J. Schnaubelt and F. Van Fleteren, eds., Collectanea Augustiniana
(New York: Peter Lang, 1990), for an illuminating account of this hoary
dispute at the close of the fourth century. 5. From the point of view of
advocates of human choice, Luther's On the Bondage of the Will (1525)
makes chilling reading. He angrily rebutted the Dutch theologian
Erasmus's view of God (On

the Freedom of the Will, 1524) as a father who lifts a fallen toddler.
The father, Erasmus explained, does almost everything, but the toddler
has some small agency of his own. The new Protestantism was a backward
step on the road to belief in human agency when contrasted to the
emerging Catholic humanists such as Erasmus. 6. There are two related
theological disputes. The rst concerns free will. The second is whether
humans participate in their own salvation, in "grace." It is the
attitude toward this second issue that probably best re ects what people
believe about the power or impotence of human agency. Grace, gratis in
Latin, means "freely given"---by God, of course. In this original
meaning, humans do not participate at all--- receiving grace is entirely
God's will. Pelagius, in addition to believing in free will, believed
that we do participate in grace. This is part of the Pelagian heresy:
There are things humans can do to achieve salvation. Saint Augustine wa
ed on free will, occasionally endorsing the notion that humans could
choose good as well as evil. But he clearly believed that humans do not
participate in achieving grace. Thomas Aquinas, while closer to Pelagius
on the subject of free will, also believed that humans do not
participate in grace. The possibility that humans participate in their
own grace--- and the accompanying leap forward in the belief in the
potency of human agency---came from Erasmus, Arminius, and Wesley. This
belief was simply without an e ective voice throughout the Middle Ages
and the early Renaissance. 7. From "The General Deliverance," in J.
Wesley, Sermons, vol. 2 (New York: Emory and Waugh, 1831), 50. 8. From
"The Means of Grace," in J. Wesley, Sermons, vol. 1 (New York: Emory and
Waugh, 1831), 135--47. 9. The Jackson speech is quoted in Alice Felt
Tyler's important Freedom's Ferment (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press,

1944), 22. Tyler portrays the rst half of the nineteenth century as
centrally driven by the idea of the perfectibility of humankind. 10.
Letter of Freud to Wilhelm Fliess, 14 November 1897. From the Complete
Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fliess, 1887--1904 (Cambridge,
Mass.: Belknap, 1985), 281. It is signi cant, however, that in concert
with the therapist's agency, the patient must "work through" his
problems. The patient is never viewed as wholly passive, but he is not
viewed as capable of unaided self-improvement. Most of the booters also
have the individual at least cooperating in his elevation, but not being
the primary motive force. It is like Erasmus's toddler, with some little
agency, guided by God, with most of the agency. 11. From Bruce Kuklick's
brilliant Churchmen and Philosophers (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1985), 227. Kuklick traces the history and in uence of American
Protestantism on American social consciousness. 12. J. B. Watson,
Behaviorism (New York: People's Institute Publishing, 1924), 237. 13. It
is astonishing to me that this stream of thought, which I believe is the
religious manifestation of the idea of the potency of individual agency,
seems to be beneath the notice of academics. I cannot nd a learned
treatise in social science that even cites these thinkers, much less
takes them seriously. Serious they are.

CHAPTER

3 Drugs, Germs, and Genes

1.  This and all other case histories in this book are collages, with
    the details somewhat ctionalized to protect the identity of those
    concerned.
2.  A review of the only ve well-done controlled studies of the
    antipsychotics can be found in P. Keck, B. Cohen, R. Baldessarini,
    and S. McElroy, "Time Course of Antipsychotic E ects of Neuroleptic
    Drugs," American Journal of Psychiatry 146 (1989): 1289--92. Across
    these ve studies, roughly 50 percent reduction of symptoms is
    reported. A useful general review of rate of e ectiveness is in R.
    Spiegel, Psychopharmacology, 2d ed. (New York: Wiley, 1989).
3.  Nathan Kline's militant brief about the discovery of the rst
    antidepressant drugs, "Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors: An Un nished
    Picaresque Tale," in F. J. Ayd and H. Blackwell, eds., Discoveries
    in Biological Psychiatry (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1970), makes for
    delicious reading.
4.  Quantifying the e ect of the antidepressants is not simple. Unlike
    the antipsychotics, there have been a large number of good outcome
    (double-blind, placebo-controlled) studies of the tricyclics. But
    depression goes away on its own in time, and so there is a high rate
    of remission with just a placebo, perhaps as high as 45 percent. A
    drug has to outperform the placebo to work, and this happens in only
    about two-thirds of outcome studies. Di erent studies quantify
    improvement in many di erent ways, and this also makes comparison di
    cult. A consensus gure is that about 65 percent of patients improve
    noticeably with the tricyclics. See, for example, the useful review
    by Phillip Berger, "Antidepressant Medications and the Treatment of
    Depression," in J. Barchas, P. Berger, R. Ciaranello, and G. Elliot,
    eds., Psychopharmacology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977),
    174--207. For a good recent study, see K.

White, W. Wyko , L. Tynes, L. Schneider, et al., "Fluvoxamine in the
Treatment of Tricyclic-Resistant Depression," Psychiatric Journal of the
University of Ottawa 15 (1990): 156--58. A useful general review of rate
of e ectiveness is in Spiegel, Psychopharmacology. 5. See, for example,
J. Hall, "Fluoxetine: E cacy Against Placebo and by Dose---An Over
view," British Journal of Psychiatry supplement 3 (1988): 59--63. 6.
This little-known story is narrated by John Cade in his "The Story of
Lithium," in Ayd and Blackwell, Discoveries in Biological Psychiatry,
218--29. 7. Lithium is more e ective on the manic side of
manic-depressive illness than it is for the depression. It is
preventative of manic episodes as well, if taken regularly. It has toxic
side e ects (both cardiac and gastrointestinal) and so must be monitored
carefully. See R. Sack and E. De Fraites, "Lithium and the Treatment of
Mania," in Barchas et al., Psychopharmacology, 208--25. One of the major
problems of prescribing lithium is that many manic patients won't take
it. They feel good---very good---and they often don't want medication.
See also H. Johnson, K. Olafsson, J. Andersen, P. Plenge, et al.,
"Lithium Every Second Day," American Journal of Psychiatry 146 (1989):
557, for a recent study on e ective administration. 8. The discovery and
early history of the minor tranquilizers (as the anxiolytics are called)
is narrated candidly by Frank Berger, "Anxiety and the Discovery of
Tranquilizers," and by Irvin Cohen, "The Benzodiazepines," in Ayd and
Blackwell, Discoveries in Biological Psychiatry, 115--29 and 130--41,
respectively. 9. The most optimistic recent estimate I know of
concerning "percentage e ectiveness" of the antipsychotics is: complete
eradication of delusions and hallucinations, 22.5 percent; partial
improvement, 60 percent; no improvement, 17.5 percent. This is from J.
Chandler and G. Winokur, "How Antipsychotic Are the

Antipsychotics? A Clinical Study of the Subjective Antipsychotic E ect
of the Antipsychotics in Chronic Schizophrenia," Annals of Clinical
Psychiatry 1 (1989): 215--20. 10 I volunteered to be a subject for David
Rosenhan's classic study "On Being Sane in Insane Places," Science 179
(1973): 250--58. Rosenhan and I went into Norristown State Hospital
together. He was ill-treated, as expected. I was wonderfully treated.
This tale is worth a whole chapter itself---but in some other volume. 11
J. Wegner, F. Catalano, J. Gibralter, and J. Kane, "Schizophrenics with
Tardive Dyskinesia," Archives of General Psychiatry 42 (1985): 860--65;
ACNP-FDA Task Force, "Medical Intelligence---Drug Therapy," New England
Journal of Medicine 130 (1973): 20--24. Fine recent coverage of tardive
dyskinesia is in C. Gualtieri, Neuropsychiatry and Behavioral
Pharmacology (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991). 12 G. Cooper, "The
Safety of Fluoxetine---An Update," British Journal of Psychiatry 153
(1988): 77--86; J. Wernicke, "The SideE ect Pro le and Safety of
Fluoxetine," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 46 (1985): 59--67; M.
Teicher, C. Glod, and J. Cole, "Emergence of Intense Suicidal
Preoccupation During Fluoxetine Treatment," American Journal of
Psychiatry 147 (1990): 207--10. For a recent review of antidepressant
side e ects generally, see G. Beaumont, "Adverse E ects of
Antidepressants," International Clinical Psychopharmacology 5 (1990):
61--66, and S. Preskorn and G. Jerkovich, "Central Nervous System
Toxicity of Tricyclic Antidepressants: Phenomenology, Course, Risk
Factors, and the Role of Drug Monitoring," Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology 10 (1990): 88--95. The jury is still out on both the
safety and the relative e ectiveness of Prozac. 13. P. Tyrer, S. Murphy,
D. Kingdon, et al., "The Nottingham Study of Neurotic Disorder:
Comparison of Drug and Psychological Treatment," Lancet, 30 July 1988,
235--40, contends that the

anti-anxiety drugs are clinically useless for neurotic disorders. A
useful general review of rate of e ectiveness is in Spiegel,
Psychopharmacology, 15--19, 25--29. 14. J. Roache, "Addiction Potential
of Benzodiazepines and NonBenzodiazepine Anxiolytics," in Advances in
Alcohol and Substance Abuse 9 (1990): 103--28, provides a balanced view.
For an alarmist view, see S. Olivieri, T. Cantopher, and J. Edwards,
"Two Hundred Years of Anxiolytic Drug Dependence," Neuropharmacology 25
(1986): 669--70. For a more complacent view of the safety of
anti-anxiety drugs, see A. Nagy, "Possible Reasons for a Negative
Attitude to Benzodiazepines as Antianxiety Drugs," Nordisk Psykiatrisk
Tidsskrift 4 (1987): 27-- 30. My best guess is that taken regularly, the
anti-anxiety drugs tend to become impotent and addictive. J.
Tinklenberg, "Anti-Anxiety Medications and the Treatment of Anxiety," in
Barchas et al., Psychopharmacology, 226--42, provides useful descriptive
data. 15. For a recent upbeat review of lithium and its side e ects, see
J. Je erson, "Lithium: The Present and the Future," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 5 (1990): 4--8. Lithium is being used more and more on
unipolar depression as well as on manic-depression. The data are
suggestive, but the side e ects are still de nitely a danger. 16. K.
Dodge, J. Bates, and G. Pettit, "Mechanisms in the Cycle of Violence,"
Science 250 (1990): 1678--83, is a "politically correct" article notable
for the completeness of its environmental theorizing on the cycle of
abuse, and its complete absence of genetic theorizing. 17. D. Buss, "Sex
Di erences in Human Mate Preferences: Evolutionary Hypotheses Tested in
37 Cultures," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 12 (1989): 1--49, discusses
cogently the evolution of sexual attractiveness. See especially the
quoted comment within by N. Thorn-hill on the evolution of feminine
beauty. See

also D. Buss, "Evolutionary Personality Psychology," Annual Review of
Psychology 42 (1991): 439--91, for related theorizing. 18. Ludwig
Wittgenstein, in Philosophical Investigations (London: Blackwell, 1953),
paragraphs 77--83, sets the stage for this argument by showing that
nouns in ordinary language have no necessary feature that de nes them.
Rather, nouns like games consist of a family resemblance of overlapping
elements. Inasmuch as evolution selects traits like beauty,
intelligence, and motor coordination, which have no necessary de ning
feature, the problem of nding their underlying genetic structure will be
identical to the problem of nding a necessary condition de ning a word.
To say that these traits are polygenic (determined by many genes) is to
miss the point. On my analysis, then, these traits are not interestingly
genetic ---the combination of genes that underlie them is too large and
overlapping. But they are heritable, nonetheless. 19. One quibble
concerning personality traits in identical twins reared apart rises from
selective placement by adoption agencies. When identical twins are
separated and put up for adoption, agencies might place them similarly.
So the o spring of religious parents might go to religious homes, and
the o spring of rich parents to rich homes. When similarity of placement
is quanti ed, however, this doesn't seem to count for much of the
observed similarity. Another quibble concerns how long the twins were
reared together before separation. If they are not put up for adoption
until late in childhood, the whole argument falls, and similarity could
result either from genes or rearing. Most good twinsreared-apart
studies, therefore, look only at twins separated early in the rst year
of life. What is not a quibble is the possibility that personality is
only indirectly heritable---that "nature works via nurture." So we will
see below that optimism is heritable: Identical twins are more

concordant for it than fraternal twins. But optimism is produced by lots
of success (and pessimism by lots of failure) in life. Success and
failure, in turn, are caused by characteristics like looks, strength,
and motor coordination, all of which are physical and heritable.
Identical twins are more concordant for these characteristics (both
twins are similar on massiveness or runtiness) than are fraternal twins.
So what might be directly heritable are physical characteristics that
produce the personality trait, with the personality trait actually
wholly caused by the environment. This argument applies to all molar
personality characteristics. T. Bouchard, D. Lykken, M. McGue, N. Segal,
A. Tellegen, "Sources of Human Psychological Di erences: The Minnesota
Study of Twins Reared Apart," Science 250 (1990): 223--28, apart from
being a classic experiment, is also articulate on this point. While
these ndings are sometimes dismissed as "geneenvironment covariation,"
such dismissal misses the point. It is the environment that is primarily
causal here, not the genes--- and intervening to break the
gene-environment covariation shows this. Much of the future of
environmental treatments for biologically loaded problems may be
discovering ways to break the gene-environment covariation. 20. The best
source for the details of this monumental study is Bouchard, et al.,
"Sources of Human Psychological Di erences." I highly recommend it to
the curious reader. It is of high scope and quality. Some people still
have the preconception that IQ is not at all genetic. They are wrong. If
someone tells you this, they are either scienti cally illiterate or
ideologically blinded. Don't buy a used car from them. The
identical-twin and adoptive data on IQ are massive and compelling: At
least half (and in the Bouchard study, 75 percent) of the variance in IQ
is genetic.

What "intelligence" means, however, and what it predicts about
achievement in life is much murkier. The television-viewing study is R.
Plomin, R. Corley, J. DeFries, and D. Fulker, "Individual Di erences in
Television Viewing in Early Childhood: Nature as Well as Nurture,"
Psychological Science 1 (1990): 371--77. The religiosity study is N.
Waller, B. Kojetin, T. Bouchard, D. Lykken, and A. Tellegen, "Genetic
and Environmental In uences on Religious Interests, Attitudes, and
Values," Psychological Science 1 (1990): 138--42. The last four
personality factors are from an analysis of the California Personality
Inventory: T. Bouchard and M. McGue, "Genetic and Rearing Environmental
In uences on Adult Personality: An Analysis of Adopted Twins Reared
Apart," Journal of Personality 58 (1990): 263--92. 21. See N. Pedersen,
G. McClearn, R. Plomin, J. Nesselroade, J. Berg, and U. DeFaire, "The
Swedish Adoption/Twin Study of Aging: An Update," Acta Geneticae Medicae
et Gemellologiae 40 (1991): 7--20. R. Plomin, M. Scheier, C. Bergeman,
N. Pedersen, J. Nesselroade, and G. McClearn, "Optimism, Pessimism, and
Mental Health: A Twin/Adoption Analysis," Personality and Individual Di
erences 13 (1992): 921--30, presents the optimism piece of it. 22. See
B. Hutchings and S. Mednick, "Criminality in Adoptees and Their Adoptive
and Biological Parents: A Pilot Study," in S. Mednick and K.
Christiansen, eds., Biosocial Bases of Criminal Behavior (New York:
Gardner, 1977), 127--42. For similar logic applied to divorce, see M.
McGue and D. Lykken, "Genetic In uence on Risk of Divorce,"
Psychological Science 3 (1992): 368--73. Divorce is partly heritable and
seems to result partly from heritable characteristics that the two
parties bring to their union. 23. It is not only the nonheritable half
of personality that can change. The heritable half is made up of both
directly genetic

e ects and "gene-environment covariance." This last bit of jargon is
very important. "Gene-environment covariance" refers to the e ective
events in the environment that produce a trait but that are correlated
with genes, and so do not appear to be environmental e ects. So, for
example, being very tall is heritable. Playing basketball professionally
is also heritable. This is because tall people get into
environments-eighth-grade basketball teams, for example---in which they
excel and that reward them. They go on to become top basketball players.
The genes don't directly get you to the NBA; success at basketball does.
Success at basketball is the e ective environmental cause--- but it is
correlated with the genes for tallness. Gene-environment covariance can
be broken by intervention, allowing change to occur even in the
heritable fraction of personality. Tall people who don't get the
opportunity to play basketball in high school don't get into the NBA.
Another example of gene-environment covariance is crime. Crime is partly
heritable, and psychopathic kids tend to alienate their parents and
teachers. Their parents and teachers usually give up on them because
they are so nasty. The kids, lacking a relationship with an adult, turn
to the streets. This makes them street-smart criminals. If the parents
persist and don't reject the kid---breaking the covariance---they may
prevent the kid from becoming a criminal. I thank David Lykken for this
example. Its implications are profound.

CHAPTER

4 Everyday Anxiety

1.  Judith Rapoport, in The Boy Who Couldn't Stop Washing (New York:
    Dutton, 1989), calls attention to trichotillomania---the disorder of
    pulling at your hair, twirling it, picking pimples, and extreme
    self-grooming. When severe, baldness and skin irritation result. She
    argues that it is a biological disorder related to
    obsessive-compulsive disorders and that it can be relieved with an
    antidepressant drug, Anafranil (clomipramine), that also relieves
    obsessive-compulsive disorder. While I don't agree that either
    trichotillomania or obsessive-compulsive disorder is a "brain"
    disorder, both do have biological correlates. I believe that the two
    are related to each other, and that both are related to the
    evolution of grooming, in the large sense.
2.  Randolph Nesse uses the oil-light metaphor in "What Good Is Feeling
    Bad? The Evolutionary Bene ts of Psychic Pain," The Sciences (1991):
    30--37.
3.  Developed by Charles Spielberger in collaboration with G. Jacobs, R.
    Crane, S. Russell, L. Westberry, L. Barker, E. Johnson, J. Knight,
    and E. Marks. I have selected the trait-anxiety questions, inverting
    some of the scoring of the negatively worded items for easy
    self-scoring. Dr. Spielberger has kindly provided comparison norms
    as well.
4.  Benson's suggested technique (as explained in The Relaxation
    Response \[New York: Morrow, 1975\]) combines progressive
    relaxation, nasal breathing, and meditation. See E. Jacobson's
    classic Progressive Relaxation (Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press, 1938) for the original technique. Neither of these is a quick
    "how to" manual, however. The single best quick technique is called
    applied relaxation training. It is based on a therapy developed by
    Lars Goren-Ost ("Applied Relaxation: Description of a Coping
    Technique and

Review of Controlled Studies," Behaviour Research and Therapy 25
\[1987\]: 397--410). A simple ve-page "how to do it" is found in the
appendix of D. Clark, "Anxiety States: Panic and Generalized Anxiety,"
in K. Hawton, P. Salkovskis, J. Kirk, and D. Clark, eds., Cognitive
Behaviour Therapy for Psychiatric Problems: A Practical Guide (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1989), 92--96. This technique takes you from
progressive relaxation to relaxing while engaged in everyday activities.
5. For a meta-analysis (composite analysis of many studies), see K.
Eppley, A. Abrams, and J. Shear, "Di erential E ects of Relaxation
Techniques on Trait Anxiety: A Meta-analysis," Journal of Clinical
Psychology 45 (1989): 957--74. In their review of seventy studies, TM
does best, exceeding progressive relaxation and other relaxation and
meditation techniques, which all reduce trait anxiety as well. Recent
evidence also suggests bene ts of meditation for even the severely
anxious patient: See J. Kabat-Zinn, A. Massion, J. Kristeller, et al.,
"E ectiveness of Meditation-Based Stress Reduction Program in the
Treatment of Anxiety Disorders," American Journal of Psychiatry 149
(1992): 937--43. See also G. Butler, M. Fennell, P. Robson, and M.
Gelder, "Comparison of Behavior Therapy and Cognitive Behavior Therapy
in the Treatment of Generalized Anxiety Disorder," Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 59 (1991): 167--75. 6. My one warning about
meditation and relaxation concerns depression. I do not recommend either
of these techniques if you are highly depressed (see chapter 8). Both
relaxation and meditation work by lowering autonomic nervous system
arousal. Highly depressed people (who are not agitated) need autonomic
rewing-up, and not dampening, since lowering arousal further can feed
into their depression. Adverse e ects of TM are not unknown, but the
majority of practitioners report no adverse e ects at all. See L. Otis,
"Adverse E ects of Transcendental Meditation," in D. Shapiro and R.
Walsh, eds., Meditation: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives (New
York: Aldine, 1984), 201--8.

CHAPTER

5 Catastrophic Thinking

1.  You might wonder about my choice of sex for case histories. When
    there is a clear prevalence for females, as there is for panic (two
    to one, women versus men), I choose she. If there is a clear
    prevalence for males, I use he. If there is no di erence, I will use
    he and note the prevalence. 2 It has become fashionable to claim
    that the distinction between the biological and the psychological is
    not meaningful. It is all a pseudoquestion of historic interest
    only, some writers tell us. Or we're told that there is no deep
    distinction between mind and body. "Reductionists" tell us that all
    psychological events are ultimately biological, but that we just
    don't know the biology of them yet. "Interactionists" tell us that
    all psychological events are just the interaction of environmental
    events and biology. I plead agnosticism. Both reductionism and
    interactionism are philosophical positions, unproven matters of
    faith. One or the other might turn out to be correct---in a thousand
    years. It may ultimately turn out, for example, that cognitive
    therapy works because it changes the trait of pessimism that is
    located in a presently unknown chemical pathway in the hippocampus.
    Such a possibility, however, is completely unhelpful to the consumer
    trying to decide if cognitive therapy or imipramine is the best
    thing for her depression now. Such a possibility is completely
    irrelevant to the scientist trying to nd out now if pessimism is a
    risk factor for depression. Right now, 1994, there are clear and
    useful distinctions between the biological and the psychological.
    Psychological events are measured at the molar level, the level of
    the whole intact person: Feelings, thoughts, traits, and behaviors
    are examples. Biological events don't require a whole person for

measurement; they are speci ed molecularly: Neural rings, endorphin
changes, and dexamethasone suppression are examples. When something is
primarily psychological, this means that it can be treated by
interventions involving the whole person---cognitive therapy,
psychoanalysis, hypnosis, behavior therapy, meditation, or day care, for
example. When something is primarily biological, this means that
intervention can successfully occur at the molecular level: drugs,
surgery, or electroconvulsive shock, for example. When someone tells you
that there is no biological/psychological distinction, that the
nature/nurture dispute is settled or passe, or that there is no
mind/body distinction, keep a close eye on your wallet. That someone is
stating an article of faith, one that is unhelpful to any actual
scientist or consumer of therapy and, worse, that is intellectually
anesthetic. 3. This is a highly reliable nding, shown in dozens of
studies. See, for example, M. Liebowitz, J. Gorman, A. Fryer, et al.,
"Lactate Provocation of Panic Attacks," Archives of General Psychiatry
41 (1984): 764--70; and J. Gorman, M. Liebowitz, A. Fryer, et al.,
"Lactate Infusions in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder," American Journal
of Psychiatry 142 (1985): 864--66. 4. See S. Torgersen, "Genetic Factors
in Anxiety Disorders," Archives of General Psychiatry 40 (1983):
1085--89; and R. Crowe, "Panic Disorder: Genetic Considerations,"
Journal of Psychiatric Research 24 (1990): 129--34. 5. See D. Charney
and G. Heninger, "Abnormal Regulation of Noradrenergic Function in Panic
Disorders," Archives of General Psychiatry 43 (1986): 1042--54; and E.
Reiman, M. Raichle, E. Robins, et al., "The Application of Positron
Emission Tomography to the Study of Panic Disorder," American Journal of
Psychiatry 143 (1986): 469--77.

6. See, for example, S. Svebak, A. Cameron, S. Levander, "Clonazepam and
Imipramine in the Treatment of Panic Attacks," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 51 (1990): 14--17; and G. Tesar, "High-Potency
Benzodiazepines for Short-term Management of Panic Disorder: The U.S.
Experience," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 51 (1990): 4--10. 7. The
proceedings of this conference are published in S. J. Rachman and J.
Maser, eds., Panic-Psychological Perspectives (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum,
1988). 8. Parallel examples can be generated for fear of going crazy and
fear of losing control, two other common contents of a panic attack. In
each case, the rst bodily sensations are misinterpreted as a sign of
insanity or of losing control. The vicious cycle of misinterpreting
mounting anxiety symptoms as further evidence of imminent cataclysm then
starts. 9. This dialogue is adapted from D. Clark, "Anxiety States:
Panic and Generalized Anxiety," in K. Hawton, P. Salkovskis, J. Kirk,
and D. Clark, eds., Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Psychiatric
Problems: A Practical Guide (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989),
76--77. 10. For relapse with Xanax (alprazolam), see, for example, J.
Pecknold, R. Swinson, K. Kuch, C. Lewis, "Alprazolam in Panic Disorder
and Agoraphobia: Results from a Multicenter Trial: III. Discontinuation
E ects," Archives of General Psychiatry 45 (1988): 429--36. A very
informative lay article about Xanax, "High Anxiety," appeared in
Consumer Reports January 1993, 19-- 24. 11. On 25--27 September 1991,
NIMH brought the leading gures in panic together again for a "consensus"
meeting, a trial by jury of the panic therapies. Their conclusion was
equivocal and disappointing. The numbers presented agree very closely
with my summary table. In spite of this, the jury did not explicitly
compare the cognitive therapies to the drug therapies, and

therefore no mention was made of the superiority of the cognitive
treatment to drugs. I can only speculate as to what interests were
served by this, but I think their conclusions were pusillanimous and a
disservice to the general public. See "National Institutes of Health
Consensus Development Statement. Treatment of Panic Disorder. September
25--27, 1991." See especially J. Margraf, D. Barlow, D. Clark, and M.
Telch, "Psychological Treatment of Panic: Work in Progress on Outcome,
Active Ingredients, and Follow-up," Behaviour Research and Therapy 31
(1993): 1--8. Since my conclusions are not as yet universally accepted,
I want to list the main outcome studies that document the unusually
powerful e ects of the cognitive treatment: D. Clark, M. Gelder, P.
Salkovskis, A. Hackman, H. Middleton, and P. Anastasiades, "Cognitive
Therapy for Panic: Comparative E cacy." Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, New York City, May
1990. A. Beck, L. Sokol, D. Clark, B. Berchick, and F. Wright, "Focussed
Cognitive Therapy of Panic Disorder: A Crossover Design and One Year
Follow-up" (manuscript, 1991). L. Michelson and K. Marchione,
"Cognitive, Behavioral, and Physiologically-based Treatments of
Agoraphobia: A Comparative Outcome Study." Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Behavior
Therapy, Washington, D.C., November 1989. L. Ost, "Cognitive Therapy
Versus Applied Relaxation in the Treatment of Panic Disorder." Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the European Association of Behavior
Therapy, Oslo, September 1991. J. Margraf and S. Schneider, "Outcome and
Active Ingredients of Cognitive-Behavioural Treatments for Panic
Disorder." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American
Association for

the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, New York City, November 1991.

CHAPTER

6 Phobias

1.  Through mistranslation, the CS and CR have become known as the
    "conditioned" stimulus and response. Conditions/ (that is, the
    conditional stimulus only acquires its properties conditionally,
    upon pairing with the US and the UR) is the actual meaning of the
    adjective, however.
2.  J. Garcia and R. Koelling, "Relation of Cue to Consequence in
    Avoidance Learning," Psychonomic Science 4 (1966): 123--24.
3.  For the detailed discussion and debate about these ve problems,
    start with M. Seligman and J. Hager, eds., The Biological Boundaries
    of Learning (New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1972).
4.  The anesthesia experiment can be found in D. Roll and J. Smith,
    "Conditioned Taste Aversion in Anesthetized Rats," in Seligman and
    Hager, The Biological Boundaries of Learning, 98--102. Garcia tried
    his experiment with coyotes who made a habit of killing sheep. He
    laced ground lamb with nonlethal doses of poison. When the coyotes
    recovered, not only did they hate the taste of lamb, but they ran
    away from sheep! Lambs would actually chase them around the
    barnyard. When around lamb meat, the coyotes urinated on it and
    buried it. They didn't treat lamb meat as a mere signal that
    sickness was on its way; rather, they came to hate and fear sheep in
    themselves. See C. Gustavson, J. Garcia, W. Hankins, and K.
    Rusiniak, "Coyote Predation Control by Aversive Conditioning,"
    Science 184 (1974): 581--83. Pavlovian conditioning is de ned
    operationally: pairing of CS and US that results in a CR. This
    operational de nition masks a basic distinction between two di erent
    processes that can be engaged.

The rst is bloodless and intellectual: A CS is treated as a mere signal
for the US. Dogs salivated to the sight of Pavlov because they expected
to be fed. Pavlov himself had not become like food. The second is
deeper: The CS actually takes on the properties of the US, and becomes
aversive in and of itself. Coyotes urinating on lamb meat, trying to
bury it, and treating lambs as if they were dominant coyotes all
indicate that the lamb has taken on aversive properties in itself.
Unlike ordinary Pavlovian conditioning, whatever occurs during taste
aversion does not occur at a rational level. Prepared CS-UR
relationships, in my view, create conditioning at this deeper level. 5.
L. Robins, J. Helzer, M. Weissman, et al., "Lifetime Prevalence of Speci
c Psychiatric Disorders at Three Sites," Archives of General Psychiatry
41 (1984): 949--58; I. Marks, "Epidemiology of Anxiety," Social
Psychiatry 21 (1986): 167--71. 6. Until the early 1960s, psychoanalysis
was the therapy used by default. The discovery of systematic
desensitization and of ooding ended this. It is worth reading Freud's
famous "Little Hans" case, which originated the Oedipal theory of
phobias. See S. Freud, "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy," in
The Complete Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. 10, trans. J. Strachey
(London: Hogarth Press, 1974), 5--100; and, for a demolition of Freud's
argument, J. Wolpe and S. J. Rachman, "Psychoanalytic 'Evidence': A
Critique Based on Freud's Case of Little Hans," Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease 131 (1960): 135--47. See also H. Laughlin, The Neuroses
(Washington, D.C.: Butterworth, 1967), 545--606, on phobias, for the
analytic view at this time. The "never easy" comes from Laughlin. This
view of phobias is--- at last and deservedly---a dead horse. 7. L. Ost,
U. Steiner, and J. Fellenius, "Applied Tension, Applied Relaxation, and
the Combination in the Treatment of Blood Phobia," Behaviour Research
and Therapy 2.7 (1989): 109--21.

More recent reports suggest close to 100 percent cure with this
procedure. 8. There are few noncase report studies of cognitive therapy
for phobias. Those that exist show gains, but behavior therapy is added,
so it is not possible to sort out any additional usefulness of the
cognitive component. There are undeniable cognitive distortions in
phobias, but I doubt that they can be countered directly by cognitive
techniques. See G. Thorpe, J. Hacker, L. Cavallaro, and G. Kulberg,
"Insight Versus Rehearsal in Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy: A Crossover
Study with Sixteen Phobics," Behavioural Psychotherapy 15 (1987):
319--36. 9. In one study, 79 percent of agoraphobic patients who
received cognitive therapy plus extinction for panic were panic free, as
against only 39 percent with extinction alone. In L. Michelson and K.
Marchione, "Cognitive, Behavioral, and Physiologicallybased Treatments
of Agoraphobia: A Comparative Outcome Study." Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Behavior Therapy, Washington, D.C., November 1989. R. Mattick and L.
Peters, "Treatment of Severe Social Phobia: E ects of Guided Exposure
With and Without Cognitive Restructuring," Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 56 (1988): 251--60, suggest possible bene ts of
cognitive therapy with social phobias as well. 10. There are about a
half dozen reasonably well done recent studies of the e ects of various
drugs on social phobias. See J. Gorman and L. Gorman, "Drug Treatment of
Social Phobia," Journal of A ective Disorders 13 (1987): 183--92; A.
Levin, F. Scheier, and M. Liebowitz, "Social Phobia: Biology and
Pharmacology," Clinical Psychology Review 9 (1989): 129--40; M.
Versiani, F. Mundim, A. Nardi, et al., "Tranycypromine in Social
Phobia," Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 8 (1988): 279-- 83; M.
Liebowitz, J. Gorman, A. Fryer, et al., "Pharmacotherapy of Social
Phobia: An Interim Report of a Placebo-Controlled

Comparison of Phenelzine and Atenolol," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
49 (1988): 252--57; J. Reich and W. Yates, "A Pilot Study of the
Treatment of Social Phobia with Alprazolam," American Journal of
Psychiatry 145 (1988): 590--94; and M. Liebowitz, R. Campeas, A. Levin,
et al., "Pharmacotherapy of Social Phobia," Psychosomatics 28 (1987):
305--8. Most of these studies show a 60 to 75 percent level of
improvement with drugs (the MAO inhibitors are particularly e ective).
Unfortunately, most of these studies do not report what happens to the
patients after drugs are discontinued. Those that do (Versiani et al.,
"Tranycypromine in Social Phobia;" Reich and Yates, "A Pilot Study")
report very high relapse rates. R. Noyes, D. Chaudry, and D. Domingo,
"Pharmacologic Treatment of Phobic Disorders," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 47 (1986): 445--52, review this literature and conclude with
two major cautions: A high dropout rate with drugs and a high relapse
rate after drug discontinuation are likely. It is on this basis that I
conclude that the drugs have only a cosmetic e ect on social anxiety.
11. See C. Zitrin, D. Klein, M. Woerner, and D. Ross, "Treatment of
Phobias I: Comparison of Imipramine Hydrochloride and Placebo," Archives
of General Psychiatry 40 (1983): 125--38, versus I. Marks, S. Gray, D.
Cohen, et al., "Imipramine and Brief Therapist-Aided Exposure in
Agoraphobics Having Self-Exposure Homework," Archives of General
Psychiatry 40 (1983): 153--62. This is still rather a heated
controversy, with the bene ts of antidepressants alone and of exposure
(extinction) alone in some doubt. One serious worry is the high relapse
rate, perhaps over 50 percent, when drugs are stopped (see R. Noyes, M.
Garvey, B. Cook, and L. Samuelson, "Problems with Tricyclic
AntiDepressant Use in Patients with Panic Disorder or Agoraphobia,"
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 50 \[1989\]: 163--69). Similarly,
extinction therapy alone has some lasting bene t ve years after
termination, with about 50 percent of patients doing well, but

few completely well (see P. Lelliott, I. Marks, W. Monteiro, et al.,
"Agoraphobics 5 Years After Imipramine and Exposure: Outcome and
Predictors," Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases 175 \[1987\]:
599--605). So each alone has some lasting bene t but is far from a cure.
The combination of exposure and antidepressants looks like the least
controversial treatment of choice. Improvement rate may be as high as 90
percent with the combination (see J. Ballenger, "Pharmacotherapy of the
Panic Disorders," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 47 \[1986\]: 27--32).
In a particularly well executed study, only the combination group
improved, with the agoraphobes who had either tricyclics alone or
exposure alone not improving signi cantly (see M. Telch, S. Agras, C.
Taylor, et al., "Combined Pharmacological and Behavioural Treatment for
Agoraphobia," Behaviour Research and Therapy 23 \[1985\]: 325-- 35). For
other well-executed combined drug-and-exposure studies, see M.
Mavissakalian and L. Michelson, "Two-Year Follow-up of Exposure and
Imipramine Treatment of Agoraphobia," American Journal of Psychiatry 143
(1986): 1106-- 12. For a quantitative review of the drug and
psychotherapy literatures in agoraphobia, see R. Mattick, G. Andrews, D.
HadziPavlovic, and H. Christensen, "Treatment of Panic and Agoraphobia:
An Integrative Review," Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 178
(1990): 567--76. 12. This case history comes from Isaac Marks, the
leading contemporary British investigator of phobias. 13. See M.
Seligman, "Preparedness and Phobias," Behavior Therapy 2 (1971):
307--20; and S. J. Rachman and M. Seligman, "Unprepared Phobias: Be
Prepared," Behaviour Research and Therapy 14 (1976): 333--38. 14. A.
Ohman, M. Fredrikson, K. Hugdahl, and P. Rimmo, "The Premise of
Equipotentiality in Classical Conditioning:

Conditioned Electrodermal Responses to Potentially Phobic Stimuli,"
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 105 (1976): 313--37. For an
articulate dissenter from the Ohman experiments and from the
preparedness theory of phobias, see R. McNally, "Preparedness and
Phobias: A Review," Psychological Bulletin 101 (1987): 283--303. 15. L.
Ost and K. Hugdahl, "Acquisition of Phobias and Anxiety Response
Patterns in Clinical Patients," Behaviour Research and Therapy 21
(1981): 623--31 16. S. Hygge and A. Ohman, "Modelling Processes in
Acquisition of Fear: Vicarious Electrodermal Conditioning to
Fear-Relevant Stimuli," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 36
(1978): 271--79. For a beautifully done parallel experiment in nonhuman
primates, see S. Mineka, M. Davidson, M. Cook, and R. Keir,
"Observational Conditioning of Snake Fear in Rhesus Monkeys," Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 93 (1984): 355--72. 17. Snakes and spiders make for
stronger CSs than guns and knives, although the latter are more
dangerous in cultural---but not evolutionary---fact than the former. See
E. Cook, P. Hodes, and P. Lang, "Preparedness and Phobias: E ects of
Stimulus Content on Human Visceral Conditioning," Journal of Abnormal
Psychology 95 (1986): 195--207.

CHAPTER

7 Obsessions

1.  As remembered from "What Do We Plant?," by Henry Abbey (i
    842--1911).
2.  So catchy is this ditty that I read it once in fth grade (some forty
    years ago) and it has stayed with me---intact---ever since, making
    monthly appearances on my jingle channel. Mark Twain, "Punch,
    Brothers, Punch" (1876), in The Complete Humorous Sketches and Tales
    of Mark Twain, ed. Charles Neider (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
    1961), 303. Ethical considerations forbid my telling you the lyrics
    of the even catchier jingles.
3.  D. Barlett and J. Steele, Empire: The Life, Legend, and Madness of
    Howard Hughes (New York: Norton, 1979), 233.
4.  S. J. Rachman and R. Hodgson's classic book Obsessions and
    Compulsions (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1980) remains the de
    nitive behavioral work on the topic. The questionnaire from this
    book is reproduced with minor changes.
5.  Judith Rapoport, The Boy Who Couldn't Stop Washing (New York: Plume,
    1990), 90--91. The evidence for heritability that follows comes
    from M. Lenane, S. Swedo, H. Leonard, et al., "Psychiatric Disorders
    in First Degree Relatives of Children and Adolescents with Obsessive
    Compulsive Disorder," Journal of the American Academy of Child and
    Adolescent Psychiatry 29 (1990): 407--12.
6.  S. Turner, D. Beidel, and R. Nathan, "Biological Factors in
    Obsessive-Compulsive Disorders," Psychological Bulletin 97 (1985):
    430--50; L. Baxter, M. Phelps, J. Mazziotta, et al., "Local Cerebral
    Glucose Metabolic Rates in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A
    Comparison with Rates in Unipolar Depression and Normal Controls,"
    Archives of General Psychiatry 44 (1987): 211-- 18; R. Rubin, J.
    Villanueva-Meyer, J. Ananth, et al., "Regional

Xenon 133 Cerebral Blood Flow and Cerebral Technetium 99m HMPAO Uptake
in Unmedicated Patients with ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder and Matched
Normal Control Subjects," Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (1992):
695--702. The latest studies show normalization of brain function with
Anafranil (clomipramine) treatment, uoxetine treatment, and behavior
therapy. See C. Benkelfat, T. Nordahl, W. Semple, et al., "Local
Cerebral Glucose Metabolic Rates in ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder,"
Archives of General Psychiatry 47 (1990): 840--48; L. Baxter, J.
Schwartz, K. Bergman, et al., "Caudate Glucose Metabolic Rate Changes
with Both Drug and Behavior Therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder,"
Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (1992): 681--89; S. Swedo, P.
Pietrini, H. Leonard, et al., "Cerebral Glucose Metabolism in
Childhood-Onset Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder," Archives of General
Psychiatry 49 (1992): 690--94. 7. Both Judith Rapoport, in The Boy Who
Couldn't Stop Washing, and Isaac Marks and Adolf Tobena, in "Learning
and Unlearning Fear: A Clinical and Evolutionary Perspective,"
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 14 (1990): 365--84, have argued
for an evolutionarily prepared substratum of OCD. 8. For recent studies
of Anafranil (clomipramine), see M. Jenike, L. Baer, P. Summergrad, et
al., "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Trial of Clomipramine in 27 Patients," American Journal of Psychiatry
146 (1989): 1328--30; R. Katz, J. DeVeaugh-Geiss, P. Landau,
"Clomipramine in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder," Biological Psychiatry
28 (1990): 401--14; M. Pato, T. Piggott, J. Hill, et al., "Controlled
Comparison of Buspirone and Clomipramine in ObsessiveCompulsive
Disorder," American Journal of Psychiatry 148 (1991): 127--29; and M.
Mavissakalian, B. Jones, S. Olson, J. Perel, "Clomipramine in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Clinical Response and Plasma Levels,"
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 10 (1990): 261--68. See M.
Trimble,

"Worldwide Use of Clomipramine," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 51
(1990): 51--54, for a review of eleven double-blind studies. Overall,
slightly fewer than 50 percent of the patients are improved to
subclinical levels, and perhaps 25 percent are almost symptom free. For
side e ects and the high relapse rate after drug discontinuation, see M.
Pato, R. Zohar-Kadouch, J. Zohar, D. Murphy, "Return of Symptoms After
Discontinuation of Clomipramine in Patients with Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder," American Journal of Psychiatry 145 (1988): 1521--25, which
shows an 80 percent relapse rate; T. Piggott, M. Pato, S. Bernstein, et
al., "Controlled Comparisons of Clomipramine and Fluoxetine in the
Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder," Archives of General
Psychiatry 47 (1990): 926--32, which shows a comparable e ect for
uoxetine to clomipramine and comparable high relapse after drug
discontinuation; and J. Greist, "Treating the Anxiety: Therapeutic
Options in ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
51 (1990): 29--34. For an articulate critique of the biological
viewpoint, see P. DeSilva and S. J. Rachman, Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder: The Facts (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992), 53--54 9.
The woodworking- lm experiment was reported by M. Horowitz, "Intrusive
and Repetitive Thoughts After Experimental Stress," Archives of General
Psychiatry 32 (1975): 1457--63. 10. This case is adapted from I. Marks,
S. J. Rachman, and R. Hodgson, "Treatment of Chronic
Obsessive-Compulsive Neurosis by in Vivo Exposure," British Journal of
Psychiatry 127 (1975): 349--64. 11. J. Greist, "Treatment for Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder: Psychotherapies, Drugs, and Other Somatic
Treatment," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 51 (1990): 44--50. For a
complete review of the dozen or more outcome studies of behavior therapy
for OCD,

see Rachman and Hodgson, Obsessions and Compulsions, 299--358; and
DeSilva and Rachman, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, 53--54.

CHAPTER

8 Depression

1.  I have spent most of my life writing about depression. Much of the
    material in this chapter is adapted from other things I have
    written, particularly from chapter 4, "Ultimate Pessimism," in
    Learned Optimism (New York: Knopf, 1991), 54--70.
2.  See Seligman, Learned Optimism, for the grand tour of explanatory
    style. Detailed reviews of explanatory style and depression, and
    extensive bibliographies, can be found in C. Peterson and M.
    Seligman, "Causal Explanations as a Risk Factor for Depression:
    Theory and Evidence," Psychological Review 91 (1984): 347--74; in P.
    Sweeney, K. Anderson, and S. Bailey, "Attributional Style in
    Depression: A Meta-analytic Review," Journal of Personality and
    Social Psychology 50 (1986): 974--91; and in L. Abramson, G.
    Metalsky, and L. Alloy, "Hopelessness Depression: A Theory-Based
    Process-Oriented Sub-Type of Depression," Psychological Review 96
    (1989): 358--72.
3.  L. Robins, J. Helzer, M. Weissman, H. Orvaschel, E. Gruenberg, J.
    Burke, and J. Regier, "Lifetime Prevalence of Speci c Psychiatric
    Disorders in Three Sites," Archives of General Psychiatry 41 (1984):
    949--958G; G. Klerman and M. Weissman, "Increasing Rates of
    Depression," Journal of the American Medical Association 261 (1989):
    2229--35.
4.  G. Klerman, P. Lavori, J. Rice, T. Reich, J. Endicott, N.
    Andreason, M. Keller, and R. Hirschfeld, "Birth-Cohort Trends in
    Rates of Major Depressive Disorder Among Relatives of Patients with
    A ective Disorder," Archives of General Psychiatry 42 (1985):
    689--93.
5.  The nding that depression now starts younger comes from the elegant
    mathematization of the data from a study by T. Reich, P. Van
    Eerdewegh, J. Rice, J. Mullaney, G. Klerman, and J.

Endicott, "The Family Transmission of Primary Depressive Disorder,"
Journal of Psychiatric Research 21 (1987): 613--24. 6. P. Lewinsohn, P.
Rohde, and J. Seeley, "Birth-Cohort Changes in the Occurrence of
Depression: Are We Experiencing an Epidemic of Depression?" Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 102 (1993): 110-- 20. 7. This is an area so obscured
by ideology that you should be guided to the best disinterested study. I
recommend the very careful review of the topic by S. Nolen-Hoeksema,
"Sex Di erences in Depression: Theory and Evidence," Psychological
Bulletin 101 (1987): 259--82. A longer version is S. NolenHoeksema, Sex
Di erences in Depression (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press,
1990). An exhaustive bibliography of the topic and of the controversy
discussed in the next few paragraphs of chapter 8 can be found there. 8.

The most detailed argument for the close symptom correspondence of
learned helplessness and DSM-3-diagnosed depression is made by J. Weiss,
P. Simson, M. Ambrose, A. Webster, and L. Ho man, "Neurochemical Basis
of Behavioral Depression," Advances in Behavioral Medicine 1 (1985):
253--75. This paper and the important work of Sherman and Petty (below)
also lay out the powerful brain-chemistry and pharmacological
similarities between learned helplessness and depression (see A. Sherman
and F. Petty, "Neurochemical Basis of Antidepressants on Learned
Helplessness," Behavioral and Neurological Biology 30 \[1982\]:
119--34).

9.  Three psychologists have made the major contributions to the recent
    study of rumination: Julius Kuhl, Susan Nolen-Hoeksema, and Harold
    Zullow. See J. Kuhl, "Motivational and Functional Helplessness: The
    Moderating E ect of State-Versus ActionOrientation," Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology 40 (1981): 155--70; H. Zullow,
    "The Interaction of Rumination and Explanatory Style in Depression."
    Master's thesis, University of

Pennsylvania, 1984; and Nolen-Hoeksema, Sex Di erences in Depression.
10. M. McCarthy, "The Thin Ideal, Depression, and Eating Disorders in
Women," Behaviour Research and Therapy 28 (1990): 205--15. 11. J.
Girgus, S. Nolen-Hoeksema, M. Seligman, G. Paul, and H. Spears, "Why Do
Girls Become More Depressed Than Boys in Early Adolescence?" Paper
presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, San
Francisco, August 1991. 12. S. Hollon, R. DeRubeis, and M. Evans,
"Combined Cognitive Therapy and Pharmacotherapy in the Treatment of
Depression," in D. Manning and A. Frances, eds., Combined
Pharmacotherapy and Psychotherapy in Depression (Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Press, 1990), 35--64. In one well-publicized study,
eleven patients who responded well to imipramine took the drug
continuously for ve years, and only one became depressed. Of nine
patients given a placebo, ve became depressed. See D. Kupfer, E. Frank,
J. Perel, et al., "Five-Year Outcome for Maintenance Therapies for
Recurrent Depression," Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (1992):
769--73. This suggests that if antidepressant drugs work for you and
curtail depression, stay on them even when you're feeling ne, to prevent
recurrence. 13. For a review of the e ectiveness of ECS, see M. Fink,
Convulsive Therapy: Therapy and Practice (New York: Raven Press, 1979).
There is now a whole journal, Convulsive Therapy, devoted to ECS. For a
cautious view, see J. Taylor and J. Carroll, "Current Issues in
Electroconvulsive Therapy," Psychological Reports 60 (1987): 747--58.
For recent ndings, see D. Devanand, H. Sackeim, and J. Prudic,
"Electro-convulsive Therapy in the Treatment-Resistant Patient,"
Psychiatric Clinics of North America 14 (1991): 905--23. 14. A. Beck,
Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders (New York: New American
Library, 1976), 233--62.

15. The basic reference to the NIMH collaborative study is I. Elkin, M.
Shea, J. Watkins, S. Imber, et al., "National Institute of Mental Health
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: General E
ectiveness of Treatments," Archives of General Psychiatry 46 (1989):
971--82. The reader should be warned that this is still a guild "hot
potato" and that even now the data are disputed and are in the process
of being reanalyzed. The latest ndings are about recurrence: M. Shea, I.
Elkin, S. Imber, et al., "Course of Depressive Symptoms over Follow-up,"
Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (1992): 782--87; and M. Evans, S.
Hollon, R. DeRubeis, et al., "Di erential Relapse Following Cognitive
Therapy and Pharmacotherapy for Depression," Archives of General
Psychiatry 49 (1992): 802--8. Both of these major studies nd that
cognitive therapy fares better than drug treatment (which is tapered o
during follow-up) on preventing recurrence of depression. But there is
still considerable recurrence even in the cognitive-therapy groups, with
drugs showing about 50 percent recurrence over two years and cognitive
therapy about 30 percent recurrence. 16. Elkin et al., "National
Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative
Research Program," 971--82. 17. G. Klerman, M. Weissman, B. Rounsaville,
and E. Chevron, Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression (New York:
Basic Books, 1984).

CHAPTER

9 The Angry Person

1.  Developed by Charles Spielberger in collaboration with G. Jacobs, R.
    Crane, S. Russell, L. Westberry, L. Barker, E. Johnson, J. Knight,
    and E. Marks. I have selected the trait-anger questions, inverting
    some of the scoring of the negatively worded items for easy
    self-scoring.
2.  R. Ardrey, The Territorial Imperative (New York: Atheneum, 1966).
3.  J. Hokanson, "The E ects of Frustration and Anxiety on Aggression,"
    Journal of Abnormal Psychology 62 (1961): 346; J. Hokanson and M.
    Burgess, "The E ects of Three Types of Aggression on Vascular
    Processes," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 65 (1962):
    446--49; R. Williams, J. Barefoot, and R. Shekelle, "The Health
    Consequences of Hostility," in M. Chesney and R. Rosenman, eds.,
    Anger and Hostility in Cardiovascular and Behavioral Disorders (New
    York: McGraw-Hill, 1985), 173--85.
4.  S. Greer and T. Morris, "Psychological Attributes of Women Who
    Develop Breast Cancer: A Controlled Study," Journal of Psychosomatic
    Research 19 (1975): 147--53; M. Watson, S. Greer, L. Rowden, C.
    Gorman, et al., "Relationship Between Emotional Control, Adjustment
    to Cancer and Depression and Anxiety in Breast Cancer Patients,"
    Psychological Medicine 21 (1991): 51--57.
5.  D. Spiegel, J. Bloom, H. Draemer, and E. Gottheil, "E ect of
    Psycho-Social Treatment on Survival of Patients with Metastatic
    Breast Cancer," Lancet 2 (1989): 888--91.
6.  S. Greer and T. Morris, "Psychological Attributes of Women Who
    Develop Breast Cancer," found higher rates of breast cancer for both
    anger suppressors and exploders. There is one very serious
    statistical problem in this study. With a complex trait like Type C,
    there is a technique called partial correlation that can tell us

what the active ingredient---anger suppression, helplessness, or lack of
ghting spirit---is in the higher rates of cancer. These authors
consistently fail to use it. See M. Seligman, Learned Optimism (New
York: Knopf, 1991), 167--78, for the documentation of the cancer link to
helplessness, hopelessness, and depression. As things stand, my best
guess is that any Type C link to breast cancer operates through
helplessness, and not through anger suppression. 7. Williams et al.,
"The Health Consequences of Hostility," in Chesney and Rosenman, Anger
and Hostility in Cardiovascular and Behavioral Disorders, 173--85; K.
Matthews, D. Glass, R. Rosenman, and R. Bortner, "Competitive Drive,
Pattern A, and Coronary Heart Disease: A Further Analysis of Some Data
from the Western Collaborative Group Study," Journal of Chronic Diseases
30 (1977): 489--98; G. Ironson, C. Taylor, M. Boltwood, et al., "E ects
of Anger on Left Ventricle Rejection Fraction in Coronary Artery
Disease," American Journal of Cardiology 70 (1992): 281--85. 8. J.
Hokanson and M. Burgess, "The E ects of Status, Type of Frustration, and
Aggression on Vascular Processes," Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 65 (1962): 232--37; J. Hokanson and R. Edelman, "E ects of
Three Social Responses on Vascular Processes," Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology 71 (1966): 442--47. 9. You might ask why regular
exercise---e.g., marathon running--- decreases your risk of heart
attack, since it raises heart rate. During the actual running of the
marathon, your heart rate goes way up. But your resting heart rate level
during the other twenty-one hours of the day goes down. Indeed, this may
be the main bene t of exercise. Your total number of beats per year is
now lower, and you don't reach your beat allotment until later in life.

10. M. Weissman and E. Paykel, The Depressed Woman (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1974), 138--53. 11. K. Dodge and N. Crick, "Social
Information-Processing Bases of Aggressive Behavior in Children,"
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 16 (1990): 8--22. Dodge's
work is pioneering and has generated an intervention program for conduct
disorder in schools. 12. S. Nolen-Hoeksema, J. Girgus, and M. Seligman,
"Depression in Children of Families in Turmoil" (unpublished
manuscript). I want especially to exempt my valued colleagues, Joan
Girgus and Susan Nolen-Hoeksema, from any responsibility for my
speculation that less parental ghting will lower the amount of
depression in children. 13. See chapter 8 of my Learned Optimism, on
which this discussion of parental turmoil is based. Three other
important references are J. Wallerstein and S. Blakeslee, Second
Chances: Men, Women, and Children a Decade After Divorce (New York:
Ticknor & Fields, 1989) (but see R. Forehand, "Parental Divorce and
Adolescent Maladjustment: Scienti c Inquiry vs. Public Information,"
Behaviour Research and Therapy 30 \[1992\]: 319--28, for a critique of
such studies as Wallerstein and Blakeslee's); E. Hetherington, M. Cox,
and C. Roger, "E ects of Divorce on Parents and Children," in M. E.
Lamb, ed., Nontraditional Families (Hillside, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1982); and
E. Cummings, D. Vogel, J. Cummings, and M. El-Sheikh, "Children's
Responses to Di erent Forms of Expression of Anger Between Adults,"
Child Development 60 (1989): 1392--1404. 14. S. Feshbach, "The Catharsis
Hypothesis and Some Consequences of Interaction with Aggression and
Neutral Play Objects," Journal of Personality 24 (1956): 449--62; L.
Berkowitz, "Experimental Investigations of Hostility Catharsis," Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 35 (1970): 1--7. Carol Tavris's
discussion of the catharsis view in her excellent book Anger: The

Misunderstood Emotion particularly lucid.

(New

York:

Touchstone,

1989) 

is

15. Raymond Novaco, Anger Control (Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath, 1975),
    52--67. This is a good book for the professional, detailing one
    small-scale outcome study and a variety of cognitivebehavioral
    techniques for controlling anger.
16. This example is from L. Powell and C. Thoreson, "Modifying the Type
    A Pattern: A Small Group Treatment Approach," in J. A. Blumenthal
    and D. C. McKee, eds., Applications in Behavioral Medicine and
    Health Psychology: A Clinician's Source Book (Sarasota, Fla.:
    Professional Resource Exchange, 1987), 171--207.
17. Novaco, Anger Control, 8--12. See also A. Goldstein and H. Keller,
    Aggressive Behavior: Assessment and Intervention (New York:
    Pergamon, 1987), 139--44. Several investigators are presently
    developing new strategies for anger control. These are summarized
    in D. Golcman, "Strategies for Lifting Spirits Are Emerging from
    Studies," New York Times, 30 December 1992, C6.
18. Sharon Bower, Assert Yourself (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1975).

CHAPTER

10 Post-traumatic Stress

1.  The case of Hector and Jodi is adapted and modi ed to protect the
    privacy of the family. The case comes from the les of Dr. Camille
    Wortman, the leading researcher on the long-term consequences of
    bereavement.
2.  E. Lindemann, "The Symptomatology and Management of Acute Grief,"
    American Journal of Psychiatry 101 (1944): 141--48.
3.  D. Lehman, C. Wortman, and A. Williams, "Long-term E ects of Losing
    a Spouse or Child in a Motor Vehicle Crash," Journal of Personality
    and Social Psychology 52 (1987): 218--31.
4.  J. Kluznik, N. Speed, C. Van Valkenberg, and R. Magraw, "FortyYear
    Follow-up of United States Prisoners of War," American Journal of
    Psychiatry 143 (1986): 1443--45.
5.  Reliable statistics for unreported rape are hard to get, and
    increasingly they are becoming ideologically obfuscated. L. Gise
    and P. Paddison, "Rape, Sexual Abuse, and Its Victims," Psychiatric
    Clinics of North America 11 (1988): 629--48, make the one-in-three
    lifetime guess. The o cial diagnostic criteria for PTSD are now
    softening, particularly in response to the "Rape Trauma Syndrome."
    No longer will the criteria include such language as "beyond the
    ordinary range of human loss." DSM-4's description of a qualifying
    event will probably be "actual or threatened death or injury, or a
    threat to the physical integrity of oneself or others." See DSM-4
    Options Book (Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association,
    1991), H-17.
6.  This case is adapted from S. Bowie, D. Silverman, S. Kalick, and S.
    Edbril, "Blitz Rape and Con dence Rape: Implications for Clinical
    Intervention," American Journal of Psychotherapy 44 (1990): 180--88.
    They distinguish between a blitz rape, which

involves an unknown assailant attacking out of the blue, and a con dence
rape, which involves someone you know. Their data is based on one
thousand rape victims. Unfortunately, they do not tell us if the
prognoses for PTSD and recovery di er with the two kinds of rapes. 7. B.
Rothbaum, E. Foa, D. Riggs, T. Murdock, and W. Walsh, "A Prospective
Examination of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Rape Victims," Journal
of Traumatic Stress 5 (1992): 455--75. 8. The classic modern paper about
reaction to rape, its typology, and its duration is A. Burgess and L.
Holmstrom, "Adaptive Strategies and Recovery from Rape," American
Journal of Psychiatry 136 (1979): 1278--82. B. Rothbaum et al., "A
Prospective Examination of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Rape
Victims," present the most complete picture of the sequelae in the rst
three months following rape. S. Girelli, P. Resick, S. Marhoefer-Dvorak,
and C. Hutter, "Subjective Distress and Violence During Rape: The E ects
on Long-term Fear," Violence and Victims 1 (1986): 35--46, report
prognosis to be a function of distress, not violence. D. Kilpatrick, B.
Saunders, A. AmickMcMullan, et al., "Victim and Crime Factors Associated
with the Development of Crime-Related Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,"
Behavior Therapy 20 (1989): 199--214, in contrast, report that life
threat and violence best predict chronic PTSD. D. Kilpatrick, B.
Saunders, L. Veronen, C. Best, and J. Von, "Criminal Victimization:
Lifetime Prevalence, Reporting to Police, and Psychological Impact,"
Crime and Delinquency 33 (1987): 479--89, report the seventeen-year
follow-up. 9. A. Feinstein and R. Dolan, "Predictors of Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder Following Physical Trauma: An Examination of the
Stressor Criterion," Psychological Medicine 21 (1991): 85--91. 10. L.
Weisaeth, "A Study of Behavioural Responses to Industrial Disaster,"
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia 80 (1989): 13--24; A. McFarlane, "The
Aetiology of Post-Traumatic Morbidity:

Predisposing, Precipitating, and Perpetuating Factors," British Journal
of Psychiatry 154 (1989): 1221--28; Z. Solomon, M. Kotler, and M.
Mikulincer, "Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Among
Second-Generation Holocaust Survivors: Preliminary Findings," American
Journal of Psychiatry 145 (1988): 865--68; Z. Solomon, B. Oppenheimer,
Y. Elizur, M. Waysman, "Exposure to Recurrent Combat Stress: Can
Successful Coping in a Second War Heal Combat-Related PTSD from the
Past?" Journal of Anxiety Disorders 4 (1990): 141--45; U. Malt and L.
Weisaeth, "Disaster Psychiatry and Traumatic Stress Studies in Norway,"
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia 80 (1989): 7--12. 11. T. Yager, R. Laufer,
and M. Gallops, "Some Problems Associated with War Experience in Men of
the Vietnam Generation," Archives of General Psychiatry 41 (1984):
327--33, present grim statistics on the aftermath of the Vietnam War for
veterans. These authors are not the skeptics. 12. K. Erikson, Everything
in Its Path: Destruction of Community in the Bu alo Creek Flood (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1976), movingly narrates the destruction of an
Appalachian community and the plight of the dispossessed survivors. What
Erikson fails to make clear, however, is that the survivors who so
wrenchingly told him their awful stories were in the middle of suing the
Pittston Company for the ruin of their lives and the dissolution of
their community. 13. J. Frank, T. Kosten, E. Giller, and E. Dan, "A
Randomized Clinical Trial of Phenelzine and Imipramine for Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder," American Journal of Psychiatry 145 (1988): 1289--91;
J. Davidson, H. Kudler, R. Smith, et al., "Treatment of PTSD with
Amitriptyline and Placebo," Archives of General Psychiatry 47 (1990):
250--60. For a review of twenty drug studies for PTSD, see M. Friedman,
"Toward Rational Pharmacotherapy for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: An
Interim Report," American Journal of Psychiatry 145 (1988): 281--85.

14. James Pennebaker, Opening Up (New York: Morrow, 1990), 37-- 51,
94--97.1 recommend this book to all students of PTSD. 15. E. Foa, B.
Rothbaum, D. Riggs, and T. Murdock, "Treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder in Rape Victims," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
59 (1991): 715--23. 16. Foa et al., "Treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder in Rape Victims." Other studies that suggest some relief
produced by cognitive and behavioral treatment of PTSD are E. Frank, B.
Anderson, B. Stewart, C. Dacu, et al., "E cacy of Cognitive Behavior
Therapy and Systematic Desensitization in the Treatment of Rape Trauma,"
Behavior Therapy 19 (1988): 403-- 20; and P. Resick, C. Jordan, S.
Girelli, C. Hutter, et al., "A Comparative Outcome Study of Behavioral
Group Therapy for Sexual Assault Victims," Behavior Therapy 19 (1988):
385--401. An easy-to-follow manual for such exposure therapy is H.
Moore, Traumatic Incident Reduction: A Cognitive-Emotional Resolution of
the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) (Clearwater, Fla., 1991).
Patients are cycled repeatedly through a mental viewing of the
precipitating incident, until the response becomes "lighter." Using TIR,
Moore reports dramatic improvement in a brief time, but what is needed
is a wellcontrolled outcome test of these procedures. 17. Edna Foa,
personal communication, 18 July 1992. Foa is a professor at the Medical
College of Pennsylvania, Department of Psychiatry, Center for the
Treatment and Study of Anxiety. Because this is the pioneering center in
the treatment of rape, and because so few centers are presently treating
rape e ectively, I include the center's phone number: (215) 842-- 4010.
The study is mentioned in E. Foa and D. Riggs's comprehensive
"Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in Rape Victims," American Psychiatric
Press Review of Psychiatry 12 (1992): 273--303. See also P. Resick and
M. Schnicke, "Cognitive Processing Therapy

for Sexual Assault Survivors," Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 60 (1992): 748--56.

CHAPTER

11 Sex

1.  Sexologists refer to these layers as gender identity, gender role,
    and the like. I nd the word gender in such usage unpalatable.
    Pronouns, but little else, can be properly said to have gender. This
    is more than a grammarian's reservation, however: Gender in place of
    sex is a desiccating word, a eunuch word. Like the id of Freud's
    translators in place of his original das Es, gender dries up the
    vital uids that pulsate through erotic life. John Money, a modern
    pioneer in research on sexuality, is most responsible for
    introducing gender to mean more than what pronouns have. Underlying
    his attempt is the distinction between sex---your genital con
    guration---and gender---your status as male and female, a much
    broader idea than what is dictated by your genitals. As laudable as
    this distinction may be, sexology has become a eld with impenetrable
    jargon ("Let's do it, let's fall in limerence"). For a history and
    apologia for some of this jargon, see J. Money, "The Concept of
    Gender Identity Disorder in Childhood and Adolescence After 37
    Years." Paper presented at a conference on gender identity and
    development, St. George's Hospital, London, March 1992.
2.  D. Barlow, G. Abel, and E. Blanchard, "Gender Identity Change in a
    Transsexual: An Exorcism," Archives of Sexual Behavior 6 (1977):
    387--95.
3.  In the only well-documented report of psychotherapy changing sexual
    identity that I can nd, three yeoman behavior therapists attempted
    very intensive therapy to change, piece by piece, the feminine motor
    behaviors, role behaviors, masturbation, and fantasies in sequence
    over the course of many months. Three transsexual men were so
    treated. In only one of the three cases was clear long-term success
    obtained. See D. Barlow, G. Abel, and E. Blanchard, "Gender Identity
    Change in Transsexuals," Archives of General Psychiatry 36 (1979):
    1001--7.

4. B. Kuiper and P. Cohen-Kettenis, "Sex Reassignment Surgery: A Study
of 141 Dutch Transsexuals," Archives of Sexual Behavior 17 (1988):
439--57; M. Ross and J. Need, "E ects of Adequacy of Gender Reassignment
on Psychological Adjustment: A Follow-up of Fourteen Male-to-Female
Patients," Archives of Sexual Behavior 18 (1989): 145--53. 5. I want to
call the reader's attention to an alternative theory: R. Pillard and J.
Weinrich, "The Periodic Table Model of the Gender Transpositions: Part
I. A Theory Based on Masculinization and Defeminization of the Brain,"
The Journal of Sex Research 4 (1987): 425--54, is an oddly brilliant
attempt to explain the variations in sexual identity and behavior with
two simple principles: masculinization and defeminization, both in
uenced by genes, hormones, and nurture. So speculative is this theory
(and mine as well) that I leave it to future research to pass judgment.
6. J. Money and J. Dalery, "Iatrogenic Homosexuality: Gender Identity in
Seven 46XX Chromosomal Females with Hyperadrenocortical Hermaphroditism
Born with a Penis, Three Reared as Boys, Four Reared as Girls," Journal
of Homosexuality 1 (1976): 357--71; J. Money, M. Schwartz, and V. Lewis,
"Adult Heterosexual Status and Fetal Hormonal Masculinization and
Demasculinization: 46XX Congenital Virilizing Adrenal Hyperplasia and
46XY Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome Compared," Psychoneuroendocrinology
9 (1984): 405--14; J. Money, "Sin, Sickness, or Status?" American
Psychologist 42 (1987): 384--99. 7. V. Lewis and J. Money, "Gender
Identity/Role: GI/R Part A: XY (Androgen-Insensitivity) Syndrome and XX
(Rokitansky) Syndrome of Vaginal Atresia Compared," in L. Dennerstein
and G. Burrows, eds., Handbook of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and
Gynecology (New York: Elsevier, 1983), 51--60. 8. Sexologists lump the
homosexual-versus-heterosexual "choice" into the same category
("sexual-object choice") as the "choice" of

body parts, fetishistic objects, and erotic situations (S-M, pedophilia,
ashing, etc.). I break these into two separate categories, sexual
orientation and sexual preferences, because I think they are di erent
processes. The homosexual/heterosexual "choice" is deeper, dictated
earlier in life, and more in exible than the sexual preferences for body
parts, inanimate objects, and arousing situations. 9. S. Levay, "A Di
erence in Hypothalamic Structure Between Heterosexual and Homosexual
Men," Science 253 (1991): 1034-- 37. Further evidence for di ering brain
structures in a nonreproductively related area was found by L. Allen and
R. Gorski, "Sexual Orientation and the Size of the Anterior Commissure
in the Human Brain," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 89
(1992): 7199--7202. Here the anterior commissure was signi cantly larger
in homosexual men than in heterosexual women, who in turn had more
tissue here than heterosexual men had. 10. The examples that follow are
not intended to be hormonally or anatomically accurate; they are merely
schemata to illustrate what the architecture underlying separate
processes for identity, sexual organs, and orientation would have to be
like. 11. The breakthrough article speculating roughly in this way is L.
Ellis and M. Ames, "Prenatal Neurohormonal Functioning and Sexual
Orientation: A Theory of Homosexuality-Heterosexuality," Psychological
Bulletin 101 (1987): 233--58. So provocative was this piece that I was
forced to change an entire course in midstream to discuss it at length
when it came out in 1987. For the literature on twins and homosexuality,
see E. Eckert, T. Bouchard, J. Bohlen, and L. Heston, "Homosexuality in
Monozygotic Twins Reared Apart," British Journal of Psychiatry 148
(1986): 421--25. M. Bailey and R. Pillard, "A Genetic Study of Male
Sexual Orientation," Archives of General Psychiatry 48 (1991): 1089--96,
is the landmark study in this area. While this points directly to a
genetic in addition to a fetal-hormone

mechanism, homosexuality still might be entirely fetal in origin.
Identical twins do not have identical intrauterine environments. One
twin is often bigger than the other. Could it be that identical twins do
not get identical hormonal baths? No one knows yet. It is possible that
bisexuality---or, strictly speaking, the capacity for bisexuality---has
as its substratum just a bit of androgen insu ciency in utero. Future
research will tell. But it is important that most of the development of
bisexuality is in adolescence and adulthood, not in utero. People not
infrequently become actively bisexual when exposed to homosexuality
during their teens and twenties. For this reason I include bisexuality
as a sexual preference, and exclusive homosexuality as a sexual
orientation. 12. Evidence is not completely lacking. A. Ehrhardt, H.
MeyerBahlburg, L. Rosen, et al., "Sexual Orientation After Prenatal
Exposure to Exogenous Estrogen," Archives of Sexual Behavior 14 (1985):
57--75, found increased bisexuality and homosexuality among women whose
mothers had taken DES, which has masculinizing e ects, during pregnancy.
In the genetic study of lesbianism, unlike the study of male
homosexuality, sisters were just as concordant for lesbianism as
fraternal twins, suggesting no clear role for fetal hormones. M. Bailey,
R. Pillard, M. Neale, and Y. Agyei, "Heritable Factors In uence Sexual
Orientation in Women," Archives of General Psychiatry 50 (1993):
217--23. 13. In the original study (M. Feldman and M. MacCulloch, "The
Application of Anticipatory Avoidance Learning to the Treatment of
Homosexuality. 1. Theory, Technique, and Preliminary Results," Behaviour
Research and Therapy 2 \[1966\]: 165--83), the authors found marked
improvement in 58 percent of the men who started therapy and 69 percent
of the men who completed therapy. In an automated follow-up, only 31
percent of the men who started therapy and 42 percent of the completers
improved markedly. "Heterophobes" and men completely indi erent to

women did not improve. See S. James, A. Orwin, and R. Turner, "Treatment
of Homosexuality. 1. Analysis of Failure Following a Trial of
Anticipatory Avoidance Conditioning and the Development of an
Alternative Treatment System," Behavior Therapy 8 (1977): 840--48. See
also N. McConaghy, M. Armstrong, and A. Blaszczynski, "Controlled
Comparison of Aversive Therapy and Covert Sensitization in Compulsive
Homosexuality," Behaviour Research and Therapy 19 (1981): 425-- 34. They
also nd about 50 percent success, but argue that no change in sexual
orientation has occurred. The best overall review is H. Adams and E.
Sturgis, "Status of Behavioral Reorientation Techniques in the Modi
cation of Homosexuality: A Review," Psychological Bulletin 84 (1977):
1171--88. 14. R. Baenninger, "Some Consequences of Aggressive Behavior:
A Selective Review of the Literature on Other Animals," Aggressive
Behavior 1 (1974): 17--37. 15. T. Templeman and R. Stinnett, "Patterns
of Sexual Arousal and History in a 'Normal' Sample of Young Men,"
Archives of Sexual Behavior 20 (1991): 137--50. 16. This is the view
propounded by Richard von Kra t-Ebing. His Psychopathia Sexualis (New
York: Physicians' and Surgeons' Book Company, 1922) is a great and
eminently readable compilation. I number him with Freud, Kinsey, Masters
and Johnson, and John Money among the great liberators in this eld. 17.
For example, see D. Raphling, "Fetishism in a Woman," Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association 37 (1989): 465--91. The S-M study is
N. Breslow, L. Evans, and J. Langley, "On the Prevalence and Roles of
Females in the Sadomasochistic Subculture: Report of an Empirical
Study," Archives of Sexual Behavior 14 (1985): 303--17. 18. I recommend
the rst chapter of the explosive Sexual Personae (New York: Vintage,
1991), by the bete noire of feminism, Camille Paglia, for the view that
promiscuity is normal in men

but an illness in women. As for evidence, see David Buss's crosscultural
studies about sexual attractants in men versus women, reported in his
"Sex Di erences in Human Mate Preferences: Evolutionary Hypotheses
Tested in 37 Cultures," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 12 (1989): 1--49.
19. W. Marshall, A. Eccles, and H. Barbaree, "The Treatment of
Exhibitionists: A Focus on Sexual Deviance Versus Cognitive and
Relationship Features," Behaviour Research and Therapy 29 (1991):
129--35; B. Maletzky, "'Assisted' Covert Sensitization in the Treatment
of Exhibitionism," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 42
(1974): 34--40. 20. A thorough review is found in J. Bradford, "Organic
Treatment for the Male Sexual O ender," Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 528 (1988): 193--202. 21. There are large literatures on all
these points. Two good reviews are A. Huston, "The Development of Sex
Typing: Themes from Recent Research," in Developmental Review 5 (1985):
1--17; and M. Sedney, "Development of Androgyny: Parental In uences,"
Psychology of Women Quarterly 11 (1987): 31--326. The classic in this
eld is E. Maccoby and C. Jacklin, The Psychology of Sex Di erences
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1974). 22. See the Sedney
and Huston reviews (cited immediately above) for good coverage of the
studies that try and fail to coax young children into androgyny. 23. H.
Meyer-Bahlburg, J. Feldman, P. Cohen, and A. Ehrhardt, "Perinatal
Factors in the Development of Gender-Related Play Behavior: Sex Hormones
Versus Pregnancy Complications," Psychiatry 51 (1988): 260--71; S.
Berenbaum and M. Hines, "Early Androgens Are Related to Childhood
Sex-Typed Toy Preferences," Psychological Science 3 (1992): 203--6. J.
Money and A. Ehrhardt, Man and Woman, Boy and Girl (Baltimore:

Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972), is an excellent general reference
for the precursor studies. 24. J. Reinisch, unpublished study cited in
C. Gorman, "Sizing Up the Sexes," Time (20 January 1992), 45--46. 25.
The most comprehensive recent overview is J. Hyde, "Metaanalysis and the
Psychology of Gender Di erences," Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society 16 (1990): 55--73. The spatial score may have a biological
component. Astonishingly, women's scores go up by between 50 and 100
percent when their estrogen level is low, and men's scores go up when
their testosterone level is low. See I. Silverman and M. Eals, "Sex Di
erences in Spatial Abilities: Evolutionary Theory and Data," in J.
Barko, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, eds., The Adaptive Mind: Evolutionary
Psychology and the Generation of Culture (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1992), 487--503. It is also intriguing that while men are better
at rotating threedimensional objects (perhaps related to navigating the
savannah while hunting), women are apparently better at the spatial task
of remembering the place of objects (perhaps related to foraging). 26.
J. Hall, Nonverbal Sex Di erences: Communication Accuracy and Expressive
Styles (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984). 27. Alan
Feingold of Yale University has written a landmark article on this
topic, containing exhaustive data reanalysis of the major ability tests:
"Sex Di erences in Variability in Intellectual Abilities: A New Look at
an Old Controversy," Review of Educational Research 62 (1992): 61--84.
28. A. Feingold, "Sex Di erences in Variability in Intellectual
Abilities." 29. There is an alternate explanation of the narrowing of
sex di erences: renorming. Every few years, the big test makers (ETS,
California Achievement, etc.) renorm their tests to try to

make them better and "fairer." To do this, they sometimes throw out
items on which there is a sex di erence or a race di erence and
substitute items that do not di er empirically. If this is what is going
on in the reduction of the ability-score di erences, it is sheer
artifact. The ability di erences remain, but we can no longer see them
as clearly. 30. W. Masters and V. Johnson, Human Sexual Inadequacy
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1970), is a classic, but too technical to be a
good read. H. Kaplan, The New Sex Therapy (New York: BrunnerMazel,
1974), is a better choice for the layman. For a skeptical view, see B.
Zilbergeld and M. Evans, "The Inadequacy of Masters and Johnson,"
Psychology Today 14 (1980): 28--43. 31. I adopt the usage of acedia from
Robertson Davies's essay "The Deadliest Sin of All," in One Half of
Robertson Davies (New York: Viking, 1977), 62--68. Much of what follows
derives from this brilliant essay.

CHAPTER

12 Dieting

1.  This is a truly voluminous subject, full of articles that contradict
    one another, and peopled by scientists and clinicians caught in a
    con ict between an emerging truth about the ine ectiveness of
    dieting on the one hand, and making a living on the other. I want to
    single out two major pieces of work about dieting, both unpopular:
    The rst is J. Polivy and P. Herman, Breaking the Diet Habit (New
    York: Basic Books, 1983). Although a decade old now and out of
    print, its basic contentions on the ine ectiveness and dangers of
    dieting continue to be borne out in this fastmoving eld. The second
    is the most up-to-date, scholarly review of dieting: D. Garner
    and S. Wooley, "Confronting the Failure of Behavioral and Dietary
    Treatments for Obesity," Clinical Psychology Review 11 (1991):
    729--80. Both are whistle-blowing (though possibly overstated) and
    ahead of their time. I lean on them strongly in this chapter. They
    are must reads for all students in this eld, and if taken to heart
    they will go a long way toward making psychology a more responsible
    profession. Finally, the consumer should consult the splendid
    "Diets: What Works---What Doesn't," Consumer Reports, June 1993,
    347--57.
2.  The Metropolitan Life table is adapted from E. Weigley, "Average?
    Ideal? Desirable? A Brief Overview of Height-Weight Tables in the
    United States," Journal of the American Dietetic Association 84
    (1984): 417--23.
3.  The argument that being over your "ideal" weight means that you
    would live longer if you dieted down to your "ideal" weight is a non
    sequitur of the rst magnitude. It astonishes me that serious
    physicians have been dispensing such advice for decades. Technically
    speaking, it is a fallacious argument on two grounds: First, it
    confuses correlation and cause. Some third variable may cause people
    at their "ideal" weight both to have that weight and

to live longer. Second, it ignores the health cost of dieting to get to
a lower weight, which in itself could o set the health bene t of being
at that lower weight. There is something else to be said against the Met
Life "ideal" weights. Met Life charged about 20 to 30 percent extra in
lifeinsurance premiums to the overweight. A good number of the
overweight policyholders were willing to pay an extra premium because
they knew something was wrong with their health that the company didn't.
This means that the overweight people that Met Life insured were
probably unhealthier than people of the same weight who didn't try to
get insurance. Policyholders systematically select against the company,
and the result of this is that the "ideal" weight gure is probably
markedly too low. 4. J. Garrow, Energy Balance and Obesity in Man (New
York: Elsevier, 1974), and S. Wooley, O. Wooley, and S. Dyrenforth,
"Theoretical, Practical, and Social Issues in Behavioral Treatment of
Obesity," Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 12 (1979): 3--25, review
these studies. K. Brownell and T. Wadden, "The Heterogeneity of Obesity:
Fitting Treatments to Individuals," Behavior Therapy 22 (1991): 153--77,
is a useful general source debunking the myths of overweight. New
studies of doubly labeled water challenge the view that the obese don't
overeat, however. According to such studies, obese people underreport
how much they eat by 30 percent. See D. Schoeller, "Measurement of
Energy Expenditure in Free-Living Humans by Using Doubly Labeled Water,"
Journal of Nutrition 118 (1988): 1278--89. 5. R. Striegel-Moore and J.
Rodin, "The In uence of Psychological Variables in Obesity," in K.
Brownell and J. Foreyt, eds., Handbook of Eating Disorders (New York:
Basic Books, 1986), 99-- 121. 6. "What's Ahead? The Weight Loss Market,"
Obesity and Health (July 1989), 51--54. J. LaRosa, Dieter Beware: The
Complete

Consumer Guide to Weight Loss Programs (Valley Stream, N.Y.: Marketdata
Enterprises, 1991), is a useful if unselective compendium of the facts
and nancial doings of the diet industry. 7. D. Garner, P. Gar nkel, D.
Schwartz, and M. Thompson, "Cultural Expectations of Thinness in Women,"
Psychological Reports 47 (1980): 483--91; R. Je rey, S. Adlis, and J.
Forster, "Prevalence of Dieting Among Working Men and Women: The Healthy
Worker Project," Health Psychology 10 (1991): 274--81. 8. M. Hovell, A.
Koch, C. Hofstetter, et al., "Long-term Weight Loss Maintenance:
Assessment of a Behavioral and Supplemented Fasting Regimen," American
Journal of Public Health 78 (1988): 663--66; T. Andersen, K. Stokholm,
O. Backer, and F. Quaade, "Long-term (5-Year) Results After Either
Horizontal Gastroplasty or Very-Low-Calorie Diet for Morbid Obesity,"
International Journal of Obesity 12 (1988): 277--84; D. Johnson and E.
Drenick, "Therapeutic Fasting in Morbid Obesity: Long-term Follow-up,"
Archives of Internal Medicine 137 (1977): 1381--82; P. Stalonas, M.
Perri, and A. Kerzner, "Do Behavioral Treatments of Obesity Last? A
Five-Year Follow-up Investigation," Addictive Behavior 9 (1984):
175--83. T. Wadden, A. Stunkard, and J. Liebschutz, "Three-Year
Follow-up of the Treatment of Obesity by a Very Low Calorie Diet,
Behavior Therapy, and Their Combination," Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 56 (1988): 925--28, found that six out of forty- ve
patients maintained weight loss completely after three years. The most
complete source is "Methods for Voluntary Weight Loss and Control,"
proceedings of a National Institutes of Health conference, 30 March-i
April 1992, along with its staggering 1,119-item bibliography ("Methods
for Voluntary Weight Loss and Control," in Current Bibliographies in
Medicine \[CBM 92--1\] \[Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing O
ce, 1992\]. 9. See Garner and Wooley, "Confronting the Failure of
Behavioral and Dietary Treatments," for a review and bibliography of all
the

long-term follow-up studies. See also M. Holmes, B. Zysow, and T.
Delbanco, "An Analytic Review of Current Therapies for Obesity," Journal
of Family Practice 28 (1989): 610--16. 10. K. Brownell and T. Wadden,
"Etiology and Treatment of Obesity: Understanding a Serious, Prevalent,
and Refractory Disorder," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
60 (1992): 505--17, are representative of the group that remains
undaunted by the poor long-term results of dieting. They call for more
realistic goals---reasonable weight rather than "ideal" weight--- better
screening for really motivated clients, and more research on
maintenance. They write articles on a "balanced" view of dieting in
response to the data in this chapter. I admire their dogged persistence,
but I do not share their optimism about the future of the dieting
industry. There is little reason to hope that ten-pound losses will be
maintained any better than twenty- vepound losses are. There is little
reason to believe that people who su er through diet after diet are
unmotivated, and there is even less reason to expect any breakthrough
about maintenance. Brownell and Wadden assert that the public good will
not be served if people come to believe "(a) diets do not work; (b)
dieting is more dangerous than staying heavy; and (c) excess weight is a
trivial risk factor." This statement astonishes me. Brownell and Wadden
are two of the investigators whose very research makes these
propositions so plausible. Rather than hoping to chill debate about
whether dieting is useless or even harmful, I believe it is very much in
the public interest to provoke such debate. 11. See R. Je rey, J.
Forster, and T. Schmid, "Worksite Health Promotion: Feasibility Testing
of Repeated Weight Control and Smoking Cessation Classes," American
Journal of Health 3 (1989): 11--16; and R. Je rey, W. Hellerstedt, and
T. Schmid, "Correspondence Programs for Smoking Cessation and Weight
Control: A Comparison of Two Strategies in the Minnesota Heart Health
Program," Health Psychology 9 (1990): 585--98.

12. The serious scholar should read "Methods for Voluntary Weight Loss
and Control" (see note 9, above). The upshot is that no known diet keeps
weight o in the long run, except for a very small minority of dieters.
13. The rat model of yo-yo dieting was developed by K. Brownell, M.
Greenwood, E. Stellar, and E. Shrager, "The E ects of Repeated Cycles of
Weight Loss and Regain in Rats," Physiology and Behavior 38 (1986):
459--64. The increased metabolic e ciency is well replicated, but
whether yo-yo rats rebound to a higher weight is still controversial.
See R. Contreras and V. Williams, "Dietary Obesity and Weight Cycling: E
ects on Blood Pressure and Heart Rate in Rats," American Journal of
Physiology 256 (1989): 1209--19. See R. Keesey, "The Body-Weight Set
Point," Postgraduate Medicine 83 (1988): 115--27, and Garner and Wooley,
"Confront the Failure of Behavioral and Dietary Treatments," for
reviews. In spite of all the press on yo-yo dieting, I believe that more
animal research is still needed to determine which e ects of yoyoing are
reliable. 14. G. Blackburn, G. Wilson, B. Kanders, et al.,
"Weight-cycling: The Experience of Human Dieters," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 49 (1989): 1105--9; E. Drenick and D. Johnson,
"Weight-Reduction by Fasting and Semi-Starvation in Morbid Obesity:
Long-term Follow-up," in G. Bray, ed., Obesity: Comparative Methods of
Weight Control (London: John Libbey, 1980), 25--34; C. Geissler, D.
Miller, and M. Shah, "The Daily Metabolic Rate of the Post-Obese and the
Lean," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 45 (1987): 914--20. I do
not believe that the human literature on this issue is yet conclusive.
The rat literature and the human literature have replicated increased
metabolic e ciency during starvation and dieting. But what happens after
weight is regained is less certain: I would like to see replications of
whether weight overshoots to higher levels in rats and humans. I would
also like to see a

longitudinal study with long-term follow-up looking at metabolic e
ciency after weight regain along the lines of the crosssectional study
of Geissler et al., "The Daily Metabolic Rate." See also Garner and
Wooley, "Confront the Failure of Behavioral and Dietary Treatments." 15.
Geissler et al., "The Daily Metabolic Rate;" Blackburn et al.,
"Weight-cycling." 16. P. Brown and M. Konner, "An Anthropological
Perspective on Obesity," Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 499
(1987): 29--46. 17. E. Sims, "Experimental Obesity, Diet-Induced
Thermogenesis, and Their Clinical Implications," Clinics in
Endocrinology and Metabolism 5 (1976): 377--95. 18. Sims, "Experimental
Obesity;" A. Stunkard, J. Harris, N. Pedersen, and G. McClearn, "The
Body-Mass Index of Twins Who Have Been Reared Apart," New England
Journal of Medicine 322 (1990): 1483--87; A. Stunkard, T. Sorenson, C.
Hanis, et al., "An Adoption Study of Human Obesity," New England Journal
of Medicine 314 (1986): 193--98. The correlation is stronger for the
lean than for the obese, indicating that environmental factors may play
more of a role in obesity. See R. Price and A. Stunkard, "Commingling
Analysis of Obesity in Twins," Human Heredity 39 (1989): 121--35; C.
Bouchard, A. Tremblay, J. Despres, et al., "The Response to Long-term
Overfeeding in Identical Twins," New England Journal of Medicine 322
(1990): 1477--82. For the relation between "ideal" weight and actual
weight, see A. Keys, "Overweight, Obesity, Coronary Heart Disease and
Mortality," Nutrition Reviews 38 (1980): 297--307. 19. The best
prevalence statistics come from C. Fairburn and S. Beglin, "Studies of
the Epidemiology of Bulimia Nervosa," American Journal of Psychiatry 147
(1990): 401--8. 20. Antidepressant drugs have some positive e ects. They
do better than a placebo at reducing binging and purging, with about a
60

percent reduction in frequency. But most patients still have the
symptoms at the end of treatment, with only 22 percent, on average,
symptom free. Once antidepressants are stopped, rate of relapse is very
high. For a review of the antidepressants in bulimia, see C. Fairburn,
W. S. Agras, and G. T. Wilson, "The Research on the Treatment of Bulimia
Nervosa: Practical and Theoretical Implications," in G. Anderson and S.
Kennedy, eds., The Biology of Feast and Famine: Relevance to Eating
Disorders (New York: Academic Press, 1992), 318--40. 21. This is not an
original proposal. It is the interpretation put forward by Polivy and
Herman in Breaking the Diet Habit, Garner and Wooley in "Confront the
Failure of Behavioral and Dietary Treatments," and Jane Wardle. See
particularly J. Polivy and C. P. Herman, "Dieting and Binging: A Causal
Analysis," American Psychologist 40 (1985): 193--201; and J. Wardle,
"Compulsive Eating and Dietary Restraint," British Journal of Clinical
Psychology 26 (1987): 47--55. In putting forward a similar theory both
of anorexia and bulimia, Peter Slade calls the bulimic a "failed
anorexic," failed in that the anorexic can keep dieting without giving
in to binging. See P. Slade, "Towards a Functional Analysis of Anorexia
Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa," British Journal of Clinical Psychology 21
(1982): 167--79. See M. Boskind-Lodahl and J. Sirlin, "The
Gorging-Purging Syndrome," Psychology Today (March 1977), 50--52,
82--85, for a survey of the rate of dieting just before bulimia starts.
For two epidemiological studies linking dieting quite tightly to eating
disorders, see G. Patton, E. Johnson-Sabine, K. Wood, et al., "Abnormal
Eating Attitudes in London Schoolgirls---A Prospective Epidemiological
Study: Outcome at Twelve Month Follow-up," Psychological Medicine 20
(1990): 383--94; and K. Kendler, C. MacLean, M. Neale, et al., "The
Genetic Epidemiology of Bulimia Nervosa," American Journal of Psychiatry
148 (1991): 1627--37. Dieters are at least eight times more likely to
get an eating disorder than nondieters.

22. I take my hat o to S. Dalvit-McPhillips, "A Dietary Approach to
Bulimia Treatment," Physiology and Behavior 33 (1984): 769-- 75. It is a
shame that this paper has remained obscure. 23. See Fairburn and Beglin,
"Studies of the Epidemiology of Bulimia Nervosa," for a complete review
of the cognitivebehavioral studies, and C. Fairburn, R. Jones, R.
Peveler, et al., "Three Psychological Treatments for Bulimia Nervosa,"
Archives of General Psychiatry 48 (1991): 463--69, for an exemplary
outcome study. For a ne antidepressant drug study, see U. McCann and W.
S. Agras, "Successful Treatment of Nonpurging Bulimia Nervosa with
Desimpramine: A Double-Blind, PlaceboControlled Study," American Journal
of Psychiatry 147 (1990): 1509--13. The two outcome studies that
explicitly compare drugs and cognitive-behavioral therapy are J.
Mitchell, R. Pyle, E. Eckert, et al., "A Comparison Study of
Antidepressants and Structured Intensive Group Psychotherapy in the
Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa," Archives of General Psychiatry 47 (1990):
149-- 57; and W. S. Agras, E. Rossiter, B. Arnow, et al., "Pharmacologic
and Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for Bulimia Nervosa: A Controlled
Comparison," American Journal of Psychiatry 149 (1992): 82--87. 24. C.
Telch, W. Agras, and E. Rossiter, "Binge Eating Increases with
Increasing Adiposity," International Journal of Eating Disorders 7
(1988): 115--19. See G. T. Wilson, "Short-term Psychological Bene ts and
Adverse E ects of Dieting and Weight Loss," paper delivered at the NIH
conference "Methods for Voluntary Weight Loss and Control" (1991), for
the argument that dieting may be necessary but not su cient for bulimia.
25. J. Brody, "Study De nes 'Binge Eating Disorder,'" New York Times, 27
March 1992, A16. 26. There is an inconclusive small literature about the
e ect of arti cial sweeteners on weight gain. Some researchers have
shown that rats gain weight with arti cial sweeteners, but some have
shown the reverse. It's the same with human subjects. (See

Appetite 11 \[1988\]: supplement 1.) No one has attempted the right
study: a long-term follow-up of overweight people who are put on (or
taken o ) arti cial sweeteners. It would cost about \$5 million to do
this study and nd out if the \$10-billion-a-year diet-food industry is a
scam. 27. L. Craighead, A. Stunkard, and R. O'Brien, "Behavior Therapy
and Pharmacotherapy for Obesity," Archives of General Psychiatry 38
(1981): 763--68. 28. This study may prove to be a watershed, shifting
the treatment of obesity from dietary (too ine ective) or surgical (too
radical) to pharmacological. It was published in eight articles as
"Longterm Weight Control: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
Funded Multimodal Intervention Study," Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics (supplement) (May 1992), 581-- 646. 29. This footnote could
be a chapter in length, but I am going to resist. Rather, I will be
selective and highlight just the best studies to guide the student of
this topic as to why I come to the conclusions I do: Enormous Obesity
(100 percent above "ideal" weight): E. Drenick, S. Gurunanjappa, F.
Seltzer, and D. Johnson, "Excessive Mortality and Causes of Death in
Morbidly Obese Men," Journal of the American Medical Association 243
(1980): 443--45, followed two hundred extremely fat young men for ten
years. They found that fty died. Indeed, among the 25-to 34-year-olds,
there was twelve times the expected death rate. But their subjects were
people who had lost and regained weight from therapeutic fasts. It is
just possible that dieting itself, not morbid obesity, contributed to
sudden death. Substantial Obesity (30 to 100 percent above "ideal
"weight): Choosing the low cut point is the most di cult and
controversial part of distilling this large literature. Thirty percent
overweight looks to me to be approximately the point at which some
danger

begins. The "Pooling Project" combined data for 12,381 men from eight di
erent American populations who had been followed for ve to ten years.
Looking at rst heart attack, the in ection point seems to be at 30
percent over "ideal" weight. This is a conservative estimate, however,
since it can be argued from these data sets that there is no increase at
all in coronary risk with weight. See The Pooling Research Project
Research Group, "Relationship of Blood Pressure, Serum Cholesterol,
Smoking Habit, Relative Weight and ECG Abnormality to Incidences of
Major Coronary Events: Final Report of the Pooling Project," Journal of
Chronic Diseases 31 (1978): 201--306; E. Barrett-Connor, "Obesity,
Atherosclerosis, and Coronary Artery Disease," Annals of Internal
Medicine 103 (1985): 1010--19. The other essential source is Ancel
Keys's curve tting of more than a dozen large-scale studies of body mass
and coronary heart disease. His curves show two in ection points: one at
the 30 percent overweight locus and the other at underweight.
Importantly, the direction of the slope with mild overweight (o to 30
percent) is downward, with more weight up to about 30 percent associated
with less risk. See A. Keys, "Overweight, Obesity, Coronary Heart
Disease." See also E. Hammond and L. Gar nkel, "Coronary Heart Disease,
Stroke, and Aortic Aneurysm," Archives of Environmental Health 19
(1969): 167--82. This is a landmark prospective study of one million
people, and it shows increased risk with body weight. But the body
weight at which the risk begins is in the upper 20 percent of the
population, which seems to correspond to about the 30 percent overweight
cut point. One consoling note to people in this category: This amount of
overweight probably does put you at risk in and of itself. Overweight
correlates with high blood pressure and serum cholesterol. If your blood
pressure is normal, if your cholesterol is normal, if you exercise
moderately, and if you don't smoke, your risk of heart attack is not
increased by being overweight.

See the classic A. Keys, C. Aravanis, H. Blackburn, et al., "Coronary
Heart Disease: Overweight and Obesity as Risk Factors," Annals of
Internal Medicine 77 (1972): 15--27. Diabetes mellitus, in contrast to
coronary heart disease, presents a clearer picture of risk with moderate
overweight. In one prospective study, risk went up 1,000 percent with
moderate obesity and 3,000 percent with 45 percent obesity. See K.
Westlund and R. Nicholaysen, "Ten-Year Mortality and Morbidity Related
to Serum Cholesterol," Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory
Investigations 30 (supplement 127) (1972), 3. See also A. Rimm, L.
Werner, B. Van Yserloo, and R. Bernstein, "Relationship of Obesity and
Disease in 73,532 Weight-Conscious Women," Public Health Reports 90
(1975): 44--51. My conclusion is that if diabetes runs in your family,
you should be more attentive to overweight as a risk factor than if
heart disease runs in your family. Mild to Moderate Overweight (10 to 30
percent above "ideal" weight): I have chosen my language carefully
here---"possibly associated with a marginal increase in
mortality"---because for every study that shows some health risk in this
category, there is at least one that shows no health risk. The thrust of
the Keys and Barrett-Connor reviews is that there is little or no more
heart-attack incidence in this range. Indeed, these people may be at
lower risk than 0 percent overweight people. On the other hand, the gray
eminence is the Met Life "ideal weight" table, which in spite of its aws
is well entrenched in the public mind. More modern data supporting the
view that even a little overweight is a health risk are found in J.
Manson, G. Colditz, M. Stampfer, et al., "A Prospective Study of Obesity
and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Women," New England Journal of
Medicine 322 (1990): 882--89, which found risk starting at 10 percent
overweight among female nurses; and T. Wilcovsky, J. Hyde, J. Anderson,
et al., "Obesity and Mortality in

the Lipid Research Clinics Program Follow-up Study," Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology 43 (1990): 743--52, which found risk at low levels of
overweight with men but not women. See also the National Institutes of
Health Consensus Development and Conference Statement "Health
Implications of Obesity," Annals of Internal Medicine 103 (1985):
147--51, which echoes the view that even a little overweight is bad. I
nd this report overly alarmist, and the tone is considerably moderated
by the more recent National Research Council, "Obesity and Eating
Disorders," in National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council,
Diet and Health Risk: Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk
(Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1989), 563--92. Nonetheless,
there has never been a study that shows anything but a very small
statistical increase of coronary risk in the 10 to 30 percent range of
overweight. Underweight: See Keys, "Overweight, Obesity, Coronary Heart
Disease;" S. Blair, H. Kohl, R. Pa enbarger, et al., "Physical Fitness
and All-Cause Mortality: A Prospective Study of Healthy Men and Women,"
Journal of the American Medical Association 262 (1989): 2395--2401; R.
Pa enbarger, P. Hyde, A. Wing, and C. C. Hsiesh, "Physical Activity,
All-Cause Mortality, and Longevity of College Alumni," New England
Journal of Medicine 314 (1986): 605--13. The mortality risk of the
underweight, unlike that of the mild and moderately overweight, is
strong, and it is not attributable to smoking or to subclinical disease.
See also P. Sorlie, T. Gordon, and W. Kannel, "Body Build and Mortality:
The Framingham Study," Journal of the American Medical Association 243
(1980): 1828--31. One nal caveat: No one has ever done the right kind of
study to nd out if overweight really causes premature death or poor
health. The methodologically right study would randomly assign
individuals to di erent weight levels and see who dies when. It seems
likely that for ethical reasons this study will never be done

in humans. All of the above studies are therefore distant secondbest
evidence. 30. Hammond and Gar nkel, "Coronary Heart Disease, Stroke, and
Aortic Aneurysm;" P. Hamm, R. Shekelle, and J. Stamler, "Large
Fluctuations in Body Weight During Young Adulthood and the
Twenty-Five-Year Risk of Coronary Death in Men," American Journal of
Epidemiology 129 (1989): 312--18; L. Lissner, P. Odell, R. D'Agostino,
et al., "Variability of Body Weight and Health Outcomes in the
Framingham Population," New England Journal of Medicine 324 (1991):
1839--44; L. Lissner, C. Bengtsson, L. Lapidus, et al., "Body Weight
Variability and Mortality in the Gothenburg Prospective Studies of Men
and Women," in P. Bjorntorp and S. Rossner, eds., Obesity in Europe 88
(London: Libbey, 1989), 51--56. I use the word probably to describe the
health risk of dieting. These four studies support it, and their ndings
do not come out of the blue. A number of smaller-scale studies of humans
point to the same health risk for weight cycling, and so does the rat
literature. See Garner and Wooley, "Confront the Failure of Behavioral
and Dietary Treatments," for references and a selective review. But I
judge the risk "probable," not "certain," because two studies fail to nd
weight variability associated with mortality: L. Lissner, R. Andres, D.
Muller, and H. Shimokata, "Body Weight Variability in Men: Metabolic
Rate, Health, and Longevity," International Journal of Obesity 14
(1990): 373--83; and J. Stevens and L. Lissner, "Body Weight Variability
and Mortality in the Charleston Heart Study" (letter to the editor), in
International Journal of Obesity 14 (1990): 385--86. 31. R. Pa enbarger
et al., "Physical Activity, All-Cause Mortality." This paper is a
classic, head and shoulders better in quality than the literature that
precedes it. 32. M. McCarthy, "The Thin Ideal, Depression, and Eating
Disorders in Women," Behaviour Research and Therapy 28 (1990): 205--15.
See Je rey et al., "Prevalence of Dieting Among

Working Men and Women," for dieting statistics. T. Wadden, A. Stunkard,
and J. Smoller, "Dieting and Depression: A Methodological Study,"
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 54 (1986): 869--71, nd
that dieting, when measured from the beginning to the end, decreases
depression among obese women who lost forty- ve pounds on average. But
when looked at from week to week, depression uctuated wildly, with half
the women getting noticeably more depressed occasionally. 33. J. Girgus,
S. Nolen-Hoeksema, M. Seligman, G. Paul, and H. Spears, "Why Do Girls
Become More Depressed Than Boys in Early Adolescence?" Paper presented
at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, San Francisco,
August 1991. 34. A. Fallon and P. Rozin, "Sex Di erences in Perceptions
of Desirable Body Shape," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 94 (1985):
102--5. 35. The closest any study has ever come concerns lowering blood
pressure. If you are obese and your blood pressure is high, even a small
amount of weight loss (10 percent of your weight) will probably lower
it. See G. Blackburn and B. Kanders, "Medical Evaluation and Treatment
of the Obese Patient with Cardiovascular Disease," American Journal of
Cardiology 60 (1987): 55g-58g. What is still unknown is: When the lost
body weight returns, how much will blood pressure increase, and what
will the health damage be then? In any case, blood pressure is quite a
fallible predictor of health. I nd this study methodologically outdated.
With what is known about the likelihood of weight regain after dieting,
I believe that any claim about health bene t and weight loss can no
longer be made on the basis of a "snapshot" study like Blackburn and
Kanders's. The question is not the momentary bene t after dieting, but
the net health e ect of dieting followed by regaining the weight.

36. S. Blair et al., "Physical Fitness and All-Cause Mortality;" J.
Holloway, A. Beuter, and J. Duda, "Self-E cacy and Training for Strength
in Adolescent Girls," Journal of Applied Social Psychology 18 (1988):
699--719; Pa enbarger et al., "Physical Activity, AllCause Mortality."
Again, this is probable but not certain, and I have used the quali ers
seems and probably to describe the bene cial e ects on heart disease of
taking up exercise. One study involving over eight thousand Swedish men
found twice the risk for physically inactive men, which con rms the
above studies. But when that study controlled for the factors correlated
with exercise (occupation, diabetes, family history of coronary disease,
and mental stress), the bene cial e ect of exercise, in itself,
disappeared. This nding is important because no one has yet done a
large-scale random-assignment study of exercise and heart disease. So it
is still unknown if exercising will prevent heart attack or if
unchangeable factors that correlate with exercising prevent heart
attack. See S. Johansson, A. Rosengren, A. Tsipogianni, et al.,
"Physical Inactivity as a Risk Factor for Primary and Secondary Coronary
Events in Goteborg, Sweden," European Heart Journal 9 (supplement L)
(1988): 8--19. Dr. Ralph Pa enbarger of Stanford University recently
reported that it is never too late to take up exercise. Based on a study
of 10,000 Harvard alumni, he nds that men who start exercising between
ages 45 and 54 live ten months longer, on average, than sedentary men;
taking up exercise between ages 55 and 64 adds nine months, starting
between 65 and 74 adds six months, and starting between 75 and 84 adds
two months. See "Exercise to Live Longer, by 10 Months, That Is," The
New York Times, 25 February 1993, B7. 37. The outstanding review of this
large literature is G. Bray, "Exercise and Obesity," in C. Bouchard, R.
Shepard, T. Stephens, et al., eds., Exercise, Fitness, and Health. A
Consensus of Current Knowledge (Champaign, Ill.: Human Kinetics, 1990),
497--510.

See also J. Foreyt and G. Goodrick, "Factors Common to Successful
Therapy for the Obese Patient," Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise 23 (1991): 292--97; and L. Ekelund, W. Haskell, J. Johnson, et
al., "Physical Fitness as a Predictor of Cardiovascular Mortality in
Asymptomatic North American Men," New England Journal of Medicine 319
(1988): 1379--84. S. Kayman, W. Bruvold, and J. Stern, "Maintenance and
Relapse After Weight Loss in Women: Behavioral Aspects," American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52 (1990): 800--807, found in a
retrospective study that 90 percent of women who had dieted on their own
and not regained weight exercised regularly, but that only 34 percent of
relapsers did. 38. National Academy of Sciences, National Research
Council, Diet and Health Risk: Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease
Risk, 159--258, 431--64. Martin Katahn's popular T-Factor Diet: Lose
Weight Safely and Quickly Without Counting Calories or Even Cutting Them
(New York: Norton, 1989) is a useful guide to avoiding fatty foods. R.
Stamler, J. Stamler, F. Gosch, et al., "Primary Prevention of
Hypertension by Nutritional-Hygienic Means: Final Report of a
Randomized, Controlled Trial," Journal of the American Medical
Association 262 (1989): 1801--7. 39. These steps come from the last
chapter of Polivy and Herman, Breaking the Diet Habit, 190--211. 40. C.
Yale, "Gastric Surgery for the Morbidly Obese," Archives of Surgery 124
(1989): 941--46, followed 537 patients who underwent one of three kinds
of surgery. In a ve-year followup, gastric bypass was better than
vertical-banded gastroplasty (VBG), which was much better than unbanded
gastrogastrostomy. J. Hall, J. Watts, P. O'Brien, et al., "Gastric
Surgery for Morbid Obesity: The Adelaide Study," Annals of Surgery 211
(1990): 419--27, followed 310 patients for three years, with similar
outcomes. Cardiac function seems to improve after such surgery. See A.
Alaud-din, S. Meterissian, R. Lisbona,

et al., "Assessment of Cardiac Function in Patients Who Were Morbidly
Obese," Surgery 108 (1990): 809--20.

CHAPTER 13 Alcohol 1. 1. See my Learned Optimism (New York: Knopf,
1991), chapter 6, for a review of the evidence on this fascinating and
robust illusion of control. The most recent piece showing realism as a
risk factor for depression is L. Alloy and C. Clements, "Illusion of
Control: Invulnerability to Negative A ect and Depressive Symptoms After
Laboratory and Natural Stressors," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 101
(1992): 234--45. 2. "Drunkenness a Vice, Not a Disease" is the title of
an 1882 pamphlet by J. E. Todd (Hartford, Conn.: Case, Lockwood, and
Brainard). The parallel to thieving and lynching comes from E. J.
McGoldrick, The Management of the Mind (Boston: Houghton Mi in, 1954).
3. There have been at least ten heritability studies of alcoholism that
converge on a substantial genetic risk. These are reviewed by D.
Goodwin, "Alcoholism and Heredity," Archives of General Psychiatry 36
(1979): 57--61. The most complete review is in C. Cloninger and H.
Begleiter, eds., Genetics and Biology of Alcoholism (Banbury Report
Number 33) (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.: Cold Spring Harbor Press: 1990).
4. George Vaillant, in his landmark and courageous book The Natural
History of Alcoholism (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1983), uses this metaphor in his illuminating argument for retaining the
medical model of alcoholism. It is, along with James Orford's sober
Excessive Appetites: A Psychological View of Addictions (New York:
Wiley, 1985), one of the two must reads in the eld of alcoholism. 5. See
G. A. Marlatt and J. Gordon, Relapse Prevention (New York: Guilford,
1985), for the argument that twelve-step programs and the disease
concept are more pessimistic and imply greater chronicity than a
"biopsychosocial model," which de nes the

problem as a "habit disorder." While these latter concepts are available
and plausible to educated and sophisticated people, I cannot judge how
plausible they are to the less sophisticated alcoholic. 6. All major
studies of the natural history of alcoholism are about men. There is not
a single one about women. While considerably fewer women are alcoholic,
given the large absolute numbers of female alcoholics, there is a
serious need for knowledge about the course of recovery among women. 7.
See Vaillant, The Natural History of Alcoholism, 74--90; W. Beardslee,
L. Son, and G. Vaillant, "Exposure to Parental Alcoholism During
Childhood and Outcome in Adulthood: A Prospective Longitudinal Study,"
British Journal of Psychiatry 149 (1986): 584--91; and R. Drake and G.
Vaillant, "Predicting Alcoholism and Personality Disorder in a 33-Year
Longitudinal Study of the Children of Alcoholics," British Journal of
Addiction 83 (1988): 799--807. 8. The quote comes from M. Tyndel,
"Psychiatric Study of One Thousand Alcoholic Patients," Canadian
Psychiatric Association Journal 19 (1974): 21--24. See also C. Vaillant,
E. Milofsky, R. Richards, and G. Vaillant, "A Social Casework
Contribution to Understanding Alcoholism," Health and Social Work 12
(1987): 169--76. 9. Someday the notion of "physical addiction" may come
to have a speci c physical, rather than just a behavioral, meaning.
There is evidence that the brain may lose plasticity---the ability to
make choices---as alcoholism gets worse. There is also evidence that
when brain cells live in alcohol for a time, they change: They acclimate
to an alcoholic medium and function better with alcohol than without it.
See A. Urrutia and D. Gruol, "Acute Alcohol Alters the Excitability of
Cerebellar Purkinje Neurons and Hippocampal Neurons in Culture," Brain
Research 569 (1992): 26--37; D. Gruol, "Chronic Exposure to Alcohol
During Development Alters the Membrane Properties of Cerebellar

Purkinje Neurons in Culture," Brain Research 558 (1991): 1--12. Repeated
doses of alcohol might even produce brain-cell "kindling" of the sort
that Robert Post has hypothesized for cocaine, for stress, and for
depression. See R. Post, "Transduction of Psychosocial Stress into the
Neurobiology of Recurrent A ective Disorder," American Journal of
Psychiatry 149 (1992): 999--1010. But at present, the "physical" part of
addiction is mostly hypothetical. 10. A. Pokorny, T. Kanas, and J.
Overall, "Order of Appearance of Alcoholic Symptoms," Alcoholism:
Clinical and Experimental Research 5 (1981): 216--20, lay out the steps
of the progression, based on retrospective data. 11. This latest data
and theory are contained in a personal communication from George
Vaillant, July 1992. 12. See Vaillant, The Natural History of
Alcoholism, 170--71, for a lucid discussion of the who and why of
relapse. 13. F. Baekland, L. Lundwall, and B. Kissim, "Methods for the
Treatment of Chronic Alcoholism: A Critical Approach," in R. Gibbons, Y.
Israel, H. Kalant, et al., eds., Research Advances in Alcohol and Drug
Problems, vol. 2 (New York: Wiley, 1975), 247-- 327; D. Armor, J.
Polich, J. Michael, and H. Stanbul, Alcoholism and Treatment (Santa
Monica, Calif.: The Rand Corporation, 1976); R. Rychtarik, D. Foy, W.
Scott, et al., "Five to Six Year Follow-up of Broad Spectrum Behavioral
Treatment for Alcoholism: E ects of Controlled Drinking Skills," Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 55 (1987): 106--8. 14. George
Vaillant, personal communication, July 1992. 15. G. Vaillant, "What Can
Long-term Follow-up Teach Us About Relapse and Prevention of Relapse in
Addiction?" British Journal of Addiction 83 (1988): 1147--57. G.
Edwards, "As the Years Go Rolling By: Drinking Problems in the Time
Dimension," British Journal of Psychiatry 154 (1989): 18--26, found that
out of the expatients followed for a decade, 18 died (250 percent above

expectation), 33 had good outcomes, 11 were equivocal, and 56 had bad
outcomes. 16. The single best study I can nd of elaborate hospital-based
treatment is G. Cross, C. Morgan, A. Mooney, et al, "Alcoholism
Treatment: A Ten-Year Follow-up Study," Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research 14 (1990): 169--73. Its results are good: 61
percent remission. Crucially, however, it lacks the matched control
group. J. Wallace, "Controlled Drinking, Treatment E ectiveness, and the
Disease Model of Addiction: A Commentary on the Ideological Wishes of
Stanton Peele," Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 22 (1990): 261--84, argues
articulately for the e ectiveness of such units, but given only one
study with a matched and randomly assigned control group that nds
positive results (see note 19, below), I cannot in good conscience
recommend such treatment as reliably more e ective than natural healing.
This is not just an academic quibble. If this were a new treatment area,
controlled study would not yet be mandatory. But this is a problem that
costs the United States \$100 billion or more annually and for which
elaborate and expensive treatment has been going on for more than four
decades. Fully cognizant of the practical problems, I nevertheless
believe that controlled long-term studies are overdue. The most complete
reviews of controlled studies of alcoholism have been reported by
William R. Miller of the University of New Mexico. On the whole, he is
less optimistic than I am about AA and more optimistic about behavioral
training (marital therapy, self-control training, and social skills
training). My reservations about the behavioral modalities concern the
need for large groups and very-long-term follow-up. Otherwise our
reviews coincide. See H. Holder, R. Longabaugh, W. Miller, and A.
Rubonis, "The Cost E ectiveness of Treatment for Alcoholism: A First
Approximation," Journal of Studies on Alcoholism 52 (1991): 517--40; W.
Miller, "The E ectiveness of Treatment for Substance

Abuse: Reasons for Optimism," Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 9
(1992): 93--102. 17. J. Orford and G. Edwards, Alcoholism---A Comparison
of Treatment with Advice, with a Study of the In uence of Marriage
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977). See also Herbert Fingarette's
discussion of this study in his Heavy Drinking (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1989), 70--95. 18. Chap. 8 of Vaillant, The Natural
History of Alcoholism, is must reading for all who would not have their
hearts broken and rebroken by the chronic relapses of their patients and
relatives. See also National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
"Seventh Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcohol and Health"
(Washington, D.C.: Public Health Service, 1990) (DHHS publication number
ADM 90--1656); and W. Miller and R. Hester, "Inpatient Alcoholism
Treatment: Who Bene ts?" American Psychologist 41 (1986): 794--805. 19.
This study stands alone as being methodologically adequate and as
supporting the usefulness of hospital treatment. See D. Walsh, R.
Hingson, D. Merrigan, et al., "A Randomized Trial of Treatment Options
for Alcohol-Abusing Workers," New England Journal of Medicine 325
(1991): 775--82. If replicated, it may be a watershed for inpatient
alcoholism treatment. 20. E. Chaney, M. O'Leary, and G. Marlatt, "Skill
Training with Alcoholics," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
46 (1978): 1092--1104. This seems like a promising treatment package,
and it should be followed up on a large scale. It is, however, too
small-scale and tentative to warrant recommendation now. 21. See chapter
12, "The Place of Expert Help" in J. Orford, Excessive Appetites, for a
telling review of psychotherapy and alcoholism. 22. The full range of
psychotropic drugs have been tried in alcoholism. None seem to work. See
J. Halikas, "Psychotropic

Medication Used in the Treatment of Alcoholism," Hospital and Community
Psychiatry 34 (1983): 1035--39; and J. Sinclair, "The Feasibility of E
ective Psychopharmacological Treatments for Alcoholism," British Journal
of Addiction 82 (1987): 1213--23. There have been two apparent
exceptions, neither of which, however, has worked out when large-scale
controlled studies were done. The rst apparent exception was Antabuse
(disul ram). For the best studies of Antabuse (double blind, placebo
controlled) see J. Johnsen, A. Stowell, J. Bache-Wing, et al., "A
Double-Blind Placebo Controlled Study of Male Alcoholics Given a
Subcutaneous Disul ram Implantation," British Journal of Addiction 82
(1987): 607--13; and J. Johnsen and J. Morland, "Disul ram Implant: A
Double-Blind Placebo Controlled Followup on Treatment Outcome,"
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 15 (1991): 532--38. The
second apparent exception was lithium: In the rst welldone study, a 67
percent abstinence rate after one year in a controlled,
random-assignment design was found. See J. Fawcett, D. Clark, C.
Aagesen, et al., "A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial of Lithium
Carbonate Therapy for Alcoholism," Archives of General Psychiatry 44
(1987): 248--56. These results were promising, and were thought to be
independent of lithium's e ect on manic-depression, until a major
replication was undertaken: A double-blind study of 457 male alcoholics,
both depressed and not depressed, showed no e ect of lithium on alcohol
drinking. See W. Dorus, D. Ostrow, R. Anton, et al., "Lithium Treatment
of Depressed and Nondepressed Alcoholics," Journal of the American
Medical Association 262 (1989): 1646--52. 23. The aversion treatments
make up a large literature. The best recent reviews are found in the
debate between Terry Wilson and Ralph Elkins. See G. T. Wilson,
"Chemical Aversion Conditioning as a Treatment for Alcoholism: A
Reanalysis," Behaviour Research and Therapy 25 (1987): 503--16; R.
Elkins, "An Appraisal of

Chemical Aversion (Emetic Therapy) Approaches to Alcoholism Treatment,"
Behaviour Research and Therapy 29 (1991): 387--413; G. T. Wilson,
"Chemical Aversion Conditioning in the Treatment of Alcoholism: Further
Comments," Behaviour Research and Therapy 29 (1991): 415--19. The lone
controlled study is D. Cannon, T. Baker, and C. Wehl, "Emetic and
Electric Shock Alcohol Aversion Therapy: Six-and Twelve-Month
Follow-up," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 49 (1981):
360--68. I have to remark, again, that it is little short of a scandal
that the therapies for alcoholism that patients have had for decades---
inpatient hospitalization, aversion, and AA---do not have largescale,
random-assignment, controlled studies to document their alleged e
ectiveness. This is particularly scandalous when there is so much
precedent showing that in this area, controlled studies usually suggest
that treatment does not improve on the natural recovery rate. 24. J.
Volpicelli, A. Alterman, M. Hayashida, and C. O'Brien, "Naltrexone in
the Treatment of Alcohol Dependence," Archives of General Psychiatry 49
(1992): 876--80; S. O'Malley, A. Ja ee, G. Chang, et al., "Naltrexone
and Coping Skills Therapy for Alcohol Dependence," Archives of General
Psychiatry 49 (1992): 881--87. 25. Here are the three most useful sets
of references as to whether AA works. First, two studies in addition to
Vaillant's that show better prognosis for people who attend more AA
meetings: M. O'Leary, D. Coastline, D. Haddock, et al., "Di erential
Alcohol Use Patterns and Personality Traits Among Three Alcoholics
Anonymous Attendance Level Groups: Further Considerations of the A
liation Pro le," Drug and Alcohol Dependence 5 (1980): 135--44; V.
Giannetti, "Alcoholics Anonymous and the Recovering Alcoholic: An
Exploratory Study," American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 8 (1981):
363--70.

Second, the only studies that actually use a randomized assignment to
treatment: One (K. Ditman, G. Crawford, C. Forgy, et al., "A Controlled
Experiment on the Use of Court Probation for Drunk Arrests," American
Journal of Psychiatry 124 \[1967\]: 160--63) shows no di erence among
AA, clinic attendance, and no treatment; another (J. Brandsma, M.
Maultsby, and R. Welsh, Out-Patient Treatment of Alcoholism \[Baltimore,
Md.: University Park Press, 1980\]) shows that AA does worse (more
dropouts) than insight therapy, behavior therapy, or paraprofessional
behavior therapy. Both these studies use court-referred involuntary
subjects. They strongly suggest that AA is not useful for such subjects,
on average, but they do not bear directly on the e ectiveness of AA with
voluntary subjects. A third randomized-assignment study, Walsh et al.,
"A Randomized Trial of Treatment Options," assigned alcoholic workers to
AA or to hospital-based detoxi cation (but with a strong AA component)
and found that those assigned to AA alone did most poorly. Third, some
studies that look at AA e ectiveness with voluntary attenders, but with
substandard methods: D. Smith, "Evaluation of a Residential AA Program,"
International Journal of the Addictions 21 (1986): 33--49; AA World
Services, "Analysis of the 1980 Survey of the Membership of AA"
(unpublished report, New York, 1981); G. Alford, "Alcoholics Anonymous:
An Empirical Outcome Study," Addictive Behaviors 5 (1981): 359--70. This
literature is usefully reviewed by B. McCrady and S. Irvine, "Self-Help
Groups," in R. Hester and W. Miller, eds., Handbook of Alcoholism
Treatment Approaches (New York: Pergamon, 1989). 26. When data rst came
to light that some alcoholics could recover and still tipple, AA
attacked in full force. For the beginnings of the scienti c debate, see
M. Sobell and L. Sobell, "Second Year Treatment Outcome of Alcoholics
Treated by Individualized Behaviour Therapy," Behaviour Research and
Therapy 14 (1976): 195--215, versus M. Pendery, I. Maltzman,

and L. West, "Controlled Drinking by Alcoholics? New Findings and a
Re-evaluation of a Major A rmative Study," Science 217 (1982): 169--75.
"Alcoholics could die because of this," AA spokesmen were quoted as
saying. That at least a few alcoholics recover through controlled
drinking is now widely accepted. G. Nordstrom and M. Berglund, "A
Prospective Study of Successful Long-term Adjustment in Alcohol
Dependence: Social Drinking Versus Abstinence," Journal of Studies on
Alcohol 48 (1987): 95-- 103; J. Orford and A. Keddie, "Abstinence or
Controlled Drinking in Clinical Practice: A Test of the Dependence and
Persuasion Hypothesis," British Journal of Addiction 81 (1986):
495--504; G. Edwards, A. Duckitt, E. Oppenheimer, et al., "What Happens
to Alcoholics?" Lancet (30 July 1983), 269--71. For the data that
less-severe alcoholics recover through controlled drinking and that
more-severe alcoholics recover through abstinence, see Vaillant, The
Natural History of Alcoholism, 221--35. 27. M. Sobell and L. Sobell,
Individualized Behavior Therapy for Alcoholics: Rationale, Procedures,
Preliminary Results, and Appendix (California Mental Health Research
Monograph no. 13) (California Department of Mental Hygiene, 1972);
Pendery et al., "Controlled Drinking by Alcoholics?" See especially H.
Fingarette's lucid discussion on pages 124--29 of Heavy Drinking, and
the references in note 26, above. 28. See chapter 2, "Can Alcoholics
Control Their Drinking?" of H. Fingarette's lucid little book Heavy
Drinking; and A. Marlatt, "The Controlled Drinking Controversy,"
American Psychologist 38 (1983): 1097--1110. 29. S. Curry, G. A.
Marlatt, and J. Gordon, "Abstinence Violation E ect: Validation of an
Attributional Construct with Smoking Cessation," Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology 58 (1987): 145--49; and G. A. Marlatt and S.
Tapert, "Harm Reduction: Reducing the Risk of Addictive Behaviors," in
J. Baer, G. A. Marlatt, and R. McMahon, eds., Addictive Behaviors Across

the Lifespan: Prevention, Treatment and Policy Issues (Newbury Park,
Calif.: Sage, 1993), 243--73. 30. See chapter 5, "Heavy Drinking as a
Way of Life," in Fingarette, Heavy Drinking. 31. See chapter 7, "Social
Policies to Prevent and Control Heavy Drinking," in Fingarette, Heavy
Drinking.

PART FOUR

epigraph

1.  In J. S. Grant, ed., The Enthusiasms of Robertson Davies (New York:
    Penguin, 1990), 235--36.

CHAPTER

14 Shedding the Skins of Childhood

1.  P. Davis, The Way I See It (New York: Putnam, 1992), 33--42.
2.  Adapted from John Bradshaw's immensely popular Homecoming:
    Reclaiming and Championing Your Inner Child (New York: Bantam,
    1990), 227, 239.
3.  Useful reviews: Divorce: R. Forehand, "Parental Divorce and
    Adolescent Maladjustment: Scienti c Inquiry vs. Public Information,"
    Behaviour Research and Therapy 30 (1992): 319--28. This review is a
    good corrective to the alarmist popular literature on divorce. It
    seems to be con ict, and not divorce per se, that does the harm.
    Parental Death: G. Brown and T. Harris, Social Origins of Depression
    (London: Tavistock, 1978). Birth Order: R. Galbraith, "Sibling
    Spacing and Intellectual Development: A Closer Look at the Con uence
    Models," Developmental Psychology 18 (1982): 151--73. Adversity
    (generally): A. Clarke and A. D. Clarke, Early Experience: Myth and
    Evidence (New York: Free Press, 1976); M. Rutter, "The Long-term E
    ects of Early Experience," Developmental Medicine and Child
    Neurology 22 (1980): 800--815.
4.  When investigators actually go and look, rather than just declare
    that we are products of childhood, the lack of strong continuity
    from childhood to adulthood is what hits you between the eyes. This
    is a major discovery of life-span developmental psychology. "Change"
    is at least as good a description as "continuity" for what happens
    to us as we mature. For good reviews of this very large literature,
    see M. Rutter, "Continuities and Discontinuities from Infancy,"
    in J. Osofsky, ed., Handbook of Infant Development, 2d ed. (New
    York: Wiley, 1987), 1256--98; H. Moss and E. Sussman, "Longitudinal
    Study of Personality Development," in O. Brim and J. Kagan, eds.,
    Constancy and Change in Human Development (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
    University Press, 1980), 530--95; G. Parker, E. Barrett, and I.
    Hickie, "From Nurture to

Network: Examining Links Between Perceptions of Parenting Received in
Childhood and Social Bonds in Adulthood," American Journal of Psychiatry
149 (1992): 877--85; and R. Plomin, H. Chipuer, and J. Loehlin,
"Behavior Genetics and Personality," in L. Pervin, ed., Handbook of
Personality Theory and Research (New York: Guilford, 1990), 225--43.
Especially instructive is the nding that divorce itself is heritable. If
you have an identical twin who divorces, your chances of divorce
increase sixfold, whereas a divorced fraternal twin only increases your
chances of divorce twofold. See M. McGue and D. Lykken, "Genetic In
uence on the Risk of Divorce," Psychological Science 3 (1992): 368--73.
5. The twin studies and adoptive studies are cited in chapter 3. See
especially R. Plomin and C. Bergeman, "The Nature of Nurture: Genetic In
uence on 'Environmental Measures,'" Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14
(1991): 373--427. For other important studies, see S. Dinwiddie and R.
Cloninger, "Family and Adoption Studies in Alcoholism and Drug
Addiction," Psychiatric Annals 21 (1991): 206--14; T. Bouchard and M.
McGue, "Genetic and Rearing Environmental In uences on Adult
Personality: An Analysis of Adopted Twins Reared Apart," Journal of
Personality 68 (1990): 263--82; A. Heath, L. Eaves, and N. Martin, "The
Genetic Structure of Personality: III. Multivariate Genetic Item
Analysis of the EPQ Scales," Personality and Individual Di erences 12
(1988): 877--88. There continues to be a ourishing eld investigating
childhood antecedents of adult problems. Occasionally reliable e ects
emerge, but what astonishes me---given the heritability literature---is
the absence of any genetic theorizing in this eld. So, for example,
there are two recent, otherwise competent studies that nd (1)
correlations between mothers' treatment of children and the children's
later criminality, and (2) correlations between childhood trauma and
later suicidal attempts. Both interpret the childhood events as causal.
Both fail to explore the

possibility that the adult behavior and what happened in childhood
result from third, genetic variables. These studies are H. Stattin and
I. Klackenberg-Larsson, "The Relationship Between Maternal Attributes in
the Early Life of the Child and the Child's Future Criminal Behavior,"
Development and Psychopathology 2 (1990): 99--111; and B. van der Kolk,
C. Perry, and J. Herman, "Childhood Origins of Self-Destructive
Behavior," American Journal of Psychiatry 148 (1991): 1665--71. Editors
beware. 6. A. Browne and D. Finkelohr, "Impact of Child Sexual Abuse: A
Review of the Research," Psychological Bulletin 99 (1986): 66--77; and
K. Alter-Reid, M. Gibbs, J. Lachenmeyer, et al., "Sexual Abuse of
Children: A Review of the Empirical Findings," Clinical Psychology
Review 6 (1986): 249--66, both provide good reviews. J. Herman, D.
Russell, and K. Trocki, "Long-term E ects of Incestuous Abuse in
Childhood," American Journal of Psychiatry 143 (1986): 1293--96, is a
good example of the genre. In one of the only studies to play o family
pathology against the e ect of childhood sexual abuse per se, no
long-term e ect of childhood sexual abuse could be found over and above
associated family pathology. See M. Nash, T. Hulsey, M. Sexton, T.
Harralson, and W. Lambert, "Long-term Sequelae of Childhood Sexual
Abuse: Perceived Family Environment, Psychopathology, and Dissociation,"
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 61 (1993): 276--83. This
leads to the curmudgeonly skepticism in the next paragraph. 7. D.
Finkelhor, "Early and Long-term E ects of Child Sexual Abuse: An
Update," Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 5 (1990):
325--30. 8. See D. Finkelhor, "Early and Long-term E ects of Child
Sexual Abuse," for a recent review. Three longitudinal studies are R.
Gomes-Schwartz, J. Horowitz, and A. Cardarelli, Child Sexual Abuse: The
Initial E ects (Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1990); A. Bentovim, P.
Boston, and

A. Van Elburg, "Child Sexual Abuse---Children and Families Referred to a
Treatment Project and the E ects of Intervention,". British Medical
Journal 295 (1987): 1453--57; J. Conte, "The E ects of Sexual Abuse on
Children: Results of a Research Project," Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 528 (1988): 310--26. For the better prognosis in children
than in adults, see R. Hanson, "The Psychological Impact of Sexual
Assault on Women and Children: A Review," Annals of Sex Research 3
(1990): 187-- 232. For ripping o the scars and even manufacturing them
out of whole cloth, see D. Kent, "Remembering 'Repressed' Abuse," APS
Observer 5 (1992): 6--7. For the e ect of lengthy litigation, see D.
Runyan, M. Everson, D. Edelsohn, et al., "Impact of Legal Intervention
on Sexually Abused Children," Journal of Pediatrics 113 (1988): 647--53.
9. The rst scenario is from D. Quinton and M. Rutter, Parenting
Breakdown: The Making and Breaking of Intergenerational Links
(Aldershot, Eng.: Gower, 1988), 93--108. The second scenario is from A.
Caspi and G. Elder, "Emergent Family Patterns: The Intergenerational
Construction of Problem Behaviors and Relationships," in R. Hinde and J.
Stevenson-Hinde, eds., Relationships Within Families: Mutual In uences
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 218--40. 10. There is one disorder that
seems to t the inner-child premises well: multiple personality. This
typically seems to begin with severe childhood abuse---rape or attempted
murder---from which the child withdraws by creating another personality
to endure it. This tactic relieves pain, and so, when further trauma
strikes, new personalities are created. See E. Bliss, "Multiple
Personalities: Report of Fourteen Cases with Implications for
Schizophrenia and Hysteria," Archives of General Psychiatry 37 (1980):
1388--97. Fortunately, this disorder is quite rare, and

there is no evidence that this kind of etiology applies to ordinary
depression, anxiety, or other common adult problems. 11. For a good
review of this large literature, see R. Plomin and D. Daniels, "Why Are
Children in the Same Family So Di erent from One Another?" Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 10 (1987): 1-- 60, and R. Plomin, "Environment and
Genes," American Psychologist 44 (1989): 105--11. For some of the
literature on the small e ects of child rearing on adult personality,
see M. Heinstein, "Behavioral Correlates of Breast-Bottle Regimes Under
Varying Parent-Infant Relationships," Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development 28 (1963); J. Whiting and I. Child,
Child-Training and Personality (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1953).
12. I thank my good friend Barry Schwartz for these colorful metaphors,
which he uses in Psychology 1 at Swarthmore College. But I wish he would
remember new minor forcing. See M. Rutter, "Pathways from Childhood to
Adult Life," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 30 (1989):
23--51, for an elaborate discussion of many possible models and paths.
13. My discussion of the in uence of the childhood environment on adult
personality has glossed over an important distinction for human-behavior
geneticists: the distinction between "shared" and "unshared"
environments. Joan and Sarah share certain experiences---being
upper-middle-class, gardening with Daddy, and Catholicism, for example.
They also have an unshared environment: Joan was molested at age ten,
Sarah had appendicitis, and Sarah secretly hates gardening. Shared and
unshared environments turn out to have very di erent in uences on adult
personality. The shared childhood environment--- church, school, rearing
techniques, socioeconomic status---has virtually no e ect on adult
personality. Identical twins reared apart are just as similar, maybe
more similar, in adult personality than identical twins reared together.
Conversely, adopted sibs raised in the same household are no more
similar

than if they had been raised separately. This means that shared
environment in childhood adds nothing. The whole kit and caboodle that
conventional American developmental psychology bet on came up with a
bust. The unshared childhood environment is more promising. It probably
accounts for between 15 and 50 percent of the variance in adult
personality---probably not as much as genes, but a substantial amount.
Before we environmentalists get too excited once again, however, let me
say some of what "unshared environment" includes: big events like sexual
abuse (which warms the hearts of environmentalists); small events like
missing one ballet class; how you interpret, perceive, or remember big
or small events; di ering bodily reaction to events; parents' loving you
more or less than they did your sib; fetal hormones; childhood
illnesses; and good old error of measurement--- anything at all that you
and your sib are not identical for. It is, unfortunately, a wastebasket
category that contains threequarters of psychology. No speci c piece of
unshared environment in childhood has yet to be shown to have any e ect
at all on adult personality once genes are controlled. In the correct
kind of design, J. Loehlin and R. Nichols, Heredity, Environment, and
Personality (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1976), looked at over
seven hundred pairs of identical twins. They isolated about fty pairs in
which one had saliently di erent events from the other during
childhood---one had a serious illness but the other did not, one got
spanked a lot, but the other did not, and so on. None of these di
erences produced any detectable di erences in later personality. To sum
up: Genes have a big e ect on adult personality. Surprisingly,
childrearing techniques, schools, socioeconomic status, and religion do
not have a detectable e ect. Idiosyncratic experience---traumatic or
nontraumatic events, di erential

treatment by parents, peculiar turn of mind---should in theory have a
noticeable e ect, but it has yet to be demonstrated. This is a di cult
but illuminating literature. I recommend that the serious student start
with R. Plomin and D. Daniel's classic "Why are Children in the Same
Family So Di erent from One Another?" Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10
(1987): 1--16, along with the very high quality "peer commentary" that
follows. It also has a rst-rate bibliography. Then read J. Dunn and R.
Plomin, Separate Lives: Why Siblings Are So Di erent (New York: Basic
Books, 1990). More recent papers include A. Tellegen, D. Lykken, T.
Bouchard, et al., "Personality Similarity in Twins Reared Apart and
Together," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 (1988):
1031--39; L. Baker and D. Daniels, "Nonshared Environmental In uences
and Personality Di erences in Adult Twins," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 58 (1990): 103--10 (showing small but signi cant
nonshared in uences--- father's strictness and mother's warmth---the
only speci c ones in the whole literature); J. Loehlin, J. Horn, and L.
Willerman, "Heredity, Environment, and Personality Change: Evidence from
the Texas Adoption Project," Journal of Personality 58 (1990): 221--43;
T. Bouchard and M. McGue, "Genetic and Rearing Environmental In uences
on Adult Personality: An Analysis of Adopted Twins Reared Apart,"
Journal of Personality 58 (1990): 263--92. All of this heralds nothing
less than a revolution in the study of how personality develops. 14. J.
L. Austin, "A Plea for Excuses," in Philosophical Papers (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1961), 123--52. 15. The research literature on the e
ectiveness of catharsis (also called abreaction) is very thin. For the
most complete recent review, see I. Marks, "Emotional Arousal as
Therapy: Activation vs. Dissociation," European Psychiatry 6 (1991):
161--70.

On the negative side, see, for example, M. Stern, E. Plionis, and L.
Kaslow, "Group Process Expectations and Outcome with Post-Myocardial
Infarction Patients," General Hospital Psychiatry 6 (1984): 101--8; M.
Lieberman, I. Yalom, and M. Miles, Encounter Groups: First Facts (New
York: Basic Books, 1973); A Bohart, "Toward a Cognitive Theory of
Catharsis," Psychotherapy ---Theory, Research, and Practice 17 (1980):
192--201; R. Baron, "Countering the E ects of Destructive Criticism: The
Relative E cacy of Four Interventions," Journal of Applied Psychology 75
(1990): 235--45; and R. Edelmann and S. Hardwick, "Test Anxiety: Past
Performance and Coping Strategies," Personality and Individual Di
erences 7 (1986): 255--57. On the positive side, see M. Nichols,
"Outcome of Brief Cathartic Psychotherapy," Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 42 (1974): 403--10; and H. Bierenbaum, A. Schwartz,
and M. Nichols, "E ects of Varying Session Length and Frequency in Brief
Emotive Psychotherapy," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 44
(1976): 790--98. In general, when it comes to how much patients like it,
catharsis is rated highly. When it comes to measures of how well they
do, catharsis fares badly. There is something to be said for disclosure
of traumatic events, as opposed to catharsis per se. Evidence is
mounting that not keeping trauma secret helps physical health. See, for
example, J. Pennebaker, J. Kielcolt-Glaser, and J. Glaser, "Disclosure
of Traumas and Immune Function: Health Implications for Psychotherapy,"
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 56 (1988): 239--45; and M.
Greenberg and A. Stone, "Emotional Disclosure About Traumas and Its
Relation to Health: E ects of Previous Disclosure and Trauma Severity,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63 (1992): 75--84. But
disclosure to others does not equal catharsis, which is disclosure to
the self.

There may indeed be something to catharsis, but after 100 years its e
ects remain undocumented and underresearched, and its adherents seem to
have largely given it up. So I am not prepared to condemn it outright as
a method, just to caution the reader. I do nd it scary to see such an
unfounded method recurrently creep into such "pop" therapies for
seriously troubled people as the encounter groups of the 1960s and
1970s, and the recovery groups of the 1990s. 16. I tried in vain to nd
any follow-up data at all from the recovery movement. John Bradshaw's o
ce didn't have any (25 June 1992) and referred me to Mary Bell at the
Center for Recovering Families in Houston. They were hoping to start
such a study. 17. Two excellent critiques of the recovery movement: W.
Kaminer, I'm Dysfunctional, You're Dysfunctional: The Recovery Movement
and Other Self-Help Fashions (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1992); and
D. Rie , "Victims, All? Recovery, Co-dependency, and the Art of Blaming
Somebody Else," Harper's, October 1991. See also J. Leo, "The
It's-Not-My-Fault Syndrome," U.S. News & World Report, 18 June 1991. 18.
These remarks about the importance of therapy being forwardlooking,
rather than focused on the past, should not be construed as an
indictment of all psychodynamic therapy. One of the most welcome
developments in modern psychoanalysis is the technique of looking in
detail at what past con icts, current con icts, and con icts right in
therapy have in common. This is done in order to isolate the core con
ictual pattern and to deal with the future. (See L. Luborsky, Principles
of Psychoanalytic Theory: A Manual for Supportive-Expressive Treatment
\[New York: Basic Books, 1984\].) This is, to my way of thinking, a
major advance.

CHAPTER

15 Depth and Change

1.  I use the locution unchangeable and not incurable because I want to
    emphasize that I do not believe that homosexuality (when
    egosyntonic) is a disease in need of cure.
2.  Peter Whybrow has argued that bipolar depression has its roots in
    seasonal demands on activity expenditure and activity
    conservation. P. Whybrow, The Hibernation Response (New York: Avon,
    1988).
3.  But not to be forgotten is the classic story of a "Cotard" patient.
    Cotard is an extreme form of depression in which you believe you are
    dead. One Cotard patient was queried about whether dead people
    bleed. He said, "Of course not." His therapist then stuck him with a
    pin. "I guess dead people Discon rmation evaded.

do

bleed"

was

his

response.

4.  L. Alloy and L. Abramson, "Judgment of Contingency in Depressed and
    Nondepressed Students: Sadder but Wiser?" Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: General 108 (1979): 441--85.

Permissions Acknowledgments Grateful acknowledgment is made to

the following for permission to reprint previously published material:

Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.: Items from "State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory" from Self-Evaluation Questionnaire---Form Y by C. D.
Spielberger, R. L. Gorsuch, R. E. Lushene, P. R. Vagg, and G. A. Jacobs,
copyright © 1977 by Charles D. Spielberger. Modi ed and reprinted by
permission of the publisher, Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc., Palo
Alto, CA 94303. All rights reserved. Further reproduction is prohibited
without the publisher's written consent. New Directions Publishing
Corporation: "The Mind Is an Ancient and Famous Capitol" from Selected
Poems: Summer Knowledge by Delmore Schwartz, copyright © 1959 by Delmore
Schwartz. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing
Corporation. University of Pennsylvania, Department of Psychology: Items
10--20 from Part Two of "State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI)"
by Charles D. Spielberger, copyright © 1979, 1986, 1988 by Psychological
Assessment Resources, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

FIRST VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, JANUARY 2007

Copyright © 1993, 2007 by Martin E. P. Seligman All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random
House, Inc., New York, and in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited,
Toronto.

Originally published in hardcover in the United States in slightly di
erent form by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York, in 1993.

Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Owing to limitations on space, acknowledgments for permission to reprint
previously published material can be found following the index.

The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition as follows:
Seligman, Martin E. P.

What you can change and what you can't : the complete guide to
successful self-improvement / Martin E. P. Seligman.---1st ed. p. cm.

1.  Change (Psychology). 2. Self-actualization (Psychology).
2.  Behavior modi cation. BF637.C4 S45 1994 158′. 1---dc20 93014757

eISBN: 978-0-307-49870-0 Author photograph © Kyle Cassidy ASC/Pandemon
www.vintagebooks.com v3.0


