DECLUTTER YOUR MIND How to Stop Worrying, Relieve Anxiety, and Eliminate
Negative Thinking Barrie Davenport liveboldandbloom.com Steve "S.J."
Scott DevelopGoodHabits.com

Declutter Your Mind Copyright Â© 2016 by Oldtown Publishing LLC All
rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form
without per-mission in writing from the author. Reviewers may quote
brief passages in reviews. Disclaimer No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, mechanical or
electronic, including photocopying or recording, or by any in-formation
storage and retrieval system, or transmitted by email without permission
in writing from the publisher. While all attempts have been made to
verify the information provided in this publica-tion, neither the author
nor the publisher assumes any responsibility for errors, omissions, or
contrary interpretations of the subject matter herein. This book is for
entertainment purposes only. The views expressed are those of the author
alone, and should not be taken as expert instruction or commands. The
reader is responsible for his or her own actions. Adherence to all
applicable laws and regulations, including international, federal,
state, and local governing professional licensing, business practices,
advertising, and all other aspects of doing business in the US, Canada,
or any other jurisdiction is the sole responsibility of the purchaser or
reader. Neither the author nor the publisher assumes any responsibility
or liability whatso-ever on the behalf of the purchaser or reader of
these materials. Any perceived slight of any individual or organization
is purely unintentional.

CONTENTS YOUR FREE GIFT INTRODUCTION How Thoughts Determine Our Outcomes
Barrie's Story... Steve's Story... Why You NEED to Read Declutter Your
Mind

PART I: DECLUTTERING YOUR THOUGHTS Four Causes of Mental Clutter Mental
Declutter Habit #1: Focused Deep Breathing Mental Declutter Habit #2:
Meditation Mental Declutter Habit #3: Reframe ALL Negative Thoughts
Mental Declutter Habit #4: Teach Your Old Mind New Tricks

PART II: DECLUTTERING YOUR LIFE OBLIGATIONS The Importance of Core
Values Strategy #1: Identify YOUR Core Values Strategy #2: Clarify Your
Life Priorities Exercise #3a: Focus on Mindful Goal Setting Strategy
#3b: Create Quarterly S.M.A.R.T. Goals Strategy #4: Connect Goals to
Your Passions

PART III: DECLUTTERING YOUR RELATIONSHIPS The Negative Impact of Bad
Relationships Relationship Strategy #1: Be More Present

Relationship Strategy #2: Getting Unstuck from the Past Relationship
Strategy #3: Mindfulness with Your Partner Relationship Strategy #4: Let
Go of Certain People

PART IV: DECLUTTERING YOUR SURROUNDINGS The Value of Decluttering Your
Surroundings Simplify Your Home Simplify Your Digital Life Simplify Your
Activities Simplify Your Distractions (to Overcome Procrastination)
Simplify Your Actions

CONCLUSION Final Thoughts on Decluttering Your Mind 400 Words That
Identify Your Values (Bonus Section)

Did You Like Declutter Your Mind? More Books by Barrie More Books by
Steve About Steve About Barrie

YOUR FREE GIFT

liveboldandbloom.com/mindfulness-meditation-series

INTRODUCTION

How Thoughts Determine Our Outcomes "Very little is needed to make a
happy life; it's all within yourself, in your way of thinking." --
Marcus Aurelius Ever feel overwhelmed by your thoughts? Do you struggle
with stress or anxiety about the tasks you need to complete on a weekly
basis? Do you want to simply stop worrying about life in general? We all
experience negative thinking from time to time. But if you often feel
overwhelmed by these thoughts, then you should closely examine what
you're thinking and how your thoughts impact your mental well-being.
This inner monologue is a natural part of your mental landscape. It's
there all the time, night and day, reminding you about the groceries you
need to pick up, shaming you about missing your sister's birthday, or
making you feel anxious about current headlines (like politics, the
environment, or the current state of the economy). These thoughts are
the background noise of your life, even though you may not always be
aware of their constant presence. Take a second right now and pay
attention to your thoughts. Try to stop them. It's hard, right? You'll
see how they keep streaming in, one after another, unbidden and often
unwanted. Some of your thoughts are random and useless. "My arm itches."
"It looks like it's gonna rain." "Where did I put my keys?" On the other
hand, many of our thoughts are intrusive and negative. "That guy is a
jerk." "I really screwed up that project." "I feel so guilty about what
I said to Mom." Whether they are negative, neutral, or positive, these
thoughts clutter our minds , just like your home can get cluttered when
you have too many possessions.

Unfortunately, clearing your mental clutter isn't as simple as
eliminating a possession. You can't "throw away" a thought and expect it
to stay gone. In fact, like a never-ending game of Whacka-Mole, your
negative thoughts have a way of popping back up as soon as you slap them
down.

Why We Think Negative Thoughts Now, imagine your mind as a fully
organized home---a home that's free from extraneous, draining, and
useless items that agitate you. What if you could surround yourself only
with thoughts that uplift, inspire, and soothe you? Consider for a
moment your mind as a peaceful cloudless sky, and you have the power to
choose what floats across. If that cloudless mental sky is so desirable,
then why do we think so much, with so few filters to sort the positive
and necessary thoughts from the random and unnecessary? Your brain
contains about 100 billion neurons, with another billion in your spinal
cord. The total number of connections between neurons---the cells
responsible for processing---has been estimated at 100 trillion
synapses. Our powerful brains are constantly processing all sorts of
experiences and analyzing them in the form of thoughts. Thoughts form
what we perceive to be reality. We can control and direct our thoughts,
but it often feels like our thoughts have minds of their own,
controlling us and how we feel. Thinking is necessary for solving
problems, analyzing, making decisions, and planning, but in between the
times of proactive mental endeavors, the mind roams like a wild monkey,
dragging you through the brambles of rumination and negativity. Your
constant inner dialog distracts you from what is happening around you,
right here and now. It causes you to miss valuable experiences and
sabotages the joy of the present moment. Absurdly, we assume we need to
think more or harder in order to "figure out" why we aren't as happy or
fulfilled as we wish we

could be. We try to pinpoint the possessions, people, and experiences
that might quench our longings and ease our unhappiness. The more we
ponder our despair, the more despondent we become. Our thoughts make us
restless, empty, and agitated as we project into the future or look to
the past for answers. In fact, nearly every negative thought you have
relates to the past or future. It's common to find yourself trapped in a
looping cycle of regretful thinking or worry thoughts, even while
feeling desperate to escape the never-ending tape playing in your mind.
Not only do you struggle with your thoughts, but you also struggle with
your inability to be free of them. The longer the negative thoughts
continue to loop, the worse you feel. It's almost as if there were two
of you---the thinker and the judge, the person thinking the thoughts and
the person aware that you are thinking them and judging how bad they
are. This thinking/judging dynamic infects us with painful emotions. The
more fearful, guilt-ridden, regretful thoughts we have, the more
stressed, anxious, depressed, and angry we feel. Sometimes our thoughts
paralyze us with bad feelings, and it's those feelings that rob us of
inner peace and contentment. Although our thoughts are the culprit
responsible for so much distress, we assume there's not much to be done
about it. You can't stop your mind from thinking, right? You can't shut
off your brain at will or rid yourself of the mental chatter and
associated feelings that prevent you from enjoying life fully.
Occasionally, we have unexpected moments of mental peace and quiet. More
often, however, we try to quell the mental chatter by self-medicating
with too much food, alcohol, drugs, work, sex, or exercise. But these
are temporary solutions to muffle the noise and ease the pain. Soon
enough, our thoughts are back at it again, and the cycle continues. Are
we destined to be victims of our "monkey minds" at all times? Must we
constantly battle our thoughts and allow them to drag us down with
worry, regret, and anxiety? Is there a way to have a

clear mind, free of negativity and pain? You may not be able to keep
your mental house free from clutter all the time, but you can impact
your thoughts enough to improve your quality of life and overall
happiness in a profound way. Thinking may seem automatic and
uncontrollable, but many of our thought patterns are habitual and, well,
thoughtless. Although it appears you and your thoughts are inseparable,
you do possess a "conscious self" that can step in with intention and
manage your thoughts. You have far more control of your thoughts than
you think. When you learn how to control your mind, you open a door to
the vastness of creativity, inspiration, and brilliance that is just
behind the clutter of those untamed thoughts. Through various
mindfulness practices and practical habits, you can disempower your
thoughts and have more "space" in your mind to enjoy inner peace and
happiness. You'll have the clarity to prioritize what's most important
in your life, what no longer serves your goals, and how you want to live
on a daily basis.

Introducing: Declutter Your Mind The goal of this book is simple: We
will teach you the habits, actions, and mindsets you can use to clean up
the mental clutter that might be holding you back from being more
focused and mindful. Instead of just telling you to do something, we
show you how practical, science-backed actions can create real and
lasting change if practiced regularly. Declutter Your Mind is broken
down into four information-packed sections that you can use to change a
specific aspect of your life that might be causing you to feel stressed
or overwhelmed. Specifically, we cover these topics: 1. Decluttering
Your Thoughts 2. Decluttering Your Life Obligations 3. Decluttering your
Relationships

4. Decluttering Your Surroundings You'll find that this book is full of
exercises that can have an immediate, positive impact on your mindset.
Since there is a lot of material, we suggest you read it all the way
through one time and then go through it again to identify the one area
of your life that needs the most work. In other words, you should find a
"quick win" that will have an immediate impact on your life.

Who Are We? Barrie is the founder of the award-winning personal
development site, Live Bold and Bloom . She is a certified personal
coach and online course creator, helping people apply practical
strategies to push past comfort zones and create happier, richer, more
successful lives. She is also the author of a series of selfimprovement
books on positive habits, life passion, confidence building,
mindfulness, and simplicity. As an entrepreneur, a mom of three, and a
homeowner, Barrie knows firsthand how valuable and life-changing it is
to simplify and manage both our inner and outer lives in order to reduce
stress and enjoy life to the fullest. Steve (or "S.J.") runs the blog
Develop Good Habits and is the author of a series of habit-related
titles, all of which are available on Amazon at HabitBooks.com. The goal
of his content is to show how continuous habit development can lead to a
better life. Together, we are the authors of two previous books about
mindfulness and leading a less complicated lifestyle: 10-Minute
Declutter: The Stress Free Habit for Simplifying Your Home and 10-Minute
Digital Declutter: The Simple Habit to Eliminate Technology Overload .
Not only do these books teach practical actions to control your material
possessions, they also show how eliminating the "noise" in your life can
have a positive impact on mental health. Both of us have different
reasons for not only adopting the following principles, but also
deciding to write this book in the first place.

Barrie's Story... Over the last few years, Barrie has had a profound
shift in her lifestyle and life priorities. Feeling an emptiness in her
life and often dealing with generalized anxiety, she began a personal
quest to find what she felt passionate about beyond her role as a mom,
and to figure out how to quiet the "voice in her head" that triggered
the anxiety and suffering she experienced. Her journey led her to a new
career as a personal coach, personal development blogger, teacher, and
author. Through her work and research, she encountered several profound
"aha" moments when she learned more about mindfulness practices,
simplifying, and identifying a few life priorities where she wanted to
spend most of her time and energy. She recently moved from a congested
and busy suburb of Atlanta to Asheville, NC, where she enjoys a slower
pace of life in a town that focuses on healthy living, great food,
interpersonal connections, nature, and music. She downsized to a much
smaller house, getting rid of many of her possessions and streamlining
her wardrobe. She prioritizes relationships, experiences, and meaningful
work over things, money, and prestige. In her daily life, she tries to
focus on balance and being present, using meditation, exercise, and time
in nature as her tools.

Steve's Story... For many years, Steve led a pretty simplistic
lifestyle, but since the second half of 2015 he has experienced four
major life event changes (marriage, a new baby, buying a house, and
starting a brand new business). While all of these events have been
amazing, they have also led to an increased amount of stress in his
life. At first, Steve felt overwhelmed by these changes, but he
eventually learned how to simplify what goes through his head, and to be
in the moment with whatever he is doing at the time. So now, when he
spends time with this wife and son, he is 100 percent in the moment; and
when he's working, he completes important tasks in a productive flow
state. The strategies that Steve and Barrie both use to overcome the
stress in their lives aren't easy. But they definitely work---if you're
willing to work at it on a daily basis. These are the strategies that
you'll discover in the following book.

Why You NEED to Read Declutter Your Mind This book is for anyone who
recognizes how their untamed thoughts are interfering with their focus,
productivity, happiness, and peace of mind. Declutter Your Mind will be
a good fit if you: Often find yourself trapped in anxious, negative, and
unproductive thinking Lose valuable time, focus, and energy because of
overthinking and worry Feel frustrated and confused about how to stop
negative and compulsive thinking Have experienced times of high stress,
agitation, anxiety, and even depression as a result of mental overwhelm
Find yourself looking to money, possessions, work, success, or prestige
to fill a void of emptiness or sadness you feel Feel so busy,
overwhelmed, and stressed that you've lost touch with who you really are
Find yourself turning to distractions, alcohol, drugs, and other
compulsions to numb yourself to painful thoughts and feelings Would like
to change your priorities and learn to manage and understand your
thoughts so they don't rule your life Get complaints from your boss,
spouse, or family members about your distraction, disengagement,
agitation, or constant stress Simply desire a more centered, calm, and
peaceful lifestyle The bottom line?

If you desire to have a simplified, calm mental life---and to reclaim
some of the time and emotional energy you give up to overthinking and
anxiety---then you've come to the right place. Throughout this book, you
will not only learn the skills you need to declutter and manage your
thoughts, but also discover actionable strategies to implement
immediately. We have a lot of ground to cover, so let's jump in and
discuss why we are so trapped by our thoughts, and how it's impacting
us.

PART I DECLUTTERING YOUR THOUGHTS

Four Causes of Mental Clutter "It's not a daily increase, but a daily
decrease. Hack away at the inessentials." -- Bruce Lee Before we dive
into the various exercises to eliminate your negative thinking, it's
important to first understand why you have these thoughts. So, in this
section, we'll go over four causes of mental clutter.

Cause #1: Daily Stress An excessive amount of stress is the primary
reason many people feel overwhelmed by life. In fact, the stress created
by information overload, physical clutter, and the endless choices
required from these things can trigger an array of mental health issues
like generalized anxiety, panic attacks, and depression. Couple this
stress with the legitimate worries and concerns in your life, and you
may find yourself with sleep problems, muscle pain, headaches, chest
pain, frequent infections, and stomach and intestinal disorders,
according to the American Psychological Association (not to mention
dozens of studies supporting the connection between stress and physical
problems). Dan Harris, ABC News anchor and author of the book 10%
Happier, didn't acknowledge how the stress of mental overload was
impacting him until he had a full-blown panic attack on national
television. His demanding and competitive job (which took him to the
front lines of Afghanistan, Israel, Palestine, and Iraq) had left him
depressed and anxious. He self-medicated his internal pain with
recreational drugs, triggering the on-air attack. After a meeting with
his doctor, Dan had a wake-up call about his mental state. He says in a
post on the ABC website, "As I sat there in his office, the sheer
enormity of my mindlessness started to sink in---from hurtling headlong
into war zones without considering

the psychological consequences, to using drugs for a synthetic squirt of
replacement adrenaline. It was as if I had been sleepwalking through a
cascade of moronic behavior." Dan's "moronic behavior" was simply a
human reaction to everything that was happening in his head. When life
becomes so intense and complicated, our psyches search out escape ramps.
Too much input, too much negative exposure, and too many choices can
trigger a not-so-healthy coping response.

Cause #2: The Paradox of Choice The freedom of choice, something revered
in free societies, can have a diminishing point of return when it comes
to mental health. Psychologist Barry Schwartz coined the phrase "paradox
of choice," which sums up his findings that increased choice leads to
greater anxiety, indecision, paralysis, and dissatisfaction. More
choices might afford objectively better results, but they won't make you
happy. Consider a simple trip to the grocery store. According to the
Food Marketing Institute , in 2014 there were 42,214 items carried in
the average supermarket. What once might have been a 10-minute excursion
to grab the necessities now requires at least that much time to agonize
over the best brand of yogurt or the right glutenfree crackers. Try to
purchase a pair of jeans, the staple of most wardrobes, and you'll be
faced with an endless array of decisions. Baggy fit? Boot cut? Skinny?
Wide leg? Vintage wash? Button fly? Zipper? A simple purchase is enough
to make you hyperventilate. Steve Jobs, Mark Zuckerberg, and even
President Obama made the decision to limit their clothing options to
minimize feelings of overwhelm from making decisions. In an article from
Michael Lewis for Vanity Fair , the president explained the logic behind
his limited wardrobe selections: "You'll see I wear only gray or blue
suits," Obama said. "I'm trying to pare down decisions. I don't want to
make decisions about what I'm eating or wearing. Because I have too many
other decisions to

make."

Cause #3: Too Much "Stuff" Our homes are filled with clothes we never
wear, books we won't read, toys that are unused, and gadgets that don't
see the light of day. Our computer inboxes are overflowing. Our desktops
are cluttered, and our phones are flashing messages like "You need more
storage." As mentioned in 10-Minute Digital Declutter, "We have become
such slaves to our gadgets that we'd rather have the quick fix of
instant information or entertainment over real-world interactions and
experiences." With this constant flow of information and access to
technology, becoming mass consumers of things and data is easier than
ever. At the click of a button, we can order anything from a book to a
motorboat and have it delivered to our doorstep. We're filling our homes
with things we don't need and filling our time with a steady stream of
tweets, updates, articles, blog posts, and cat videos. Information and
stuff is piling up around us, and yet we feel helpless to do anything
about it. All of this extraneous stuff and data not only sucks our time
and productivity, but also produces reactive, anxious, and negative
thoughts. Like: "My Facebook friend looks like she's living a happy
life. My life sucks." "Should I buy that FitBit and start tracking my
health so I don't die too early?" "Oh no, I forgot that 'How to Make a
Million Before You're 30' webinar---what if they shared something really
important?" Everything seems important and urgent . Every email and

text must be answered. Every latest device or contraption must be
purchased. This keeps us constantly stirred up, busy with trivialities,
and detached from the people around us and the feelings within us. We
often feel like we don't have time to declutter because we're too busy
consuming new stuff and information. But at some point, all this
busyness is leading us to mental and emotional exhaustion. As we process
everything coming at us, we analyze, ruminate, and worry ourselves to
the breaking point. How have we lost sight of the values and life
priorities that once kept us balanced and sane? What can we do about it?
We can't go back in time and live without technology. We can't renounce
all of our worldly possessions and dwell in a cave. We have to figure
out a way to live in this modern world without losing our sanity.
Decluttering our stuff and cutting back on time spent with our digital
devices does help eliminate some of the anxiety and negative thinking.
But we still have plenty of reason to get lost in the mental clutter of
negative thinking, worry, and regret. We worry about our health, our
jobs, our kids, the economy, our relationships, how we look, what other
people think of us, terrorism, politics, pain from the past, and our
unpredictable futures. Our thoughts about these things make us suffer
and undermine the happiness we could experience right now if we didn't
have that constant voice in our heads stirring things up.

Cause #4: The Negativity Bias "But it was in this moment, lying in bed
late at night, that I first realized that the voice in my head---the
running commentary that had dominated my field of consciousness since I
could remember ---was kind of an asshole." -- Dan Harris The human
nervous system has been evolving for 600 million years, but it still
responds the same as our early human ancestors who faced
life-threatening situations many times a day and simply needed to
survive.

Dr.Â Rick Hanson, Senior Fellow of the Greater Good Science Center at UC
Berkeley, in an article on his website says, "To keep our ancestors
alive, Mother Nature evolved a brain that routinely tricked them into
making three mistakes: overestimating threats, underestimating
opportunities, and underestimating resources (for dealing with threats
and fulfilling opportunities)." Thus evolved the "negativity bias," our
tendency to react to negative stimuli more intensely than positive.
Negative stimuli produce more neural activity than do equally intense
(e.g., loud, bright) positive ones. They are also perceived more easily
and quickly. Hanson says, "The brain is like Velcro for negative
experiences but Teflon for positive ones." So what does the negativity
bias have to do with your thoughts? It means that you are hardwired to
overthink, worry, and view situations more negatively than they are in
reality. You see threats as more threatening and challenges as more
challenging. Any negative thought that enters your mind feels real, so
there is an impulse to accept it as reality. But you are not living in a
cave, facing life-threatening situations daily. You may be hardwired to
think negatively, but you don't have to accept this predisposition. Sam
Harris says, "There is an alternative to simply identifying with the
next thought that pops into consciousness." That alternative is
mindfulness . Mindfulness can be practiced in the most mundane
activities, and it can be fostered through specific exercises that are
provided throughout this book. Mindfulness requires retraining your
brain to stay out of the mental clutter from the future and focus
instead on the present moment. When you are mindful, you no longer
attach to your thoughts. You are simply present in whatever you happen
to be doing. Sounds simple, right? The concept is deceptively
simple---but changing your thinking is

not so easy. As with building any other habit, decluttering your mind
requires practice, patience, and a willingness to start small, then grow
from there. Fortunately, we'll show how to do all of this throughout
this book. Not only will you learn the practices to train your brain and
control your thoughts, but you'll also build the specific habits that
will support these mental practices on a daily basis. In the remainder
of this section, we'll go over four habits you can use to declutter your
thoughts . You'll find that, as you master your thinking, you'll not
only be more focused and productive, but also feel more at peace with
all the crazy demands of modern life. So let's dive into the first habit
that will retrain your brain--- focused breathing.

Mental Declutter Habit #1: Focused Deep Breathing "Feelings come and go
like clouds in a windy sky. Conscious breathing is my anchor." -- ThÃ­ch
Nhat Hanh Even though you take about 20,000 breaths a day, you probably
don't think about your breathing very often. Your brain adjusts your
breathing to the needs of your body automatically. When you're climbing
stairs or going for a run, you don't have to think, "I better breathe
deeper and harder to get more oxygen to my muscles." It just happens. To
adjust your breathing to your body's changing needs, sensors in your
brain, blood vessels, muscles, and lungs handle the job for you.
However, whenever you want to take over, you have that power. You can
slow down your breathing, change where you breathe from (chest or
abdomen), and even make your breaths shallow or deep. A change in
breathing is often the first sign that our thoughts are overwhelming and
stressful. When we feel anxious, depressed, rushed, or upset, we may
experience rapid breathing or shortness of breath. Our modern lifestyles
and job settings also contribute to improper, shallow breathing. As
Barrie writes in her book Peace of Mindfulness: Everyday Rituals to
Conquer Anxiety and Claim Unlimited Inner Peace: Unfortunately, we are
sedentary most of the day, so there is less need to breathe deeply, the
way our ancestors did in order to hunt, gather, farm, and perform other
manual labor. Sitting behind our desks or slumped on the couch watching
TV, we have developed a habit of short and shallow breathing. When we're
in a hurry and rushed, our breathing follows suit with quick, nervous
breaths. When we're stressed, anxious, or focused on a problem, our
bodies contract, and we bend

forward, with our heads down, arms together, and muscles tensed. All of
these postures constrict breathing. Sometimes when we're absorbed with
stress and worry, the muscles that move the thorax and control
inhalation and muscular tenseness clamp down like a vice to restrict
exhalation, and we forget to breathe altogether. You may not pay much
attention to your breathing and your posture, but by simply becoming
more aware of how you breathe, you foster a calmer state of body and
mind. Start paying attention to your breathing and simply become aware
of how you are taking in and releasing air throughout your day. We
recommend keeping four things in mind while building the focused deep
breathing habit : 1. Rather than slouching at your desk or on the sofa
at home, sit up straighter to allow more room for your lungs to take in
oxygen. Become aware of areas where your body is tense, and mentally
"breathe into" those areas, seeing them relax as you breathe. 2. Be
conscious of breathing through your nose rather than your mouth. Your
nose has defense mechanisms that prevent impurities and excessively cold
air from entering your body. Your nose also can detect poisonous gases
that could be harmful to you. Viruses and bacteria can enter the lungs
through mouth breathing, so let your nose do the work. 3. When you
inhale, use abdominal breathing by gently pushing your stomach outward,
and breathe through as though you're filling your stomach. On the
exhale, breathe out slowly and allow your stomach to return to its
normal position. 4. Pay attention to the difference between shallow
breathing (which stops at the chest) and abdominal or diaphragmatic
breathing (which fills the lower lobes of

the lungs and encourages full oxygen exchange). Abdominal breathing also
massages the abdominal organs through the movements of the diaphragm.
One of the best ways to detach from negative thoughts and gain control
over your mind is through slow, deep, rhythmic breathing . This focused
breathing stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system, reducing your
heart rate, relaxing muscles, calming the mind, and normalizing brain
function. Deep breathing helps you feel connected to your body, shifting
your awareness away from worry and quieting the inner dialog in your
brain. The physiological changes that occur with deep breathing are
referred to as the "relaxation response ." The relaxation response is a
term first coined by Dr.Â Herbert Benson, professor, author,
cardiologist, and founder of Harvard's Mind/Body Medical Institute. He
wrote the book The Relaxation Response , in which he shares the benefits
of a variety of relaxation techniques (including diaphragmatic
breathing) in treating a wide range of stress-related disorders. Benson
says, "The relaxation response is a physical state of deep rest that
changes the physical and emotional responses to stress... and the
opposite of the fight or flight response." In addition to promoting the
relaxation response, deep breathing has many well-researched health
benefits. Here's a summary of what deep nose breathing can do for you:
Boost nitric oxide, a powerful immune-boosting molecule produced in the
sinuses during nose breathing. Improve the quality of your blood through
eliminating toxins and increased oxygenation. Assist the digestion and
assimilation of food through a more efficient stomach and digestive
system. Increase the health and function of the nervous system by
increased oxygenation.

Improve the function of the abdominal organs and the heart through
increased circulation. Help prevent respiratory problems as the lungs
become stronger and more powerful. Reduce blood pressure and help
prevent heart disease as the heart becomes more efficient and stronger
and the workload on the heart is reduced. Assist in weight control as
extra oxygen burns excess fat more efficiently. By practicing a few
minutes of deep abdominal breathing every day, you are building a
life-long habit proven through years of research and testing to clear
your mind, reduce stress, and promote relaxation of the mind and body.
Barrie likes to practice deep breathing several times a day when she
takes a break from work and before bed to prepare her mind and body for
sleep. You can practice mindful breathing just about anywhere at any
time of day, especially when you find yourself overthinking or feeling
stressed and anxious. Even a few minutes of mindful breathing a day can
improve your sense of well-being and mental calm. However, you might
want to develop a regular practice of deep breathing at a specific time
of day, as focused breathing is the foundation for a meditation
practice, which we'll discuss in the next chapter. If you establish a 5
-- to 10-minute breathing habit, you can easily use this habit as a
trigger and starting point for your meditation practice . Here is a
seven-step process you can use to develop the practice of deep breathing
on a daily basis: 1. Determine a time of day to practice deep breathing,
preferably after a daily habit you perform consistently, like brushing
your teeth. Morning is always a good time to practice, as it sets the
tone for your day. However, you may find you want to take a break in the
middle of the day, as things get more

hectic during your workday. Before bed is another good time, as it
promotes a restful state before sleep. 2. Select a setting for your
breathing practice in a quiet space where you won't be distracted or
interrupted. Turn off your phone, computer, and any other device that
might disturb you. 3. Set a timer for 10 minutes. 4. Sit on the floor
with a pillow in a meditative position, like the lotus position, or in a
chair with your spine straight and feet planted on the floor. Let your
hands rest gently in your lap. 5. Inhale slowly through your nose until
your lungs are filled to capacity, allowing your stomach to push out on
the inhalation. 6. At the end of the inhalation, pause for a count of
two. 7. Exhale slowly, smoothly, and completely, allowing your stomach
to return to its natural position. Pause at the end of the exhalation as
well. When you first begin, don't take in too much air in one breath.
Start by breathing to the count of four, pausing for the count of two,
and exhaling to the count of four. If you notice you're
hyperventilating, don't breathe in quite as deeply. With practice,
you'll enlarge your lung capacity and can inhale more air. Now let's
move on to another mindfulness practice that involves focused breathing
but takes you to another level of calm, mental clarity, and inner peace.

Mental Declutter Habit #2: Meditation "Meditation is not a way of making
your mind quiet. It's a way of entering into the quiet that's already
there---buried under the 50,000 thoughts the average person thinks every
day." -- Deepak Chopra You don't have to be a Buddhist, a mystic, or a
crystal-carrying exhippie to practice meditation. You can belong to any
spiritual or religious faith or have no religious affiliation at all to
reap the benefits of meditation and use it as a tool for decluttering
your mind. If you've never practiced meditation or you're not familiar
with it, you might be put off by the idea of sitting quietly in the
lotus position and emptying your mind. But don't let the clichÃ©s about
meditating cave dwellers prevent you from giving it a try. In his book
10% Happier , Dan Harris says, "Meditation suffers from a towering PR
problem.... If you can get past the cultural baggage, though, what
you'll find is that meditation is simply exercise for your brain."
Meditation has been practiced for thousands of years and originates in
ancient Buddhist, Hindu, and Chinese traditions. There are dozens of
styles of meditative practices, but most practices begin with the same
steps---sitting quietly, focusing attention on your breath, and
dismissing any distractions that come your way . The goal of meditation
varies depending on the type of meditation practice and the desired
outcome of the meditator. For our purposes here, we suggest meditation
as a tool to help you train your mind and control your thoughts , both
when you are sitting in meditation and when you aren't. The benefits of
meditating translate to your daily life, helping you control worry and
overthinking, and providing a host of health benefits that we'll discuss
below. The key to finding satisfaction with meditation is simply

to practice . By making a daily commitment to meditation, you will
improve your skills and discover how the mental, physical, and emotional
benefits increase over time. Barrie has noticed that, on the days she
meditates, she is less anxious and agitated and more focused in her
work, especially with writing. She has also noticed an increased ability
to stay in the present moment and redirect herself back to the task at
hand whenever she feels tempted by a potential distraction. Finally,
Barrie uses short meditation breaks during the day to help her relax
during particularly stressful times. The steps to meditating are simple
and straightforward, but the practice is not as easy as it seems. You'll
discover that, at first, trying to quiet your mind and maintain focus is
like attempting to train fleas. But the more you practice, the easier
and more enjoyable the experience becomes. As professor David Levy
describes it to USA Today , "Meditation is a lot like doing reps at a
gym. It strengthens your attention muscle." Of all of the strategies
outlined in this book, meditation is the one that can have the most
profound impact on your overall wellbeing. Meditation has long been
touted as a way to improve concentration and focus, but only recently
have studies confirmed these claims. A study from the University of
Washington showed that meditation increases productivity and promotes
focus. Another study published in Brain Research Bulletin supports the
claims that meditation can decrease stress. A University of
Massachusetts Medical School study has shown meditation can boost your
overall brainpower in a number of ways. Other studies have shown how
meditation can help preserve the aging brain, improve the symptoms of
depression and anxiety, thicken the learning and memory areas of the
brain, and help with addiction.

Research has found that meditation also promotes divergent thinking, a
type of thinking that fosters creativity by allowing many new ideas to
be generated. Our main point in sharing this research is to reinforce
the profound benefits of meditation---benefits not only demonstrated by
thousands of years of anecdotal evidence, but also validated by solid
scientific research. If you have any doubt that meditation is worth your
time and effort, hopefully you're beginning to shift your opinion. Let's
get started with the very simple 10-minute meditation Barrie and Steve
practice that you can begin today . There isn't anything fancy or
complicated about the practice. You don't need special clothes or
equipment. All you need is a quiet space and the willingness to stick to
it. Here is a simple 11-step process you can use to build the meditation
habit: 1. Select a quiet, calm space for your meditation practice where
you can close the door to be completely alone. 2. Determine a specific
time of day for your practice. If you've begun a deep breathing
practice, you can use this as your trigger (and starting point) for your
new meditation habit. Or you can choose another trigger and practice
meditating at another time of day. 3. Decide whether you want to
meditate sitting on a pillow on the floor or in a straight-back chair or
sofa. Try not to recline as you meditate, since you might fall asleep.
4. Remove all distractions and turn off all digital devices or other
devices that make noise. Remove pets from the room. 5. Set a timer for
10 minutes. 6. Sit comfortably either in a chair or cross-legged on the
floor with a cushion. Keep your spine erect and your hands resting
gently in your lap.

7. Close your eyes, or keep them open with a downwardfocused gaze, then
take a few deep cleansing breaths through your nose---we recommend three
or four breaths at a time. 8. Gradually become aware of your breathing.
Notice the air moving in and out through your nostrils and the rise and
fall of your chest and abdomen. Allow your breaths to come naturally,
without forcing them. 9. Focus your attention on the sensation of
breathing, perhaps even mentally thinking the word "in" as you inhale
and "out" as you exhale. 10. Your thoughts will wander a lot in the
beginning. Every time they do, gently let them go and then return your
attention to the sensation of breathing. Don't judge yourself for having
intrusive thoughts. That's just your "monkey mind" trying to take over.
Just lead your mind back to focused attention on breathing. You may have
to do this dozens of times at first. 11. As you focus on breathing,
you'll likely notice other perceptions and sensations like sounds,
physical discomfort, emotions, etc. Simply notice these as they arise in
your awareness, and then gently return to the sensation of breathing.
Your goal is to increasingly become the witness to all sounds,
sensations, emotions, and thoughts as they arise and pass away. View
them as though you are observing them from a distance without judgment
or internal comment. Rather than your mind taking control and running
away whenever a thought or distraction occurs, you eventually gain more
and more control of your mind and your ability to redirect it back to
the present. In the beginning, you'll feel you're in a constant battle
with your monkey mind. But with practice you won't need to constantly
redirect your thoughts. Thoughts begin to drop away naturally,

and your mind opens up to the immense stillness and vastness of just
being present. This is a deeply peaceful, satisfying experience.
Meditation masters refer to this space of stillness as the "gap"---the
silent space between thoughts. At first the gap is very narrow, and it's
difficult to remain there for more than a few nanoseconds. As you become
a more practiced meditator, you'll find the gap opens wider and more
frequently, and you can rest in it for longer periods of time. You can
experience a brief moment of the space between thoughts by trying this
exercise: Close your eyes and begin to notice your thoughts. Simply
watch them come and go for a few seconds. Then ask yourself the
question, "Where will my next thought come from?" Stop and wait for the
answer. You may notice there's a short gap in your thinking while you
await the answer. Eckhart Tolle, author of the book The Power of Now ,
suggests this gap experience is like a cat watching a mouse hole. You're
awake and waiting, but with no thoughts in that gap. You can also
practice this "space between thoughts" exercise by putting yourself in a
state of deep listening. Sit quietly and listen intently, as though
you're trying to hear a quiet and distant sound. Again, you are alert,
awake, and waiting without the distraction of thought. You may not
experience a gap moment in your early days of meditating. In fact, you
may find you are constantly redirecting your thoughts, noticing your
physical discomforts, and wondering why you're bothering with this silly
practice at all. You may judge yourself harshly for not "getting it
right," or wonder if you are making any progress at all. During
meditation, your mind might wander off on a meandering dialog about how
you're feeling and how the meditation is going. Or, if you experience a
space between thought moment, you might get distracted by the thrill of
finally experiencing it. Your job is always to simply observe and
redirect your mind back to the present moment, to your breathing. The
goal of your

meditation practice is not to reach nirvana or have a spiritual
awakening. It's simply to strengthen your control over your mind until
your mind gets the message and gives in. The results of your efforts
will be a mental house that you control rather than the other way
around. Some beginning meditators prefer to use a guided meditation to
help them get the feel for the practice and stay focused . You can find
many free guided meditations online, and there are dozens of smartphone
apps available. We recommend three to get started: 1. Buddhify has over
80 custom guided audio meditation tracks on various topics. 2. Omvana ,
with dozens of guided meditations by very famous authors, teachers, and
spiritual celebrities. 3. Headspace has a series of 10-minute guided
exercises for your mind. If you find you enjoy meditating, gradually
increase your practice from 10 minutes a day to 30 minutes. Or you can
try two 15minute meditation sessions during different parts of the day.
Steve and Barrie find it's valuable to keep a meditation diary to make
notes about your experiences and feelings during meditation. Try to
write in it immediately following your meditation so your memory is
fresh. Write down how uncomfortable or distracted you felt, and whether
or not you felt the "space between thought" for any period of time.
Also, write about any changes in your daily mental state---whether you
are feeling more or less anxious, stressed, or worried. Over time,
you'll have a document reflecting how you've improved with your
practice, as well as how the practice has impacted your overall state of
mind. Now, if meditation isn't your thing, then you might want to
consider a different habit where you learn how to reframe the negative
thoughts that often pop into your mind. So let's talk

about that next.

Mental Declutter Habit #3: Reframe ALL Negative Thoughts "Whether you
think you can or you think you can't, either way, you are right!" --
Henry Ford Our thinking processes are necessary for survival and for
competing in a modern world. Critical thinking gives us the ability to
solve problems quickly and effectively. Creative thinking allows us to
develop original, diverse, and elaborate ideas and connections. But it's
the uninvited negative thinking that clutters our minds and often drains
our enthusiasm for life. According to Australian psychologist Dr.Â Russ
Harris, author of The Happiness Trap: How to Stop Struggling and Start
Living , "Thus, evolution has shaped our brains so that we are hardwired
to suffer psychologically: to compare, evaluate, and criticize
ourselves, to focus on what we're lacking, to rapidly become
dissatisfied with what we have, and to imagine all sorts of frightening
scenarios, most of which will never happen. No wonder humans find it
hard to be happy!" Many people go through their entire lives victimized
by their negative thoughts. They feel they have no control of what
thoughts take up residence in their brains---and worse, they believe the
"voices" in their heads that tell them the sky is falling. While the
negativity bias is real, it isn't impervious to your efforts for change
and self-awareness. Though it may feel natural to allow your mind to
wander into worry and despair, you've reinforced negative thinking by
not challenging it, and by accepting your thoughts as your identity. But
you have the power to recognize this tendency and change it by building
the reframing habit . The first step is to notice your thought patterns
and interrupt them before they get out of control. Here are six
strategies you can use throughout your day to break the pattern and
begin taming your mind.

Each of these strategies takes just a few minutes to employ.

Strategy #1. Be the Watcher Start by becoming aware of your thoughts.
Separate your "self" from your thoughts, and just observe what is going
on in your mind. The trick here is to do this in an impartial manner
where you're not judging any particular thought. Simply be conscious of
yourself as a detached witness to your thoughts. This exercise can be
done sporadically throughout the day or during a meditation session.
Observing your thoughts rather than attaching to them disempowers the
thoughts and the emotions they foster.

Strategy #2. Name That Thought Another way to separate yourself from
your thoughts is by mentally acknowledging that they are nothing more
than thoughts ---not your reality. For example, if you think, "I'll
never get all of this done," change the mental dialog to "I'm having the
thought that I'll never get all of this done." This reinforces the fact
that you are not your thoughts.

Strategy #3. Just Say No When you catch yourself in mental looping or
worry, simply say, "STOP!" out loud (vocalizing reinforces the
interruption), and then visualize a heavy metal wall slamming down in
front of your runaway thoughts. Barrie sometimes visualizes pushing
negative thoughts into a deep hole or putting them into a balloon that
floats away.

Strategy #4. Try the Rubber Band Trick Wear a rubber band on your wrist.
Whenever you see it, stop and

notice your thoughts. If you are stuck in negative thinking, put the
rubber band on the other wrist or gently pop it on your wrist. This
physical action interrupts the flow of negative thought.

Strategy #5. Know Your Triggers Often, overthinking and negativity are
triggered by a person, situation, or physical state. Pay attention to
common worries and anxieties you brood about. Is there anything that
happens that sets these off in your mind? If so, write down the triggers
so you're aware when they happen. This awareness can help prevent you
from being ambushed by negative thoughts.

Strategy #6. Distract Yourself Break the cycle using distraction. Do
something that will occupy your mind so there's no room for the negative
thoughts. Immerse yourself in a project that involves focus and
brainpower. If you're stuck in the car or waiting in line, go through
the multiplication tables in your head or try to memorize a poem.

Mental Declutter Habit #4: Teach Your Old Mind New Tricks Truthfully,
you will always struggle with some amount of negative thinking. You
can't overcome millions of years of evolutionary wiring through sheer
willpower. As Dr.Â Russ Harris says, "Any search for a 'pain-free
existence' is doomed to failure." However, you can manage the pain by
being more proactive in what you allow to remain in your thoughts.
Interrupting cluttered thinking is only part of the process of
retraining your brain and learning to disassociate from negative
thoughts. Your mind abhors a vacuum, so you need to fill the void with
constructive thought so you don't careen back into old patterns. Here
are four ways to do this:

#1. Challenge the Thought and Replace It You may notice that many of
your thoughts are wildly exaggerated. They are not the truth, or at
least not the whole truth. You might think, "I'm a loser, I can never do
anything right." In the moment, you certainly feel like a loser, but if
you examine the thought, you recognize that it's not entirely truthful.
You've done plenty of things well and have been successful on many
occasions. Rather than allowing "all or nothing" thinking to have a free
pass, challenge these negative thoughts whenever they occur. This simply
means coming up with a concrete example that contradicts the thought by
reminding yourself of a positive event or previous "win." For instance,
let's say you're a writer who receives a negative review on a recent
book. Your first thought might be, "I'm a terrible writer---everyone
hates what I write." However, if you take the time to look at the 100
previous positive reviews, then you'll recognize that the majority of
your readers love your content.

Using positive reminders might feel awkward at first, but eventually
you'll train yourself to interrupt those cycles of negative thinking.
This habit helps you take control of your reality and puts a roadblock
in front of the never-ending highway of selfsabotaging beliefs.

#2 Practice Acceptance One question you might have is "what do you do
about those negative thoughts that are true?" In other words, how do you
cope in those times when there is a legitimate reason for having
negative thoughts? The truth is that there are times when you'll feel
like it's impossible to maintain a positive outlook. However, it's also
true that the thoughts and feelings about these challenging situations
are often far worse than the situation itself. You can't completely
eradicate your troubled thoughts during hard times, but you can lessen
them through acceptance. When you struggle against the reality of a bad
situation, you're adding another layer of suffering to your psyche. You
can't worry or guilt yourself into a solution. Instead, you need a clear
head and a calm mind. When you find yourself struggling and ruminating,
stop for a moment and simply say, "I accept this situation is
happening." Take a deep breath and try to stop mentally fighting against
it. As you begin to accept this challenge, you can... Determine any
actions to take to improve or rectify it. Seek out anything positive you
can learn from it. Find ways to get support as you are enduring it.
Acceptance of a situation doesn't mean you avoid action. It means you
don't blindly fight and claw to escape. You put yourself in a state of
mind that allows you to take correct and useful action.

#3. Take Mindful Action

Overthinking is usually a pointless activity, so why not turn that
energy into structured thinking and then action? When your thoughts are
cluttered, do something positive that will distract you from negative
thoughts. Just about anything that requires some brain power and focus
will do the trick, but we suggest you take mindful action---action that
focuses on your values, goals, or priorities. A quick way to do this is
to define your goals, which is something we discuss in the next section.
In fact, one of the first mindful actions you could take is to define
your values and priorities for the next year. Some other ideas that you
might try include: Writing Practicing an instrument Constructing
something by hand Painting or drawing Working on a complex problem
Studying Memorizing something Practicing a speech Designing something
from scratch All of these activities require focus and some level of
mental challenge, which helps prevent you from falling back into random
overthinking or worry.

#4. Set a Worry Timer You can't completely break the worry habit . There
will be times when you're flooded with such powerful negative thoughts
that no amount of self-talk or distraction works. But even during these
times, you don't have to fall headfirst into

the quicksand of negative thinking. You can limit the amount of time you
spend in your head so you don't sink so far you can't easily get out.
Set a timer for 10 to 15 minutes and allow yourself to stress over
whatever enters your mind. Get it all out! Take this time to express all
of the bottled up feelings and thoughts. In fact, during your "worry
time," you might even write down your thoughts in a journal. Writing in
longhand helps you process your thoughts and can often lead to a
creative solution to your problem. When the timer goes off, get up and
do something distracting (as suggested in the previous strategy) to help
you taper off of this worry time. If you find one worry session isn't
enough, plan for one early in the day and one later in the afternoon.
When you start to get back into your head in between sessions, remind
yourself to hold off until the next one.

Final Thoughts on Decluttering Your Thoughts You may not use all of
these strategies for training your mind to work more constructively, but
they give you an arsenal of tools to choose from so you're prepared.
Barrie has found the ability to challenge thoughts and recognize how
they don't always reflect reality to be particularly helpful in reducing
worry and overthinking. You'll discover which of these practices work
best for you and the mental clutter that often occupies your mind. Don't
get discouraged if you find yourself falling back into old patterns.
With any new behavior, you have to practice regularly before it becomes
more automatic. Now, let's switch gears by talking about the importance
of identifying your "why" and how it can eliminate many of the mental
obstacles that occur and streamline your life where you focus on what
matters most to you.

PART II DECLUTTERING YOUR LIFE OBLIGATIONS

The Importance of Core Values One of the challenges of modern living is
figuring out what's truly important and differentiating those from the
obligations that seem important at first, but really don't matter when
you take the time to examine them. If you're like most people, then you
might find that it's increasingly difficult to minimize, organize, or
bypass the deluge of information you encounter on a regular basis.
Today, we have more information, data, and material possessions
available to us than any previous generation, but this new way of life
doesn't come with instructions on how to manage it all. Many of us feel
so overwhelmed that we fail to step back and assess the impact of
information overload. Nor do we know how to prioritize it all. We become
reactors to what life throws at us, rather than carefully evaluating
what is best for us. Our grandparents and great-grandparents were
certainly as busy as we are. They didn't have the benefit of all of the
time-saving technology to make their lives easier and more productive.
But they did have one big advantage over our generation---they weren't
inundated with the stream of information and deluge of choices that we
experience every minute of the day. They were clear on how to prioritize
their time, with less money and fewer choices to entice or confuse them.
The "Greatest Generation," those who grew up during the Great
Depression, had strong, clear values and priorities, and a solid sense
of purpose forged during the difficult years during and after World War
II. A strong work ethic coupled with a focus on family, faith, and
patriotism defined this generation of Americans. They knew who they were
and what they stood for, and therefore how to focus their time and
energy. Fortunately, there is actually a simple solution to cutting
through the "noise" of modern society, which can help you make effective
decisions whenever you feel overwhelmed by all the available options:
Define your core values .

Why Core Values? One of the simplest ways to eliminate mental clutter
and live a more fulfilling life is to define your values and guiding
principles for your life. Now, more than ever, we need these principles
to help us clarify how we want to spend our time, energy, and money. Why
is this important? Because your core values can serve as a measuring
stick for all of your choices and decisions in life , keeping you
focused on the person you want to be and the life you wish to lead. By
living in alignment with your values, you create the best environment
for happiness, inner peace, and clear thinking. Core values form a
foundation for your life that endures through time, life difficulties,
and major changes. Embracing your core values is like being a tree with
deep and stable roots---the storms of life will not dislodge you. When
you're clear on your values, you reduce confusion, overthinking, worry,
and anxiety. For example, one of Barrie's core values in her
professional life is freedom and flexibility. Once she defined this
value, she didn't want to pursue a traditional 9-to-5 job because she
knew she wouldn't be happy. Even when great job opportunities came her
way, it was easy to say, "No, thank you," because she was clear on her
values. Personal development blogger and author Steve Pavlina describes
the importance of core values like this: Values act as our compass to
put us back on course every single day, so that day after day, we're
moving in the direction that takes us closer and closer to our
definition of the "best" life we could possibly live. The "best" is your
own ideal, but generally as you get closer to this ideal, you'll enjoy
increasingly positive shades of "better" even if you never reach "best."
And this makes sense because many results in life exist on a continuum.
Living out of alignment with your values or outgrowing your

existing values can throw you off course and contribute to feelings of
anxiety and depression. If you haven't defined your values, your life
can feel unbalanced or directionless, and you may not know why. In this
section, we go over four strategies to define your core values and make
intelligent decisions about your life obligations, so what you do on a
daily basis matches up with these important items.

Strategy #1: Identify YOUR Core Values To understand why something feels
wrong, you must have a strong grasp of what is right for you. Who do you
want to be and how do you want to live your life? If you have never
defined your values, you are sailing the sea of life without a compass.
You're allowing the winds and storms to define your direction and
accepting the outcome without question. Even if you have defined them in
the past, it doesn't hurt to revisit them, as your values can change
over time. Here's a six-step process for defining your values. 1. First,
go through this list of value words on Barrie's blog Live Bold and Bloom
, and write down every value word that feels important to you for your
personal life. 2. Then, go through the list again, and write down every
value word that feels important for your career or business. 3. For both
lists, pick your top five to six values, and write them down on two
separate sheets of paper. Title one sheet "Life Values" and the other
"Work Values. 4. Under each value, list all of the ways you are
currently living out of alignment with this value. For example, if one
of your values is quality time with family, but you travel five days a
week, you may not be honoring this value. 5. For each value, think about
actions you could take to fix those out-of-alignment situations. Ask
yourself, "What do I need to do to correct this situation so I'm
honoring my core values?" If you use the example about family time,
maybe one action is cutting back on your travel schedule, or hiring out
some household tasks when you're home so you can spend more quality time
with family. Write these down for both life and work even if the actions
seem impossible

right now. 6. On both lists of actions, put a check mark next to the
actions that are doable for you now or in the near future. Break these
actions down into even smaller, easily manageable actions. These actions
might involve making calls, rearranging your schedule, delegating some
responsibilities, brainstorming a possible career change, thinking of
ways to reengage with your spouse, etc. Once you have a list of values
that align with your goals, review it on a daily basis and make sure
that the actions you take match these desired outcomes. You may want to
focus first on your personal values and then on your professional
values. Or you might choose one value from each and start there. No
matter what you pick, be sure to start with the area of your life where
you feel the biggest disconnect. This is where you likely feel the most
internal pain and mental agitation. Chip away at your action list daily
so you can create changes and boundaries that prevent you from
mindlessly wandering away from your values again. Even small,
incremental changes can create a huge, positive shift in your attitude.
You'll have a sense of direction and a purpose that feels authentic to
you, even if you can't act on it all immediately. This is an incredibly
empowering feeling! You'll still have times of transition and upheaval,
but this values exercise gives you the tools to navigate through all of
life's ups and downs.

Strategy #2: Clarify Your Life Priorities Once you've defined your core
values, you should use this information to complete another exercise
that will enrich your life ---clarify your life priorities so you know
exactly how you want to spend your time, energy, and money . Without
knowing our priorities, we allow the pressures of life to determine our
actions and decisions. An email comes in, and we respond. An enticing
offer appears on our Facebook page, and we buy it. Someone interrupts
our work flow, and we allow it. When we don't know the bigger "why" of
our lives, there are no rules, no boundaries, no priorities to help us.
Here's another exercise that we recommend that will help you figure out
where you are currently spending your time, energy, and money. Answer
the following questions as honestly as possible. (Also, be sure to have
your list of personal and professional core values handy as you answer.)
How much time per day do you feel you waste on activities unrelated to
your core values (i.e., surfing the net, watching mindless TV, shopping,
or working in a job you hate)? How are you spending money unconsciously?
How are you interacting with the people you care about unconsciously?
How do you make career decisions (i.e., do you have a predetermined plan
or do you spend most of your day in "reaction mode")? How much time do
you spend worrying about how you should best spend your time and money?
What tasks, obligations, and relationships are you allowing in your life
unconsciously? How are you neglecting other important parts of your life

that you never seem to have time for? Now that you see how you're
actually spending your energy and focus, let's determine the ideal way
you'd like to prioritize the important areas of your life. For the sake
of this discussion, let's look at seven main life areas to help you
establish your priorities and how you want to spend your time and money.
If you want to add or remove any of these areas, feel free to do so if
they don't apply to you now. The areas are: 1. Career 2. Family 3.
Marriage (or love partnership) 4. Spiritual/personal
growth/self-improvement 5. Leisure/social 6. Life management (i.e., home
tasks, financial planning, budgeting, etc.) 7. Health and fitness If you
sleep 8 hours a day, that leaves 16 waking hours. Let's remove 2 hours a
day for personal hygiene activities and eating. That leaves 14 waking
hours a day or 98 hours a week. For the sake of simplicity, let's round
that up to 100 hours a week. In an ideal world, how would you prioritize
those seven key areas of your life? How many hours of those 100 per week
would you prefer to devote to each area (using your values to help guide
you)? Two examples... Barrie's current life priorities focus heavily on
career, love relationship, and life management. Her children are young
adults, and since she recently moved to a new city, many of her friends

and family aren't nearby. Ideally, she'd like to give more time to
leisure and social activities, as well as fitness and self-improvement.
She is trying to focus more on these things as she gets more acclimated
to her new location. Steve's current priority focuses heavily on family,
due to his recent marriage, the birth of his son, and the fact that his
parents just turned 70. So his current goal is to spend as much time as
possible with the people he loves the most in the world. While his
career (i.e., online business) and fitness were the biggest priorities
only a few years ago, they now are less important than his interpersonal
relationships. Often, this means "letting go" of the major goals that
once seemed important. So while he still likes to work hard, he has
learned to not feel anxious if he can't hit a milestone related to
business or his fitness. Now, these are just two examples from the
authors. To help you find your priorities, we recommend answering two
simple questions: 1. How different is your current life priority reality
from your ideal? 2. What are some actions you need to take to focus your
efforts on what really matters to you? We recommend you begin with the
priority that can make the most positive difference in your life or
where you feel the most imbalance . You may find this area reflects one
or more of your values that you aren't honoring. For example, you might
have a core value related to family, and a life priority of spending
more time with your family. Start small by making the decision to add
one extra hour a week spending quality time with your family. Of course,
this will bump out some other activity, but you often bump out something
that can be easily bumped out---or at least something that isn't a big
priority.

Continue adding weekly time to your life priorities until you have them
rearranged to more closely match your ideal. Sometimes, changing a
priority can be difficult. If you want to spend more time with your
family, will that impact your work schedule? If so, what do you need to
do to manage any fallout? If you want to focus more on your health and
fitness, you'll have to create new and challenging habits to ensure you
follow through on this priority. If you want to have a healthy, happy
marriage, you may have to give up time in front of the TV or on the
computer, which might be hard at first. Just stating your life
priorities isn't enough. You have to take the sometimes difficult
actions necessary to make the changes you want to see in your life. But
the closer you come to your ideal, the less internal conflict and
struggle you'll feel. Over time, you won't miss those old habits,
choices, and behaviors ---and your life will flow more easily because
you are living authentically, true to your values and priorities.

Exercise #3a: Focus on Mindful Goal Setting A natural outcome of having
values and setting priorities is considering how these apply to your
life in the future. Although worrying about the future contributes to an
unsettled mind, planning for the future is an important and valuable
exercise that can set the stage for true fulfillment in the years to
come. But is it really possible to look toward a better future and still
be happy with your life right now? Can you be content and evolving at
the same time? We believe it's possible to focus on the future while
still learning how to enjoy the present moment. There are many great
writers and philosophical thinkers who talk about contentedness in the
present moment. The renowned psychologist Abraham Maslow reminds us that
"the ability to be in the present moment is a major component of mental
wellness." ThÃ­ch Nhat Hanh, the Zen Buddhist monk and bestselling
author, teaches that every moment in your life, every breath, every step
you take, should be consciously experienced as a moment of joyous
arrival. He suggests you don't need to wait for change, for something
better, for the future, before you are content. You can be content right
now if you choose to see all of the good and beauty around you in the
present moment. Of course, this is easier said than done . The realities
of our daily lives are constantly pulling us into the future. We worry
about paying the bills, how our children will turn out, whether we will
remain healthy. And the very nature of setting goals is future-oriented.
Longing and struggling against "what is" causes suffering. Wishing for
more, for something different, for something better at the expense of
contentment in the moment robs us of life. If that's the case, why
should you focus on your future goals if

they pull you away from the moment? Because change and transformation
will happen to you whether or not you decide to focus on it. Change is a
constant of life, whether we are sitting in the lotus position absorbed
in the moment or wringing our hands about some imagined future outcome.
So we might as well create our futures mindfully. When you embrace the
truth that contentment and change can happen simultaneously, you reduce
the tension between thinking it's an either/or proposition. There is a
way to establish a balance between mindfulness and self-creation. You
can view the process of creating and reaching your goals as a place for
happiness and contentment. Rather than holding back happiness while you
await an outcome, enjoy every step along the path. Every revelation,
every small action toward your goals should be savored and celebrated.
Knowing that goal-setting isn't incompatible with mindfulness, let's
discuss how to create and work toward your goals in a way that supports
the bigger "why" of your life. When you first sit down to ponder your
goals for the future, remember to have your core values and life
priorities handy as points of reference. As long as your values and
priorities remain valid, they should be the compass for directing your
goals. Otherwise, you set yourself up for a future of frustration and
unhappiness. In the next section, we will go over the process that Steve
uses to create simple goals focused on what's truly important. The
benefit of this strategy is that you'll feel less stressed about the
future, and instead focus on what's currently going on in your life.

Strategy #3b: Create Quarterly S.M.A.R.T. Goals The simplest way to
focus on what's truly important in life is to create S.M.A.R.T. goals
that will be achieved in the immediate future. This means you'll set
goals for each quarter (i.e., three months) instead of the yearlong
goals that often take you out of the present moment. To begin, let's
start with a simple definition of S.M.A.R.T. goals: George Doran first
used the S.M.A.R.T. acronym in the November 1981 issue of the Management
Review . It stands for: S pecific, M easurable, A ttainable, R elevant,
and T ime-bound. Here's how it works:

S: Specific Specific goals answer your six "W" questions: who, what,
where, when, which, and why . When you can identify each element, you'll
know which tools (and actions) are required to reach a goal. Who: Who is
involved? What: What do you want to accomplish? Where: Where will you
complete the goal? When: When do you want to do it? Which: Which
requirements and constraints might get in your way? Why: Why are you
doing it? Specificity is important because, when you reach these
milestones (date, location, and objective), you'll know for certain you
have achieved your goal.

M: Measurable Measurable goals are defined with precise times, amounts,
or other units---essentially anything that measures progress toward a
goal. Creating measurable goals makes it easy to determine if you have
progressed from point A to point B. Measureable goals also help you
figure out when you're headed in the right direction, and when you're
not. Generally, a measurable goal statement answers questions starting
with "how," such as "how much," "how many," and "how fast."

A: Attainable Attainable goals stretch the limits of what you think is
possible. While they're not impossible to complete, they're often
challenging and full of obstacles. The key to creating an attainable
goal is to look at your current life and set an objective that seems
slightly beyond your reach. That way, even if you fail, you still
accomplish something of significance.

R: Relevant Relevant goals focus on what you truly desire. They are the
exact opposite of inconsistent or scattered goals. They are in harmony
with everything that is important in your life, from success in your
career to happiness with the people you love.

T: Time-bound Time-bound goals have specific deadlines. You are expected
to achieve your desired outcome before a target date. Time-bound goals
are challenging and grounding. You can set your target date for today,
or you can set it for a few months, a few weeks, or a few years from
now. The key to creating a time-bound goal is to set a deadline you'll
meet by working backward and developing habits (more on this later).
S.M.A.R.T. goals are clear and well-defined. There is no doubt about the
result you want to achieve. At its deadline, you'll know if

you have or haven't achieved a particular goal. As an example, here are
S.M.A.R.T. goals related to the seven areas of your life that we
mentioned in the previous section: 1. Career: "I will acquire five new
projects for my Web design consultancy through referrals, networking,
and social media marketing campaigns within two months." 2. Family: "I
will strengthen my bond with my family by taking them for a vacation at
least once in six months. This will be accomplished by setting aside an
hour each month during my review session and planning out future trip
ideas." 3. Marriage (or love partnership): "I will identify three things
I really love about my partner, and tell her about them on Friday night.
This will be done by scheduling a 30-minute block on Tuesday so I can
reminisce about all the good times we've shared together." 4.
Spiritual/personal growth/self-improvement: "I will take five minutes
each day to give thanks for everything that's good in my life. I will
develop this habit by setting aside time right before my lunch to
remember what's important." 5. Leisure/social: "I will dedicate three
hours every week to learn and practice watercolor painting. This will be
done by eliminating unimportant habits like watching TV." 6. Life
management: "I will save 10 percent of every paycheck and invest it in
index funds through my 401k." 7. Health and fitness: "I will work out a
minimum of 30 minutes per day, three days per week by December 31."
Hopefully, these seven examples give you an idea of how to create
S.M.A.R.T. goals that lead to a balanced life. Now let's go over a
six-step process that will turn this information into action.

Step #1: Identify What's Important to You

The key to achieving meaningful goals isn't to focus on all of the areas
of your life. The reason is simple: If you want to find meaning in what
you do, then you'll quickly feel overwhelmed if your days are fixated on
a laundry list of goals. Yes, it's important to be forward thinking, but
you also want enough time to live in the present moment. Our advice is
to focus on three to four areas of your life . You can do this by
looking at the seven areas we've discussed and identifying what's most
important to you right now . From there, simply create goals that tap
into an outcome you find both challenging and exciting.

Step #2: Focus on Three-Month Goals It's been Steve's experience that
long-term goals are constantly shifting. What seems urgent today often
isn't important next month. So the strategy that works for him is to
take the major priorities in his life and then break them down into
three-month (or quarterly) goals. Why should you focus on three-month
goals? Because your life is fast-paced and constantly shifting. In order
to keep up with all these changes, it's often better to create goals for
the short term because this helps maintain consistent effort and a high
level of motivation. It's also been Steve's experience that lengthy
goals (i.e., anything over six months) are often demotivating . When you
know an outcome is months away, it's easy to procrastinate on taking
consistent action. You keep putting off your goals, promising you'll
work on them next week . Next thing you know, it's a year later and
nothing has been accomplished. So to keep things simple, we recommend
identifying the three to four areas of your life that are most important
to you right now, and then creating a specific S.M.A.R.T. goal for each
one that you hope to achieve within the next three months.

Step #3: Use a Weekly Review to Create a Schedule

It's not always easy to consistently work on your goals when you have a
dozen other obligations. Fortunately, there is a simple solution to this
dilemma---schedule a weekly review session where you create a daily
action plan for the next seven days. The weekly review is a great
concept that David Allen teaches in Getting Things Done . It's a simple
process. Once a week (Steve prefers Sundays), look at the next seven
days and schedule the activities/projects you'd like to accomplish. You
can accomplish all of this with three simple steps: 1. Answer three
questions: Think carefully about the next seven days and answer these
three questions: What are my personal obligations? What are my priority
projects? How much time do I have? Your responses to these questions are
extremely important because they will determine the amount of time that
can be devoted to your goals during the next seven days. The lesson here
is that you shouldn't schedule your week with hundreds of activities.
That's the quickest path to leading a mentally cluttered life. Instead,
it's better to recognize, ahead of time, a realistic amount of time that
can be dedicated to your important goals. 2. Schedule project tasks:
After answering these three questions, map out the next seven days. The
simplest way to do this is to look at the list for each goal and
schedule time to follow-up on the most important activities. 3. Process
captured ideas: If you're like Barrie and Steve, then you probably have
dozens of great ideas every week related to your goals. The question is,
how do you follow up on them? My advice is to process these notes,
making one of two choices: 1) Take action on it immediately or 2)
schedule a time when you'll follow up on it. Here's how that would work:
If the idea is actionable... then write out a step-by-step plan for how
you'll do it. Simply write down a series of

actions you'll take on this idea and then schedule these ideas into your
week. If the idea is NOT actionable... then put the idea into an archive
folder that's reviewed every month. If you do this for every idea you
have, you won't forget to follow up at the right time. The weekly review
is an important part of achieving your goals. When you plan out each
week, you create a sense of urgency, making it more likely you will
follow up on each goal. Your weekly review will also help you create a
schedule you can turn into a list of daily activities.

Step #4: Take Action on Your Goals It's impossible to achieve your goals
without action. In fact, the trick to getting what you want is to
schedule time into your week that's solely dedicated to your goals.
That's why we recommend the following actions: Turn your goal into a
project : The easiest way to do this is to look at the target date and
work your way backward. Visualize reaching this milestone. What are the
specific steps you completed to get to this point? Once you identify the
actions, you simply put them down into a simple, step-by-step list.
Schedule time to work on goals : How much time you spend on each goal
depends on what's required for each activity. Some tasks might only
require a few minutes each week, while others require hours of your day
(that's why it's important to understand the time commitment of each
goal). Figure out how much time you'll need for each task and schedule
them into your week. Turn goals into priority tasks : We all have those
busy schedules full of activities that conflict with one another. The
solution? Start your day by working on goals first thing in the morning,
or some other time when you

feel the most energetic. Schedule time for single actions : Many people
get bogged down by the single actions that are important but not
immediately urgent. A quick fix for this is to schedule time each week
to complete a number of single actions. The tool that Steve uses for
these single actions is the ToDoist app . Whenever he sets a three-month
goal, he creates it as a project in ToDoist and then he adds all the
single actions that are required to achieve it. Finally, he schedules
specific actions into his weekly calendar. (For more on how to do this
in ToDoist, here is a comprehensive guide they put together that will
walk you through the entire process .)

Step #5: Review Your Goals The key to achieving anything in life is
consistency . That's why you should review your "goal project" on a
daily basis and make sure you're hitting every important milestone. We
recommend creating specific measurements for each step of the process
and using a weekly review to make sure you're touching on those as well.
Setting aside time for a daily review is a key step to achieving any
goal. It doesn't matter how busy you are---if you are not reviewing your
goals every day, you will be less likely to succeed. The truth is,
sometimes life can throw major curveballs in your pursuit of a long-term
objective. Often, these challenges can be frustrating and cause you to
feel less excited about a goal. So our advice is simple: Review your
goals at least two to three times per day. That way, you can keep them
at the forefront of your mind and remind yourself why you're taking a
specific action on a daily basis.

Step #6: Evaluate Your Quarterly Goals You work hard on your goals every
day. You even review them on a weekly and daily basis. The problem? Some
people never take a

step back and understand the "why" behind each goal. In other words,
people don't review their goals to see if they're actually worth
pursuing. That's why it's important to evaluate your goals every three
months, make sure they are aligned with your life purpose, and then
create new goals based on what you've learned. You can complete this
evaluation by answering a number of questions: Have I attained the
desired outcome? What were the successful and unsuccessful strategies?
Did I put 100 percent of my effort toward completing these goals? If
not, why? Have I achieved results consistent with my efforts? Should I
create a similar goal for the next quarter? What goals should I
eliminate or alter? Is there anything new I'd like to try? Even though
it takes a few hours to complete this evaluation, you should always take
time do it every quarter. It will be your ultimate safeguard against
wasting time on a goal that doesn't align with your long-term plans. So,
that was a brief introduction to the value of setting S.M.A.R.T. goals.
Now, the best way to make sure you're actually setting goals that you
truly want is to connect them with a personal passion. In the next (and
final) strategy we will show you how to do this.

Strategy #4: Connect Goals to Your Passions Too many people live lives
of quiet desperation. They wake up with a low-level sense of dread,
anxiety, or sadness. At work, they feel underutilized, unappreciated,
and underwhelmed. And when they get home, they feel mentally and
physically exhausted, with just enough energy to take care of the kids,
fix a meal, and plop onto the couch to watch a few hours of television.
Then they wake up and do it all over again . Even if this doesn't
describe you exactly, I'm sure you can relate. We all get in the
occasional rut. We accept less than our dreams. We stay in jobs that
don't inspire us or make us happy. All of this angst adds to our mental
clutter and distraction. Life has a way of swallowing us up, and before
we know it we're far down a path that feels nothing like who we are or
what we want for our lives. By the time we realize it, we have
obligations and responsibilities that add yet another reason to stick
with the status quo---even if we hate it. While the concept of "finding
your passion" might remind you of those woo-woo quotes you often see on
Facebook or Instagram, it still is incredibly important to connect what
you do on a daily basis with goals that you feel are truly important.
The reality is that your mental health can be negatively impacted when
you feel unfulfilled with your work. Think about how much negative
mental energy you've devoted to a bad boss, a job you hate, or a career
move you regret. We spend huge chunks of our lives working, so the
decision you make about your job will have the potential to make or
break your overall happiness. If you find work that you love, you not
only free your mind from oppressive thoughts, but will also feel
energized in all areas of your life. So what does it mean to live your
passion?

We think it can be defined with a few examples: Most days you wake up
feeling enthusiastic and happy about what you have going on that day.
You feel like you're in the "right" place, doing something in your work
or life that feels authentic to who you are and how you're wired. You
attract interesting, like-minded people in your life and work. You have
a sense of self-confidence and empowerment about what you're doing
because it's a great fit for you. You experience a deeper purpose or
meaning---or at least you are more fulfilled in general. Your overall
life is better and your relationships are happier because you are more
content, self-directed, and present in your work. Finding your passion
and making it part of your life isn't something that happens overnight,
and it isn't an exact "paint by numbers process." It's not like teaching
you how to follow a recipe or change the oil in your car. It involves a
variety of actions and experiments to figure it out. In fact, Barrie
teaches the process in her Path to Passion online course, and in her
book The 52-Week Life Passion Project . Everyone who reads this book is
unique. We all have different personalities, aptitudes, dreams, and life
obligations. What you determine to be your passion may differ from what
others find for themselves. So that's why we recommend a 14-step
exercise you can use to find your passion.

Step 1: Write a vision. Using your values and priorities as guides,
write down what you want in every area of your life---especially in your
work. You may not know precisely what to include, but a good starting
point is to describe what you DON'T want.

For example, when Barrie wrote her life vision five years ago, it looked
like this: I live in an interesting, progressive, vibrant city where I
can enjoy nature, the arts, culture, great food, and likeminded people.
I'm working in a career I love where I help people, utilizing my
coaching and interpersonal skills, as well as my writing and creative
skills. My work is flexible and allows me the freedom to travel and work
from anywhere. My income continues to increase, but I do not allow my
career to create imbalance in my life. I am in a relationship that is
loving, respectful, and mutually supportive with a smart, creative,
funny, kind, and ethical man. I have a network of close and supportive
friends and family with whom I regularly spend time, and I have a
loving, positive relationship with each of my three young adult
children. I frequently spend time in nature, and travel to new locations
several times a year. I remain active, energetic, and health conscious
with every passing year, and I remain open to new opportunities and
possibilities for my life. She can honestly say that she has made this
vision a reality by moving to a new city, building an online business
related to personal development and helping others, going on several
amazing trips, and nurturing her relationships, health, and freedom. Our
recommendation is to write down what you want and then revise it along
the way whenever you recognize something you do/don't want in your life.
Finally, post this vision where you can see it every day.

Step 2: Revisit your current life. If you feel yourself focusing too
much on what you don't like about your life, then take a look at your
current life to see how much of it matches the vision from the previous
exercise. You want to maintain those things, and remind yourself that
part of your

vision is already happening for you...right now! Write a list of
everything in your work that you do enjoy or view as positive---whether
it's the comfy desk chair or the client you really like. Write the same
list for your personal life, including everything about your life that
is working well for you. Don't throw out the baby with the bath water
when you're seeking your passion. Sometimes we overlook positive things
in our lives when we're so focused on the negative. If you want to learn
more about this subject, then read this blog post on mindful journaling
that will help you recognize possible passions you might be overlooking
right now.

Step 3: Investigate yourself. Begin learning more about who you are,
what motivates you, and what your strengths are. Take some online
personality assessments like: The Myers Briggs Test The Keirsey
Temperament Sorter Or strengths assessment tests like Strengths Finder
2.0 or this free online strengths test Learn everything you can about
your personality type. You'll find that this information about you gives
you a sense of self-awareness that is both comforting and enlightening.

Step 4: Start reading. Set aside 10 minutes a day to read everything you
can about your interests or ideas for potential passions. Look at how
other people have translated these interests and ideas into careers.
Make notes about anything that seems interesting or relevant to you. You
should also consider taking an online course to gain more indepth
knowledge and understanding of what you're investigating as a possible
passion.

Step 5: Narrow your search. As you begin reading and researching, you
may find one or more career options that jump out at you. Deepen your
research on those topics to find out exactly what kind of training or
education is needed, who is already successful in this area, what kind
of salary you could make, and how long it would take to become
proficient in this area. Start filling in the blanks of all of the
details necessary to make this possible passion a reality for you and
the structure of your life.

Step 6: Find a mentor. Find one or two people who are doing what you
want to do, and doing it well. Reach out to them. Send them emails to
ask if you can get their advice. Make a list of questions you want to
ask.

Step 7: Brainstorm and write. Think about all of the possible action
steps you'll need to take to move the needle toward living your passion
(once you have done your research). Make one long list of actions, then
go back and prioritize and order the list. Break down each action into
the smallest possible steps.

Step 8: Take the first action. Do one concrete thing to get the ball
rolling toward your passion. Maybe it's getting your resume in order,
signing up for a training class, or making a call to someone. You may
not feel 100% sure that this first step is the right step, but you have
to take it to find out. So set a date and take it. If you get stuck,
refer back to the previous strategy on setting S.M.A.R.T. quarterly
goals. We recommend turning your pursuit of a meaningful career into a
project where you take action on a daily basis.

Step 9: Decide on a test drive.

One of the best ways to figure out if a passion really is a passion is
to test it out. Rather than making a full-on commitment to a new job or
starting a business, find a way to get hands-on experience through
volunteering, a part-time job, or even shadowing someone for a few days.
This test drive gives you real-world feedback to help you decide if
you've truly found what you love.

Step 10: Consider other people. Remember to keep those close to you
involved and in the loop. You will likely meet some resistance. Think
ahead about this possibility and how you will handle it. What is the
bottom line for you? For them? Keep the lines of communication open.

Step 11: Save money. Begin putting money aside in a savings account. You
may need this as you make your transition to something new. It might be
used for additional education or training, to get a business started, or
to sustain you financially while you get a business up and running.
Start thinking about ways you can bring in extra cash in a pinch. Even
if you transition from one full-time job to another, it's always good to
have a back-up plan.

Step 12: Plan your income. Determine your lowest acceptable yearly
income. To do this, you will need to know how you spend your money,
where you can (and are willing to) cut back, and how long you are
willing to live at this income level. You don't want to go into debt, so
this needs to be a realistic number that can sustain a basic lifestyle.
One tool that's great for monitoring your spending and staying on top of
your finances is the Mint app . Here, you can enter your billing
information, current debt, and bank accounts to get a complete picture
of your financial situation. Then you can use Mint to fully understand
how much money you need on a monthly

basis.

Step 13: Deal with your current job. Be sure to include as part of your
action steps how you will move from your current job into your new one.
Will you continue working at your old job as you start your new work?
How and when will you discuss this with your employer? Be sure to leave
on a good note and handle things professionally so you can maintain
those ties.

Step 14: Stay motivated with action. When moving from something safe and
secure to the unknown, it's natural to feel a lot of fear. Thinking,
planning, fretting, and pontificating only go so far, and they
contribute to your mental clutter. Daily, focused action will move you
forward. If you don't know what to do, just do something. Take one small
action in the direction of your dream. One of the positive outcomes of
this 14-step exercise is that you create a sense of purpose as you take
control of your life and move toward something more meaningful. In fact,
the effort of working toward your passion is sometimes as satisfying as
the outcome. Greg Johnson, author of the book Living Life on Purpose: A
Guide to Creating a Life of Success and Significance , says "Focus on
the journey, not the destination. Joy is found not in finishing an
activity but in doing it." Much of our mental distress and negative
thinking comes from feeling uncertain and out-of-control about our
lives. Once you start taking action toward finding your passion, you'll
have more and more mental clarity and peace of mind. Okay, at this
point, you've learned a number of strategies you can use to overcome
your negative thought patterns and reduce the impact of life obligations
that don't truly matter. In the next section, we'll talk about the
negative impact that some relationships have on your mental well-being,
and what to do

about them.

PART III DECLUTTERING YOUR RELATIONSHIPS

The Negative Impact of Bad Relationships Your children drive you crazy.
Your parents are too needy. Your boss is a jerk. Your spouse doesn't
understand you. Your best friend never calls. How often do you feel
irritated, frustrated, or even furious with the people in your life? The
answer to this question is important because relationship problems are a
leading cause of unhappiness that people feel in life. We replay
unpleasant conversations in our heads and stew for hours over a
perceived slight. Or we're detached from our friends and loved ones,
only to feel lonely, isolated, and unloved. We create false mental
narratives about other people, assigning to them thoughts and behaviors
that may or may not be true, but that feel hurtful and overwhelming
nonetheless. Now, it's true that you can't coexist with others without
the occasional misunderstanding. However, if you find that most
interactions leave you emotionally drained, then you should look for
ways to either improve these relationships or remove certain people from
your life. Imagine if you had no anxiety related to the people in your
life. How much less cluttered would your mind be? How much more energy
could you put toward productive, positive pursuits? Although the
important people in our lives can be the source of mental distress, our
close relationships remain one of the fundamental components in life
contributing to long-term happiness. Can Great Relationships Lead to
Happiness? One of the longest studies ever conducted on happiness is the
Harvard Study of Adult Development , previously known as the

Grant Study in Social Adjustments. Since 1937, researchers at Harvard
have been examining the question of what makes us happy by following 268
men who entered college in the late 1930s. They have followed them
through war, career, marriage and divorce, parenthood and
grandparenthood, and old age. Robert Waldinger, the psychiatrist and
Harvard Medical School professor who currently leads the study, says the
long-term research is unequivocal: "Close relationships and social
connections keep you happy and healthy. That is the bottom line. People
who were more concerned with achievement or less concerned with
connection were less happy. Basically, humans are wired for personal
connections." How is it that relationships can contribute so much to our
happiness while also being a huge source of our mental fatigue? The key
is not just having relationships---it's having high-quality
relationships. Whether with a romantic partner, friend, family member,
or even work associate, a high-quality relationship involves:
Prioritizing the relationship Open communication Healthy conflict
resolution Mutual trust and respect Shared interests Some level of
emotional and/or intellectual intimacy Acceptance and forgiveness
Physical touch (for personal relationships) It's in our best interest to
be proactive about how we choose the people in our lives and how we
choose to interact with them. Creating, maintaining, and nurturing good
relationships is necessary for our well-being and peace of mind. Rather
than looking to others to make relationship changes, the best place to
start is within you . Even if your family

members, friends, and business associates need to improve their
relationship skills, you can go a long way in reducing stress in your
life by initiating changes in you. You can't change others, anyway
---you only have the power to control how you interact with and react to
the people around you. Let's look at four ways you can improve your
relationships, which can have a direct, positive impact on your mindset.

Relationship Strategy #1: Be More Present A University of North Carolina
study of "relatively happy, nondistressed couples" revealed that couples
who actively practiced mindfulness saw improvements to their
relationship happiness. They also enjoyed healthier levels of
"relationship stress, stress coping efficacy, and overall stress." The
practice of mindfulness allows us to be present with our partners, to be
less emotionally reactive with them, and to more quickly overcome
stressful situations in the relationship. Relationship presence doesn't
just apply to romantic couples. You can practice mindfulness in all of
your relationships. What does it mean to be more present in your
relationships? Here are a few strategies you can practice:

Practice Empathic Listening Have you ever noticed that some people don't
listen closely during a conversation? For many folks, it's hard to pay
attention because our minds are full of so many thoughts. Often, when
someone is talking, our mind is more focused on the minutia of our
lives, our worries, or what we want to say next. Empathic (or active)
listening is a willingness to step outside of your distracted mind and
listen to their words in a nonjudgmental way. Empathy is the grace note
of empathic listening, as it allows the speaker to feel safe, validated,
and understood. Active listening isn't part of a conversation in the
traditional sense. There's no give and take, sharing dialogue, or
competing to talk. With empathic listening, it's all about the other
person and what they are trying to communicate---with their words, with
the words left unspoken, and with their emotions. As an empathic
listener, you must be willing to:

Allow the other person to dominate the conversation and determine the
topic discussed. Remain completely attentive to what the other person is
saying. Avoid interrupting, even when you have something important to
add. Ask open-ended questions that invite more from the speaker. Avoid
coming to premature conclusions or offering solutions. Reflect back to
the speaker what you heard them say. It may seem that empathic listening
only provides benefits for the speaker, but as the listener you are in a
state of focused awareness. When you listen empathically, it's
impossible to be stuck in looping thoughts or distracted by worry or
regret. You can start practicing empathic listening with your partner,
family members, and close friends. In your next interaction, commit to
10 minutes of active listening where you are focused solely on the other
person and what they are saying. This will bring you closer to your
loved one and also give you a break from your cluttered thoughts.

Mindful Speaking Negative thinking can have a damaging impact on the
quality of your relationships. If your language is filled with fearful
comments, self-condemnation, disparaging remarks about others, or
self-pity, you do nothing more than convince others that you are a
negative person to be around. On other hand, when you focus on fostering
positive interactions, you can strengthen the relationships you do have.
For instance, Dr.Â John Gottman discovered through his research that
there should be five times as many positive interactions between
partners as there are negative in order for a relationship to be stable
and a marriage to last . Gottman's findings can

be applied to other relationships as well. Conflict and negativity tend
to push people away. Awareness is always the first step toward change.
We recommend paying close attention to what you say during a
conversation, particularly in your love relationship. Place a mental
filter between your thoughts and words, recognizing the power your words
have on one of the most important people in your life. Resist the
temptation to simply react to someone's words or actions. Take a moment
to choose your words carefully. Speak in ways that are loving,
compassionate, and respectful, and try to use a calm, non-threatening
voice, even if the other person is agitated or angry. As you speak more
mindfully, those around you will often respond in kind. Even if they
don't, you empower yourself to maintain selfcontrol and inner peace.
Through the practice of mindful speaking, you not only improve the
quality of your relationships, but also improve the quality of your
inner world.

Loving Kindness Meditation A loving kindness meditation focuses on
developing feelings of warmth towards others. You can use a loving
kindness meditation specifically to improve your relationships with
specific people in your life in order to reduce negative thinking about
them. This kind of meditation cultivates our awareness of others as
human beings deserving of compassion and love---even when they are being
difficult---which can decrease relationship conflicts and improve your
own well-being. There are three studies that support this claim. First,
scientists from Stanford University found that meditation that focuses
on loving kindness increases people's feelings of social connectedness.
Also, according to a University of Utah study , loving kindness
meditation practice "decreased overall levels of perceived hostility,

insensitivity, interference, and ridicule from others." This special
meditation practice will not only improve your intimate relationships,
but your relationship with you as well. Finally, in a landmark study ,
researchers found that practicing seven weeks of loving kindness
meditation increased feelings of love, joy, contentment, gratitude,
pride, hope, interest, amusement, and awe. You can practice a loving
kindness meditation anywhere, but start with a short 10-minute
meditation in a quiet place without distraction. Here is a simple
process for practicing this habit: Sit in a comfortable position, either
on the floor with your legs crossed and your hands sitting loosely in
your lap, or sitting up straight in a chair with your legs uncrossed,
feet on the floor, and hands resting in your lap. Close your eyes and
take two or three deep cleansing breathes, and then begin counting each
breath, going from 1 to 10. One you are relaxed, bring to mind a person
to whom you wish to send loving kindness, and consider their positive
qualities---the light of goodness you see in them. After you focus on
their positive qualities for a few minutes, mentally say the following
statements directed to your loved one: "May you be happy," "May you be
well," "May you be loved." There is nothing wrong with altering the
words slightly to focus on the needs of the individual. There are no
hard and fast rules. You might substitute the person's name rather than
saying "you." You could also add thoughts like: May you be free from
inner and outer harm and danger. May you be safe and protected.

May you be free of mental suffering or distress. May you be free of
physical pain and suffering. May you be healthy and strong. May you be
able to live in this world happily, peacefully, joyfully, with ease. Not
only will this meditation practice improve your relationships, but it
also will increase your emotional well-being and peace of mind. How you
adapt the practice to your personal circumstances is ultimately up to
you, but it remains at its heart a deeply transformative process in your
efforts toward mental decluttering and peace of mind.

End the Comparisons to Others "Let us not look at the talents we wish we
had or pine away for the gifts that are not ours, but instead do the
best we can with what we have." -- B.J. Richardson Comparing ourselves
unfavorably to other people is one of the major causes of mental turmoil
and emotional suffering. "If only I were as attractive as my friend."
"Why can't I be as smart as my brother?" "They have so much more money
than we do." "She travels all the time, and I never get to go anywhere."
These thoughts can spiral out of control, making us feel bad about
ourselves while viewing other people as the cause of our unhappiness. By
measuring ourselves against the achievements, possessions, or traits of
everyone else, we set the stage for the disintegration of potentially
fulfilling relationships. In their work as authors and entrepreneurs,
Steve and Barrie have seen how easy it is to make comparisons with those
who have achieved more success. "I have fallen into the trap of
measuring myself against my peers," says Barrie. "It undermines my focus
on the work I'm doing, making me feel inept and envious until I

regain my footing and realize I'm on my own journey, which should be
different from those around me." Comparison fosters so many negative
feelings that it destroys more than just your peace of mind---it damages
your relationships. The more you ruminate about how you measure up, the
worse you feel about both you and the other person. Feelings of envy,
jealously, shame, guilt, embarrassment, self-loathing, resentment, and
anger are not qualities that enhance a relationship or make you
attractive to others. Gretchen Rubin, author of the New York Times #1
bestselling book The Happiness Project , says "Negative emotions like
loneliness, envy, and guilt have an important role to play in a happy
life; they're big, flashing signs that something needs to change." We
all compare ourselves from time to time, and sometimes comparing can
motivate us to improve ourselves or to achieve something that we observe
in others. But when comparison causes those "big, flashing signs" to
light up, it's time to take action. It does take mental effort to
disengage from comparing and the emotions that go along with it. But
changing your reactions to those who have "more" will free you up to
follow your own path and become the best person YOU are meant to be.
Here are three simple and short practices that can help you end the
practice of comparing yourself to others:

Practice #1: Practice radical self-acceptance. No amount of comparing,
fretting, and ruminating will change who you are, how you look, what
you've achieved, or what you own in this moment. The person you are
right now is all you've got, at least for today. Rather than resisting
this person, lean into it. Accept it, and acknowledge that you are
perfectly okay right now. Simply adopting this moment of radical
self-acceptance is liberating and empowering.

Practice #2: Change what you can. American theologian Reinhold Niebuhr
is known for writing The Serenity Prayer , in which he states: God grant
me the serenity To accept the things I cannot change; The courage to
change the things I can; And the wisdom to know the difference.
Embracing the serenity, courage, and wisdom Niebuhr prays for will give
you practical tools for tempering your longings and frustrations with
realism. Comparing yourself to others you admire can inspire you to
change for the better, to step up your game, and to improve your life.
But sometimes, no matter how hard you may try, you will never be able to
match the accomplishments of a particular person. You may never look
like your fashion model friend or become as wealthy as your millionaire
cousin. Rather than blindly longing for something you don't have, make
decisions through the filter of your inner wisdom. What can you change?
What do you want to change? Go back to your values and life priorities
to help you define your life on your own terms rather than trying to
emulate someone else who may have differing values and priorities. You
may still occasionally long for something you can't have, but do the
best you can with what you do have. Focus on your strengths and continue
to practice self-acceptance.

Practice #3: Express gratitude constantly. Comparisons blind us to all
that we already have. We become so focused on what someone else has and
how we don't measure up that we neglect to acknowledge all of the
blessings around us. It's a matter of choosing to see the glass half
full rather than half empty---and acknowledging your gratitude for the
water in the

glass. When you wake up in the morning, before you get out of bed, make
a mental list of everything good in your life and focus on each blessing
for a minute or two. Do this before you go to sleep as well. You can
reinforce feelings of gratitude by writing them in a gratitude journal.
At the end of the day, mentally review everything positive that occurred
and write it down. Take a moment to consider what your life would be
like without the people you love, your home, your health, etc. When you
consider having your blessings taken away from you, it becomes very
clear how blessed you are.

Relationship Strategy #2: Getting Unstuck from the Past We talked
earlier in the book about ruminating on the past, and how it can cause
those feelings of being mentally overwhelmed. When you think about the
past, you may notice that many of your thoughts relate to encounters
with the current people in your life. You replay conversations that were
unpleasant or hurtful. You dwell on a broken relationship or a lost
love. Maybe you reflect with longing and sadness about children who have
grown and moved out of the house, friends who have drifted away, or
siblings who seem disconnected. Perhaps you encountered relationship
pain that was so deep and wounding you have never really healed from it,
and it continues to disrupt your life and sabotage your thoughts.
Looping these memories can trigger unresolved anger, shame, guilt, fear,
and sadness. Because relationships are so integral to our lives, it's
not surprising that people from our pasts continue to cause us pain
weeks, months, or even years after an encounter or relationship has
ended. You replay these "mind movies" so often that you start to
identify with them. Dragging the past around in this way is a heavy
burden that drains you of energy and inner peace. Sometimes we replay
past situations in an unconscious attempt to resolve them, but
ruminating only keeps us stuck in the past and miserable in the present.
How can we break free from our thoughts about the past so they don't
continue to imprison us or bind us to people who should no longer be
part of our lives? Eckhart Tolle, author of The Power of Now , says "We
can learn to break the habit of accumulating and perpetuating old
emotion by flapping our wings, metaphorically speaking, and refrain from
mentally dwelling on the past, regardless of whether something happened
yesterday or 30 years ago. We can learn not to keep situations or events
alive in our minds, but to return our attention continuously to the
pristine, timeless present moment rather than

be caught up in mental movie-making." Easier said than done, right? It's
hard to just drop painful memories and push these thoughts out of our
minds. Hard...but not impossible . And certainly worth the effort if you
want to free yourself to enjoy positive, loving relationships in your
current life. If you want to be present with your family and friends
today, you can't remain stuck in your thoughts about past relationships
and old hurts. Here are some ways you can clear the clutter of negative
thoughts about the past:

Resolve what you can. If there's an unresolved problem or hurt between
you and another person, take action to resolve the situation . Rather
than stewing about the past issue, initiate communication with the other
person to talk through it, even if you feel you were "wronged." It's
hard to reach out to someone who has hurt you, but the discomfort of
doing this is far less than the slow torment of lingering on past pain.
Feelings of anger or hurt can make open dialog difficult, but learn more
about healthy communication so you can have a productive talk with the
other person. Part of resolution might include sharing your feelings and
pain, listening to the other person's perspective, offering or asking
for forgiveness, and discussing the future of the relationship. Break
the "spell" of your internal story about the past by talking about it
openly. Having a productive conversation with someone from your past
isn't always possible, but when it is, it can be the best way to release
you from feeling trapped by your memories and pain.

Challenge your story. When you mentally replay a situation over and
over, your perspective becomes the ultimate truth for you. It seems
impossible to view the situation from any other angle. You may believe
your memories and interpretation of the relationship are correct, but
the other person may have an entirely different perspective. Challenge
your own interpretation by stepping into the other person's shoes. You
can do this by answering these questions: How might they see what
happened between you? What could you have said or done that they might
have misinterpreted? Is it possible that your memories are incorrect?
Does the other person have a valid point of view? Is it possible that
things didn't occur exactly as you believe they did? When you empathize
with the other person, it removes some of the pain or anger associated
with the memory. By challenging your own beliefs and memories, you give
yourself permission to view the situation from a less negative point of
view.

Offer forgiveness. The person from your past may never apologize, but
offer forgiveness anyway. You don't have to forgive them in person, but
forgive them inside your own heart and mind. Clinging to your anger and
pain only prolongs suffering and mental distress. You forgive to set
yourself free from this suffering so you can move on to live in the
present with a clear mind. Bestselling self-improvement author Dr.Â Wayne
Dyer says, "Forgiving others is essential for spiritual growth. Your
experience of someone who has hurt you, while painful, is now nothing
more

than a thought or feeling that you carry around. These thoughts of
resentment, anger, and hatred represent slow, debilitating energies that
will dis-empower you if you continue to let these thoughts occupy space
in your head. If you could release them, you would know more peace."
Forgiving someone doesn't necessarily mean you reconcile with them. It
means you let go of resentment and anger so it doesn't further poison
you. It may be hard to forgive, especially when the offending person
hasn't accepted responsibility for their behavior. But you can begin by
recognizing this person is doing the best they know how with the skills
they possess. When you find yourself ruminating about their past
offenses, shift your thoughts away from them and to yourself.
Acknowledge your feelings without blaming the other person for them. Ask
yourself, "What have I learned from this? How can I use it to improve
myself?" As Dr.Â Dyer says, "Your life is like a play with several acts.
Some of the characters who enter have short roles to play, others, much
larger. Some are villains and others are good guys. But all of them are
necessary, otherwise they wouldn't be in the play. Embrace them all, and
move on to the next act." Offering forgiveness might require you forgive
yourself for something you said or did in a relationship. Reflect
honestly on your actions and how they might have hurt or offended the
other person. You'll likely come up with many reasons why you behaved as
you did, and perhaps have some legitimate rationalizations for your
actions. But if there is any part of your behavior that was wrong, you
must accept it and forgive yourself for it. It becomes easier to forgive
yourself when you shift your perspective about past mistakes. Rather
than beating yourself up over past relationship mistakes, try to honor
the past and see your actions as a blessing. They were part of who you
were at the time, and you needed to learn from them. Now you can move on
and forgive yourself, knowing who you want to be and how you want to
behave.

Relationship Strategy #3: Mindfulness with Your Partner The two previous
strategies we've discussed apply to any relationship in your life. But
your intimate love relationship stands apart as one that deserves
special attention. With your spouse or romantic partner, you have the
opportunity for tremendous emotional and personal growth, especially if
you view your partner as someone who is in your life to teach you
something. It's through this relationship that you can learn to be more
present and compassionate. Ironically, our love relationships tend to
present us with the biggest challenges in our lives, causing the most
"mental clutter" and distress. Practicing mindfulness in your love
relationship gives you a tool for strengthening your intimate connection
while reducing stress and angst in your life. Mindfulness expert and
Professor of Medicine Emeritus Jon Kabat-Zinn describes mindfulness as
paying attention to the present moment with intention, while letting go
of judgment. This practice might seem impossible in the heat of an
argument when you just want to lash out at your partner. But with
practice, mindfulness increases our awareness of what we are
experiencing with our partners, and allows us the space to determine how
we want to act (and react) with them. When you're able to bypass
emotional reactions with your spouse or partner, you feel more centered,
calm, and capable of resolving issues in a loving manner. This ability
alone can save you from days and even years of mental and emotional
distress that depletes your emotional energy. "Mindfulness isn't about
denying or burying our emotions," says psychologist and author Dr.Â Lisa
Firestone in an article for Psychology Today . "It's simply about
cultivating a different relationship to our feelings and experiences, in
which we are in the driver's seat. We can see our feelings and thoughts
like a passing

train roaring through the station, but we alone choose if we want to get
on board." Choosing not to get on board is the beginning of a conscious
relationship that promotes healing and intimacy rather than discord and
divisiveness. Here are some simple actions you can take to become more
present in your marriage or love relationship:

Make the commitment. With the awareness that mindfulness will improve
the quality of your connection with your partner, commit yourself to
practicing this habit on a daily basis. If you've spent years in an
unconscious relationship in which you and your partner are reactive, it
will take some time to retrain yourself to interact differently. But if
you're motivated to grow in your relationship and reduce stress in your
life, you can change. This is the most important relationship in your
life, and it impacts your mental health and your outlook on everything.
Commit to this one practice in your relationship, and you'll see an
improvement in all areas of your life. Put a note in a place you will
see it first thing in the morning to remind you to be present with your
spouse when you interact. You may need reminders in several places in
the house when you begin this practice.

Communicate your commitment. Your decision to be more mindful with your
partner isn't predicated by your partner's mutual commitment---but it
certainly helps. Sit down with your spouse when you can talk without
interruption and let him or her know about your new plan. You might say
something like, "I've decided I want to be more present and
compassionate in my relationship with you. It will make us closer and
will help us resolve our differences without as much anger or

hurt. I've made a commitment to this, and I'd like it if you'd commit to
it as well." Your spouse may wonder exactly what this means, and this
leads to the other actions in this chapter that you can practice.

Be emotionally present. Being emotionally present means being fully
attuned to your partner in conversation. If your partner is in pain, it
means remaining emotionally open to the pain, and showing empathy. It
also means paying attention to your partner's body language and
reflecting it back, as well as using eye contact, gentle touch, and
nodding to show you hear your partner. It generally doesn't mean
offering suggestions or ways to "fix" a situation unless your partner
asks for that. In fact, we block our innate ability for emotional
presence when we try to do something "more" for our partner. Attuned
presence allows your partner to feel less alone with his or her
feelings. This kind of emotional resonance with your spouse leads to
more intimacy, trust, and security in your relationship.

Listen without defensiveness. When you and your partner have a conflict
or emotionally charged conversation, presence means you listen without
preparing your response or defense. Be aware of your own reactive
emotions, name them, and recognize that they have been triggered, but
don't act on them. Try to pull your attention back to your partner's
words, and acknowledge that your partner's feelings are as important as
your own.

Reflect back to your partner. The willingness to reflect back to your
partner the words you hear from them shows that you are actively
listening. It also reinforces for your spouse that you care enough to
seek to fully understand

what that are saying to you. Reflecting back isn't simply parroting what
your partner says. It's a way of confirming that what you heard is
actually what your partner meant. It opens dialog for clarification and
invites discussion about mutual resolution and understanding. This is a
highly valuable mindfulness technique during times of conflict, hurt
feelings, or misunderstandings.

Communicate authentically. Being present with your partner is a mature
relationship skill. It means you can't respond or react in childlike
ways, using passiveaggressive words or behaviors like eye rolling, the
silent treatment, or sulking. Throwing tantrums or having angry
outbursts always prevents open, authentic communication. When you have
an issue with your spouse, rather than taking a jab at them or making a
disparaging comment, turn back to the practice of mindfulness. Pay
attention to your emotions and wait until you are calm and less
defensive before initiating a conversation. Share the issue without
blame or criticism. State your perception of the issue, how it made you
feel, and what you need from your partner in order to restore your
connection. Listen to your partner's response and perspective without
defensiveness.

Look for lessons within conflict. We mentioned earlier that your love
relationship is the laboratory for personal growth if you pay attention.
Conflict is uncomfortable and unpleasant, but it provides the perfect
opportunity for learning. Rather than stewing in your angry juices after
a conflict, ask yourself these questions: Is it possible that I'm not
entirely right? Is my partner's perspective valid to some extent?

Am I being the person I want to be with my partner? What have I learned
from this conflict? What is the deeper issue triggering my reactions?
How are my wounded feelings getting in the way of my growth? How do I
want to change as a result of this interaction? Your answers to these
questions will foster healing and selfawareness, and allow you to break
free from the inner critic who keeps you agitated and angry.

Spend quality time with your partner without distraction. One of the
most valuable things you can do for the health of your relationship is
to spend quality time with your partner. This is time when you are both
relaxed and engaged without the pressures of work, children, or
conflict. Busy couples often have to schedule this time because life is
so hectic and demanding. If that's the case for you, make a point to
arrange a regular date or even 30 minutes of daily quiet time with your
spouse where you can talk and reconnect. The more emotional intimacy you
share with your partner, the more you insulate your relationship from
the conflicts that create suffering for you both. Putting in this effort
is an investment in your peace of mind and mental clarity.

Relationship Strategy #4: Let Go of Certain People Decluttering your
relationships sometimes means just that--- letting go of people who
cause you suffering. Sometimes the only course of action is to say
goodbye to those who continue to undermine your mental and emotional
health. Letting go of a relationship is painful, even if it's draining
you, holding you back, blinding you to your true self, or, worse yet,
toxic or abusive. We invest a lot in our friendships, our marriages, our
business partners, and our family members. Quite often, it's one of
these close relationships---a person or people with whom we've been
intimately and deeply involved for many years---that cause us the most
pain and turmoil. At some point in one of these relationships, you will
reach the point where the pain and difficulty outweigh the
positives---where the fallout of letting go seems less daunting than the
misery of staying put. For instance, one of the hardest things Steve
ever had to do was to cut off all communication with an ex-girlfriend.
After an extremely frustrating yearlong relationship, he felt that there
was no way he could have her in his life---even as a friend. Their
interaction was just too toxic for both people to find any happiness
around one another. So he made the decision to "force" a permanent
separation by going to Europe and spending eight months traveling
without any access to a cell phone. While it was challenging, Steve knew
that the only way to move on was to create a "cold turkey" situation
where it would be almost impossible for the two of them to have any sort
of conversation. Now, you don't have leave your country in order to
escape from a bad relationship, but you might want to consider taking a

proactive approach to eliminate certain people from your life---and make
sure you stick to this plan. We'll admit it's not easy to make this
final decision. But, there are some universal themes of discord in any
kind of relationship that reveal it's time to say goodbye. These
include: Verbal, emotional, or physical abuse Consistent dishonesty,
disloyalty, or deceit Divergent core values or questionable integrity
General toxicity, negativity, and incompatibility Consistent, harmful
irresponsibility Ongoing immaturity and emotional manipulation
Unresolved or untreated mental health issues Addictions (drugs, alcohol,
sex, gambling, pornography) Refusal to communicate, address problems, or
invest in the relationship Beyond these more serious situations,
sometimes a relationship simply runs its course. You may find, for
reasons you don't completely understand, that another person diminishes
your life more than enlivens it. You may come to a point where you
simply don't wish to deal with the emotional clutter and chaos another
person creates in your life. If the person causing your suffering
happens to be your spouse, a parent or family member, or an adult child,
you can't just abandon the relationship without serious repercussions.
But you can better manage these relationships and protect your mental
health by creating strong boundaries and communicating your boundaries
to the person involved. You can learn more about creating relationship
boundaries in this post on Barrie's blog, Live Bold and Bloom . If you
have difficult parents and extended family members who are causing you
angst, you can learn how to deal with them in this article ; or, if your
marriage is unhappy and you're considering

divorce, you might want to check out this post. Of course, managing or
letting go of any relationship is not a quick proposition. It can take
months or years and a lot of heartache to detach from someone who has
been a part of your life in any significant way. But we would be remiss
if we didn't include this point as part of your mental declutter
options. Here are some thoughts on how to remove yourself from a
draining or painful relationship:

Consider the positives of life without this person. Letting go of a
relationship might feel like you're giving up or being unkind. You might
feel guilty if you step away from this person. But if the relationship
is causing you regular discomfort, you are not treating yourself with
respect. If you're having trouble deciding whether or not to end (or
contain) the relationship, think about how your life would feel if you
didn't have this person around you. Would you feel relieved? Liberated?
Less anxious or stressed? Ask yourself how your life might change for
the better if you didn't have to cope with the problems and concerns
associated with your interactions with this person. Your judgment might
be clouded by your feelings of guilt or obligation, but try to honestly
weigh the positives of letting go.

Consider the fallout of saying goodbye. Ending a relationship rarely
occurs without some fallout. Your decision will likely impact other
people close to you, forcing them to choose sides or at least take some
kind of stand---which might not be in your favor. Some people might cut
you off as a result. The person you are saying goodbye to may try to
sabotage you, talk behind your back, or wound you in some way. Their
reaction may be more dramatic or damaging than you anticipated, causing
things to get worse before they get better. You might find the loss of
the relationship more painful than you thought it would be, and

you second-guess yourself. It's valuable to think through all of the
possible repercussions before you end the relationship. How will each of
these scenarios make your feel? Can you handle the fallout, or do you
find it more damaging than maintaining a draining relationship?

Define what "goodbye" really means. Letting go might mean a permanent
end to a relationship where there is no communication or interaction at
all. But this isn't possible or reasonable for all relationships.
Goodbye might also mean letting go of the old way of relating to this
person and implementing a new, more self-protective way. Relationships
you have with family members, adult children, or a former spouse can't
always be cut off entirely. But you can create boundaries around the
time spent with these people and how you communicate with them in order
to protect your mental and emotional health. Decide what "goodbye" means
for you exactly. How much time are you willing to spend with this
person? How do you wish to communicate with them, and how often? What
will you no longer tolerate in your interactions with them? Being
proactive about these decisions makes you feel more in control and calm
about how to move forward.

Communicate your intentions without blame. Simply dropping a friend or
family member cold turkey, with no explanation or conversation, might be
the easy way out---but it isn't the kindest way. Yes, this person might
be draining every last drop of energy and joy out of you, but they are
still deserving of an explanation, or at least a head's up. You don't
need to get into a long, drawn-out conflict in order to say goodbye or
cut back on your interactions. Nor do you need to assign blame or cast
aspersions. Try to take the high road and say what you would want to
hear if the shoe were on the other foot.

Person-to-person conversations are generally the best way to have this
talk, but you know this person best. If you anticipate a lot of drama or
anger, then maybe a letter or phone call is better than meeting in
person. Either way, try to keep it short and focus on your own feelings
rather than their faults . You might say something like, "I need a break
from our friendship because I feel like we are out of sync, and it's
causing me distress. I care about you, but I need to step away. I didn't
want to back off without saying something first."

Create a plan for a negative reaction. No matter how kindly you end a
relationship, the other person (and perhaps others you are both
associated with) will react badly. It's hard to anticipate how someone
might react when they are hurt or angry. Try to prepare for this
potential fallout in advance. This might mean you ask a support person
to be with you when you communicate your intentions, as well as after
the difficult conversation. You might need to talk personally about your
plan to end this relationship with friends and family who know the other
person. Try to explain your need to end the relationship without
badmouthing the other person if possible. Depending on the intensity and
longevity of the relationship you are ending, you might need the help of
a therapist so you can navigate your own feelings of loss and pain.

Accept that it can be a process. For some relationships, letting go is a
slow backing away over time. Or it might be an ending followed by a
period of reconciliation, only to result in a more permanent ending.
Sometimes guilt, confusion, or loneliness can make you secondguess your
decision to let go. It takes going back to the relationship to cement
your determination to finally end it.

Recognize that letting go of someone who was once close to you is rarely
easy or pain-free. Give yourself permission to do it slowly if that's
the best way for you.

Allow yourself to grieve. The ending of a relationship that was once
close or that you hoped would someday work out is painful. Yes, you may
feel relief that you don't have to deal with the difficult aspects of
the relationship. You may have more emotional energy and fewer daily
frustrations. However, grief has a way of sneaking up on us when we
least expect it. Any process of letting go can create a pocket of grief
that needs time to heal. Don't try to talk yourself out of your grief or
second-guess your decision because your grief is confusing. If you view
grief as a normal part of the process of letting go, it will pass
through you more quickly, allowing you to regain the peace of mind and
joy that was diminished during the relationship. As you can see,
eliminating people from your life can be challenging, but also rewarding
because it frees you up to spend time with the people who truly matter.
In the next section, we'll go over the fourth area that you can
declutter in order to reduce stress, anxiety, and a feeling overwhelming
your life. Let's get to it....

PART IV DECLUTTERING YOUR SURROUNDINGS

The Value of Decluttering Your Surroundings "If people concentrated on
the really important things in life, there'd be a shortage of fishing
poles." -- Doug Larson Where you choose to spend time every day
ultimately determines the quality of your life. We know that's an
obvious statement, but many people fail to analyze what they do on a
moment-tomoment, day-by-day basis. In fact, we tend to allow
happenstance, boredom, or other people to determine how we spend a lot
of our time. We react to what's in front of us, instead of mindfully
deciding how we want to create our lives. We talked earlier about
defining your values, life priorities, goals, and life passion. These
actions help you direct the daily activities of your life. But you can't
focus on these big-picture actions all day, every day. That's because
the bulk of your time is often filled with mindless tasks that
contribute to feelings of overwhelm, emptiness, and mental clutter.
We've become attached to things, routines, and environments. We allow
our homes to become repositories for every new whim as we accumulate
more and more stuff over the years. We're obsessed with technology and
spend hours on social media, taking and sharing "selfies," and
documenting the minutiae of our lives. So to get the full benefit of
mental decluttering your life, you need to address the more mundane but
potentially depleting aspects of daily life. These mindless activities
are the small holes in the dam that allow your energy and joy to seep
out. With a few changes, you can plug the holes and refill your tank. In
this section, we'll tackle the final step of the process---how to
declutter your immediate surroundings in order to free up mental space
for the important goals and people in your life.

Simplify Your Home "Have nothing in your house that you do not know to
be useful, or believe to be beautiful." -- William Morris Your home
should be a haven---a place where you feel peaceful, happy, and calm.
But can you feel this way when your home is cluttered with stuff?
Researchers at the Princeton University Neuroscience Institute published
the results of a study they conducted in The Journal of Neuroscience
that relates directly to uncluttered and organized living. According to
their report, "Interactions of Top-Down and Bottom-Up Mechanisms in
Human Visual Cortex": Multiple stimuli present in the visual field at
the same time compete for neural representation by mutually suppressing
their evoked activity throughout visual cortex, providing a neural
correlate for the limited processing capacity of the visual system. In
other word, when your environment is cluttered, the visual chaos
restricts your ability to focus. The clutter also limits your brain's
ability to process information. Clutter distracts you so you're unable
to process information as well as you would in an uncluttered,
organized, and serene environment. For a moment, visualize a room with
minimal furniture, free of clutter and extraneous knick-knacks. The room
is tidy, organized, and minimal. See yourself sitting in this room and
notice how you feel. Now visualize a room packed with furniture,
magazines and books stacked on the tables, and every surface adorned
with clutter and stuff. How do you feel sitting in this room? Clutter
steals your focus, making you feel overwhelmed,

distracted, and agitated. Your brain is so busy trying to process all of
the visual stimuli that you can't fully enjoy the moment. Now maybe you
feel sentimental about many of the objects in your home. But we invite
you to embrace a new mindset about physical clutter and how it impacts
your mental health. Decluttering your home might be a process that takes
several iterations before you feel comfortable saying goodbye to things.
But by simply starting the process, you'll be surprised at the positive
impact it has on your energy and state of mind. Steve and Barrie have
written about how to declutter your home in their book 10-Minute
Declutter: The Stress Free Habit for Simplifying Your Home , where
you'll find detailed ideas on decluttering and organizing every room in
your house. You can declutter your home in less time than you
think---and without feeling completely overwhelmed---when you tackle it
in small chunks of time every day. Set aside just 10 minutes a day to
work on your clutter, and within a few weeks your house will be in
order. Here is a 10-step process from the book to help you get started:

1.  Set up a staging area. You'll need a place to temporarily stage all
    of the items you want to store elsewhere or give away. Find a room
    or space in your house where you can place these things until you're
    ready to deal with them. You may decide to create a staging area in
    each room you're working on rather than one main area. This works
    just fine as well, as long as you don't mind having a pile of stuff
    sitting in a corner of the room.

2.  Get boxes for the staging area. You'll need boxes in varying sizes
    for staging items to donate, give to other people, sell, or put into
    storage. Use inexpensive cardboard boxes for staging purposes.
    Later, you can purchase more durable storage containers for any
    items you want to store.

3. Have a timer, notebook, and pen handy. Since you'll be working in
10-minute increments, set a timer so you'll know when to stop. You'll be
surprised at how much you can accomplish in 10 minutes. Also, keep a
notebook and pen with you as you declutter and organize. You'll want to
make notes on organizing supplies you may need to purchase or ideas you
have for storage, donation, or selling items.

4.  Set up a schedule. Setting up a 10-minute declutter schedule means
    you're adding a new habit to your day, which can be hard. Creating
    habits requires a few special skills to make sure you don't give up.
    Choose the time of day you want to perform your declutter habit.
    Make sure it immediately follows a previously established habit like
    having your coffee in the morning or brushing your teeth. This
    trigger will cue you to perform your declutter habit. Then reward
    yourself after you perform your new habit. For more on this, check
    out Steve's article on how to build a habit in eight steps .

5.  Begin where you spend most of your time. If you're confused about
    where to start your decluttering and organizing project, we suggest
    you begin where you spend the most time. For most people, that would
    be the kitchen, bedrooms, and family room. When you complete a room
    you use a lot, you'll get a great feeling of satisfaction, as well
    as a boost of emotional energy and peace of mind.

6.  Determine your system. In order to keep your work to 10 minutes a
    day, consider moving through spaces top to bottom, left to right.
    For example, in your kitchen, begin with the top shelves of cabinets
    and declutter/clean the shelves on the left side first, then move to
    the right. Remove everything from the left side shelves, then
    quickly sort

what you know you want to put back onto the shelves. Wipe the shelf
clean, and then replace the items you want to keep. Put the remaining
items in the appropriate boxes to give away, sell, donate, or store
elsewhere. With drawers, do the same---dump everything out, sort the
absolute keepers, wipe out the drawer, replace the keepers, and put the
rest in the appropriate boxes.

7.  Avoid indecision. One reason people have a hard time decluttering is
    because they can't decide whether or not to let something go. There
    are a million and one reasons for this confusion, but you need to
    deal with indecision in the moment to successfully declutter. That's
    why we suggest you put only the absolute keepers back in the spaces
    you've decluttered. Get rid of anything you know for sure you don't
    want or need. Anything you feel slightly ambivalent about or rarely
    use, put into a storage box to deal with later. Label the box, seal
    it up, and put it into a storage room.

8.  Work quickly. Have you noticed how easy it's to get distracted when
    you're cleaning and organizing? You pick something up, look at it,
    think about it, wonder what to do with it. With the 10-minute
    system, you've created a sense of urgency for yourself. You're
    trying to accomplish a task in a short amount of time. That's why
    it's so important to replace only the items you know you need. You
    can deal with the other questionable items later. You may discover
    you don't need them at all after living without them in sight for a
    while.

9.  Tell your family. Be sure you inform those who live in the house
    with you that you are working on this declutter project. Better yet,
    ask for their support and help to complete the project even more
    quickly. At the very least, you want to be sure they don't come
    behind you and reclutter the spaces you've completed. If you have
    kids, it's great to

get them involved in 10-minute cleanup projects. They'll enjoy racing
against the clock to complete a task.

10. Enjoy the process. Even the smallest accomplishments afford a great
    sense of satisfaction and pride. Every day, you'll complete a small
    task that will lead to a streamlined, organized, tidy home. But
    rather than seeing these daily tasks as simply a means to that end,
    try to enjoy each 10-minute chunk of time. Put on some music and
    make it fun. Give yourself a nice reward once you complete the
    task---a cup of tea, reading for a few minutes, or a walk outside.
    Marie Kondo, author of the book The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying
    Up , says "The space in which we live should be for the person we
    are becoming now, not for the person we were in the past." If you
    have a strong attachment to the past, whether through your thinking
    or your clutter, you cause yourself suffering. Let go. Release the
    physical objects that weigh you down. Focus your mind and your daily
    life on the present, and you'll feel liberated and unencumbered.

Simplify Your Digital Life There's a lot of good that's come from the
explosion of technology and digital communication. It has definitely
made our lives easier, faster, and more productive. But there is a
diminishing point of return with our devotion to digital devices. We've
become obsessed with technology, and it's impacting every aspect of how
we live our lives. We are slaves to the gadgets that were supposed to
simplify our lives, and prefer the quick fix of instant information and
low-quality entertainment over realworld interactions and experiences.
We spend hours on social media. Our inboxes are flooded. Our desktops
are littered. Our laptops are bursting at the seams with more documents,
photos, and downloads than we can absorb in a lifetime. Digital "stuff"
has an insidious way of occupying your time with nonessential
activities---and just like physical clutter in your home, digital
clutter creates feelings of anxiety, agitation, and overwhelm. In the
book 10-Minute Digital Declutter: The Simple Habit to Eliminate
Technology Overload , Barrie and Steve remind: If you add up the time
spent on each digital device, every day, then you probably have a closer
relationship with the virtual world than you have with your spouse,
children, or friends. You know there's something wrong with this
balance, and yet you still find yourself flipping open the lid or gazing
at your iPhone whenever you have a moment to spare ---or even when you
don't. Is this really how you want to live your life? From this book, we
recommend a few actions to consider to support your mental declutter
habits.

How are you spending your digital time? Take a realistic look at how you
spend your time on your devices.

Of course there are necessary online activities for your personal and
professional life. But then there are the hours you spend plugged in
just surfing the net, playing games, and checking in on social media.
Spend a few minutes reviewing your day and add up the nonessential time
you spent plugged in. Better yet, document your digital activities
throughout the day. You'll be surprised at how much time you give away
to virtual experiences. All of this digital input creates agitation and
has an addictive quality that pulls you away from more meaningful
pursuits that energize you rather than depleting you. Where and how can
you begin cutting back? Start with an hour a day that you hold sacred
and free from any digital time. Shut down your computer and put your
phone into a drawer. What can you do instead of engaging in digital
distractions? We suggest you... Read a book Talk a long walk Exercise
Talk with a friend Spend quality time with your spouse and children Do
something creative, like writing or drawing Learn a new skill Meditate
Listen to music Ride your bike Finish a project Do something that is
real, in-the-moment, and positive so that you avoid both the depletion
of digital immersion and the secondary

feelings of guilt and anxiety that often accompany too much time plugged
in.

How cluttered have your devices become? Digital clutter sneaks up on you
because it's not as visible as the clutter in your home. Before you know
it, your desktop is littered with icons, your email inbox is
overflowing, and your files and documents are so disorganized you need a
search party to help you find anything. If you're like us, your life
hinges on the contents of your computer. That may sound dramatic, but if
you keep all of your important personal and professional documents and
files on your computer, then you know how critical this piece of
equipment is to your daily life. It's so easy to allow our computer
lives to become the digital equivalent of Hoarders . Trying to locate
documents and emails wastes your time and causes daily frustration and
anxiety. Your smartphone is just another mini-computer you drag around
with you in your pocket or purse. It's another place for you to horde
digital "stuff" that drags you down with excess apps, photos, newsfeeds,
and games. If your devices are bursting at the seams, you feel the
weight of that excess whether or not you're aware of it. If you take 10
minutes a day to begin chipping away at the clutter, you'll begin to
feel increasingly lighter and unfettered. We suggest you begin where
you'll reap the greatest rewards from decluttering your devices. If you
are frustrated daily because you can't find a document you need, begin
there. If you have heart palpitations every time you see thousands of
emails in your inbox, that's the place to start. The key is to just
start.

What is your digital mindset? It's not news to you that your digital
devices (or rather the content on them) cause you mental distress and
agitation. None of us like

to admit it, but we all know how pervasive the digital world has become
in our daily lives. This is not a passing fad that will extinguish over
time. It's here to stay, and in all likelihood it will become
increasingly prevalent with every passing year. It's up to you to decide
how to manage the digital intrusion on your life and the impact on your
mental health. It's important to be proactive in your values and choices
related to your digital life. By developing a digital "value system,"
you create personal boundaries that help you manage your time and
clutter (both mental and digital). Here are some questions to ask
yourself that can be used to create digital boundaries: How much time
each day is absolutely necessary for me to spend on my devices for my
job? Am I in a job that requires me to spend more time than I want
behind my computer? How could I interact face-to-face with people in my
work more often? How much time do I want to spend on my home computer
doing work? How much time do I want to spend on social media for
entertainment? How much time do I want to spend on my smartphone for
entertainment? In what situations is a phone call or personal meeting
more appropriate than a text? What real-life friendships have I
neglected, and how do I want to nurture them? What family or
relationship agreements should we have in place about using our
smartphones, iPads, or laptops in each other's presence?

What traditions or family time (like dinners together) do you want to
make sacred and personal, without the presence of digital devices? What
limitations or rules should we have for our children's use of digital
devices? How should I be a role model to my children related to these
rules? When I have downtime, what are the top five best ways I should
use it? How can I deal with the urges to "surf the net" or engage in
social media when I really don't want to? How will I commit to managing
my digital clutter so it doesn't get out of hand? Use your answers to
these questions to write down your values and personal commitments
related to how you spend your time and energy on and off your devices.
You may "fall off the wagon" from time to time, but now you have a wagon
to climb back onto!

Simplify Your Activities "Don't underestimate the value of Doing
Nothing, of just going along, listening to all the things you can't
hear, and not bothering." -- Winnie the Pooh How many times have you
replied to the question, "How are you?" by answering, "I am so busy.
Life is crazy right now?" When was the last time you or someone you know
answered the "How are you?" questions with, "Life is great. I'm really
relaxed and doing absolutely nothing." Everyone is in a hurry---doing,
doing, doing. But to what end? Why are we filling our "to do" lists so
we can hurry up and enjoy the leisure time that never seems to
materialize? We feel guilty if our hours aren't packed with "productive"
activities that are either income-producing or ego-enlarging. Doing
nothing for any extended period feels like failing, even as we continue
to develop time-saving technology, gadgets, and devices. The time we
gain is quickly sucked up to quell the anxiety created by not enough to
do. According to a 2014 article in The Economist , "Individualistic
cultures, which emphasize achievement over affiliation, help cultivate
this time-is-money mindset. This creates an urgency to make every moment
count, notes Harry Triandis, a social psychologist at the University of
Illinois." Do you find yourself running around like a chicken,
mindlessly checking items off your list so you feel productive and
worthy? Sometimes our schedules take over our lives, and we don't give
much thought to whether or not we are spending our time in ways that
contribute to the mental clutter and stress that is so debilitating.

We get trapped on the treadmill of tasks and obligations, leaving little
time for those things that allow us to be present and fully engaged.
Omid Safi, Director of Duke University's Islamic Studies Center, in an
article for On Being with Krista Tippet , says: What happened to a world
in which we can sit with the people we love so much and have slow
conversations about the state of our heart and soul, conversations that
slowly unfold, conversations with pregnant pauses and silences that we
are in no rush to fill? How did we create a world in which we have more
and more and more to do with less time for leisure, less time for
reflection, less time for community, less time to just...be? There's no
doubting the fact that it's hard to break free from the busyness trap.
We've been brainwashed to believe that "idleness is the root of all
evil." We're not suggesting that working hard, being productive, and
having an active life are bad things. To the contrary, they can
contribute to a fulfilling, happy life. But there is a diminishing point
of return that creates the opposite effect, making you feel depleted and
overwhelmed. Cutting back and expunging non-essential activities can
feel uncomfortable, and even threatening at first. If I cut back, what
will people think? Will I lose income? Will I appear lazy? Will my kids
get behind? Will my world fall apart? The first step in cutting back is
embracing it as a worthy endeavor ---acknowledging that busyness is
contributing to your mental clutter and accepting that less really can
be more. Here are eight strategies to declutter your schedule so you can
enjoy more of what's truly important:

Strategy #1. Prioritize your daily priorities. Rather than trying to
"fit in" your life priorities around your busy schedule, create space
for your priorities first. For example, if spending time with your
spouse or kids is a priority, then commit

to the time you'll spend with them every day. Don't allow that time to
be violated without good reasons that you define in advance. Before you
allow a priority to be dislodged for something "really important," take
a deep breath and think about it. Does "something important" take
precedence over your life priorities?

Strategy #2. Purge your commitments. Write down all of your personal and
professional commitments and tasks for the next week (or month, if you
know them). Review the list to see if there are any you can simply drop
without serious consequence. Then review the list again to see what you
might be able to delegate, delay, or shorten. If you keep something on
the list because you feel guilty, obligated, or uncomfortable, test
letting go of it anyway to see what happens. You might discover that you
feel liberated, and that the repercussions you feared don't come to
pass.

Strategy #3. Focus on three important daily goals. Rather than trying to
accomplish a laundry list of projects and tasks during your day, narrow
it down to just three goals. Give yourself permission to do less, but
with more intention, time, and focus. You can certainly tackle more if
you accomplish your three daily goals, but having just three set in
place gives you a sense of control, inner peace, and accomplishment
without the feeling of overwhelm and urgency.

Strategy #4. Build in sacred time. Give yourself time during the day to
do absolutely nothing. Sit in a chair and stare out the window, or walk
outside and listen to the birds. You don't have to meditate, breathe,
plan, ruminate, or "do" anything. Just be. Try this for five minutes a
few times a day. Eventually you may feel comfortable "just being" for an
hour or more a day.

Strategy #5. Re-examine your children's schedule. Parents today aren't
as willing as the previous generation of parents to allow their children
to have unstructured free time. Kids are over-scheduled with multiple
extracurricular activities and pre-planned play dates. Couple this with
a much heavier homework load and the enticements of the virtual world,
and it's a wonder children spend any time at all in creative play,
hanging out with family, or alone with their own imaginations.
Children---especially young children---require plenty of free time for
their emotional health and mental development. As with adults, children
can suffer from anxiety, depression, and other issues when they feel
overwhelmed. Dorothy Sluss, associate professor of elementary and early
childhood education at James Madison University and president of the
U.S. chapter of the International Play Association, says that for every
week of intensive scheduled activity or sleepaway camp, children need
three weeks of less-structured time. Parents suffer as well from
over-scheduling their kids. Spending hours in the car shuffling children
from one activity to another is exhausting. Planning various activities
for multiple children can have a severe negative impact on your mental
energy. The anxiety created by hoping your child excels at t-ball or
makes the traveling cheerleading squad only adds to the mental clutter
in your life. It's hard to make the decision to cut back on your child's
extracurricular activities, especially in a culture that idolizes
competition for even the youngest. But you'll do your child and yourself
a favor by finding balance between enrichment activities and complete
down time.

Strategy #6. Leave work on time. According to a recent article in the
Los Angeles Times , Americans "put in more hours at our jobs than any
people in the industrialized world, except Koreans. We take far fewer
days of vacation than Europeans. In the last several years, many among
us have seen our workload double while our incomes have stayed

flat." But the article goes on the say, "Numerous studies have indicated
that people who put in too many hours at their jobs, either by choice or
by requirement, become inefficient. With rare exceptions, they burn out
and lose their creative edge." If you are putting in more hours than are
required by your job, or you find you're sacrificing other life
priorities because of the time you spend working, then you might want to
reevaluate your work hours. This is especially important if you're an
entrepreneur or work from home as Steve and Barrie do. Even if you feel
passionate about your work, being overwhelmed can still create emotional
health problems if you're not balancing it with rest, relationships, and
other relaxing activities. If you work excessive hours, try gradually
cutting back, starting with one day a week. Leave work on time, or, if
you work from home, turn off your computer at 5:00 pm and commit to
leaving it off for the night.

Strategy #7. Take a digital sabbatical. We've already discussed how
excessive digital activities can lead to mental agitation. Even when
we're not using our smartphones or laptops, they are always hovering
nearby, calling to us to check in on work and see what's happening on
Facebook, or luring us to play the latest game app. Although our parents
had plenty of distractions, they didn't have the constant
take-your-phone-to-the-bathroom habits we experience today with our
devices. It's become more the exception than the norm to see someone
walking down the street without a cell phone stuck to their ear or in
their hands texting. It may make you hyperventilate to consider this
idea, but one of the best ways to gain mental clarity in your life is to
frequently take "digital sabbaticals" where you have no access to your
cell phone, tablet, computer, or any device that connects you to the
Internet.

Start with just one full day or a weekend, or consider using your
vacation time as a digital detox where you simply relax and spend time
with real people doing real-world activities. If you find that it helps
you feel less stressed, then schedule these retreats into your life on a
regular basis.

Strategy #8. Harness the power of flow and focus. Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi (pronounced Me-high Cheek-sent-mehigh) is a Hungarian
psychologist and pioneer in the work on understanding happiness,
creativity, human fulfillment, and the notion of "flow"---a term he
coined to describe a state of experience involving heightened focus and
immersion in activities such as art, play, and work. He's the author of
the bestselling book Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience .
Cziksentmihalyi defines flow as "a state in which people are so involved
in an activity that nothing else seems to matter; the experience is so
enjoyable that people will continue to do it even at great cost, for the
sheer sake of doing it." During a "flow" state, a person is completely
absorbed in an activity, especially one that involves creative
abilities. During this activity, they feel "strong, alert, in effortless
control, unselfconscious, and at the peak of their abilities." They are
highly focused and undistracted. Relaxation time spent alone or with
family and friends is an excellent antidote to mental clutter, but time
spent in the flow state takes it to another level. The flow state can be
equated to a meditative state during which you and the activity are one,
and your actions feel effortless. Your mind becomes so absorbed in the
activity that you feel transported and almost forget yourself because
you are so immersed in the present moment. The flow state, according to
Csikszentmihalyi, is the "optimal experience," and the source of our
greatest happiness and fulfillment. He identifies various elements
involved in achieving flow, which include:

There are clear goals every step of the way. There is immediate feedback
to one's actions. There is a balance between challenges and skills.
Action and awareness are merged. Distractions are excluded from
consciousness. There is no worry of failure. Self-consciousness
disappears. The sense of time becomes distorted. The activity becomes an
end in itself. You can achieve flow state by doing the following:

Find a challenge. Choose an activity that you enjoy doing and find
somewhat challenging. It can be anything, whether it's playing the
violin, writing your book, doing yoga, playing golf, or focusing on a
work project. An activity with a clear set of rules or defined goals
makes the challenge better because you can act without questioning what
should be done, or how.

Develop your skills. In order to be able to meet the challenge, you have
to develop your skills and become proficient. If the activity is too
easy, you'll grow bored quickly, and your mind will wander, preventing
you from achieving the flow state. However, if it's too hard, you'll be
overwhelmed and you won't be able to achieve that subconscious
competence that is necessary for the flow state.

Set clear goals. You need to be very clear on what you want to achieve
with your activity and how you'll know if you're succeeding. For
example, you might say, "I'm going to write a chapter in my book. I'll
know that I'm succeeding if I define what the chapter will be about,

outline the key points I want to make, research the facts I need to
include, and know how I'll structure the material."

Focus intently on the task at hand. In order to maintain a flow state,
you'll need to eliminate all other distractions. You don't want anything
to pull your attention away from the task or disrupt the state you're
in. Once your concentration is broken, you have to rebuild the flow
state.

Set aside enough time. It will take you at least 15 minutes to begin to
get into the flow state, and a while longer after that until you feel
fully present and immersed in the activity. Once you enter the flow
state, you want to have plenty of time to complete your goals and reach
the "peak experience."

Monitor your emotional state. If you're having trouble entering the flow
state, monitor your emotions. If you're in an aroused state of anxiety,
try a calming exercise like breathing or meditation. If your energy
level is low and you're feeling sluggish, do something to invigorate
you, such as exercise, eating a healthy snack, or calling a friend. Then
go back to your activity and try again. When you are highly focused in a
state of flow, you are fully present with the moment. It's during these
moments that your mind is the least cluttered and distracted. When you
find yourself ruminating or agitated, take a few deep calming breaths
and begin a flow activity for 30 minutes to an hour or so. Give yourself
enough time to become immersed in the activity, and you'll find it has a
calming effect on you, in addition to helping you become more productive
and happy.

Simplify Your Distractions (to Overcome Procrastination)
"Procrastination is like a credit card: It's a lot of fun until you get
the bill." -- Christopher Parker We all procrastinate, but putting
things off until later is one of the worst offenses when it comes to
cluttering your mind. When you have something "hanging over your head,"
you never feel settled or relaxed because it's constantly niggling at
you. In this age of constant distractions, we procrastinate more than
ever. The phone buzzes and we look. The email dings and we click over.
We have multiple tabs open on our computers luring us away from the task
at hand. Every distraction is a thief, stealing our determination to do
what needs to be done or what we deeply desire to achieve. We have all
the excuses we need to begin later, to pick it up tomorrow, or to finish
as soon as we read just a few more Facebook posts. Distraction breeds
procrastination, but procrastination is also the result of fear---fear
of failure or fear of success. It's the great "What if" standing between
you and the action you want to take. Even though most of these fears are
unfounded, we allow them to pull us away from the task at hand. We also
procrastinate because we dread difficult tasks. We don't want to tax our
brains or expend the energy necessary to get started. As you've likely
experienced, the getting started part is the most difficult. Once you
start, momentum carries you forward, but if you keep procrastinating,
you'll never catch that wave of momentum. Procrastinating not only
steals precious time and momentum we could be devoting to achievement,
but also our energy and motivation. The more we procrastinate on
something important, the worse we

feel about ourselves. The worse we feel, the less motivation we have to
get moving on our work. The less motivation we have, the more we
procrastinate with mindless distractions. It's a vicious cycle that
traps you in self-recriminations and anxiety. The first step in
overcoming procrastination is awareness of the crippling negative impact
it has on your mental state. Think about this: You likely spend at least
one hour a day procrastinating. That's seven hours a week---nearly a
full workday. So you lose 52 full workdays a year to procrastination.
What could you do with an extra 52 workdays? You could: Write a book.
Start a business. Build a blog. Go back to school. Improve (and build
new) personal relationships. Teach yourself a new language. Finish
several big work projects. If these outcomes have convinced you about
the importance of overcoming procrastination, then we recommend the
following daily actions to help you get more done during your workweek:

1.  Plan ahead. Before bed or first thing in the morning, determine your
    first most important task of the day. Then decide on your second and
    third most important tasks. Make these tasks related to something
    critical in your work or business---something that will move you
    forward, make you more money, expand your opportunities. They
    shouldn't be mindless administrative tasks or filler work.

2.  Define your why.

Before you begin your most important task, ask yourself why it's so
important. What is the positive motivation for pursuing this task? How
will it benefit you? How will you feel when you complete it? Getting
clear on the reasons why you are doing something will help you push
through when you begin to feel tired or distracted. You might write down
your reasons to have nearby in case you need a reminder.

3.  Break it down. Break down your first most important task into all of
    the actions and sub-tasks involved in completing the main task.
    Write down and prioritize every action involved in finishing the
    task. Then estimate how much time each sub-task will take and write
    it down.

4.  Determine your schedule. What time of day are you most productive or
    creative? For Barrie, it's first thing in the morning, when her
    brain is rested. However, your most productive time might be
    mid-afternoon. Organize you sub-task priorities to maximize your
    most productive time.

5.  Prepare what you need. Make sure you have everything you need before
    you sit down for your work. Get your coffee, water, or tea and have
    it on your desk. Have a small, healthy snack like almonds, a banana,
    or some carrots to prevent your stomach from feeling too empty. Make
    sure the lighting is the way you want it, and your desk is organized
    or cleared.

6.  Repeat the process. If your priority task of the day only takes a
    few hours, then move on to task two and repeat the steps above for
    this. Once you complete task two, do this for task three as well.

7.  Remove distractions.

This is hugely important in helping you stay focused. When Barrie was in
college, she would go to a "study closet" in her dorm---a tiny
closet-sized room with just a desk and a lamp. If she was serious about
a project or preparing for a test and didn't want distractions or
reasons to procrastinate, that's where she'd go. Find a space where you
can work without interruptions. Turn off your phone. Close all other
browsers on your computer, and turn the sound off so you don't hear any
dings from emails. Put a "do not disturb" sign on your office door.

8.  Begin with mindfulness. Before you begin your first sub-task of your
    most important task for the day, close your eyes, take a few deep
    breaths, and set an intention that you will complete your task
    easily and productively. Visualize yourself accomplishing it and how
    you will feel when you're done. But try not to use this moment as
    another reason to procrastinate. Instead, make it a one -- to
    two-minute mental preparation to begin your work.

9.  Set a timer. If you have a hard time focusing, set a timer for
    20--30 minutes (or less if you have a really hard time focusing).
    Work diligently during that time, and when the timer goes off, allow
    yourself a short break to stretch, walk outside, close your eyes, or
    whatever feels rejuvenating. Try not to use this time to check
    emails, get on a long phone call, or do anything that will steal
    your productive time. One strategy that Steve uses to create extreme
    focus (using a timer) is The Pomodoro Technique , where you focus on
    a single task for 25 minutes, take a 5-minute break, and then begin
    another 25-minute block of time. This strategy can be grueling at
    times, but it also helps him stay laser-focused on his most
    important activities.

10. Schedule longer breaks.

In between your three most important tasks, schedule longer breaks of 15
minutes to an hour (for lunch). Use these breaks to re-energize by doing
some exercise or meditation, or by having a non-stressful conversation
with someone. 11. Reward yourself. After you complete a task or a series
of sub-tasks, reward yourself with either the breaks mentioned earlier
or allowing yourself to check your phone, emails, or social media for a
short amount of time (10 to 15 minutes). Or do something else that feels
rewarding and motivating. 12. Schedule mindless tasks. Beyond your three
most important tasks of the day, you will certainly have mindless tasks
to accomplish. If you must check emails first thing in the morning,
allow yourself a short amount of time to do so (10 to 15 minutes). Set a
timer, and even if you haven't completed going through the emails, stop
for now, move on to your most important task, and come back to the
emails later in the day when you've completed your tasks. Other mindless
tasks like easy paperwork, organizing, or anything that doesn't take
much brainpower can be scheduled at your least productive times of day.

Simplify Your Actions "Drink your tea slowly and reverently, as if it's
the axis on which the earth revolves--slowly, evenly, without rushing
toward the future; live the actual moment. Only this moment is life." --
ThÃ­ch Nhat Hanh What if you could always be in the state of flow
described earlier, where time disappears and you are one with the
activity? Perhaps this would be a blissful, transformative state to live
in---but you might starve, forget to pay your bills, and neglect to
shower. Real life requires that you deal with the more mundane but
necessary activities of daily survival in an organized society. They are
the tasks we try to "get through" in order to enjoy the real excitement
of life, whatever that happens to be for you. Unless you're a cave
dweller or live in a monastery, these "reallife" obligations take up a
lot of time and energy. Even if you can cut back on these tasks, you
can't escape all of them without some unpleasant consequences. But maybe
escaping them really isn't necessary in order to declutter your mind and
enjoy more of life. What if you brought mindfulness to everything you
do, including the unpleasant, boring, or neutral activities of ordinary
life? As ThÃ­ch Nhat Hanh suggests in the quote above, rather than
slurping down your tea while thinking about all you have to do today,
shift your perspective to see drinking your tea as the only important
thing in the world (while you are drinking it). This shift would apply
to everything you do---from washing the dishes to cleaning out the cat
box. Maybe you don't want to be present when cleaning the cat box, but
presence is the state of mind you want to seek in everything you do. Is
it possible to be present all of the time? Not really. But you can

try. And if you succeed in living mindfully just a little more often,
you'll discover that the joy and peace you seek is at your fingertips
all the time. Let's examine five ways you can bring mindfulness into
your daily life to become present and aware even during the most mundane
activities.

#1. Eat meals mindfully. Once upon a time, people used to spend hours
producing and preparing food. They would stop in the middle of a day for
a big meal called "dinner," when everyone would leave work and sit down
together to eat. Later on, dinner happened in the evening, but still it
was an occasion when people sat together and spent time eating and
talking. With the advent of fast food, technology, and multi-tasking,
eating is often relegated to a quick meal between obligations, something
necessary to keep us fueled for our over-scheduled lives. Not only do we
neglect the ritual of family meals, but too often we overlook the simple
joy of eating. We may not have as much time to focus on food preparation
as our grandmothers did, but we can be mindful of the food we eat and
how we experience a meal. This means not eating in front of the TV or
computer, but rather sitting with your family or alone in a quiet,
distraction-free place. Here are a few thoughts on mindful eating:
Before you eat, look at the food and notice the colors, smells, and
textures. Close your eyes and breathe in the aromas. Notice your own
hunger and urge to eat. When you put the first bite of food into your
mouth, notice the immediate tastes and sensations. As you chew, notice
how the tastes might change or expand.

Chew and swallow your food slowly, with a thought of gratitude for the
hands that prepared it. As you continue to eat, notice how your stomach
feels as you satiate your appetite. Be aware of feeling full, and cease
eating when you are. Don't feel obliged to overeat in order to clean
your plate. After you finish the meal, sit for a few moments and digest
your food. After the meal, mindfully wash your plate and utensils and
put them away. When you eat mindfully, not only will you savor the
experience of eating, but you'll also support proper digestion and
absorption of nutrients. Studies show eating slowly leads to improved
satiety and reduced calorie intake.

#2. Clean your house mindfully. ThÃ­ch Nhat Hanh has said that he washes
dishes with as much care as if he were bathing the newborn Buddha: "If I
am incapable of washing dishes joyfully, if I want to finish them
quickly so I can go and have a cup of tea, then I will be incapable of
drinking the tea joyfully." Rather than organizing your house as a means
to a decluttered mind, focus on the doing rather than the getting it
done. Cleaning won't magically become an elevated experience, but you
will be elevated by simply paying attention to the elegant cause and
effect of cleaning. Try to see housecleaning as a laboratory for being
present and engaged in life. This mind shift can be applied to any
routine task---washing your car, mowing the lawn, or even paying the
bills. You can approach these tasks with dread and resentment, or you
can approach them with your full attention and a sense of gratitude that
you are able to accomplish them, that they improve your life, and that,
however insignificant, they are worthy of your time.

#3. Walk mindfully. As Barrie writes in her book Peace of Mindfulness ,
"Taking a walk, you can be mindful by listening intently to your feet
hitting the ground, and the sounds of nature around you. Take in the
scenery you observe, the feeling of the warm or cool air, and the smells
of being outside." Wherever you are walking (either indoors or out),
whatever your destination, pay attention along the way. You don't have
to hustle along with your eye on the outcome. Let walking be the
destination.

#4. Experience nature mindfully. Numerous studies have shown the mental
and physical benefits of spending time in nature. Being in forests and
green spaces can: Boost the immune system Lower blood pressure Reduce
stress Improve your mood Increase your ability to focus Accelerate
recovery from surgery or illness Increase your energy level Improve your
sleep You will experience these benefits simply by taking a walk in
nature or sitting quietly in a forest. But when you approach your
experience of nature mindfully, you'll enhance the benefits---
particularly related to stress reduction, mood, and focus. When you
spend time in nature, try to pay attention with all of your senses to be
fully present and attentive to your surroundings. Listen... to the
sounds of the birds, the leaves rustling in the trees, the water running
over stones.

See ...the sunlight and shadows, the tiny wildflowers on the forest
floor, the hawk flying in circles overhead. Smell ...the earthy scent of
rotting leaves, the fragrance of honeysuckle, the aroma of a recent rain
shower. The experience of being in green spaces and forests is so
powerful and mind-clearing that it should be part of your Declutter Your
Mind practice.

#5. Exercise mindfully. The benefits of exercise are so numerous we
could fill an entire book with them. The physical benefits are obvious,
but related to your mental declutter efforts, exercise has some profound
psychological benefits as well. Michael Otto, PhD, a professor of
psychology at Boston University in an article for the American
Psychological Association, says "The link between exercise and mood is
pretty strong. Usually within five minutes after moderate exercise you
get a mood-enhancement effect." The article goes on to say that studies
confirm exercise can treat and perhaps prevent anxiety and depression,
both of which are potential outcomes of mental clutter, distraction, and
rumination. Even with the overwhelming evidence that exercise makes you
healthier, fitter, and happier, most people avoid it like the plague.
Exercise can feel like a chore at best, and like physical torture to
some people. Part of the problem is the way we approach exercise. We see
it as a means to an end---to lose weight, to manage stress, or to
prevent disease. We've learned that once you remove judgment,
attachments, and fear from the equation, fitness can be something to
look forward to rather than an obligation you dread. You no longer
anticipate the discomfort, think constantly about quitting, or judge
your results. You simply engage in mindful movement, pushing yourself
slightly to improve each time, while paying full attention to your body.

No matter what activity or sport you practice, you can incorporate
mindfulness into your practice to maximize a clear, focused mind. Try
these ideas:

Pay attention to your body. As you start your exercise practice, pay
attention to the placement of your body. Is your posture correct? Is
everything aligned as it should be around your core? Your core is the
center of strength and support, and for it to operate efficiently, your
body must be aligned, with your back straight, shoulders back, and head
held high (unless the exercise calls for something else). Allow your
core do most of the work, while your limbs are fluid and relaxed. Even
if you're lifting weights with your arms or legs, engage your core to
add power to your limbs. As you exercise, focus on engaging your core,
and envision an imaginary steel rod keeping your body in proper
alignment. Focus on how your body feels. Are you experiencing any pain
or discomfort? Without reacting to the feelings, simply identify them.
"My knees are hurting. I'm having trouble catching my breath. It's hot
out here." Try not to resist or fear any pain or discomfort, but rather
breathe into it and visualize it relaxing. Picture sending energy or
power to whatever part of your body is performing the work of the
exercise. If several parts are moving at once, spread the energy
throughout your body.

Find your anchor. Once you are in the groove of the movements of your
exercise, find an anchor to hold your focus. Place your attention on
your breathing, the sounds of nature, or a mantra you repeat to
yourself. For example, while running, you could focus on the sound of
your feet hitting the pavement. You could also mentally repeat a mantra
or affirmation that matches your

breathing pattern. During strength training exercises, vividly focus on
the muscles you're training and the energy surrounding those areas.
Follow your breathing, breathe out as you lift or engage the weight, and
breathe in when you lower it. Stay focused on your breathing, even in
between lifts. When thoughts intrude, just return your attention back to
your mantra or breathing, or take a moment to access how your body feels
and adjust or relax as necessary. Then go back to breathing or your
mantra.

Notice your environment. No matter where you are exercising (indoors or
out), pay attention to the temperature, sights, sounds, smells, and any
other sensory perceptions that impact your experience. Pull your focus
from inside of you to your surroundings and notice everything around
you. If you are outside, allow yourself to enjoy the dual psychological
benefits of being in nature and exercising as you give your full
attention to your surroundings. Every moment of every day, you can
easily be sucked back into the vortex of your thoughts and distractions.
You can be staring at a glorious star-filled sky or putting dishes in
the dishwasher and be completely unconscious of the experience because
of your cluttered mind. Sholto Radford, founder of Wilderness Minds
retreats, says "The practice of mindfulness invites us to let go of
goals and expectations and see what emerges in the space left when the
striving mind quiets for a moment." Your job is to awaken, even if it's
for just a few moments every day, to truly experience your
experiences---to be fully present and aware rather than tangled up in
your thoughts and worries. With practice and time, you'll find returning
to the present moment becomes more automatic. And the more you return to
it, the more

life you are actually living.

CONCLUSION

Final Thoughts on Decluttering Your Mind "Your mind is the basis of
everything you experience and of every contribution you make to the
lives of others. Given this fact, it makes sense to train it." -- Sam
Harris Training your mind is the mental equivalent of tidying your
house. It's a habit you must repeat daily in order to stay on top of it.
But training your mind is not as straightforward or simple as
housekeeping. Managing your thoughts takes commitment and practice. It
also requires daily---even moment-by-moment---awareness of your mental
state and the shenanigans of your monkey mind. Left to its own devices,
your mind will swing from branch to branch, following an old memory,
chasing a distraction, or stewing in the bitter juice of resentment or
anger. Or it can languish in daydreaming and fantasy, much more positive
but still unruly states of mind. When you neglect to take stock of your
mental clutter, your thoughts and emotions remain freewheeling and
capricious. As a result, your experience of life becomes unpredictable
and entirely dependent on the random nature of thought. The intrusive
thoughts you experience throughout the day illustrate the maddening
reality that many of the functions of the mind seem outside of conscious
control. To add insult to injury, our thoughts feel very real and
powerful and have a profound impact on our perceptions of the world. For
a moment, let go of the notion that your spontaneous thoughts have any
meaning. What if those intrusive thoughts have no more truth or
substance than random graffiti on a wall? There may be some connection
to a memory or emotion, but in the present moment they don't reflect
reality. For the most part, this is the truth about thoughts.

Although your subconscious mind will never allow you to have complete
control of your thoughts, you do have the ability to control some of
them. And you can change your reactions and habits in order to better
manage them and the emotions they foster. Throughout this book, we have
offered a wide-range selection of ideas and tools for decluttering your
mind so you can quiet the negative voice in your head, experience less
stress, and enjoy more peace of mind. With focused breathing and
mindfulness meditation, you trigger the relaxation response and learn to
detach from intrusive thoughts and emotions. By interrupting, reframing,
and challenging thoughts, you learn to take charge of your thinking and
diminish the power thoughts have over you. When you identify your core
values, you create boundaries for your choices and actions so you don't
give yourself more reason to ruminate and worry. Once you clarify your
life priorities, you don't waste your time on things that will later
cause you regret or mental suffering. When you set goals based on your
values and priorities, you set the stage for focused action and
self-esteem that keeps you feeling energized. When you seek out and live
your passion, you infuse your goals with authenticity, purpose, and joy,
leaving little room for negative thinking. By being more present and
mindful in your relationships, you prevent many of the conflicts that
come with human interaction, minimizing the resulting mental distress
and increasing fulfillment with the relationship. When you keep your
home and your digital world clean, organized, and streamlined , you
remove distractions that pull you away from your values, priorities, and
goals.

By making the decision to cut back on tasks and obligations, you reduce
stress, allowing more "space" to be present and attentive to life. As
you focus on the task at hand and involve yourself in "flow" activities,
you transcend the mental chatter in your head to become one with the
activity, fostering feelings of joy and deep satisfaction. When you
tackle procrastination and learn to quickly take the first step, you
circumvent the anxiety that comes with putting things off. By applying
mindfulness to all of the daily activities of life , from dishwashing to
exercise, you clear your mind of all but the only true reality in
life---the present moment. American psychologist Abraham Maslow says,
"The ability to be in the present moment is a major component of mental
wellness." So how do you decide where to begin your mental declutter
practice? We suggest you begin by first defining your core values, life
priorities, and goals . Once you have these personal boundaries and
directives established, you'll find it much easier to determine where
you have the most disruptive mental clutter and how you want to deal
with it. For example, if you have a core value of building strong
relationships, but you find yourself in regular conflict with someone or
constantly brooding over a relationship encounter, then the relationship
exercises we outlined are a great place to begin your mental declutter.
Or you may find yourself constantly disparaging your abilities or
appearance, and these negative thoughts prevent you from enjoying life.
If this is the case, working on self-acceptance, ending comparisons, and
forgiveness might be the place to begin. Some of the practices we
outlined, like breathing, meditation, simplifying, and daily
mindfulness, can be applied or practiced for short periods of time every
day .

The results from these practices will help you with the more complex
endeavors, such as improving relationships, overcoming the past, or
finding your passion. We also suggest you keep a journal to document the
mental declutter practices you undertake, and how your life and emotions
improve as a result . By tracking your actions and the resulting changes
that occur, you'll feel inspired and motivated to continue with your
mental decluttering efforts. Decluttering your mind is a lifelong
endeavor, but one that pays off with profound rewards that can
significantly impact your quality of life. The less time you spend "in
your head" with intrusive, negative thoughts, the more time you have to
enjoy the present moment---and every present moment for the rest of your
life. You understand what it takes to feel less anxious about all the
"stuff" that goes on inside your head. Now, we urge you to take action.
Start today with the biggest challenge in your life and commit to fixing
in the next week. If you get stuck, use the eightstep process that Steve
recommends for building a new habit . Simply, identify the exercise that
will help overcome this challenge and then create a routine for doing it
on a daily basis. We wish you the best of luck! Barrie Davenport Steve
Scott

400 Words That Identify Your Values (Bonus Section) Your core values are
the guiding principles of your life that help you determine your
behavior, words, and actions. It's essential to your personal evolution
to take stock of your values on a regular basis, and then make the
necessary changes to align your life with these most critical values.
Living in harmony with your values creates a fertile environment for
happiness, peace of mind, and success, because you are living
authentically without confusion, guilt, or shame. Even small,
incremental changes to align your life with your values will create a
positive shift in your feelings and attitude.

Look at this list of 400 value words below, and select your top 5 to 10
for your personal and professional life. Write them down and evaluate
how you might be living outside of your values right now. What do you
need to change to support your values? What is the first step you can
take today?

Ability

Abundance

Acceptance

Accomplishment

Achievement

Acknowledgement

Adaptability

Adequacy

Adroitness

Adventure

Affection

Affluence

Alertness

Aliveness

Ambition

Amusement

Anticipation

Appreciation

Approachability

Artfulness

Articulacy

Assertiveness

Assurance

Attentiveness

Attractiveness

Audacity

Availability

Awareness

Awe

Balance

Beauty

Being-ness

Belongingness

Benevolence

Blissfulness

Boldness

Bravery

Brilliance

Briskness

Buoyancy

Calmness

Camaraderie

Candor

Capability

Care

Carefulness

Certainty

Challenge

Charity

Charm

Chastity

Cheerfulness

Clarity

Classy

Cleanliness

Cleverness

Closeness

Cognizance

Comfort

Commitment

Compassion

Competence

Completion

Composure

Concentration

Confidence

Conformity

Congruency

Connection

Consciousness

Consistency

Contentment

Continuity

Contribution

Control

Conviction

Conviviality

Coolness

Cooperation

Copiousness

Cordiality

Correctness

Courage

Courtesy

Craftiness

Creativity

Credibility

Cunning

Curiosity

Daring

Decisiveness

Decorum

Deepness

Deference

Delicacy

Delight

Dependability

Depth

Desire

Determination

Devotion

Devoutness

Dexterity

Dignity

Diligence

Diplomacy

Direction

Directness

Discernment

Discretion

Discipline

Discovery

Diversity

Dreaming

Drive

Duty

Dynamism

Eagerness

Economy

Ecstasy

Education

Effectiveness

Efficiency

Elation

Elegance

Empathy

Encouragement

Endurance

Energy

Enjoyment

Enlightenment

Entertainment

Enthusiasm

Evolution

Exactness

Excellence

Excitement

Exhilaration

Expectancy

Expediency

Experience

Expertise

Exploration

Expressiveness

Extravagance

Extroversion

Exuberance

Facilitating

Fairness

Faith

Fame

Fascination

Fashion

Fearlessness

Fidelity

Fineness

Finesse

Firmness

Fitness

Flexibility

Flow

Fluency

Fluidity

Focus

Fortitude

Frankness

Freedom

Friendliness

Frugality

Fun

Gallantry

Generosity

Gentility

Genuineness

Giving

Grace

Gratefulness

Gratitude

Gregariousness

Growth

Guidance

Happiness

Harmony

Health

Heart

Helpfulness

Heroism

Holiness

Honesty

Honor

Hopefulness

Hospitality

Humility

Humor

Hygiene

Imagination

Impact

Impartiality

Impeccability

Independence

Industry

Ingenuity

Inquisitiveness

Insightfulness

Inspiration

Instinctiveness

Integrity

Intelligence

Intensity

Intimacy

Intrepidness

Introversion

Intuition

Intuitiveness

Inventiveness

Joy

Judiciousness

Justice

Keenness

Kindness

Knowledge

Lavishness

Leadership

Learning

Liberation

Liberty

Liveliness

Logic

Longevity

Love

Loyalty

Majesty

Mastery

Maturity

Meekness

Mellowness

Meticulousness

Mindfulness

Moderation

Modesty

Motivation

Mysteriousness

Neatness

Nerve

Obedience

Open-mindedness

Openness

Optimism

Opulence

Order

Organization

Originality

Outlandishness

Outrageousness

Passion

Peacefulness

Perceptiveness

Perfection

Perseverance

Persistence

Persuasiveness

Philanthropy

Piety

Playfulness

Pleasantness

Pleasure

Plentiful-ness

Poise

Polish

Popularity

Potency

Practicality

Pragmatism

Precision

Preeminence

Preparedness

Presence

Privacy

Proactivity

Proficiency

Professionalism

Prosperity

Prudence

Punctuality

Purity

Qualification

Quietness

Quickness

Realism

Readiness

Reason

Recognition

Recreation

Refinement

Reflection

Relaxation

Reliability

Resilience

Resolution

Resolve

Resourcefulness

Respect

Restfulness

Restraint

Reverence

Richness

Rigor

Sacredness

Sacrifice

Sagacity

Saintliness

Sanguinity

Satisfaction

Security

Self-control

Selflessness

Self-realization

Self-reliance

Sensitivity

Sensuality

Serenity

Service

Sexuality

Sharing

Shrewdness

Significance

Silence

Silliness

Simplicity

Sincerity

Skillfulness

Smartness

Sophistication

Solidarity

Solidity

Solitude

Soundness

Speed

Spirit

Spirituality

Spontaneity

Stability

Stillness

Strength

Structure

Substantiality

Success

Sufficiency

Support

Supremacy

Surprise

Superbness

Sympathy

Synergy

Tactfulness

Teamwork

Temperance

Thankfulness

Thoroughness

Thoughtfulness

Thrift

Tidiness

Timeliness

Traditionalism

Tranquility

Transcendence

Trust

Trustworthiness

Truth

Understanding

Uniqueness

Unity

Usefulness

Utility

Valor

Variety

Victory

Vigor

Virtue

Vision

Vitality

Vivacity

Warmth

Watchfulness

Wealth

Wholesomeness

Willfulness

Willingness

Winning

Wisdom

Wittiness

Wonder

Worthiness

Zeal

Zest

Zing

DID YOU LIKE DECLUTTER YOUR MIND? Before you go, we'd like to say "thank
you" for purchasing our book. You could have picked from dozens of books
on habit development, but you took a chance and checked out this one. So
a big thanks for downloading this book and reading all the way to the
end. Now we'd like ask for a *small* favor. Could you please take a
minute or two and leave a review for this book on Amazon ? This feedback
will help us continue to write the kind of Kindle books that help you
get results. And if you loved it, then please let us know :-)

MORE BOOKS BY BARRIE 10-Minute Digital Declutter: The Simple Habit to
Eliminate Technology Overload 10-Minute Declutter: The Stress-Free Habit
for Simplifying Your Home 201 Relationship Questions: The Couple's Guide
to Building Trust and Emotional Intimacy Self-Discovery Questions: 155
Breakthrough Questions to Accelerate Massive Action Sticky Habits: 6
Simple Steps To Create Good Habits That Stick Peace of Mindfulness:
Everyday Rituals to Conquer Anxiety and Claim Unlimited Inner Peace
Confidence Hacks: 99 Small Actions to Massively Boost Your Confidence
Building Confidence: Get Motivated, Overcome Social Fear, Be Assertive,
and Empower Your Life For Success The 52-Week Life Passion Project:
Uncover Your Life Passion

MORE BOOKS BY STEVE The Miracle Morning for Writers: How to Build a
Writing Ritual That Increases Your Impact and Your Income 10-Minute
Digital Declutter: The Simple Habit to Eliminate Technology Overload
10-Minute Declutter: The Stress-Free Habit for Simplifying Your Home
Crowdsource Your Success: How Accountability Helps You Stick to Goals
Confident You: An Introvert's Guide to Success in Life and Business
Exercise Enough: 32 Tactics for Building the Exercise Habit (Even If You
Hate Working Out) The Daily Entrepreneur: 33 Success Habits for Small
Business Owners, Freelancers and Aspiring 9-to-5 Escape Artists Master
Evernote: The Unofficial Guide to Organizing Your Life with Evernote
(Plus 75 Ideas for Getting Started) Bad Habits No More: 25 Steps to
Break ANY Bad Habit Habit Stacking: 97 Small Life Changes That Take Five
Minutes or Less To-Do List Makeover: A Simple Guide to Getting the
Important Things Done 23 Anti-Procrastination Habits: How to Stop Being
Lazy and Get Results in Your Life S.M.A.R.T. Goals Made Simple: 10 Steps
to Master Your Personal and Career Goals 115 Productivity Apps to
Maximize Your Time: Apps for iPhone, iPad, Android, Kindle Fire and
PC/iOS Desktop Computers

Writing Habit Mastery: How to Write 2,000 Words a Day and Forever Cure
Writer's Block Declutter Your Inbox: 9 Proven Steps to Eliminate Email
Overload Wake Up Successful: How to Increase Your Energy and Achieve Any
Goal with a Morning Routine 10,000 Steps Blueprint: The Daily Walking
Habit for Healthy Weight Loss and Lifelong Fitness 70 Healthy Habits:
How to Eat Better, Feel Great, Get More Energy and Live a Healthy
Lifestyle Resolutions That Stick! How 12 Habits Can Transform Your New
Year

ABOUT STEVE

In his books, S.J. Scott provides daily action plans for every area of
your life: health, fitness, work and personal relationships. Unlike
other personal development guides, his content focuses on taking action.
So instead of reading over-hyped strategies that rarely work in the
real-world, you'll get information that can be immediately implemented.

ABO UT BARRIE

Barrie is the founder of an award-winning personal development site,
Live Bold and Bloom ( liveboldandbloom.com ). She is a certified
personal coach and online course creator, helping people apply
practical, evidence-based solutions and strategies to push past comfort
zones and create happier, richer, more successful lives. She is also the
author of a series of self-improvement books on positive habits, life
passion, confidence building, mindfulness and simplicity. As an
entrepreneur, a mom of three and a homeowner, Barrie knows firsthand how
valuable and life-changing it is to simplify, prioritize and organize
your daily habits in order to live your best life.


