More Praise for Bouncing Back "A Japanese proverb tells us that 'the
bamboo that bends is stronger than the oak that resists,' for when the
monsoon strikes the oak breaks, while the bamboo bends but quickly
recovers. In clear, accessible language, Linda Graham integrates
insights from modern scientific psychology, ancient wisdom traditions,
and neurobiology to show readers how to become more like bamboo. Filled
with inspirational quotes, step-by-step exercises, and wisdom drawn from
years of psychotherapeutic practice, this book can help anyone recover
from sorrow and disappointment to live a richer, happier, more
fulfilling life." --- Ronald D. Siegel, PsyD, assistant clinical
professor of psychology at Harvard Medical School and author of The
Mindfulness Solution: Everyday Practices for Everyday Problems "Linda
Graham shines clear light on one of the most vital skills we can develop
--- resilience --- and takes the mystery out of how to get there. She
offers beautiful, practical guidance on the underpinnings of 'bouncing
back' and on how to rewire your brain's circuitry to increase your
resilience. She includes real-life, relatable examples from her
experience as a first-class psychotherapist and veteran mindfulness
practitioner, as well as insights and road-tested practices you'll want
to return to again and again." --- Marsha Lucas, PhD, author of Rewire
Your Brain for Love: Creating Vibrant Relationships Using the Science of
Mindfulness "Useful in a wide variety of contexts, Bouncing Back brings
much-needed science to the subject of resilience via a wisdom-packed
offering of simple yet effective insights and practices for growing
through life's inevitable challenges." --- Elisha Goldstein, PhD, author
of The Now Effect and coauthor of A Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction
Workbook "This book presents the neuroscience of self-healing in ways
that make it totally accessible and applicable to our daily life
concerns. Linda Graham shows us how to upgrade our old wiring to fit the
new code of mental and spiritual health. I was personally touched by how
encouraging her works and practices are." --- David Richo, PhD, author
of How to Be an Adult in Love "Linda Graham has written a remarkably
clear, extraordinarily useful, and, yes, inspiring book. She brilliantly
integrates cutting-edge neuroscience and the best of contemporary
psychotherapy with the wisdom and practices of Buddhism. The result is
both a sophisticated perspective on development and change and a
practical program for healing and strengthening the psyche through
exercises imaginatively designed to rewire the brain." --- David Wallin,
PhD, author of Attachment in Psychotherapy "Linda Graham provides a
masterful integration of novel research findings in neuroscience and
psychology with deep clinical insight into optimal human functioning. A
joy to read and full of easy-to-follow exercises, this book offers a
deceptively simple yet rich and complex road map for building and
maintaining emotional resilience." --- Kristin Neff, PhD, associate
professor of human development and culture at the University of Texas at
Austin and author of Self-Compassion

"Having researched and cocreated a resilience training program for NASA,
I can validate the breadth and power of Bouncing Back. Linda Graham has
integrated the latest findings in neuroscience and emotionally focused
therapies, along with perennial mindfulness practices, to provide us
with a first-rate book on becoming more resilient. It may be premature
to call a book a classic before it has hit the stands, but Bouncing Back
has everything it takes: it is wise, helpful, compassionate, practical,
and well researched. --- Daniel Ellenberg, PhD, leadership coach,
psychotherapist, and seminar leader "Filled with practical and powerful
exercises that not only will deepen your capacity to deal with life's
challenges but will lead to lasting change, Bouncing Back is a
comprehensive and caring road map to a life of flourishing." --- Ron
Frederick, PhD, author of Living Like You Mean It "Wherever I go, and
with all the populations I serve, I've discovered that nourishing
resilience to counteract the stresses and strains of daily life is our
number one priority. I'm therefore grateful to Linda Graham for weaving
together this incredible tapestry of time-tested insights and exercises,
which are vitally important for us to assimilate into our daily lives.
Bouncing Back is a resource guide I will cherish and look forward to
passing on to all my students, clients, and teachers-in-training." ---
Richard Miller, PhD, clinical psychologist and president of the
Integrative Restoration Institute "A wealth of neuroscience research
over the past ten years has told us much about how the brain works and
what change really means. Linda Graham's Bouncing Back is the book we've
all been waiting for that translates that knowledge into compassionate,
down-to-earth language that inspires confidence and hope. Rather than
rote skills for coping, she provides a brain-based understanding of how
we became who we are and how we can use our brains to become who we want
to be. With humor, warmth, and wisdom, she conveys how to use
mindfulness practices to increase our tolerance for the ups and downs of
human life." --- Janina Fisher, PhD, coauthor of the forthcoming The
Body as Resource "Bouncing Back reaches for and delivers more than a
strategy for dealing with hard times. Its many practices are sure to be
beneficial on a daily basis and can expand anyone's capacity to navigate
the twists and turns that life inevitably presents us with. Linda Graham
has written a very positive book that supports and encourages everyone
to engage in life consciously, with an open heart and an open mind. I
highly recommend Bouncing Back." --- Peter Baumann, coauthor of Ego and
founder of the Baumann Foundation "One of the most exciting discoveries
of the age we are living in is the growing understanding that we can
each consciously engage in practices, sometimes involving only shifts in
our attention and intention, that directly influence the function and
structure of our brains and bodies. Even better, we not only can do this
for ourselves but can connect with others in ways that support
resilience in our families, communities, and society. Bouncing Back is a
heartfelt and comprehensive guide for how to use your mind to change
your brain and, in the process, experience an amazing upward spiral of
deep well-being." --- Cassandra Vieten, PhD, executive director of
research at the Institute of Noetic Sciences, scientist at the
California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, coauthor of Living
Deeply, and author of Mindful Motherhood "We all know what it's like to
feel stuck. Grounded in solid neuroscience and relational psychology,
Bouncing Back is the perfect guidebook to help us not only get through
hard times

but develop the capacity for thriving in their midst. With extraordinary
clarity, empathy, and depth, Linda Graham shows us how to navigate
through life's challenges with confidence, trust, and the feeling of the
wind in our sails. Highly recommended." --- James Baraz, coauthor of
Awakening Joy "In Bouncing Back, Linda Graham offers a beautiful and
wise understanding of neuroscience combined with immensely practical
tools for healthy living and genuine well-being." --- Jack Kornfield,
PhD, author of A Path with Heart "We each have the capacity to meet the
most challenging life circumstances with deep intelligence and a
courageous, open heart. Yet when our resilience is diminished, we
suffer. In her pioneering new book, Linda Graham explores the
psychological, relational, and neurological dynamics of resilience and
offers a rich array of meditations and attentional practices that can
help us navigate everything from daily stressors to deep trauma. Written
with great lucidity and compassion, this book helps us cultivate a heart
that is ready for anything." --- Tara Brach, PhD, author of Radical
Acceptance and True Refuge "Astoundingly brilliant! I've never read a
book so packed with information and wisdom and so engagingly,
imaginatively, and charmingly written. Every page is a pleasure and a
delight to read. This is a must-read book for therapists, teachers, and
everyone else (which means all of us) who are interested in how we
bounce back amid life's many challenges." --- Sylvia Boorstein, PhD,
author of It's Easier Than You Think: The Buddhist Way to Happiness
"Linda Graham's Bouncing Back gives us what we most need to navigate
through our rich, complex, and often challenging world: a fundamental
understanding of how our brains work, a deep dive into the flexibility
and changeability of the brain, and practical tools for meeting life's
most difficult challenges. Whether you're currently dealing with trauma
or in a joyful and unencumbered period of your life, this book will
deepen your self-understanding as it moves your heart." --- Rick Foster,
coauthor of How We Choose to Be Happy and Happiness and Health "Linda
Graham has written the ultimate handbook for dealing with life's
inevitable bumps, challenges, and, yes, even traumas. It is both
practical and inspiring: Graham draws equally on modern science ---
neuroscience, psychology, and sociology --- and contemplative philosophy
to create a must-have resource for all those looking to make a full
comeback." --- Christine Carter, PhD, author of Raising Happiness "I
highly recommend this intelligent and very readable book by Linda
Graham. More than informative, it is a heartfelt conversation with a
wise and compassionate friend --- and we can all use more of those." ---
Louis Cozolino, PhD, professor of psychology at Pepperdine University
and author of The Neuroscience of Psychotherapy "Bouncing Back offers
the rigor of science, the beauty of art, and the wisdom of deep
reflection and contemplation. In this illuminating work, Linda Graham
has given us a treasure that has the potential to transform our
individual and collective lives." --- Shauna L. Shapiro, PhD, assistant
professor of counseling psychology at Santa Clara University and
coauthor of The Art and Science of Mindfulness

BOUNCING BACK

Copyright © 2013 by Linda Graham All rights reserved. This book may not
be reproduced in whole or in part, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means --- electronic, mechanical, or
other --- without written permission from the publisher, except by a
reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. Grateful
acknowledgment is given to Coleman Barks for the use of the Rumi poem
"The Guest House" on page 154 from his book The Essential Rumi and to
Jack Kornfield for the use of his forgiveness exercise on page 185 from
his seminar "The Science and Practice of Forgiveness" at the Greater
Good Science Center. Every effort has been made to contact rights
holders for use of quoted material in Bouncing Back. The material in
this book is intended for education. It is not meant to take the place
of individual diagnosis and treatment by a qualified medical
practitioner or therapist. No expressed or implied guarantee as to the
effects of the use of the recommendations can be given nor liability
taken. Text design by Tona Pearce Myers Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Graham, Linda, date. Bouncing back :
rewiring your brain for maximum resilience and well-being / Linda
Graham, MFT ; foreword by Rick Hanson, PhD. pages cm Includes
bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-60868-129-7 (pbk. :
alk. paper) --- ISBN 978-1-60868-130-3 (ebk.) 1. Resilience (Personality
trait) 2. Self-consciousness (Awareness) 3. Self-confidence. 4.
Neuropsychology. I. Title. BF698.35.R47G73 2013 158.1---dc23 2012048037
First printing, April 2013 ISBN 978-1-60868-129-7 Printed in Canada on
100% postconsumer-waste recycled paper New World Library is proud to be
a Gold Certified Environmentally Responsible Publisher. Publisher
certification awarded by Green Press Initiative.
www.greenpressinitiative.org 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To James Baraz, Sylvia Boorstein, Diana Fosha, Rick Hanson --- True
Others to my True Self

CONTENTS

List of Exercises Foreword by Rick Hanson, PhD INTRODUCTION

What Resilience Is and How We Rewire Our Brains to Recover It

PART ONE

How the Brain Develops Resilience --- or Doesn't How the Brain's
Strategies of Resilience Become Wired In How the Wiring In of Resilience
Can Go Awry

CHAPTER ONE CHAPTER TWO PART TWO CHAPTER THREE CHAPTER FOUR CHAPTER FIVE

Harnessing the Brain's Neuroplasticity to Recover Your Resilience Using
Mindfulness to Foster SelfAwareness and Flexible Responses Using Empathy
to Create Connections and Self-Acceptance Five Additional Practices That
Accelerate Brain Change

CHAPTER SIX

Self-Directed Neuroplasticity

PART THREE

Recovering Resilience through Resonant Relationships

CHAPTER SEVEN

How Bonding and Belonging Nourish Resilience

CHAPTER EIGHT CHAPTER NINE

Creating Inner Security and Confidence Developing Relational
Intelligence

PART FOUR

Keep Calm and Carry On: Recovering Resilience through Resources of the
Body

CHAPTER TEN CHAPTER ELEVEN CHAPTER TWELVE

Losing and Recovering Our Equilibrium Recovering Our Balance through the
Body Developing Somatic Intelligence

PART FIVE

Recovering Resilience through Emotional Well-Being

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

How Neuroscience Is Revolutionizing Our Thinking about Feelings

CHAPTER FOURTEEN CHAPTER FIFTEEN

How Positive Emotions Build Resilience Developing Emotional Intelligence

PART SIX

Shift Happens: Recovering Resilience through Reflection and Response
Flexibility CHAPTER SIXTEEN Using Reflection to Identify Options CHAPTER
SEVENTEEN Shifting Gears: Modifying Our Patterns of Response CHAPTER
EIGHTEEN Discerning Wise Choices and Responding Flexibly PART SEVEN
CHAPTER NINETEEN

Recovering Resilience through Simply Being Resting in the Wisdom of
Being

PART EIGHT CHAPTER TWENTY

Launching into a More Resilient Life Moving Resilience beyond the
Personal Self

Acknowledgments Endnotes Index About the Author

EXERCISES

Chapter Three. Using Mindfulness to Foster Self-Awareness and Flexible
Responses Exercise 1. Cultivating Mindfulness of the Breath Exercise 2.
Steadying Awareness as What We Observe Becomes More Complex Exercise 3.
Using Reflection by the Observing Ego to Formulate Wise Choices

Chapter Four. Using Empathy to Create Connections and SelfAcceptance
Exercise 1. Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4. Exercise 5. Exercise 6.

Bringing Resonance to Consciousness Bringing Attunement to Consciousness
Cultivating Empathy and Self-Empathy Cultivating Self-Compassion
Cultivating Self-Acceptance Cultivating the Wiser Self

Chapter Five. Five Additional Practices That Accelerate Brain Change
Exercise 1. Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4. Exercise 5. Exercise 6.
Exercise 7. Exercise 8. Exercise 9.

Coming into Presence Setting Intention Strengthening Perseverance
Creating a Circle of Support Creating a Safe Place Choosing a Practice
Creating Material Resources Discovering People as Resources Connecting
to Spiritual Resources

Chapter Six. Self-Directed Neuroplasticity Exercise 1. Creating a Better
Choice through New Conditioning

Exercise 2. Entering a Mental Play Space through Deconditioning Exercise
3. Out with the Old, In with the New through Reconditioning

Chapter Seven. How Bonding and Belonging Nourish Resilience Exercise 1.
Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4. Exercise 5.

Deep Listening Sharing Kindness Cultivating Loving Kindness to
Experience Innate Goodness Honoring the Innate Goodness of Others
Rewiring Negative Views of Yourself through Seeing the Goodness That
Others See in You Exercise 6. Befriending Yourself by Accepting the Many
Parts of Yourself

Chapter Eight. Creating Inner Security and Confidence Exercise 1.
Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4.

Taking In the Love of Others to Nourish the Inner Base of Resilience
Taking In the Good to Nourish the Inner Base of Resilience Listening to
the Intuitive Wisdom of the Wiser Self Imagining a Wished-For Outcome to
Rewire Difficult Experiences in Relationships

Chapter Nine. Developing Relational Intelligence Exercise 1. Exercise 2.
Exercise 3. Exercise 4. Exercise 5.

Reaching Out for Help Setting Limits and Boundaries Negotiating Changes
in Behaviors Repairing a Rupture Forgiveness

Chapter Ten. Losing and Recovering Our Equilibium Exercise 1.
Cultivating Equanimity Exercise 2. Resonating with the Calm of Others to
Calm Ourselves Down

Chapter Eleven. Recovering Our Balance through the Body Exercise 1a.
Activating the Release of Oxytocin through a Head Rub Exercise 1b.
Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Massaging the Vagus Nerve
Exercise 1c. Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Hugs Exercise 2.
Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Hand on the Heart Exercise
3a. Deep Breathing to Relax the Body Exercise 3b. Breathing to Create
Resonant Connection Exercise 4a. Rewiring Old Somatic Memories through a
Body Scan Exercise 4b. Rewiring Old Somatic Memories through the
Relaxation Response Exercise 4c. Moving the Body to Rewire Difficult
Emotions Exercise 5. Rewiring Negative Body Memories

Chapter Twelve. Developing Somatic Intelligence Exercise 1a. Prime the
Brain by Beginning the Day in Loving Connection

Exercise 1b. Prime the Brain by Beginning the Day in Ease and Well-Being
Exercise 1c. Prime the Brain by Returning to Your Window of Tolerance
Exercise 2. Wiring In Current Confidence from Previous Competence
Exercise 3. Reframing Incompetence as Competence Exercise 4. Do One
Scary Thing a Day to Train Your Brain to Risk Something New Exercise 5.
Wiring for Resilience by Finding the Gift in the Mistake

Chapter Thirteen. How Neuroscience is Revolutionizing Our Thinking about
Feelings Exercise 1. Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4.

Noticing and Regulating Your Emotions Expressing Your Own Emotions and
Reading the Meaning of Others' Emotions Managing and Shifting Emotions
by Practicing Compassion Resolving the Shutdown of Emotions

Chapter Fourteen. How Positive Emotions Build Resilience Exercise 1.
Cultivating Gratitude to Wire In New Patterns Exercise 2. Finding
Emotionally Healthy Brains to Connect With Exercise 3. Healing Toxic
Shame through Love and Acceptance

Chapter Fifteen. Developing Emotional Intelligence Exercise 1. Carry
Love and Appreciation in Your Wallet Exercise 2. Using Self-Compassion
to Answer the Inner Critic Exercise 3. Compassionate Communication

Chapter Sixteen. Using Reflection to Identify Options Exercise 1.
Noticing and Naming to Create Options Exercise 2. Naming Patterns as
Patterns Exercise 3. Recognizing Opportunities to Shift Old Patterns and
Create Options

Chapter Seventeen. Shifting Gears: Modifying Our Patterns of Response
Exercise 1. Shifting Perspectives by Replacing ANTS with APTS Exercise
2. Using Belly Botany to Shift Perspectives Exercise 3. Reconditioning
to Shed Old Identities

Chapter Eighteen. Discerning Wise Choices and Responding Flexibly
Exercise 1. Creating Options, Discerning Choices, and Choosing Wisely

Chapter Nineteen. Resting in the Wisdom of Being Exercise 1. Exploring
the Contents of the Self Even as They Evolve Exercise 2. Relaxing in a
Reverie; Gaining Insights into the Self Exercise 3. Dropping into the
Unconditioned: Dissolving the Self into the Nonself

Exercise 4. Integrating the Self and Nonself Exercise 5. Experiencing
the Whole Self

Chapter Twenty. Moving Resilience beyond the Personal Self Exercise 1.
Exercise 2. Exercise 3. Exercise 4. Exercise 5.

Learning Resilience Identifying Your BOPs Finding Keys for Cracking the
Code Practicing Altruism Becoming an Agent of Change

FOREWORD

LIFE HAS MANY ENJOYABLE, even wonderful moments. Of course, as we all
know, it contains other kinds of moments as well: times that are
stressful, upsetting, depleting, tiring, even devastating and traumatic
--- or simply dull and dreary. These sometimes come with great
intensity, but mainly they're woven into the fabric of everyday life:
the frustrations of a long commute, a squabble with a roommate, trying
to settle a squirming toddler into a car seat, an unexpected bill, a big
push at work, a nagging illness, criticism from a boss, a painful
breakup with a partner, sullen silence from a teenager...real life.
Faced with great challenges or a long accumulation of small ones, you
may wonder: How hard will this hit me? How soon will I recover? And most
important, how can I help myself? Drawing on her many years of
experience as a psychotherapist, meditation teacher, workshop leader,
and writer, Linda Graham provides many excellent, even life-changing
answers to these questions. She explores the intersection of brain
science, relational psychology, and mindfulness practices to show us how
to recover and develop our natural resilience. The past several decades
have produced a whole library's worth of research on stress, trauma, and
recovery. We have learned how the body and mind react to threats,
losses, and rejections, and we have discovered how some people are able
to ride life's waves with skill and grace by developing new kinds of
flexibility and strength. In what's called the "stress-diathesis" model
in health care, a person's response to the hard parts of life is shaped
by three factors: the intensity of the challenges, his or her
vulnerabilities, and compensating resources. We try to manage the
challenges as best we can. Yet storms still come, bearing down on our
vulnerabilities and taxing our resources.

We all have vulnerabilities, chinks in our mental and emotional armor.
With the warm and accepting perspective of a seasoned therapist, Linda
focuses on how we can protect our vulnerable points and strengthen them
over time. Further, in a rich vein of gold running throughout this book,
Linda offers down-to-earth perspectives and dozens of powerful,
experiential practices for building up our inner resources. She knows
these practices from the inside out, and she offers enthusiastic and
creative ways to use them to help us develop new insights, inspirations,
and capabilities. These resources --- a kind of inner treasure ---
include greater mindfulness, empathy, self-understanding,
self-compassion, security, confidence, interpersonal skills, comfort
with the body, reservoirs of positive emotions, calm, courage, and
flexibility. These help a person deal with life adaptively --- to bend
but not break, and then, as Linda puts it, to bounce back. In a word,
they help a person become more resilient. As the pace of social change
accelerates, as negative developments emerge amid more positive ones,
and as old bulwarks of protection fade or fracture, personal resilience
is more valuable than ever. Rich or poor, child or adult, sick or
healthy --- we all need resilience. Besides helping us to help
ourselves, resilience helps us to help others. In these pages, parents,
teachers, therapists, managers, and health-care providers can learn many
effective ways to support others in developing resilience of their own.
Linda Graham has seen up close what builds resilience and what tears it
down. In language that is heartfelt, often lyrical, and always
practical, and with a comprehensive approach to mind, body, heart, and
spirit, she has distilled a lifetime of clinical practice and deep
reflection into an authoritative and practical guide. Her work is
creative in its groundbreaking integration of ancient contemplative
wisdom, relational psychology, and modern neuroscience, and it is
eminently useful in its compassionate focus on what will help you here
and now. Resilience is like the keel of a sailboat. As the winds of life
blow, resilience keeps you balanced and moving forward. And when the
really big squalls come --- no life is without them --- resilience lets
you right your boat as soon as possible. Using the knowledge you gain
from this book, you'll be able to chart your course with confidence
across the great seas of this precious life.

RICK HANSON, PHD Wellspring Institute for Neuroscience and Contemplative
Wisdom San Rafael, California November 26, 2012

INTRODUCTION

What Resilience Is and How We Rewire Our Brains to Recover It

I'm not afraid of storms, for I am learning how to sail my ship. ---
LOUISA MAY ALCOTT

IN MY WORK as a psychotherapist, I hear many stories of resilience in
action, such as this one from my client Deborah. Deborah had had a
wonderful day at the beach during a heat wave last summer, luxuriating
in the soft sleepiness of the day. She had no worries, no frets: she was
just relaxing into a peaceful feeling that "God's in his heaven; all's
right with the world." Two hours later, stuck in gridlocked traffic and
anxious about getting home in time to fix dinner for friends, she had to
let go of the effortless good feeling of the day and click into the
high-gear planning that she knew how to do so well: whom could she call
and ask to pick up the salmon? Who had keys to let the others in? She
was swiftly calculating and strategizing to navigate around this blip on
the radar screen. When Deborah arrived home, she encountered yet another
setback: the dishwasher had flooded the kitchen. A good half inch of
sudsy water covered the linoleum where people needed to be cooking
dinner thirty minutes ago already. Deborah's friends, who were already
there to help pull the dinner together, pitched in to clear up the mess.
Meanwhile, Deborah was able to quickly check her phone messages. Her
sister-in-law Sheila had called with the news that her brother George in
Detroit had been rushed to the emergency room...She didn't even wait for
the end of the message. Her

brother had had a heart attack four months before, and she was panicking
right now. She immediately called her brother's cell phone; Sheila
answered at the hospital. George was alive; he was stable; he would
probably be kept overnight and released in the morning. What they had
suspected was his second heart attack was angina --- severe enough to
warrant calling the ambulance, but not life threatening. The doctors
were glad he had come in so quickly this time; it looked as if he was
going to be fine. Deborah talked with Sheila for a few more minutes,
discussing whether she should fly out that night; they agreed she could
come the next day. After she hung up the phone, Deborah lost it. Her
mother had had a heart attack when Deborah was eleven and her brother
was eight. Memories of the panic and worry from the week their mother
had been hospitalized flooded over her. Even with a house full of
guests, she collapsed on the couch, shaking and crying. Her friend Gary
came over and put his hands on Deborah's shoulders. Without even knowing
the details of what Deborah was upset about, Gary reminded her of what
she had often said to him in other circumstances: "You are big enough to
hold this." As Deborah remembers it, she could feel her awareness
expanding back out from its implosion like a balloon expanding as breath
is blown into it. "Oh, right. This is now; that was then. That then
turned out fine. This now is fine." (Her mother lived another
thirty-five years, well into her senior years and Deborah's own
adulthood.) "George is okay. I'm okay. Right here, right now, everything
is okay." Deborah came back into a sense of presence, into compassion
for herself and her brother. She remembered the peacefulness she had
felt at the beach earlier in the day and reflected on all the modes of
coping she'd shifted in and out of in just a few hours. She went out
into her garden and breathed a prayer of relief and gratitude, for her
brother, for the empathy of friends, for Gary's caring touch, for the
calm that reconnected her to her inner resources and restored her
resilience. We are all called upon to cope with hiccups and hurricanes
in our lives --- losing our wallet and car keys, discovering mold in the
bathroom, missing three days at the office to care for a sick child ---
and we do. We are resilient heroes in our own lives every day as we
skillfully navigate the disruptive, unwanted changes of the washing
machine going on the fritz or the car needing a new transmission.

Occasionally we have to respond with grace under pressure to greater
troubles and tragedies: infertility or infidelity, a diagnosis of
pancreatic cancer, losing a job, a son wounded in combat overseas.
Sometimes too many things go disastrously wrong all at once: a daughter
arrested for selling pot, a laptop left on a plane, finding out that the
contractor repairing our roof is being sued for shoddy construction
work, all in the same week we're placing an aging parent in a nursing
home. We begin to feel as if we're drinking from a fire hose and about
to go under. Most of us feel internally stressed-out by some external
stressor every single day. Few of us will get through an entire lifetime
without our resilience being seriously challenged by the pain and
suffering inherent in the human condition. None of us is immune to being
asked to cope with what we never asked for, with what we deeply, deeply
do not want. The way we can respond with skill to such unwelcome
challenges is through resilience. Resilience is the capacity to respond
to pressures and tragedies quickly, adaptively, and effectively.
Researchers have found that there's no single best or infallible way to
cope with difficulties. Being able to adapt our coping to a specific
challenge is the skill that allows us to find our footing when we're
thrown off balance by the unknown, by stress, or by trauma. Responding
flexibly can carry us through the ups and downs of our days. In the
words of my yoga teacher, Debra McKnight-Higgins, "Blessed are they who
are flexible, for they shall never be bent out of shape." We now know,
from the latest advances in neuroscience, that capacities for resilience
are innate in the brain, hard-wired in by evolution. How well these
capacities develop as we mature depends on our responses to our life
experiences and how those experiences shape the neural circuitry and
functioning of our brains --- which in turn influence our responses.
Whether we tend to bounce back from terrible setbacks or stay where
we've been thrown depends on our learned patterns of response to other
people and events. These patterns become fixed, not just incorporated
into a behavioral repertoire but deeply encoded into our neural
circuitry, from an early age. They shape not only the ways we cope with
challenges but also the functioning of the brain itself.

Only in recent years have neuroscientists begun to understand how to
harness the brain's capacities to radically rewire these neural circuits
and rebuild the functioning of the brain to increase resilience. Science
doesn't have all the answers yet. The technology that can look inside
the "black box" of the brain and observe its functioning in real time,
as it creates music, reacts to scenes of combat, or grieves over the
death of a beloved pet, is a mere two decades old. The application of
the findings of neuroscience to behavior in real time, as people cope
with losing a job or flunking out of school, is even more recent. New
discoveries are reported daily, but the data are still far from
complete. As in any new science, contradictions and controversies
emerge, are resolved, and reemerge as new perspectives evolve. New
understandings of the structures of the brain are allowing researchers
to hypothesize about the dynamic and interrelated functions of those
structures that can alter neural circuits, pathways, and networks
created by those structures and even change the structures themselves.
According to my friend neurologist Rick Mendius, "Modern neuroscience is
so new that we must be comfortable venturing not only into the unknown
but into error." I'm neither a neuroscientist nor an academic
researcher: I don't conduct laboratory research on brains or on people's
behavior. My laboratory has been in the trenches. For twenty years I
have worked every day with people earnestly seeking better ways to cope
with the unexpected twists and turns of their lives, as a licensed
psychotherapist, consultant and trainer, and workshop leader. For
fifteen years I have been a dedicated practitioner of vipassana
(insight) meditation in the Buddhist contemplative tradition. And for
the past ten years I have also been a diligent student of the
application of neuroscience to healing trauma and recovering resilience.
I've been privileged to study with some of the best thinkers and
innovators in the emerging discipline of interpersonal neurobiology and
in related, cutting-edge modalities of psychotherapy, particularly
accelerated experiential dynamic psychotherapy, emotionally focused
therapy for couples, and sensorimotor psychotherapy, a mindfulness- and
body-based therapy for trauma. It's been a great privilege to study with
the founders of Spirit Rock Meditation Center, masterful practitioners
who bring Buddhist teachings to Western sensibilities with great skill
and integrity.

The greatest privilege of all has been to apply the theories and tools
for recovering resilience in my work with hundreds of clients,
colleagues, workshop participants, and students who have rounded out my
own learning about resilience with their openness and courage. Their
stories are disguised or composited here to protect confidentiality. I
owe them all a deep debt of gratitude. I take full responsibility for
any errors I have made in understanding the latest findings of
neuroscience or in interpreting the thinking of the pioneers who are
applying those findings to clinical psychology and mindfulness practice.
Our interpretations of the emerging data and extrapolations of these
findings to clinical applications are still filtered through our own
subjective experience. Some of the other paradigms I draw on in Bouncing
Back have hundreds, even thousands of years of evidence behind them to
validate their efficacy. All of the tools and techniques used here are
offered in the spirit of helping you discover for yourself what works
best for you. However, it is abundantly clear that we can learn to
bounce back better by consciously rewiring our brain's learned patterns
of coping. To do that most successfully and efficiently, we must know
how to select the new experiences that will best do that rewiring. In
the words of leading neuroscientist Richard Davidson, "Based upon
everything we know about the brain in neuroscience, change is not only
possible, but is actually the rule rather than the exception. It's
really just a question of which influences we're going to choose for our
brain." In Bouncing Back, I present two powerful processes of brain
functioning: conditioning, which determines how our learning of
resilience is encoded in the neural circuitry of our brains in the first
place; and neuroplasticity, which determines how we can use new
experiences to rewire those patterns. Using these processes, you can
master what I call the five Cs of resilient coping: 1. Calm: You can
stay calm in a crisis. 2. Clarity: You can see clearly what's happening
as well as your internal response to what's happening; you can see what
needs to happen next; and you can see possibilities from different
perspectives that will enhance your ability to respond flexibly. 3.
Connection: You can reach out for help as needed; you can learn from
others how to be resilient; and you can connect to resources

that greatly expand your options. 4. Competence: You can call on skills
and competencies that you have learned through previous experience (or
that you learn through Bouncing Back) to act quickly and effectively. 5.
Courage: You can strengthen your faith to persevere in your actions
until you come to resolution or acceptance of the difficulty. Bouncing
Back helps you develop these five Cs of coping by teaching you how to
rewire old patterns of response in your brain that derail resilience and
how to wire in new and better coping skills. It shows how you can apply
the latest discoveries of modern neuroscience to your everyday struggles
to become more resilient. In part 1, you will learn how the brain
develops its strategies for coping in the first place, and how our
earliest experiences in responding to stressors shape the functioning of
the brain's CEO of resilience --- the prefrontal cortex. Do you need to
know how your brain works to skillfully navigate your daily life? No, no
more than you need to know what's under the hood of your car in order to
drive to work, or how the Internet works to check your email. But if you
want to change how you manage your daily life, then knowing how your
brain works, and how you can change how it works, will help you develop
a sense of competence and mastery that in turn will engender a sense of
confidence about rewiring your brain to become more resilient. In part
2, you will also learn self-directed neuroplasticity --- tools and
techniques to harness the capacities of your brain to change and
strengthen itself in lasting ways. The tools are drawn from two of the
most powerful paradigms of brain change known to science: mindfulness,
from the 2,500-year-old Buddhist contemplative tradition, and empathy,
from the 150-year-old practice of Western relational psychology. With
the findings of modern neuroscience to guide the integrated application
of tools from these two paradigms, you won't have to spend years either
meditating in a cave or reclining on an analyst's couch to learn how to
effect immediate and permanent changes in your coping strategies. You'll
learn how to use an integration of these tools in ways that make it
safe, efficient, and effective to tinker with, even wrestle

with, the brain. You can become resilient again, creating options and
choosing wisely, even during catastrophes. The brain rewires itself by
focusing attention on new experiences and encoding in its neural
circuitry the learning from those experiences. And it does that most
quickly through interactions with other people. Parts 3--7 lead you
through a series of experiential exercises you can do on your own, with
a partner, or in a small group that steadily build skills in relational
intelligence, somatic (body-based) intelligence, emotional intelligence,
reflection and choosing options, and the deep wisdom of simply being.
These exercises strengthen the functioning of the prefrontal cortex and
then use that platform both to rewire old coping strategies that don't
work so well anymore and to learn new ones that work better. Following
the exercises, I briefly explain the neuroscience underlying them,
showing how you are rewiring your brain for resilience as you go along.
In my twenty years of clinical practice, over and over again I have seen
people rewire their own brains, making lasting changes for the better in
their capacities to respond to the storms and struggles of their lives.
The well-researched tools and techniques presented here have been
further refined by my own longtime practice and teaching of meditation,
my personal journey through the ups and downs of life, and my study of
the neuroscience of human development and self-transformation, all of
which help guide me in suggesting which tools work well and why. Many
current models of self-help and personal growth and many modalities of
coaching and therapy presume that individuals already have resilient
brain functioning. Bouncing Back takes the time and practice to develop
or rebuild that functioning. Part 8 examines what resilience in the
brain makes possible: finding more meaning and fulfillment, creativity
and productivity, connection and belonging, ease and well-being, and
compassion to skillfully navigate your life and engage with a widening
world. We rediscover the urgent need of the human mind to re-envision
ourselves and the world, and the boundless depths of the human heart and
soul to care. I encourage you to try all the experiential exercises as
you proceed through the book, as practical experiments in rewiring your
brain. Because every brain is conditioned differently, everyone's
experience using these exercises will be different. I suggest you do
them at your own pace. It will be helpful to do the exercises in the
order presented to

progress steadily toward more complex skills. It will be useful to
engage in these experiments with curiosity and openness rather than
following fixed rules and expecting a guaranteed outcome. As you reflect
on the learning your brain is encoding from each exercise, you will
notice that you are rewiring your brain as you go along. As you learn to
rewire your brain from the level of the neurons up, you will experience
the joy of recovering a resilience that will last a lifetime.

PART ONE

HOW THE BRAIN DEVELOPS RESILIENCE -- OR DOESN'T

CHAPTER ONE

How the Brain's Strategies of Resilience Become Wired In

What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters compared to
what lies within us. --- RALPH WALDO EMERSON

MY NEXT-DOOR NEIGHBOR has a big, affectionate, 125-pound malamute named
Barney and an eight-year-old granddaughter who adores him. One day, as
Samantha was arriving to visit, I watched her run up to Barney to give
him a hug. Barney responded exuberantly, licking her face profusely. He
was simply greeting her with affection, but Samantha clearly wasn't
prepared for such rough-and-tumble love: she burst into tears. As I
witnessed Samantha's distress, I immediately felt a sympathetic response
in my own body, as you may have felt in yours --- a rush of "Oh, no!" I
went to comfort Samantha with a hug and a quick wipe of her face with my
sweatshirt. Then I held a bewildered Barney at bay while Samantha's mom
came outside for a more thorough wash-down with a wet washcloth and
clean towel. With her mom's soothing words of "There, there," Samantha
quickly calmed down, wiped a tear from her cheek, then took her mom's
hand and walked over to Barney to start again. Her mom showed her how to
hold her hand out and let Barney lick that first. After that, they both
patted the top of Barney's head, then Samantha slowly moved toward
Barney and gave him a hug. His tail wagged exuberantly, but there was no
more face washing.

As you may have noticed, Samantha learned several resilient coping
strategies from her mom in this encounter with Barney. She learned that
receiving support from others could help her calm down, and she learned
how to approach the big dog in a confident, competent way that didn't
overexcite him. Her brain immediately encoded those lessons in her
neural circuits for future reference. Resilience, like all innate
capacities in the brain, develops as the brain processes or learns from
experience and translates or encodes that learning into its neural
circuitry. Because resilience is all about surviving and thriving, our
brains begin to learn and encode lessons about coping strategies that
keep us alive and safe from the very beginning of brain development.
Some responses to "safe" and "dangerous" even begin in utero. In this
chapter we will examine how learning from experience is translated or
encoded in our brains through the interaction of two powerful mechanisms
of brain functioning. The first is conditioning: broadly speaking, how
the brain learns and stabilizes our conditioned patterns of response
through repeated experience. The second is neuroplasticity: how the
brain remains flexible in order to change that encoding, learning or
unlearning patterns of response, growing new neurons, and connecting
them in new circuits. Conditioning and neuroplasticity work together as
the brain develops and matures. Much of this work occurs in the
prefrontal cortex of the brain. I call this structure of executive
functioning in the brain the CEO of resilience because it guides the
encoding process and integrates the work of other brain structures that
use both conditioning and neuroplasticity to help us learn from our
experiences in the first place and rewire that learning later if need
be. When our conditioning goes well, especially early in our lives, we
build a solid neural foundation for resilience in the brain. The "rules"
encoded in our neural circuitry allow us to respond skillfully and
adaptively to the outer hiccups and hurricanes of our lives that trigger
agitation or distress within. The brain structures that perform the
encoding are stable, yet flexible enough to learn new coping strategies.
They buffer us against the effects of external stressors and traumas
later in life. And that's true for many of us, much of the time.
However, our conditioning --- the wiring of our neural circuitry as we
learn from experience --- sometimes goes awry. When this happens,

we can find ourselves stuck in negative, dysfunctional response patterns
that leave us feeling ineffective and miserable and more vulnerable to
stressors and traumas. We may refrain from pushing back to assert our
needs, watching someone else get the promotion we worked hard for. We
may avoid opening the envelope from an insurance company or doctor,
afraid of bad news, only to discover a month later that the enclosed
letter was no big deal. When encoded early enough in our development,
these patterns can even derail the maturation of the brain itself.
Chapter 2 explores how and why such glitches in our learning may arise.
With an understanding of how our brains develop, we can forgive
ourselves for finding it hard to rewire those early coping strategies if
they failed to become fully established, leaving us floundering in a
"neural swamp," or if they became rigid, leaving us stuck in "neural
cement." When we know how to choose specific experiences to deliberately
rewire our brains for better coping, we can fully recover our capacities
for resilience and even strengthen the brain structures themselves that
encode the new strategies. Neuroscientists have proved irrefutably that
you can teach an old dog new tricks; you can even heal the dog --- or
the brain --- when necessary. Although the initial wiring of our brains
is based on early experience, we know that later experiences, especially
healthy relational ones, can undo or overwrite that early learning to
help us to cope differently and more resiliently with anything, anything
at all.

The Neurobiological Basis for Resilience The human brain is a
social-learning organ. Throughout our lives, it develops and matures
most efficiently in interactions with other human brains. In fact,
initially the brain develops only in interactions with other human
brains. It relies on interactions with other brains to turn on the
actual expression of our genes according to the developmental timetables
that have evolved in small human groups over millions of years. For
example, a human infant typically recognizes the face of its own mother
by three months of age and can say "Dada" and "Mama" (or the equivalent)
for the correct gender of parent by ten months of age. Babies enjoy
gazing at themselves in a mirror by twelve months of age and can string
words together in phrases by eighteen months of age. They become
interested in playing with other children by age two and can

comprehend that someone else is thinking something different from their
own thoughts, by age four. It's the social interactions of the child's
brain with the brains of other people that nurture these neurological
developments. The rapidly growing field of epigenetics explores how
non-genetic factors, such as environmental stimuli, can turn on the
expression of parts of the genetic code. Research shows that contact
with other people can catalyze or inhibit the expression of specific
genes in humans. For example, a person may have a genetically inherited
talent for music, but unless that talent is encouraged by people around
her early on, those "musical genes" may not be expressed, and the talent
will remain undeveloped. Interactions in the early environment stimulate
more growth in brain volume between birth and three years of age than at
any other stage of life. Those early years create the neural foundation
for all subsequent development. The prefrontal cortex develops on a
longer timetable, approximately twenty-five years, stimulated by
empathic relationships with other mature prefrontal cortices.
Evolutionary psychologists now posit that it was the need for our
ancestors to communicate with one another quickly, through body language
and facial expressions, that catalyzed the emergence of empathy,
language, and many other advances in human mental capacities. In other
words, the increased brain volume and the strong executive functioning
of the prefrontal cortex that we needed to become empathic and highly
skilled communicators --- discerning whether situations were safe or
dangerous, whether other people were allies or enemies, making decisions
based on those assessments, formulating a narrative of the experience
and evaluating whether that worked or not, planning a future, and
creating meaning --- are what drove the evolution of the higher cortex
of the human brain in the first place. It still does.

Secure Attachment: The Interpersonal Base of Resilience We learn our
earliest strategies of resilience in infancy, through interacting with
parents, caregivers, and others close to us. The British psychoanalyst
John Bowlby proposed sixty years ago that human babies are "programmed"
by evolution to "seek physical proximity to a

caregiver in times of perceived threat or danger." Neuropsychologists
have repeatedly demonstrated that Bowlby's theory of attachment and the
fear-attachment-exploration motivational system underlying it are valid
and form the neurobiological basis of our earliest learning of
resilience. Fear (like Samantha's startle reaction to Barney's licking
her face) naturally drives us to seek reassurance and protection from
someone older, wiser, stronger, and able to help. This behavior, wired
in from birth, is lifelong. The successful soothing of the fear in an
empathic and responsive relationship allows the child --- or adult ---
to venture out and continue to follow the natural urges to play,
explore, and create. This is resilient behavior based on what Bowlby
called "secure attachment." The parents' responses to the baby's initial
attachment behaviors encode the earliest and most enduring internal
working models or rules of coping in the human brain. You may recognize
some of your own patterns of conditioning in the style of secure
attachment described below, or in the three other universal styles
described in chapter 2. In our quest to recover our resilience,
understanding the results of this early conditioning is essential. The
earliest strategies for resilience become stably encoded in our neural
circuitry by twelve to eighteen months of age and have what the
neuropsychologist Louis Cozolino calls "permanent psychological
significance." They even affect the maturation of the developing brain
itself. In rewiring our brains for resilience, we must take this early
conditioning into account.

How Secure Attachment Leads to Stable and Flexible Coping Bowlby and
other attachment researchers have found that secure attachment is the
relational style that is most effective in enabling the prefrontal
cortex to mature and "teaches" the brain to be resilient, both stable
and flexible. According to Pat Ogden, the developer of sensorimotor
psychotherapy, "Secure attachment is the strongest inoculator you can
have against future trauma." When a parent repeatedly responds to a
baby's smile with a smile in return, perhaps amplified by gentle
holding, playful cooing, and empathic baby talk, the earliest processing
of the baby's neural circuits is based on a sense of safety and trust.
If a parent consistently responds readily and calmly to a baby's
expressions of distress (by changing its

diaper or with a feeding), the baby learns to soothe itself, and the
baby's neural circuits begin to stabilize around the sense that "I am
important. I matter. I am loved." The baby also learns that calls for
help are answered and that solutions to problems exist. In other words,
basic patterns of resilience are established. If a growing child sees
that his efforts to communicate with a parent are valued and understood,
even if the parent can't do what the child wants, right then or ever,
the child's neural circuits stabilize around a trustworthy sense of his
own competence and mastery. Learning to communicate our needs and wants
to others, mastering various strategies to get those needs met, trusting
that we deserve to have those needs met, and delighting in our growing
competencies to do so form our very first experiences of resilience.
This resilience grows as we learn to bounce back from moments of fear,
anger, grief, and shame. We learn strategies for reaching out to people
for help and protection. As our neural circuits mature and integrate,
the feelings of trust, being loved, and becoming competent generate a
sense of inner security. They create neural patterns of response
flexibility that become the brain's template for resilience for the rest
of our lives. The maturation of the developing prefrontal cortex serves
as a scaffolding for further healthy selfdevelopment, self-regulation,
and self-confidence and further learning about resilient coping. As we
grow older, our brains learn to navigate an increasingly complex world,
primarily through interactions with other resilient people: teachers,
coaches, older siblings, peers, partners, mentors, therapists, and role
models from life, history, and literature. Over our lifetime, it is
through interactions with other people that we learn how to handle
disappointment, how to stop gossip and backbiting at the office, how to
pull a team of people together to stop the building of a toxic waste
dump in our neighborhood, or how to think outside the box when it comes
to helping a child overcome a speech impediment. Research indicates that
even as adults, our brain's preferred method of learning resilience
continues to be through interacting with resilient people around us,
through dialogue and shared work and play. An ancient Chinese proverb
reminds us: A single conversation with a wise man is better than ten
years of study. A secure base of neural stability and flexibility helps
you remain open to new learning. You can easily harness the brain's
neuroplasticity

to change old patterns of response and to strengthen the prefrontal
cortex, which coordinates the encoding of those responses. Confident in
your ability to respond effectively, you can take advantage of new
possibilities. Your innate capacity for resilience continues to develop
fully.

How the Brain Learns Habits of Behavior Focusing our attention on any
experience stimulates cells called neurons in various parts of the brain
to fire; this firing extends from the brain into the nerves in the rest
of the body. The experience may be an external event, like Barney's
licking Samantha's face, or an internal response to the event, like
Samantha's reaction of upset. When neurons fire in response to
experience, they send electrical and chemical messages to other neurons
across the gaps that separate them (the synapses), at times creating
synaptic connections with more than five thousand other neurons at once.
This neural messaging and synaptic connecting reinforce pathways in the
brain. The reactions of people around us then activate another response
within us, like Samantha's calming down in response to her mom's
soothing touch. (If her mother had acted differently, for example by
raising her voice, Samantha could have experienced another fear response
instead.) These bursts of neural messaging and connecting (processing
the sense that a person or situation is safe or dangerous) may last only
milliseconds. But as an experience is repeated, the thousands of neurons
that fired together and created the neural network of the initial
response tend to fire together again, strengthening that network and
preparing the brain to respond in the same way when it next encounters a
similar situation. The neuroscientist Donald Hebb coined the phrase
"Neurons that fire together wire together." It describes how repeated
experiences and repeated neural firings cause neurons to strengthen the
connections between them. These strengthened synaptic connections wire
the meaning of an experience into more and more stable circuitry and
more enduring patterns of response. How we respond to an event --- this
situation was safe or dangerous; this is what I did to cope with that
situation; that coping worked well or poorly --- becomes a stable,
enduring pattern of response.

As synaptic connections become stronger and more stable over time, they
begin to link up in neural pathways. When circuits are stable, the
strength of the neural networks of associated memories and meanings
makes it very likely that we will respond to the same or similar
experiences in ways that we have already responded before. For example,
Samantha's early experience of overcoming fear by receiving comfort from
her mother may be reinforced by later experiences in which other people
provide comfort or protection. Over time, simply the memory of such
comfort may be enough to soothe her in frightening situations. And
eventually, the memory of such support may be enough to prevent the fear
response from occurring at all. This encoding of experiences and
responses into stable, enduring neural patterns is what neuroscientists
call conditioning. Conditioning creates automatic habits of behavior by
encoding the neural firing patterns of repeated responses to experience,
stabilizing the neural circuitry of that learning, and storing those
patterns of response in implicit (unconscious) memory. When you repeat a
pattern of behavior often enough, eventually you don't have to focus
your attention on it anymore: the neural circuits underlying that
behavior have stabilized in your brain, enabling you to respond to a
similar situation automatically. Creating habits of behavior through
conditioning is your brain's way of being efficient. Without
conditioning, you'd have to relearn how to tie your shoes every morning
and figure out which siblings or colleagues were trustworthy all over
again every day. You'd never have the time or mental bandwidth to enjoy
the fruits of being human --- never be able, for example, to teach your
kids to think about people besides themselves, create a business plan,
or write short stories. We can deliberately use conditioning to create
positive habits of resilience. For example, when the car won't start in
the morning, prior conditioning determines whether you panic or have the
presence of mind to call upon available resources. Perhaps you've
already created a good relationship with a neighbor who can jumpstart
the car, or you have an AAA membership so that you can call a
professional. Maybe there's money in the sock drawer for a cab to take
you to work, or maybe you know you can use your credit card to rent a
car. In the three to five seconds it takes your brain to remember the
resources available and choose the best plan, you have evoked that
conditioned safety net of resilience.

This conditioning is, in part, how the prefrontal cortex of the brain
develops the five Cs of coping. If we have learned from our experiences
with others how to calm down our nervous system, we can remain
levelheaded in a crisis. If we have learned how to reflect on and make
sense of our experience, we can maintain clarity in evaluating our
experience and possibilities of response. If we have learned to trust
ourselves in relationships with others, we can connect with resources,
both internal and external, that expand our options for coping. If we
have learned specific skills and become competent at them through past
experience (or the experiential exercises in this book), we can draw on
those competencies now and in the future. If we have found the courage
to persevere in coping with life experiences before, we can call upon
that courage to help us persevere now. The stabilization that comes from
conditioning is a natural process in the brain; it is also neutral. Just
as the same soil can grow strawberries or poison oak, the mechanisms of
conditioning can create good habits or bad habits. Our response to
feelings of anger, for example, can be positive or negative. We can
learn to channel anger into effective action for a good cause, or we can
shoot ourselves in the foot when our anger habitually causes us to act
abusively toward other people. Sometimes we realize that our learned and
conditioned patterns of response to experience are less than fully
resilient. We see that stable can mean "stuck." We may find ourselves
blowing our top at the least provocation or slinking away from the
dinner table when our spouse reminds us we've forgotten to do something
as promised --- yet again. If we have been dependent on someone else to
handle our affairs, we may have no clue whatsoever what to do when we've
lost our home to a fire or mortgage foreclosure. In order to cope with
change, we have to change how we cope. No matter what the external
trigger, it's our internal response, based on our neural wiring, that's
important for resilience. Often we can't change the external stressors.
But we can definitely do something about our internal conditioned
responses to those stressors. Through the techniques of new
conditioning, deconditioning, and reconditioning that I present in part
2, we can learn to rewire previous patterns of response that are less
than resilient, or even dysfunctional. The capacity to rewire exists
because of the brain's other powerful mechanism of functioning: our
innate neuroplasticity.

How Patterns Can Be Rewired If conditioning is the process that encodes
stable patterns in our neural circuitry, neuroplasticity is the
mechanism that works to alter them, to rewire learned responses to
stressors. Technically, neuroplasticity is the lifelong capacity of the
brain to create new neurons (brain cells) and connections among neurons
(neural pathways and circuits). As mentioned earlier, focusing attention
on an experience stimulates the neurons related to that experience to
fire. This works for internal experiences, too. When you focus attention
on the conditioned pattern you want to rewire, you activate the neural
networks of that pattern and cause the neurons to fire again. When you
know how to harness the neuroplasticity of your brain in that moment,
you can alter the pattern. When we flare in resentment when someone cuts
in front of us at the gas station, for example, we can choose instead to
rewire our coping strategies to let go of the resentment. We might make
allowances because we can remember a time when we were in such a hurry
that we did the same thing. Instead of putting off calling the plumber
to fix the leaking showerhead, we can train ourselves to take action as
soon as we see the leak. Because of neuroplasticity, we can always
create new pathways and circuits that are more resilient and effective
in responding to the challenges in our lives. All mental activity
creates neural structure. Using neuroplasticity to strengthen brain
structure is like working out at the gym to build up our muscles. (Of
course, the structures of the brain aren't actually muscles; they're
densely networked circuits and pathways of neurons. But strengthening
the capacities of these neurons to communicate with one another, and to
integrate the information being processed into new responses, is
comparable to working out to strengthen our muscles.) As Norman Doidge
says in The Brain That Changes Itself, "If you want to lift a hundred
pounds, you don't expect to succeed the first time. You start with a
lighter weight and work up little by little. You actually fail to lift a
hundred pounds, every day, until the day you succeed. But it is in the
days when you are exerting yourself that the growth is occurring." Once
you've increased the "lifting capacity" of your brain structure through
self-directed neuroplasticity, you can alter any stable (even stuck)
patterns of coping that aren't working. You can recover your resilience.

Conditioning and neuroplasticity are mechanisms powerful enough not only
to shape the brain's software --- our learned habits --- but also to
shape its hardware --- the structures coordinated by the prefrontal
cortex. To learn how to skillfully use these tools to recover our
resilience, and to better understand how that shaping and strengthening
happen, let's "take a peek under the hood" of the brain.

Getting to Know the Brain That Does the Wiring and Rewiring The adult
brain weighs only about three pounds, but it consumes 25 percent of the
energy used by the body every day. It uses that energy to process more
than fifty experiences per second. There are approximately one hundred
billion neurons in the average adult brain, with additional billions of
neural cells extending throughout the body. Each neuron is capable of
communicating with 5,000-- 7,000 other neurons. The number of possible
connections among neurons at any given instant is greater than the
number of atoms in the known universe. The complexity of the human brain
creating its neural networks, including the multitudes of its schemas,
or models, of how the world works (our patterns of resilience), is
staggering.

The brain learns to be resilient from both the bottom (the lower brain)
up and the top (the cortex) down. The lower brain is our evolutionary
inheritance from our reptilian and mammalian ancestors. Located in the
"downstairs" of the brain, from the base of the skull to the midbrain,
the fast-track lower brain reacts to events rapidly (in milliseconds)
and automatically (requiring no conscious effort). The higher brain ---
located in the "upstairs" of the human cortex --- evolved later through
our primate ancestors and operates consciously, reflectively, and on a
slow track (requiring seconds or longer).

The Lower Brain: Fast Track and Unconscious The lower brain controls our
hard-wired responses to any stressor. In evolutionary terms, these were
our earliest survival strategies. (See

figure 1 and table 1.) Our initial perceptions of and reactions to
safety or danger are always processed first by the limbic system (the
five structures of the midbrain), especially by the amygdala, our
brain's 24/7 alarm center, located just below the orbitofrontal area of
the prefrontal cortex. This tiny structure constantly scans signals from
the environment (filtered by the thalamus) and assesses them for safety
or danger --- assigning them an initial appraisal of good or bad. The
amygdala, like all structures of the lower brain, operates entirely
without conscious awareness and draws on its own implicit memories ---
those stored outside our awareness --- to distinguish between safe
situations ("good") and potentially dangerous ones ("bad") that require
an immediate reaction. Signals from the body that a situation is safe
are also processed by the vagus nerve in the brain stem: the "vagal
brake" keeps the nervous system calm and relaxed. But when the amygdala
evaluates a person or situation as dangerous, within milliseconds it
sends electrical and chemical signals along neural pathways to the
prefrontal cortex. The signal "Do something!" is our first automatic
survival response. It involves an immediate reaching out for connection
and help and further assessment of danger. This is the neurobiological
process behind the drive to seek connection and reassurance when we
experience fear.

If no one responds to our reaching out for help, or if someone responds
in a way that alarms us further, the amygdala sends a rapid cascade of
chemical signals through the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
to the autonomic nervous system, which regulates the muscles and organs
of our body, also outside our awareness. This signal says, "Do something
else": either rev up into fight-flight-freeze mode or shut down, going
into submit-collapse mode, which is our secondary automatic survival
response. (One branch of the vagus nerve can also directly trigger a
collapse response of fainting.) The lower brain operates so fast that
its signals can trigger the survival responses of fight-flightfreeze or
submit-collapse even before the prefrontal cortex has a chance to direct
actions to reach out and connect to others. These instinctive survival
responses are what we default to when other, conscious strategies
haven't been learned or are temporarily unavailable. This is why it's so
essential to strengthen the prefrontal cortex to recover our resilience.
A strong, mature prefrontal cortex can regulate the revving up or
shutting down response of the nervous system and quell the fear response
of the amygdala.

Table 1. Resonance Circuit of the Social Brain Lower Brain

Higher Brain

Unconscious but fast

Conscious but slow

Brain stem: regulation of automatic body functions related to survival
responses

Cerebral cortex: organization of sensory, motor, and conscious
experiences; processing of learned interactions with the world

Limbic system: initial processing of emotions, learning, memory,
approach-avoid responses Amygdala: initial appraisal, meaning making,
emotional processing of "safe" and "dangerous," storing of learning in
implicit memory, decision making based on past experience Thalamus:
relay station for sense perceptions Hypothalamus: release of
neurotransmitters and hormones related to body's equilibrium
Hippocampus: retrieval of memories from the past; encoding of experience
into explicit memory; "time stamping" of memories

Frontal lobes: regulation of motor behaviors, language, executive
functioning, decision making, abstract reasoning, and directed attention
Prefrontal cortex: executive center, master integrator (see table 2 for
functions) Anterior cingulate cortex: focusing attention; sensing pain;
coordinating thoughts, feelings, and body's responses to feelings;
noticing errors Insula: sensing what's happening in body; conduit
between limbic system and cortex; aids reflection on emotional
experience

Mirror neurons (not shown): distributed throughout the brain;
comprehension of another's intentional behavior

The Higher Brain: Slow Track and Conscious The frontal lobes of the
cerebral cortex, or the higher human brain (see figure 2), perform
conscious processing and the functions of reasoning, reflection,
language, and empathy. The structures in the frontal lobes enable us to
identify and choose among options and develop new coping strategies.

The prefrontal cortex, located in the lower part of the frontal lobes,
can be thought of as the executive center of the brain. It integrates
information coming from the lower brain with input from the higher
brain. (See table 2.) As a result of its integrative capacities, the
prefrontal cortex can regulate the survival responses from the lower
brain. It coordinates information from two different memory systems:
implicit memory, which is outside our awareness, and explicit memory,
which is

within our awareness. This capacity is essential for rewiring the
patterns of our earliest conditioning. The prefrontal cortex manages the
surges of our body-based emotions through conscious reflection and wise
discernment, which allows us to retain energy and passion for coping and
thriving while preventing us from being constantly panicked by floods of
emotions or paralyzed by shutting down against the emotional flood. The
prefrontal cortex also makes possible the processes of attunement
(tuning into the feelings of others), empathy (making sense of the
feelings of others), and self-awareness (making sense of ourselves and
our story), which enable us to efficiently rewire our brains. This
rewiring is what increases our capacities for response flexibility, the
neurobiological platform of resilience. All of these executive, top-down
functions are integrated by the prefrontal cortex, primarily by
coordinating the functioning of the right and left hemispheres of the
brain. The higher brain has two hemispheres that respond differently to
experience: the right hemisphere, which is primarily associated with
feelings and emotional responses, and the left hemisphere, which is
associated with more rational and logical processing. The prefrontal
cortex coordinates the processing of these two hemispheres, a function
that is essential to encoding new and more resilient patterns of coping.
Both the right and left hemispheres perceive, process, and respond to
life events consciously --- with awareness. Both encode learning into
explicit memory. However, they do so very differently. (See table 3.)

Table 2. Functions and Structures of the Prefrontal Cortex Functions

Integrative Pathways

Regulating body; recovering from a stress response

Coordinating processing of lower brain and higher brain; integrating
bodily sensations and emotions with thoughts, reflections, and conscious
decisions

Quelling fear response of the amygdala

Integrating right hemisphere (felt sense of feelings and
social-emotional self) with left hemisphere (logic and rational thought
and verbal narrative of self)

Managing emotions;

Integrating implicit (unconscious) with explicit

modulating extreme emotions

(conscious) memories; retrieving dissociated or compartmentalized trauma
memories

Attunement: tuning into another person's feelings and perspectives (or
our own); sensing even without words what action is appropriate

Integrating awareness of past, present, and future; creating a
continuity of self

Empathy: the thinking, feeling, imagining, and discerning that make
sense of what's happening in ourselves or in another

Integrating ego states, or "parts" or voices of the personal self into a
whole self

Insight and self-knowing; developing a coherent narrative of self

Managing interpersonal experience, the resonant influence of one human
brain on another

Response flexibility: the ability to pause, step back, reflect, shift
perspectives, create options, and choose wisely

Managing states of consciousness: the flow between doing and being,
focus and spaciousness, self and nonself

Intuition: inner wisdom, different from logic; felt rather than thought
Morality: behaviors based on empathy for the common good

Subareas of the Prefrontal Cortex Orbitofrontal: coordinates appraisals
of lower brain and higher brain; integrates information from external
and internal worlds; helps regulate emotions, motivation and reward,
empathy with others Ventral medial: processes judgments about people and
actions to take; ponders meaning and assesses alternatives Dorsal
lateral: working memory; play space to reshape memories

The dynamic integration of these functions and pathways supports
resilience and well-being. The many structures of the right hemisphere
process experience received through our senses (such as visual images
and sensations of motion) and our emotions, as well as through our
relationships with others. The fusiform gyrus, a small structure in the
right hemisphere, recognizes faces, interprets the emotional meaning of
another person's facial expressions, and helps us regulate our own alarm
by connecting to the resources of safe others. The right hemisphere
processes our experiences holistically: for example, we recognize
someone's face all at once rather than adding up individual perceptions
of the eyes, nose, lips, and other features to make a whole. It
processes any situation as a gestalt, the big picture, automatically.
Because of its extensive neural connections with the limbic system in
the lower brain --- the source of our most primitive emotions --- the
right hemisphere is sometimes

referred to as our "emotional brain." It is the seat of the sense of
self --- who we know ourselves to be in relation to the world --- and
the seat of our common humanity. In contrast, the left hemisphere
processes experience logically (for example, by identifying cause and
effect), linearly (by evaluating one piece of data after another in
sequence), and through language. (The verbal processing and speech
centers are located on the left side of the brain.) The left hemisphere
matures in the developing brain significantly later than the right and
so it has fewer neural connections with the limbic system than the
"emotional" right does. The left hemisphere has been dubbed the rational
side of the brain: its massive powers of analysis, judgment, and
planning are what have made science and civilization possible.

Table 3. Right and Left Hemisphere Structures and Functions Left
Hemisphere

Right Hemisphere

Verbal processing: language, speech, symbols

Nonverbal processing: visual images, body movements, emotions,
experiences in relationship

Linear processing (one bit of data after another in sequence)

Holistic processing (seeing the big picture)

Logical, rational processing: abstract reasoning and analysis, cause and
effect

Emotional processing, including processing of facial expressions in
fusiform gyrus Sense of social and emotional self

Corpus callosum: links the processing of the two hemispheres (integrated
by the prefrontal cortex)

Lobes of the Cerebral Cortex (see figure 2) Occipital: visual processing
Parietal: touch, sensory perception, orienting in time and space
Temporal: auditory processing, language and memory Somatosensory and
motor: information about the body, movement Frontal: concentration,
organization, planning, reasoning, judgment, decision making,
creativity, abstract thinking, emotional processing, relating to others

That nature evolved the two hemispheres so differently in effect doubles
the volume of neural real estate we can use to assess, reflect on, and
solve our problems. The right and left hemispheres are linked by a small
band of integrative fibers called the corpus callosum. This brain
structure tends to be thicker in women than in men, perhaps explaining
why women sometimes process their emotions more easily than men do. In
addition to integrating the right hemisphere's felt sense of our
emotions with the left hemisphere's rational assessment of them, the
prefrontal cortex integrates the various facets or "parts" that make up
the personal self, creating a coherent narrative of our self and a
continuity of self across time. It integrates the past and the present
with anticipations for the future --- what we can do about the next
unknown. It also integrates the focused states of "doing" with the
defocused states of "being." Three more structures enable the prefrontal
cortex to coordinate the mechanisms of conditioning and neuroplasticity.
The hippocampus, located next to the amygdala and technically part of
the limbic system, functions as part of the cortex. It translates
experiences and learning from implicit into explicit memory. The
hippocampus greatly increases our capacities to make wise, conscious
choices by allowing us to draw on explicit memories of what has worked
previously in order to guide us in coping resiliently now. The
hippocampus doesn't become fully functional until about 2½ years of age,
which is why we have "childhood amnesia" --- little or no recollection
of our earliest childhood. Body-based emotional memories, however, still
operate implicitly --- below the radar --- lifelong. I discuss how
significantly these early implicit memories affect our resilience in
chapter 2. The anterior cingulate cortex is adjacent to and functions
almost as a part of the prefrontal cortex. It allows the brain to focus
attention. The anterior cingulate also functions as a sort of switching
station between the right and left hemispheres, enabling integration of
our thoughts and our feelings. Tucked behind the prefrontal cortex is
the insula, a body of cortical tissue that folds down into the limbic
system. The insula serves as a vital conduit between the higher and
lower brains; it allows us to know consciously our body's responses to
internal or external signals.

The insula also helps us interpret the meaning of other people's
behavior through mirror neurons. These neurons fire in various parts of
the cortex when we observe another person's actions, and they help us
learn new behaviors by imitating others. They also help us comprehend
the intentions of other people's behavior when we see them act in a
particular way. For instance, when we see someone across a room lifting
her hand, mirror neurons help us discern whether she is waving to
attract attention or reaching up to get something off a shelf. The
discovery of mirror neurons by neuroscientists is a good example of
extrapolation from scientific data to clinical applications.
Neuropsychologists have hypothesized that mirror neurons also allow us
to feel and comprehend the emotions of another person and could be the
neurological basis of empathy. As we observe another person's nonverbal
communication, neurons are firing in our brains, mirroring what we're
seeing and sending the signal of that mirroring to the insula so that we
feel in our own bodies what the other person is feeling in theirs. The
insula then sends these emotional signals to the prefrontal cortex to be
interpreted.

Three Circuits of Self-Directed Neuroplasticity The prefrontal cortex
integrates the functioning of all the brain structures you have learned
about in this chapter, processing our experiences through what I call
three circuits of self-directed neuroplasticity. The first is an
interpersonal resonance circuit. This resonance circuit allows us to use
interactions between our brain and another (resilient) human brain to
strengthen the prefrontal cortex and to learn better strategies for
coping. You will learn to use this resonance circuit in chapter 4. The
second circuit is what I call a focusing network; it is the basis of two
of the three processes of brain change you learn to use in chapter 6.
The focusing network uses mostly the structures in the midline of the
brain --- the brain stem, the amygdala, the hippocampus, the anterior
cingulate cortex, the insula, and the prefrontal cortex itself. We can
think of the prefrontal cortex using these midline (or medial)
structures to focus attention on a specific experience, encode
strategies of coping into the neural circuitry, and pull together the
sense of self --- our personal history, personality, and identity and
our sense of how we operate in the world. The focusing network is
purposeful and self-referencing. The

processes of new conditioning and reconditioning (discussed in chapter
6) rewire the coping strategies encoded by this network. I call the
third circuit a defocusing network. It incorporates the functioning of
structures on the sides of the cortex (a lateral circuit), level with
and above the ears, to orient us in time and space. When our attention
is drawn away from an intense focus on immediate events, as in a
daydream or reverie, the neural circuitry in our brain can relax. The
brain is free to create new associations among the networks of old
encoded responses. This defocusing network, operating especially in the
right hemisphere, is the basis of the deconditioning discussed in
chapter 6, which allows us to unlearn and then rewire the strategies
encoded by the focusing network. These brain structures and networks
function together to support our capacities of resilience. Here's a
simple example of how it happens. I can startle as quickly as anybody
when I see a spider in the bathtub. My fear response is a reflex
hard-wired into my lower brain, operating to keep me alive when I
suddenly encounter a potentially dangerous situation. However, my higher
brain has spent years learning about spiders, and I know that the
spiders in my bathtub are almost certainly harmless. I also know that
they can't crawl up the slippery side of the tub to attack me, and I've
learned that spiders are, in fact, beneficial allies in my garden,
eating all kinds of bugs. The startle reflex to the threat of the spider
in my tub is now tempered by reflection from my higher brain. I can also
choose how I respond to my startle. Killing the spider would get rid of
the threat right away. But I know that I will feel better about myself
if, rather than squashing it and flushing it down the drain, I scoop it
up with a cup and a stiff piece of paper and take it out to my garden.
(In this situation, I'm a much bigger threat to the spider than it is to
me.) I have trained myself to keep a plastic cup and old greeting card
on the shelf in the bathroom for just such purposes. My response in this
situation illustrates the value of strengthening the capacities of the
prefrontal cortex to rewire the brain to employ the five Cs of coping. I
remain calm. I can see clearly that the spider is not a threat. I've
become competent at dealing with this situation. I am connected to
resources: I have my "spider transport" handy. All of this knowledge and
conditioning helps me feel courageous rather than frightened when I next
encounter a spider in the tub.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter, you have been introduced to
several key points about resilience and your brain. •

•

•

Capacities for resilience --- bouncing back when you're thrown off
center --- are evolutionarily hard-wired into your brain, part of your
birthright for coping with the stresses inherent in being alive and
human. Interactions with others --- such as experiencing empathic,
responsive parenting --- instill a sense of safety and trust, a sense of
importance and being loved, and a sense of competence and mastery that
become your brain's first templates of resilience and serve as lifelong
buffers from stress and trauma. That sense of security supports healthy
self-development, selfregulation, self-confidence, and the maturing of
the prefrontal cortex of the brain. The prefrontal cortex coordinates
other brain structures and circuits to use conditioning and
neuroplasticity to learn and stabilize patterns of resilience and to
unlearn or rewire them later when necessary.

In the next chapter, you will learn some of the common ways in which the
early learning of resilience can go awry, as it does in all of us more
than we would like, and how, when that happens, you can use the
strengthening of the prefrontal cortex and the brain's innate
neuroplasticity to get your resilience back on track.

CHAPTER TWO

How the Wiring In of Resilience Can Go Awry

All the world is full of suffering. It is also full of overcoming. ---
HELEN KELLER

AS OUR BRAINS DEVELOP, it is all too easy for the learning of resilient
coping strategies to go awry, causing us to encode responses and
behaviors that are unproductive or even harmful. We may have learned to
respond to thwarted plans by threatening people rather than negotiating.
We may pretend to not see bullying on the playground as long as our kid
isn't involved, rather than taking up the cause of safety and
supervision at recess with the school administration. We may hang up the
phone in irritation when the customer service representative puts us on
hold again, leaving our business unfinished, rather than proactively
asking to talk to a supervisor directly. This chapter examines five
possible glitches in the ways our brains process experience that can
derail the development of our resilience, and then it looks at how we
can use neuroplasticity to restore our resilience.

1.  Problems in Learning Strategies of Resilience from Others Chapter 1
    shows how a secure attachment between a growing child and his or her
    parents supports the development of resilience and enhances the
    maturation of the brain's prefrontal cortex. John Bowlby and other
    attachment researchers also identified three other styles of
    attachment

that are less successful in developing resilience and may even derail
it. Portions of these may resonate with your own experience. If they do,
remember that these are not permanent conditions. In later chapters of
this book you will learn how to strengthen the functioning of the
prefrontal cortex and rewire these patterns to recover your resilience.

Insecure-Avoidant Attachment Leads to Coping That Is Stable but Not
Always Flexible When a parent is indifferent or distant, paying scant
attention to the complex (and sometimes overwhelming) inner life of a
baby and missing or ignoring the baby's attempts to connect, the baby's
neural circuits begin to encode a feeling that "I'm not important. I
don't matter. How foolish of me to ask for attention." As these circuits
are reinforced through repetition, that feeling can solidify into a kind
of rigid selfreliance: "Knock, knock --- nobody home; I guess it's all
up to me." If a parent is dismissive, rejecting, or downright critical,
the baby toddling toward childhood begins to internalize the message
"I'm bad, not good enough, not worthy." The hurt, shame, and loneliness
of such experiences can be too much to bear, and the neural circuits
conditioned by these experiences begin a defensive process of walling
off or shutting down against emotions or connections with people. With
that rigid walling off, the prefrontal cortex doesn't develop its full
range of neural flexibility. This pattern is known as insecure-avoidant
attachment. These strategies for protection may serve the child's
short-term need to cope, but they take a toll. A child who has
experienced this style of early conditioning learns to avoid many
emotional experiences as potentially painful. She may fear interacting
with people and withdraw. It is better to feel nothing at all than to
feel so much pain; it is better to be alone than to risk being
repeatedly hurt. In this emotional environment, it becomes harder and
harder for the prefrontal cortex and related structures to take in new
experiences and develop new strategies. In extreme cases, the neural
circuitry can become like a neural cement: patterns of response become
more and more rigid rather than remaining fluid and receptive to change,
and the capacity to adapt is lost. Adults who have learned to cope by
shutting down their emotions and narrowing their range of relational
experiences can nonetheless be phenomenally successful in this world.
There is a value in learning to rely on oneself, to be able to forge
ahead without asking for help or

needing guidance. Such individuals can develop a great aptitude for
focusing on the nuts and bolts of a complex external world rather than
navigating a messy inner swamp. The lone ranger can deal. But
researchers have documented that the insecure-avoidant style of coping
can lead to a compulsive self-reliance, a continual minimizing and
devaluing of other people. As we grow older, this style can also cause a
deep discomfort with a person's own feelings or those of others, even
when these individuals want to open their hearts and feel concern and
compassion. The old, conditioned patterns of coping can lead to real
fears of intimacy, vulnerability, and dependency, and a marked inability
to learn anything new. If it becomes rigid enough, this coping style
precludes learning how to feel and to relate to others well.

Insecure-Anxious Attachment Leads to Coping That Is Flexible but Not
Always Stable When a parent is consistently inconsistent, sometimes
attentive and loving and at other times harsh or punitive, sometimes
overinvolved and at other times off in their own world, the child
doesn't know which end is up or what's coming next. She develops an
excessive focus on the parent just to survive and may become one of the
compulsive caregivers our society actually relies on to keep itself
going. In consequence, she cannot focus sufficiently on her growing
self, and many important neural circuits remain underdeveloped and
unintegrated in her brain. The prefrontal cortex doesn't stabilize
fully. A person who has experienced this style of early conditioning can
experience a sense of inner quicksand. Patterns of coping remain in the
chaos of a neural swamp rather than solidifying into stable circuits.
Adults who never felt secure with a parent or sure of themselves are
painfully subject to abandonment fears and can be hypervigilant about
loss of connection. The capacity for resilience can be too easily
derailed to become passivity, an anxious preoccupation of what others
think of them, or a sense of victimhood.

Disorganized Attachment Leads to Coping That Is Neither Stable nor
Flexible This is the style least likely to occur, but inevitably
derailing of resilience when it does. A history of unresolved trauma or
abuse in a parent can

cause episodes of dissociation or "checking out" --- a momentary neural
disintegration. When this happens to a parent, the child may develop the
sense that the parent has disappeared, triggering an implicit sense of
threat to his or her own survival. When a parent abuses a child, whether
just once or continually, the child experiences the parent as a source
of fear and pain rather than as the child's one guaranteed safe haven.
In either case, the child may want to run to the parent for soothing and
protection, but she finds that doing so is way too scary. In this
environment, the child's developing neural integration can be stalled.
The prefrontal cortex is at risk of not developing its capacities to
integrate multiple functions of the brain. The child may still be able
to learn more functional coping mechanisms from people other than the
parent. She may reach out to other people for help, care for others as a
way to get help, or become brilliantly, if rigidly, self-reliant, not
needing any help. Or she, like the parent, may experience episodes of
helplessness, paralysis, dissociation, and fragmentation --- collapsing
rather than coping. We wouldn't be able to function as adults if our
brains were this disorganized much of the time. But the vulnerability to
falling into even momentary disorganization puts the possibility of
being reliably resilient at risk.

How Early Attachment Conditions Our Resilience The first two and a half
years of life are crucial to the development of the prefrontal cortex.
The brain is not only learning strategies of resilience but also
developing its own ability to create such strategies. When the
functioning of the prefrontal cortex itself is compromised, it becomes
much more difficult to unlearn ineffective coping strategies and replace
them with better ones. Neuroscientists and developmental psychologists
have demonstrated repeatedly that these four general styles of
attachment and coping remain stable over a lifetime --- reliably so 85
percent of the time. Unless new experiences cause a rewiring of the old
circuits, the patterns of coping we learn as toddlers become our default
responses to life's perils and pitfalls. "As the twig is bent, so grows
the tree" holds true for the nature of our brain functioning as well as
for nature itself. For example, we may have learned that if we didn't do
what our parents wanted us to do, they wouldn't like it (or us!) and
they would react with anger, indifference, or scorn. In consequence, we
may later

find ourselves too easily complying with other people's wishes or
demands, to the detriment of our own well-being, without realizing which
implicit habits or rules in our brains are driving this response. If, as
children, we learned to believe from other people that we were not good
enough in some way, that core belief will very likely operate
unconsciously for the rest of our lives, unless we learn how to change
it. Fortunately for those of us who didn't experience optimal
conditioning early on, we can learn new skills and strategies of coping
and develop "earned" secure attachment from new experiences with other
people. We can learn resilience through relationships with people who
are more resilient than we are. We can harness the neuroplasticity of
our brains to rewire the patterns of our previous conditioning. We can
even rebuild the brain structures needed to do that rewiring. All of
this you will learn to do in part 2.

2.  Problems in the Self-Reinforcing of Conditioned Habits A powerful
    and efficient outcome of the brain's mechanism of conditioning is
    that once we have learned ways of responding to a certain event or
    stressor, the patterns of response become deeply ingrained in our
    neural circuitry; we don't have to think about them anymore. For
    example, we may sometimes have trouble remembering the person's name
    when we recognize a friend of a friend at a local school board
    meeting. If we have conditioned ourselves to reach out for a
    handshake with a friendly "Hi, I'm so and so; please tell me your
    name again," we can engage with them using a skillful habit rather
    than saying nothing or ignoring the person out of embarrassment. As
    we learned in chapter 1, conditioning is neither good nor bad in
    itself: it is simply one way that the brain learns. Conditioning
    becomes a problem when it reinforces unhelpful patterns of response,
    ingraining them into our neural circuitry, where they can become
    extremely difficult to budge. If we habitually get anxious before
    taking a test or speaking in public, for example, this anxiety tends
    to get worse over time, not better. If we have had difficulty making
    major decisions in the past --- whether to join the military or
    apply to graduate school, to buy a home or sell the home that's been
    in the family for three generations --- chances are we'll have
    difficulty making the next big decision as well. If we witnessed

both of our parents frequently handling conflict by walking out the door
in tight-lipped anger, chances are that under enough stress, walking out
the door in tight-lipped anger will be our default method for handling
conflict, too. Just as traces of rain that wash down a hillside will
eventually create gullies in the earth, the reinforcement of these
neural pathways can make it very hard to respond to a new experience
differently and to create new grooves or pathways in our circuitry. Once
we are stuck in a less-thanresilient pattern, our conditioning makes it
difficult to get unstuck and learn anything new, even when we're trying
very, very hard. Negative patterns, learned early or late, may become
selfreinforcing: the patterns themselves act as filters that preclude or
distort new learning. We find ourselves in a habit of procrastination,
of perennial indecisiveness, of disappearing when we hear, "Honey, we
need to talk," or throwing a tantrum when other people disappear on us.
When our strategies for coping become too rigid and constricted, remain
too chaotic and unstable, or even fall into paralysis and collapse, they
become maladaptive and defensive. We get stuck. We can't forgive someone
for stealing our girlfriend or getting the promotion we knew we deserved
--- fifteen years ago. We insist on "my way or the highway" even when
that way leads to divorce or dismissal. We find it impossible to speak
up for ourselves at the dinner table or a company lunch; we find it just
as impossible to take an assertiveness workshop that might help us do
so. When we're stuck, our capacities for flexible response contract. We
begin to suffer from either inner rigidity (neural cement) or inner
chaos (neural swamp) when faced with outer dilemmas and disasters. When
we bounce three checks in a row, we yell about the stupidity of the bank
rather than taking thirty minutes to balance the checkbook. A friend
suggests a camping weekend, but we get overwhelmed by the online search
for the perfect campground and wind up staying home. Getting stuck in
self-reinforcing, defensive coping patterns can have tragic
consequences. Our neighbors managed to rebuild their home six months
after the tornado destroyed it, but we haven't been able to find our way
through the insurance maze after three years. Our sister-in-law is
unthinkingly passing on to her teenage daughter the same alcoholic
binge-rage patterns she learned from her own mother.

To recover our resilience and unlearn these bad habits means using tools
to harness our brain's neuroplasticity to completely rewire these
entrenched negative coping strategies. Chapter 6 and part 2 show you how
to do this safely, efficiently, and permanently.

3.  When Bad Habits Become Buried in Implicit Memory As human beings we
    pride ourselves, and rightfully so, on the phenomenal capacities of
    our higher, "thinking" brain to learn from past experience, sort
    through complex issues, and resolve current problems. We recall
    previous coping strategies that were processed consciously and
    stored in our explicit memory; we intentionally reflect on our
    options and deliberately choose the best strategy for the current
    circumstances. However, we may be giving too much credit to the
    higher brain for these responses. Neuroscientists have discovered
    that about 80 percent of the neural instructions for behavior are
    recorded in implicit memory, outside our conscious awareness.
    Driving home from work on automatic pilot while thinking about
    something completely different is an example of operating on
    implicit memory. Implicit neural activation is a powerful influence
    on our behaviors. For example, if you are bitten by a dog at six
    years of age, you will probably store a conscious memory of the
    event itself, as well as how you and your parents coped with it. You
    can consciously retrieve that memory and remember what you learned
    from the experience. Later, when you encounter another dog that
    scares you, you know why, and you can consciously choose how to
    respond. If, however, you are bitten by a dog at six months of age,
    your brain has not yet developed the capacity to process that event
    or store the memory explicitly. Neither the memory of the dog biting
    you, nor the knowledge of how you and your parents coped ---
    resiliently or not --- is available to your conscious memory. But
    the memory is still stored implicitly in the form of body sensations
    and emotions and may affect the way you cope with other dogs later.
    Whenever you encounter another dog, dangerous or not, the implicit
    memory may automatically make you feel scared, but you may not
    understand why. (Of course, the later dog may in fact be dangerous,
    but often we feel fear because of a past

implicit memory rather than because it is warranted in the current
situation.) Even when we are old enough to process experiences
explicitly, many are forgotten; but they remain stored in our implicit
memory and affect our choices and behaviors in ways we aren't aware of.
My client Margaret went into a tailspin one night when Daniel, the guy
she had been dating, didn't call her when he said he would. When she put
in an urgent call to me, I thought it was understandable to be
disappointed, worried, and upset, but Margaret's agitation suggested
something deeper was going on. As we talked her reaction through, I
asked Margaret when she had ever felt that same kind of panic in her
past. She immediately remembered two incidents that happened when she
was five years old. Twice her dad had promised to pick her up from
kindergarten and failed to show up. She had been left alone, with no
teachers around, too young to get home by herself, helpless and afraid.
Daniel's failing to call when he said he would was enough to bring up
all the feelings of helplessness and abandonment encoded in her neural
circuitry by her dad's failure to keep his promise. Margaret's stress
response was entirely tied to her past. To recondition this unresolved
trauma memory, I asked Margaret to imagine that both times her dad had
forgotten to pick her up, she had walked back into the school and asked
her teacher to call her dad. In this imagined rewrite, her dad arrived
to pick her up within five minutes. Pairing the old memory of
helplessness with the new sense of being empowered, taking action to get
the help and response she needed, rewired Margaret's neural circuitry.
She could remember the previous events with more equanimity and feel
more resourceful. And her current experience with Daniel was no longer
linked to her previous trauma. The next day she was able to talk things
through with him calmly and get their relationship back on track.
Implicit memories have no time stamp. All the body sensations, emotions,
and even views and beliefs about ourselves and our capacities encoded
from the past event are vividly present, with no awareness that what
we're experiencing right now is a memory. Because it feels so real, it
must be happening now. Researchers know that the coping styles we learn
from attachment behaviors stabilize in our neural circuitry by eighteen
months of age and continue to operate well into adulthood. Since the
hippocampus doesn't fully mature until we're about two and a half years
old, our default

coping strategies are already deeply embedded in our implicit memory by
the time the hippocampus begins to translate raw experience into
explicit memories. Thus our earliest strategies of resilience are
encoded in our brain's neural circuitry before we have any conscious
choice about them or conscious awareness of them. These automatic ways
of coping then continue to operate, becoming the internal working model
for the ways we respond to all the hiccups and hurricanes of our lives.
We can react in milliseconds to any perception of safety or threat
precisely as we have learned in our attachment relationships, with no
sense whatsoever that our behavior is deriving from a memory, or any
awareness of where that original learning came from. Unless we alter our
patterns of coping using the practices described in part 2, these
strategies tend to remain our default reactions well into adulthood. At
the same time that the hippocampus is maturing enough to convert raw
experiences into explicitly encoded neural networks, the left hemisphere
of the cortex is maturing enough to put words to those experiences. At
age two to three, we develop the capacities to process our experiences
both consciously and verbally, thus enormously expanding our options for
learning and resilience. These new capacities of conscious reflection
and articulation overlie the previously encoded, unconscious coping
strategies that remain more oriented toward survival and continue to
operate lifelong. They help us consciously learn new patterns of
resilience that can be more oriented toward thriving: • •

•

remembering the fourteen times we've already resolved an argument with a
brother-in-law and trusting we can do so again; spending the first week
after losing a job repeating like a mantra, "I'm not alone; I'm not the
only one; others have been through this; someone can help," and then
contacting ten friends who might help us find a new job; watching films
like The King's Speech that remind us of the power of perseverance and
deep friendship to overcome adversity.

Even so, the implicit memory glitch remains. Learning resilience through
conscious effort still rests on the foundation of our earliest,
unconscious conditioning. Most of the time, when our early conditioning
is resilient

and serves us well, we're blithely unaware of that scaffolding. And even
when there are occasional wobbles in the foundation, our intentional
work with implicit memories later in life can take us a long way toward
overcoming our early, unhelpful learned responses. But in times of
threat or danger, our brains may automatically respond in the patterns
we learned first. It's humbling to realize the power of our implicit
memories: anything we learn or come to believe later in life, about
ourselves, about others, or about how the world works, can be overridden
or hijacked by our earliest learning. And it often is. We can experience
that response from implicit memory with such force and vividness that we
have no sense whatsoever that we're experiencing an emotional flashback
to our earliest ways of coping rather than something that is happening
now. (Part 2 shows you how to skillfully rewire those implicit
memories.)

4.  The Negativity Bias of the Brain Our early ancestors survived on the
    savannah for millions of years because our lower brain evolved to
    react almost instantaneously to threat or danger. It is better that
    our reflexes cause us to jump out of the way of a snake that turns
    out to be a stick than to mistake a snake for a stick, step on it,
    get bitten, and die. Survive first, thrive later: that's the motto
    of the lower brain. The well-documented tendency of our lower brain
    to encode negative, fear-based memories more readily into our
    unconscious memory than positive ones is referred to as negativity
    bias. As we've seen, the lower brain operates from the first moments
    of life, while the higher brain, with its capacities to reflect and
    discern options, takes several years to mature. Within the higher
    brain, the right hemisphere matures earlier than the left hemisphere
    and consequently has more densely networked connections with the
    lower brain than does the left. This means that the right hemisphere
    has evolved to focus far more attention on experiences that trigger
    the more primitive emotions of fear, anger, or shame related to our
    survival than feelings of delight, carrying forward the negativity
    bias of the lower brain. We might wish philosophically that this
    were not the case, but this is, for better or worse, how our brains
    develop; this is how we as a species have survived. Our early
    conditioning influences the strength of this negativity bias. If we
    learn adaptive ways of coping with fear and other negative feelings

early on, we can respond to a threat by calming and soothing ourselves.
We are more likely to pause in a moment of anger and reflect on the most
constructive response in the situation. We can respond to potential
shaming by connecting to resources that remind us that we are loved and
cherished. Our responses stabilize in the direction of the five Cs of
coping. If, however, our conditioning simply reinforces the body's
survival responses of fight-flight-freeze or submit-collapse, we become
less resilient and more vulnerable to experiences of terror, rage,
selfloathing, pessimism, and depression. Part 2 examines ways to harness
the brain's neuroplasticity to overcome this negativity bias.

5.  When Bad Things Happen to Good People Most of us have learned
    strategies that enable us to cope adequately with the everyday ups
    and downs and stressors of our lives, either from our conditioning
    early on (a blessing) or from the school of hard knocks later (a
    triumph). Learning to cope with adversity through bitter experience
    can, in fact, be a good thing. Triumph over trouble builds
    character. As Eleanor Roosevelt said, "You gain strength, courage,
    and confidence by every experience by which you really stop to look
    fear in the face. You are able to say to yourself, 'I lived through
    this horror. I can take the next thing that comes along.' " If we do
    cope well with seemingly adverse events, if we deploy our five Cs of
    coping, if we come to terms with what has happened, then we are not
    traumatized. We deal, and we can move on. Trauma is different.
    Trauma, by definition, is the overwhelming of our capacities to
    cope. We often use the word trauma to describe experiences that can
    temporarily overwhelm some people: visiting the dentist, flying on
    an airplane, failing an exam, being sued, causing a fender bender.
    More serious examples --- being assaulted, losing a home or a family
    member in a natural disaster, watching a buddy die in combat,
    crushing a child or a dog under the wheels of our car --- are
    experiences that could overwhelm anyone's capacities to cope. It's
    whether we can cope or not that determines whether an event is
    called trauma, not the event itself. When we can't consciously come
    to terms with a potentially traumatizing event --- by acknowledging,
    "That happened in the past, but I'm okay now" --- then our brain
    protects us from further overwhelm by

isolating the memories of the event in a "trauma capsule" buried in
implicit memory, no longer connected with the brain's conscious
processing of the experience or with other memories or learning that
could help us cope. Once a trauma memory has become dissociated and
placed into a trauma capsule, any new event can be unconsciously linked
with that implicit memory. Sudden braking in a car can trigger implicit
memories of an earlier car accident. A banging door can trigger implicit
memories of Daddy's coming home drunk. A bounced check can trigger
implicit memories of the family running out of money to pay the bills.
So our loss of resilience is not so much locked into any particular
external event as it is caused by the meaning our brain attributes to
that event and our response to that perceived meaning. This encapsulated
memory --- of body sensations, emotions, beliefs, and meanings --- can
make us vulnerable to losing our resilience in the face of stress and
trauma later. We now know that even responses to trauma that have been
deeply buried in our implicit-only memory can be rewired. Recovering
that resilience involves not avoiding the storms of life but learning to
be at peace within ourselves in the midst of those storms. Traumas, if
left unresolved, however, can damage the hardware of the brain itself.
Traumatizing experiences --- a rape or abortion with no one to turn to
for help and support afterward, an emergency leg amputation as a result
of a car accident, losing someone you tried to rescue in a flood to the
rapid current flowing downstream --- can have a devastating effect on
brain functioning. Trauma floods the brain with the stress hormone
cortisol. Cortisol gets us moving quickly to save our lives, but it also
kills brain cells in the hippocampus. When we lose too many brain cells
in the hippocampus, we can no longer learn from our experience. This
damage compromises our ability to recover from the trauma. If repeated
trauma happens at the age when the hippocampus is just developing, the
floods of cortisol can derail the maturing of the very structure we need
to organize our experience into conscious memories that we can learn
from later. Damage to the hippocampus can also delay or inhibit the
maturation of the prefrontal cortex. Even in these circumstances,
however, the neuroplasticity of the brain makes it possible to recover
from the damage of repeated trauma. You learn how to rebuild the
structures of the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex in part 2.

No Blame in This Game: Repairing Our Less-than-Optimal Conditioning
Glitches in how our brains learn from experience can derail our
resilience and make it hard to cope with everything we need to cope
with. The inevitable reality of human conditioning is that while most of
us experienced good-enough conditioning early in life, at least some of
the time, all of us experienced less-than-optimal conditioning as well.
The natural capacities of our brains to remain open and flexible --- to
learn to respond in wholesome ways to both inner and outer experience
--- can get derailed in one way or another, which can have negative and
even tragic consequences. The misery we are heirs to as human beings is
not the result of our true essence but is the product of our inescapable
conditioning. We can lose touch with our capacities for flexibility and
resilience and thus compromise our well-being. We can become reactive
and miserable. Researchers have shown us that no one --- not the Dalai
Lama, not the president of the United States, not the most beloved child
--- is exempt from this process. Less-than-optimal conditioning is the
human condition. Does that need to be a permanent problem? No. Modern
brain science gives us more evidence every day that we can harness the
brain's innate neuroplasticity to change its functioning and even its
structure. We have every reason to be en-courage-d when it comes to
recovering our resilience. It's important, as we learn how to recover
our resilience, not to dwell on shame or blame about how and why our
resilience went awry. Instead, as the new positive psychology movement
is teaching us, we can use the power of new conditioning to install and
sustain positive patterns of resilience and coping. We can use the
practice of mindfulness --- nonjudgmental awareness and acceptance ---
to reverse depression, the practice of gratitude to heal from grief, and
the practice of shifting perspectives to create options. And that's
precisely what this book aims to teach you to do. Neuroplasticity has
always existed in our brains, even though our understanding of it is
relatively recent. It has been at work for millions of years, using new
experiences in life to generate the complex neural pathways that
underpin all learning, all individual development, all personal growth
and self-transformation. Neuroplasticity has also

generated the densely networked brain structures and the interactions
between them that underlie the advancement of all human cultures. Only
in the past twenty years have advances in brain-imaging technology
allowed scientists to probe the mysteries of the brain in action. We
know now that our brains can create new brain structures to recover from
traumatic brain injury and psychological trauma. Thanks to this new
understanding of neuroplasticity, we know that the brain itself is
inherently resilient: capable of responding flexibly, adaptively to
trauma, stress, and plain old everyday life. Our brains can recondition
and rewire themselves on their own over time. If we leave this process
to chance, however, the recovery of resilience may be very haphazard,
slow, and uncertain. Unless we deliberately choose to learn how to work
with the gift of our neuroplasticity, how well our brains respond to
adversity might even get worse over time. We all know folks whose lives,
hammered by unrelenting stress and trauma, have gone downhill. No matter
what conditions we currently face in our lives, neuroscience is
increasingly teaching us which tools and techniques we can use to best
harness the brain's innate neuroplasticity to fully recover our innate
capacities of resilience. These are the tools and techniques that help
people move from overwhelm, confusion, negativity, anxiety, depression
and trauma, through resourcing and neural programming, toward a mature
and stable resilience. We can learn how to live our lives with
equanimity, energy, and a sense of well-being.

Pulling It All Together Yes, our innate capacities for resilience are
vulnerable to being derailed by evolutionary realities. •

•

Our earliest strategies for resilience are developed in interactions
with other brains. Depending on how those early interactions go, we may
encode coping strategies that are unstable (a neural swamp) or
inflexible (neural cement). Repeated experiences reinforce the
conditioning of these patterns in the human brain: we create good or bad
habits of coping that, if reinforced without awareness, become harder
and harder to change.

• •

The brain's innate negativity bias helps us survive as individuals and
as a species, but it can skew our response to stressors toward the
negative as we grow older. Trauma overwhelms our coping strategies and
can even overwhelm our capacities to recover.

Here's the good news: •

•

•

Although early experiences do much of the initial wiring of our brains,
later experiences, especially healthy relational ones, can rewire our
brains to allow us to cope differently and more resiliently. The changes
we make in our behaviors can last because we're creating new brain
structures and circuits to support them. Even learning how to rewire our
brains rewires our brains as we go along. New experiences can strengthen
the functioning of the prefrontal cortex itself. The more skillful the
prefrontal cortex is --- the more easily it integrates information from
other parts of the brain to help us make wise decisions --- the more
resilient we can become.

By applying the tools and techniques offered in the next several
chapters, you can accelerate your own process of recovering resilience
and effect changes that are both immediate and permanent. You can create
a solid neural platform for thriving.

PART TWO

HARNESSING THE BRAIN'S NEUROPLASTICITY TO RECOVER YOUR RESILIENCE

CHAPTER THREE

Using Mindfulness to Foster Awareness and Flexible Responses

Self-

It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most
intelligent that survives. It is the one that is the most adaptive to
change. --- CHARLES DARWIN

A CLIENT I'D BEEN SEEING for several months came in one day beaming with
success. Ellen had often suffered from anxiety in dealing with computers
and other new technologies. She had grown up with typewriters and rotary
phones, not laptops and cell phones. Several times she had arrived for a
session in tears of frustration after a disaster at work, not being able
to figure out how to do something on her computer that most
eight-year-olds could handle. We'd been working on finding people who
could teach her what she needed to know and on developing her trust in
herself to learn and master the necessary skills. In this session, she
reported a huge breakthrough. "Yesterday my computer crashed, and
instead of going into shock, I found myself saying, 'Oh, that's a big
problem to solve.' I almost laughed, it was so out of character for me
to be okay with something like that." Ellen was describing an important,
definable moment of developing a new way of coping. Because she had
sought the help of people who could teach her the computer skills she
needed, and because she had seen her situation clearly and hadn't
panicked, Ellen was able to take the steps that would resolve the
problem, delighting in her trust in herself to do so. Like Ellen, when
we realize we need to change the way we're coping with life's dramas and
traumas, we can harness the power of

neuroplasticity in our brain to create those changes. But we need to
learn how.

Two Essential Catalysts for Self-Directed Brain Change Harnessing
neuroplasticity --- what Jeffrey Schwartz, a neuropsychiatrist at UCLA,
calls "self-directed neuroplasticity" --- is essentially about choosing.
All mental activity creates new neural structure. Any experience rewires
the brain in some way. When we want to direct that rewiring --- for
example, when we want to rewire specifically for resilience --- it's
necessary to carefully choose the new experiences that will help create
that new neural structure and rewire old pathways effectively,
efficiently, and safely. Using self-directed neuroplasticity means
focusing attention on specific new experiences or on old patterns that
we want to rewire. When we focus attention on old patterns, we activate,
or "light up," the specific networks of neurons where those patterns are
stored. In directing how those neurons fire and rewire, we want to avoid
reinforcing negative patterns. We don't want to retraumatize ourselves
or etch the grooves of a dysfunctional or traumatic pattern any deeper.
Two practices of choosing new experiences that science shows to be
powerful catalysts in rewiring our brain are mindfulness and empathy.
These practices are drawn from two very different paradigms: mindfulness
from the 2,500-year-old Buddhist contemplative tradition, and empathy
from 150 years of Western relational psychology. But both offer
well-proven tools to reduce suffering in ourselves and others and to
cope wisely with unwelcome changes. Mindfulness --- the steady,
nonjudgmental awareness and acceptance of experience --- leads to
self-awareness and to shifts in our perspectives that allow us to see
clearly what's happening and how we are reacting, to respond to triggers
and traumas with far more open-mindedness, and to face the process of
necessary change with far more flexibility and tolerance. These
capacities are all hallmarks of emerging resilience. Empathy --- a
wholesome practice of connection and acceptance --- expands our
awareness of resources we can draw on, both within ourselves and from
others. This is another hallmark of emerging resilience.

Research is increasingly showing that practices of mindfulness and
empathy are among the most powerful agents of brain change known to
science. Both can catalyze brain change and guide it in a positive
direction. Both strengthen the functioning of the prefrontal cortex to
rewire old patterns. Both can safely and efficiently process carefully
chosen new experiences to maximize that rewiring in the brain and
sustain the desired changes over time. When we can see a situation
clearly and accept compassionately what we are seeing, we can rewire old
patterns without harm to ourselves. Mindfulness and empathy create a
safe mental environment for the three major processes of self-directed
neuroplasticity you will use to do that rewiring. Neuroscience is also
increasingly validating the effectiveness --- even the necessity --- of
integrating the two practices of mindfulness and empathy. Mindful
empathy is our single most important tool for strengthening the
functioning of the prefrontal cortex. That strengthening in itself leads
to more integrated functioning in the brain. Using experiential
exercises to develop mindful empathy in this chapter and the next is the
first step toward harnessing your neuroplasticity to recover your
resilience.

Seeing Clearly with Mindfulness Although a number of different skills
can be grouped under the umbrella of mindfulness, in essence, being
mindful simply means paying attention to the experience of the moment,
whether inner or outer, with an acceptance or friendliness toward the
experience and without judgment or ill will. Rather than acting as a
cognitive analysis of experience, mindfulness operates in the brain as
an embodied inquiry into the true nature of whatever we are
experiencing. The practice of mindfulness --- training the brain to
focus its attention and to strengthen conscious awareness --- allows us
to see our conditioned patterns of response clearly so that we can get
unstuck from them when we need to. Mindfulness trains the brain to
become astutely aware of our experiences in the moment and of our
responses to those experiences, even of our enduring patterns of
response (resilient or not), and entire styles and strategies of coping
and their effectiveness. With mindfulness, we begin to notice that all
experience unfolds moment by moment. We notice our how breathing
changes: inhalation,

exhalation, quick or slow, deep or shallow. Our mood changes over longer
periods. Maybe I felt hunky-dory two hours ago, but now the job of
fixing a leaky faucet has turned into a major and expensive replumbing
of the entire house, and I'm starting to feel deeply worried and unsure
of what to do. Or maybe this morning I was so annoyed with my nephew
that I wanted to ship him off to Australia, but now, watching him build
an airport out of Lego blocks, I can't even remember what the fuss was
about. As we mindfully focus on our experiences in the moment, we
realize that it is in the nature of all experience to change: this too
shall pass. That insight into the impermanence of all experience helps
us to begin to unpack what's actually happening, to see clearly all the
elements contributing to the situation and understand how they, too, are
changing, no matter how inescapable or compelling the experience feels
to us in the moment. Mindful awareness --- observing and reflecting ---
allows us to step back from the experience of the moment and observe it
from a larger field of awareness that is not any of those experiences,
that is larger than any of those patterns. With that awareness, we can
begin to see different possibilities for responding. Seeing things from
this awareness, we're present and engaged, noticing and curious, but
we're not embedded or trapped in the experience. This moment of pause
helps us discern new perspectives and options that weren't visible to us
before. Ellen experienced this new awareness when she was able to step
back from the computer crash and consider options she wouldn't have seen
in her previous state of panic and frustration. With mindful attention
we can choose a different, more effective and more wholesome response.
We learn to respond flexibly, and flexibility is the essence of
resilience.

Mindfulness of Breathing Builds Neural Structure We can begin
cultivating this mindfulness by focusing our attention on one specific
object of awareness --- in Eastern wisdom traditions, usually the
breath. Research has shown that even this introductory level of
mindfulness practice can increase the cell volume of the anterior
cingulate cortex (the brain structure that focuses our attention) and
other associated brain structures. That makes sense; the more we use any
structures of the cortex, the more they can grow new cells. Studies show

that violinists who have mastered rapid fingering in the left hand have
greater cell volume in the area of the motor cortex responsible for that
dexterity. Taxi drivers in London, who are required to memorize the
city's many circuitous streets and alleyways and then use that
information day after day, show a measurable increase in the volume of
the area of the brain responsible for directional orientation. In the
same way that working out our muscles at the gym actually builds them,
focusing our attention strengthens the structures that our brain uses to
focus that attention. This helps us see clearly what's going on and then
see our choices about what to do about what's going on. Research also
shows that mindfulness practices, even at this introductory level,
increase the volume of the insula and improve its function of
interoception --- awareness of what's going on in the body. Better
interoception strengthens our capacities for self-attunement,
selfawareness, and self-empathy: it helps us track how physically
comfortable, how emotionally nourished, and how relationally supported
we feel. This in turn enhances the confidence in ourselves that
increases resilience. We can strengthen the structures in the brain that
help us become more present, engaged, and confident in our lives, simply
by paying attention to our breathing. Here is a simple exercise to start
out with.

Exercise 1: Cultivating Mindfulness of the Breath 1.

Find a time and place where you can sit or lie down undisturbed. Find a
comfortable posture: relaxed yet alert. Allow your eyes to gently close
or rest open in a soft gaze. If mindfulness practice is new to you, you
can begin to experience what it means to focus your attention by first
being aware of the wall in front of you, then of the wall behind you,
then of the walls on either side of you. Then focus your attention on
your throat, and then on your breath. This simply demonstrates that you
can direct your own attention. 2. Bring your awareness to your breath
flowing gently in and out of your body, gradually noticing changes in
the rhythm, the intensity, and the sound of your breathing. Notice your
belly rising and falling with each breath. You may feel your

breath moving throughout your entire body --- your whole body breathing.
3. As you focus on your breathing, allow yourself to notice that you are
aware not only of the breath itself --- the object or noun or thing of
your awareness --- and the breathing itself --- the process or verb or
the unfolding of experience moment to moment that you are observing ---
but also that you can be aware of the fact that you are focusing your
attention: you can be aware of the steadiness of the awareness itself.
You are aware of the experience of the moment but not embedded in it. 4.
You may notice that your attention occasionally wanders as you focus on
your breathing. No problem. Noticing this wandering is part of the
process of "waking up" to awareness. If it happens, bring your attention
back to your breathing. Practice noticing your breath until you can
remain focused on the breath for one full minute. You are training your
attention to remain steady. Even one minute of practice begins to change
your brain.

How Mindfulness Steadies Awareness As we practice becoming mindful of
various objects --- the breath, a pain in the knee, a memory of a
cousin, a worry about aging --- we become aware of awareness itself. We
notice, and we notice that we are noticing. With practice in
mindfulness, our awareness steadies. We can readily notice when we're
"awake" and when we're not, when we're present and engaged and when
we're not. This awareness of being aware helps us feel safe while we
begin to notice patterns through our mindfulness. As James Baraz, the
cofounder of Spirit Rock Meditation Center in the San Francisco Bay
Area, points out, "That which is aware of fear is not itself afraid" ---
or sad, angry, or overwhelmed. Once we can perceive difficult patterns
without anxiety, we can work to rewire them. No matter what experience
is arising in the mind, when we remain steady in awareness, we're not
upset or retraumatized. There was no way my client Steve could resolve
his massive credit card debt until he could look squarely at his
spending and even more

directly at his need to bolster his sense of self-worth through his
spending. But before he could even begin to look at and recognize those
patterns, he had to develop enough awareness through his mindfulness
practice to tolerate looking at all: to see the consequences of his
behaviors and sit with the feelings of fear, disappointment, and shame
that arose in the process. As Steve steadied his awareness, he was able
to step back from his experiences. Viewing them mindfully, he could
begin to discover new options. Being mindful allows us to recognize any
feeling as a feeling, any thought as a thought, any cascade of emotions
as a cascade, any pattern of thoughts as a pattern. We become aware of
entire processes of mind or states of mind as simply that --- processes
and states of mind. We recognize any beliefs or "truths" as beliefs we
believe to be true. We become aware of entire belief systems, views,
identities --- as no more and no less than belief systems, views, and
identities. These may include stories we've told ourselves since we were
five, or twelve, or since we got married or divorced, or since we became
a CPA and wished we had become a welder instead. All the while we remain
anchored in the awareness that is noticing and observing these phenomena
(anything that can be observed by the mind) as phenomena, distinguishing
between what is actually happening in the present moment and what is
merely a pattern from the past. Research data from neuroscience are just
beginning to illuminate what happens in the brain during mindfulness
practice as we focus on increasingly complex objects of awareness: •

•

We strengthen the insula. Focusing our awareness on body sensations,
impulses, and movements --- such as an itch, an ache, a tightness in a
muscle --- builds our capacity to become similarly and resiliently aware
of big surges of rage, grief, terror. We train the brain to notice and
be aware before events and our responses get out of hand. We can attune
to our experiences and can classify them as pleasant, unpleasant, or
neutral, and no more. We learn to recognize and limit our initial
reactions to thoughts like "I like this; I want more" or "I don't like
this; go away" or "Huh? Did something just happen?" rather than
spiraling into major reactivity.

•

We become aware of patterns that some Buddhist practitioners would lump
together as "mental contents" and that Western psychologists would
thoroughly unpack as emotions, thought processes, states of mind, states
of being, identities, and belief systems. Examples of "contents" include
guilt, judgment about the guilt, and solutions to the guilt to stop the
judgment. Thought processes include imagining, describing, analyzing,
planning, and evaluating. States of mind might include feeling grumpy,
sleepy, discouraged, curious, and complaining. When we become aware of
these patterns, we greatly increase our choices and flexibility in
responding to them, thus increasing our resilience.

Guy Armstrong, a senior teacher at Spirit Rock Meditation Center in the
San Francisco Bay Area, tells of a time when he was having great
difficulty settling into a long, silent meditation retreat. Restless and
agitated, he could finally notice and name what he was experiencing:
"Oh, despair!" As soon as he could name the despair, he was no longer
embedded in it; he could observe it and begin to let it be, let it
naturally unfold, and then let it go. Any time we can notice and name
the experience of the moment, we have reengaged our prefrontal cortex.
In Guy's case, noticing and naming allowed him to reflect and come to
resolution without feeling caught or trapped. This level of awareness
helps us clearly see patterns in our thinking that might make us less
resilient, as Ellen could notice her panic at technical snafus and begin
to work with it skillfully. For example, we might react to a tickle in
the throat by assuming that a cold is coming on, which might mean
missing work, which might mean losing our job, which might turn into a
financial disaster for the family. These dreaded outcomes are not always
inevitable or even knowable, and jumping to conclusions about them makes
us less resilient. When we can become aware of patterns of thinking that
lead us in the direction of less resilience, we can begin to identify
choice points where we might actually be able to discern and choose
alternative options.

Exercise 2: Steadying Awareness as What We Observe Becomes More Complex

1.

2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  

Sit comfortably; come to a peaceful sense of engaged stillness in your
body, feeling present, relaxed, yet alert. You may wish to focus your
attention on your breathing at first. This helps you quiet the chatter
in your mind, concentrating on just this moment, just this breath.
Gradually, spontaneously become aware of the awareness that is aware of
your breathing. As that awareness steadies, you can let go of the focus
on your breath and anchor your awareness in the awareness itself. This
bare, open awareness, not anchored in any particular object, is often
compared to a vast sky, open and spacious. Memories, plans, and
complaints float through like clouds, not disturbing the unchanging sky
itself. A Zen teaching says that when our minds contract --- with
anxieties or complaints --- it's like looking at the sky through a pipe.
If you find yourself getting caught up this way in a thought, story, or
emotion, return your awareness to your breathing. Becoming present to
the moment will clear your mind and help it open up again to spacious
awareness. Once your awareness is anchored in awareness itself, you can
notice events and sensations: the sound of a door opening or closing and
that sound falling away into silence again. You can notice a burp, a
cough, or a sneeze erupting in your body and then falling away into
stillness again. Anchored in awareness, you can notice boredom,
impatience, or restlessness arising. You can notice and name states of
mind, states of being, or belief systems you have been wrestling with
for years. Without your moving to fix them or push them away, these
states, too, will pass away again into a spacious, peaceful awareness.
When you are ready, bring your attention back to the present moment,
becoming aware of how you are sitting, how you are breathing. Take a
moment to reflect on your experience of steadying your awareness. Note
any changes in your capacity to focus your attention. Take in that you
are developing a skill essential to seeing clearly, which is essential
to responding flexibly, which is essential to resilience.

With practice, we can more naturally anchor our awareness in awareness,
and then, when challenges arise, we are prepared to see clearly what's
happening and how to cope with it well.

How Mindfulness Dissolves the "Stuff" of Self One of the most important
focuses of our awareness for recovering resilience is the self: the
constellation of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors we come to identify
as "me" or "I." This "I" is seen in traditional mindfulness practice as
ever changing, ever unfolding, not a fixed or permanent entity but
simply one of the many objects (however fascinating they may be at the
personal level) that are categorized in Buddhist psychology as "mental
contents." With steady practice, mindfulness begins to penetrate the
"substance" of our personal self, much as modern physics has been able
to understand the substance of any material object. We now know that
there is far more space between atoms, and particles of atoms, than
there is "stuff," or matter. There is a vast spaciousness in the densest
of matter, paralleling the vast spaciousness between the stars in the
galaxies. Similarly, the practice of mindfulness allows us to experience
a spaciousness between the thoughts, judgments, and reactivities of the
self and to experience the possibility of flow. As the functioning of
our brain shifts from an intentional focus on stuff to a receptive
awareness of the space between the stuff, we begin to experience a flow
among the many parts that make up what we identify as the self. Instead
of the self as a noun, an object with defined perimeters, we begin to
see it as a verb, a process of continual change. With a more fluid
understanding of the self, we relax into an experience of openness,
clarity, and calm. With practice in mindfulness, this can happen within
a breath or two. Even though we have penetrated through the layers of
"stuff" to the space that holds the stuff, a kind of emptiness or
nothingness, the subjective experience is often more of an all-embracing
awareness of everything, a sense of fullness. This new object of our
awareness --- nonself --- is called true nature in the Buddhist
tradition or presence or essence in other traditions. It is a universal
phenomenon of being human, no matter how much our conditioning might
obscure it

This true nature feels like home. We feel centered, balanced, at peace,
whole, and complete. The qualities that people have identified as the
expressions of this true nature --- trust, equanimity, energy,
integrity, and generosity, to name a few --- are the qualities we come
to recognize as constituting the true self. While the patterns of neural
firing that generate this subjective experience of true nature have not
yet been fully mapped by neuroscientists, the experience itself has been
verified by millions of individual practitioners over thousands of
years. Neuroscientists have begun to identify pathways and circuits in
the brain that could explain the shift from focused attention to
spacious openness, from self to nonself. The circuit of focused
attention is the focusing network described in chapter 1. The associated
brain structures, especially the prefrontal cortex, pull the sense of
self together --- our history, personality, and identity. We know this
stable (yet flexible!) and coherent sense of self is essential to
resilience. A second circuit involved in this shift from self to nonself
that we, and science, may be less familiar with is the defocusing
network (see chapter 1). The defocusing network allows the brain to link
neurons together in a less stable, more fluid way, creating a mental
"play space" where ideas, sensations, and memories are likely to connect
with each other in new, unfamiliar ways. In this mental space, the
"facts" and "rules" of who we are and how we operate are relaxed. The
defocusing network operates mainly on the right side of the brain. The
processing of the right hemisphere allows us to perceive the world in a
more holistic, big-picture way and develops our deep, intuitive knowing.
The prefrontal cortex is engaged in this lateral network also, though
less actively. The defocusing circuit operates when we are daydreaming
or in reverie. We can consciously use it to let ourselves relax into a
more open, spacious awareness. (It helps to be trusting and curious.) As
we do so, the sense of self that we have so carefully crafted over the
years and the strategies that we have developed to stay safe and strong
in the world begin to ebb away, and we come into an experience of simply
being that feels vast and timeless. This defocusing network is the basis
of the deconditioning we use to unlearn and then rewire the strategies
encoded by the focusing network. To switch between these two networks of
self and nonself requires a mature prefrontal cortex. This is what
allows us to be self-aware: to

accomplish the developmental task of forming a functional personal self
and remaining aware of that self and, at the same time, to feel safe
enough to let go of that self and enter a more spacious consciousness.
The more flexible neural receptivity of the defocusing network allows us
to rewire different patterns constituting the personal self. Learning to
use both networks gives us more choices in rewiring our brains to
increase resilience. Because all mental activity sculpts neural
structure in some way, any effort we put into deepening our awareness of
any objects of mindfulness will in turn strengthen the prefrontal
cortex, increasing our capacity for self-awareness, self-reflection, and
self-knowing. In this sense, paying attention to the self, knowing it
honestly, without distortion or camouflage, is not self-indulgent. It is
an awareness of self that still leads to the awareness of being aware.
And that awareness is foundational to resilience.

Mindfulness: A Cornerstone of Resilience As practices of mindfulness ---
awareness and acceptance --- have come to the West from the ancient
Buddhist and Hindu traditions in Asia, they have become secularized.
Mindfulness is being integrated into tools of self-reflection in
psychotherapy, attention training in public schools, and
stress-reduction and pain-management programs in hospitals. It is being
taught to business and law students as a tool for enhancing
concentration. But we should remember that mindfulness is more than just
a tool to "train the mind to change the brain to change the mind for the
better." (I first heard that phrase from my colleague Rick Hanson; he
would agree with the reminder, too.) For the past 2,500 years,
mindfulness has been taught as a reliable path to the awakening that
leads to the "sure release" from suffering and teaches us the ultimate
resilience: trust in our capacity to wisely and compassionately meet
whatever comes our way. With enough mindfulness practice, we arrive at
our own embodied understanding of the wisdom teachings about
conditioning and getting stuck in patterns. We perceive the universality
of suffering, the natural arising of compassion in the face of
suffering, the direct experience of the interconnectedness of all beings
and the interrelatedness of all events, and the nothingness of all
phenomena --- pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. To paraphrase my
colleague Andy Dreitcer, we learn to "take it all

seriously and hold it all lightly." Because the teachings themselves
point to experiences of deep resilience that we can all partake of with
enough practice, and because focused attention on repeated experiences
of resilience does create brain change, mindfulness practice is a
cornerstone of any program to rewire our brains toward resilience.

Mindful Awareness and Western Psychology Western psychology has
developed an equally useful counterpart to mindfulness in its practice
of reflective investigation. As we will see next, mindfulness and the
"observing ego" work together to strengthen the prefrontal cortex and
help us develop resilience. When Sue arrived for her regular therapy
session one evening, she was agitated and upset. Her son's bicycle had
been stolen two days before, the washer-dryer had gone on the blink, and
her car needed new brakes. As a single parent, Sue had budgeted barely
enough to cover seeing me each week. Now, with these unexpected
expenses, she felt she had to stop therapy, now. I asked Sue to slow
down, to pause for a moment, to breathe deeply, to feel my presence with
her in the room. I asked her to let in my care and concern and to borrow
my trust, if need be, so that we could find a way through this. Then I
asked Sue to step back a bit from her feelings in the moment and to put
on her "observer" hat. This would help her reflect on the situation, to
be curious but not embedded in the anxiety. We began to pay attention to
sensations in her body: the queasiness in her stomach, the tightness in
her throat, the feeling of a steel fist in her chest. After a time of
sitting quietly with those physical sensations, not trying to figure
them out, make them go away, or jump to any conclusions because of them,
I asked, "Do these sensations have any images or words that go with
them, Sue?" She immediately responded, "There's no way out. We're
doomed." Knowing something of Sue's history from previous sessions, I
asked, "Whose voice is that? Who has ever said 'We're doomed' before?"
Sue reflected a moment, then looked up. "That was me when I was ten. My
dad lost his job, and my mom was sick. My parents saw no way out but for
me to quit my piano lessons just weeks before an important recital.
That's when I felt the doom."

I knew that Sue was at a critical point in her therapy, ready to make a
significant breakthrough. This would not be the time for her to quit.
And we were working on this very issue as part of her therapy. But to
continue had to be her decision. I encouraged Sue to explore the hurt,
disappointment, and anger of the ten-year-old who had felt so blocked in
dealing with her parents' fears and financial distress. Together we
looked at the belief system that had formed itself back then and had
remained out of her awareness for the next twenty years: the conviction
that there was no way out of financial catastrophes except to quit
anything that seemed nonessential. With that implicit belief system
brought into conscious awareness, Sue could begin to mindfully assess
whether what was true then needed to be true now. She began to remember
other times when she and her children had gotten through
impossible-seeming financial crunches. With her fears regulated and with
a sense of calm and clarity gained from her observer role, Sue began to
look for other options in her current dilemma. Instead of abandoning
therapy at a critical point, she negotiated a payment schedule with me
and thought through ways to shift household funds around to resolve the
current cash crunch. In the process, she recovered a sense of competence
and resilience and learned ways to manage stress that were appropriate
to the adult that she was. Reflective investigation, as Sue and I
practiced it, leads to what psychologists call "witness awareness" or
the "observing ego." The word ego here does not carry the colloquial
meanings of "conceited" or "selfabsorbed": quite the opposite. It refers
to the healthy functioning of the executive center of the brain --- the
prefrontal cortex. The observing ego allows us to notice our experience,
tune into the felt sense of it as we do when we practice mindfulness,
and also step back from our experience a bit and reflect on it
nonjudgmentally and objectively. We can investigate what's true and
what's not true about what we're noticing, what works and what doesn't
work in what we're observing. A key to investigating what is and isn't
working is to ask ourselves the question, "What story am I believing
right now?" By story I mean those personal narratives we create about
who we are or who we think we are. Our perception of a current crisis
can be skewed or filtered by previous beliefs that were shaped by
previous conditioning. To respond flexibly, we need to be able to
objectively see through those beliefs, no matter how compellingly true
they may seem or how familiar they are.

Exercise 3: Using Reflection by the Observing Ego to Formulate Wise
Choices 1.

Identify a particular problem in your life that seems unresolvable or
remains unsolved to date, such as a car insurance claim from a long-ago
accident that hasn't been resolved, a conflict with a divorcing spouse
who is refusing to cooperate in scheduled mediation sessions, or an
overload at work because management hasn't yet replaced the coworker who
left two months ago. 2. Put on your "observer" hat and reflect on the
problem. Become aware of whatever you're experiencing --- thoughts,
feelings, body sensations --- without becoming hijacked by them. Come
into a mode of objective observation: I notice I'm thinking this; I
notice I'm assuming that; I realize I forgot to ask about this; I don't
even want to think about that. 3. As you observe your own process of
trying to solve the problem, ask yourself, "What story am I believing
now?" about yourself, about the situation, about others in the
situation. Asking the question doesn't necessarily lead to an immediate
answer, but it could lead to new observations and new questions. It's
meant to help us develop the capacity to look again, to see new
perspectives, new options, without triggering more agitation about the
problem. 4. Reflect on what you've noticed about your patterns of
thinking, feeling, coping, and relating. Note that you are doing an
exercise to strengthen your prefrontal cortex to do its job of observing
patterns and becoming more self-aware, which will allow you to create
options to respond more flexibly.

The work of the observing ego is very similar to that of the "evenly
hovering attention" of Sigmund Freud and the "unconditional positive
regard" of Carl Rogers in Western psychology. The observing ego pays
attention to the meaning of the mental contents, finding value in the

unfolding personal story, even as it allows us to step back from our
experience and observe it nonjudgmentally (as mindfulness also does).
When we choose to do brain-changing practices like mindfulness or
observation-reflection, we set in motion the process of changing the
brain itself. When the strengthened prefrontal cortex is functioning in
its observing ego mode, paying attention to all the details of our
subjective experiences while also letting them go (as mindfulness does),
the process of reflective inquiry penetrates through all the layers of
previous conditioning. With enough practice, we come to experience a
deep intuitive knowing of our inner worth, the sense of a vital and
essential goodness, which lies underneath all the patterns and
strategies we have learned. For millennia, spiritual traditions around
the world have taught that every individual has an essential worth and
goodness, that human beings are "nobly born," that "the kingdom of God
is within you." Spiritual activist and lecturer Marianne Williamson
expressed it this way: We ask ourselves, who am I to be brilliant,
gorgeous, talented, and fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You
are a child of God. Western psychology is catching up to that view of
the soul or mind. (The ancient Greek word psyche means both "soul" and
"mind.") The traditional medical model of the human brain, or mind or
self, has emphasized illness. But by taking a more neutral view of
genetically encoded biological mechanisms that can be shaped by
conditions and experiences (conditioning), clinical practitioners are
now arriving at the view that the natural development of the brain leads
to complexity and integration of capacities that enhance well-being and
wholeness. When the deep, inner reflection of mindfulness or the
observing ego brings us to an awareness of this birthright of well-being
and wholeness, we have recovered a key component of our resilience.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter you have learned some of the
conditions needed to create reliable, lasting brain change. Because of
our brain's innate

neuroplasticity, we can choose which new experiences we want to use to
rewire our brains for resilience; we can become skillful at
self-directed neuroplasticity. •

•

•

Mindfulness --- steady, nonjudgmental awareness and acceptance of
experience --- is one of the most powerful tools for brain change known
to science. By strengthening the functioning of the prefrontal cortex
and related structures, mindfulness leads to the self-awareness and
shifts in perspective that allow the brain to remain flexible in its
response to triggers and trauma, more easily rewiring itself for
resilience. Mindfulness allows us to perceive directly that it is the
nature of all experience to change, including the constellations of
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors we have come to identify as "me" or
"I." With practice, we can loosen our grip on the "stuff" of our "self"
and relax directly into an open, spacious experience of our true self
and the wisdom of our true nature, allowing our patterns of self to be
more easily rewired. The reflective investigation of mindfulness
practice dovetails easily with the conscious examination of the
observing ego of Western psychology, helping the brain integrate a sense
of genuine wholeness that is key to resilience.

CHAPTER FOUR

Using Empathy to Create Connections and Self-Acceptance

The roots of resilience are to be found in the felt sense of existing in
the heart and mind of an empathic, attuned, self-possessed other. ---
DIANA FOSHA

WHILE MINDFULNESS and observation-reflection create the self-awareness
and expanded brain capacities that allow us to create the changes in our
behaviors critical to resilience, the other essential catalyst for brain
change --- empathy --- requires skillfully interacting with other people
to generate the connection and self-acceptance we also need for
resilience. Chapter 1 shows that the early learning of resilient coping
strategies and the development of the prefrontal cortex itself rely on
the empathy developed through experiences of secure attachment. Research
shows that five elements of that empathy are essential for maturing the
prefrontal cortex in the first place and for continuing to strengthen it
throughout our lives: 1. Resonance: picking up the "vibe" of other
people 2. Attunement: feeling your way into another person's experience
and "feeling felt" by them 3. Empathy (as one part of the larger
umbrella of empathy): making sense of your experience or another's,
conveying a shared understanding of the meaning of the experience, and
sensing that any experience is completely understood and accepted

4. Compassion: literally "feeling with," keeping the heart open and
caring in the face of struggle or suffering 5. Acceptance: coming to
terms with what is or has been, so that you can cope going forward The
power of neuroplasticity is such that even if our earliest conditioning
did not lead to secure attachment, we can use new experiences in
relationships with others now to strengthen the functioning of the
prefrontal cortex and expand the capacities for trust, connection, and
self-acceptance that lead to more resilience. Empathy uses the resonance
circuit described in chapter 1 to catalyze powerful changes in your
brain and the create safe conditions for doing so. This chapter includes
experiential exercises to develop each of the five elements of empathy,
which will strengthen the prefrontal cortex so that it can more easily
rewire your strategies for coping. That betterfunctioning prefrontal
cortex in turn reinforces a sense of innate worth and competence that
fuels your resilience.

Resonance All human beings are hard-wired to reverberate,
instantaneously and without any conscious processing, to the emotions
and actions of people around them. This process of basic sensory
perception and instant communication, especially of signals of safety or
serious danger, is called resonance. Some form of this capacity is
essential for all living organisms, from single-celled protozoa to
flatworms and sea anemones, frogs and eagles, squirrels and chimps, and
us and our neighbors. The prefrontal cortex uses resonance to relate to
other human beings. We reflexively read the body-based signals that
constantly flow between us and others. Resonance helps explain why we
yawn when we see somebody else yawn; why we flinch and say "Ouch!" when
we see someone else get hurt; and why we spontaneously say "Oh!" when
the baby says "Oh!" Resonance is the basis of the emotional contagion
that can bring us into a shared emotional state: it is at work when
anger sweeps through a soccer crowd, when an entire concert audience
jumps to its feet in applause, and when anxiety about failing health or
a failing marriage gets passed on, unconsciously, to a child.

We can misread these signals, of course. When we walk into a meeting or
a party, depending on how our early conditioning might have nurtured or
distorted this capacity, we may see safety where there is truly danger
or perceive danger or hostility where there is none. But the capacity to
use resonance skillfully is hard-wired and completely recoverable.
Though resonance itself always operates completely outside awareness, we
can learn to be mindfully aware of its workings. We can sense a "vibe"
and learn to know whether it is coming from someone else or from inside
ourselves. As we recover our capacity to use resonance skillfully, we
simultaneously strengthen the capacities of the prefrontal cortex to
relate, feel, and cope resiliently. Frank Ostaseski, the founding
director of the Zen Hospice Project in San Francisco, taught a valuable
lesson about resonance in a workshop I attended on compassionate
caregiving. Every Friday afternoon, Joe, a hospice volunteer, visited
Nathan, who was dying of complications from AIDS. One particular
afternoon, Nathan's partner, Dan, and his sister and brother-in-law were
already visiting; two friends from work were in the room as well. The
room was full of laughter and chatter. Joe felt superfluous, but he
decided to take a seat at the foot of the bed and simply hold Nathan's
feet. As he silently did so, the chatter in the room began to subside.
Within a few moments, everyone in the room relaxed into a gentle, quiet
stillness. Nathan later told Joe that those moments of silent presence,
compassionate touch, and resonant togetherness were the most healing
experiences of the entire week. The people closest to him in his life
were quietly present with him; he had relaxed into more peacefulness in
his ailing body. Nathan had found a place of calm that resonated out to
include everyone in the room.

Exercise 1: Bringing Resonance to Consciousness 1. Ask a friend to say
out loud to you, seven times, variations of "No!" and really mean it. 2.
Next, ask the friend to say seven different variations of "Yes!" with
equal conviction. 3. Notice the differences in your own body sensations
as you hear "No!" and "Yes!" As you become more aware of how experiences
resonate within you, you become better able to

choose experiences that help you feel more open, more engaged, more
flexible, and more resilient.

Attunement Attunement is the capacity to pay attention and consciously
tune in to an inner experience, our own or another person's. It is the
element of empathy that moves the processing of experience from the
lower brain, the primitive emotional processing centers of the limbic
system, through the insula and mirror neurons, into the cortex.
Attunement strengthens the capacity of the prefrontal cortex to read the
meaning of our own or other people's emotional signals, starting with
basic assessments of safe, dangerous, or neutral (similar to the hedonic
tone of pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral) all the way to detecting fine
emotional nuances. Although attunement involves the conscious processing
of the prefrontal cortex, we read the emotions of others mostly through
the nonverbal signals of facial expressions, body language, and tone of
voice. These signals are processed by the right hemisphere of the
cortex. According to A. Mehrabian in Silent Messages, 55 percent of all
emotional meaning is conveyed through facial expressions and body
language; another 38 percent is communicated through tone and rhythm of
voice; only 7 percent is communicated through words. Many
neuropsychologists hypothesize that mirror neurons are the means by
which the brain registers and comprehends the emotions of another
person. As we observe another person's facial expressions and body
language, neurons in the brain are mirroring and processing those
signals in a way that makes it feel as if they are being generated in
our own bodies. The insula then sends the information about those
sensations to our prefrontal cortex to be deciphered. This may very well
be the neurological basis of attunement. As I imagine the story of Joe
and Nathan continuing, the next time Joe visited Nathan, he saw
instantly from the look on Dan's face that things had taken a turn for
the worse. Without even hearing the change in prognosis, from the drop
in his own stomach and the thickening in his throat, Joe began to feel
in his body the grief in the room. Attunement speeds up our capacity to
know what's happening and to respond to

what's needed, even before we have time to formulate the experience in
words.

Exercise 2: Bringing Attunement to Consciousness 1. At a large, busy
public place --- in line at a movie theater or at an airport, at a
football game, or in a department store --- spend a minute or so
noticing the facial expressions and body language of ten different
people. Notice your inner sense of what the other person might be
feeling, based on what you're feeling in your body. 2. Reflect on your
experience of tuning into other people's emotional states and using your
own body sensations to decipher the meaning of what you are observing.
Take in that your practice of attunement is strengthening the
functioning of your prefrontal cortex and rebuilding the entire
resonance circuit for more accurate emotional communication and
connection between you and other people.

Attunement adds awareness to emotional resonance: we intentionally and
consciously tune into our subjective experience or another's, and we
know that we are doing so. This mindful awareness allows us to name the
emotional states we are perceiving, as Joe could do in my imagined
scenario when he named for himself the grief he felt from Dan, as Guy
Armstrong did when he could name his despair during meditation. The
ability to notice and name emotional experience enhances the capacity
for empathy and deepens the resources of connection that you will use to
rewire your previous patterns of relating.

Empathy Empathy works through the prefrontal cortex and related
structures on both sides of the brain to move beyond noticing and naming
emotional experience, ours or that of another, to generating a cognitive
understanding of that experience: to be aware of why somebody (including
us) might be feeling the way they do. This process makes

sense of the experience, present or past. Empathy generates meaning out
of our experiences and our reactions to our experiences. We can get
caught in very powerful stories about what is happening or has happened
before, positive or negative --- and frequently do. We saw how Margaret
began to spin a story about Daniel's failure to call her when he said he
would, based on her childhood experience when her father failed to pick
her up after school. We may carry a belief that we were the sole cause
of our parents' divorce or the sole cause of our fledgling business
going under. Using mindful empathy to come to clarity and make sense of
how we came to be who we are, or how others came to be who they are, is
essential if we are to begin to be resilient. The subjective experience
of empathy --- of being seen and understood, or of understanding
ourselves --- is one of the primary catalysts for rewiring our brain's
encoded messages about ourselves, our connections, our competence, our
vulnerability, and our courage. This is what happened for Dan as Joe
sensed something had changed. Nathan lay silently in his bed at the
hospice as Dan told Joe the results of the latest lab tests. They showed
that the medications being used to support Nathan's vital organs were no
longer working. Nathan's system was rapidly shutting down. Rather than
the months they had expected to share, they now had a week at the most.
Joe could feel Dan's sadness and grief spilling into the room. As he
tried to offer some words of comfort, though, Dan jumped to his feet and
began venting his anger and frustration at --- everything. Pacing back
and forth in the tiny room, he yelled at the unfairness of what was
happening. He raged at the "system" for not having found a cure for AIDS
yet. He went off on the general ignorance seven years earlier that had
left Nathan vulnerable to contracting the disease. Seeing Dan in this
distress, Joe shifted gears. He let Dan know that his anger made sense,
given the shock of the turn of events. Joe let Dan know that he
completely understood the struggle to understand, accept, and cope with
the new reality. As Joe spoke, calmly and engagingly, Dan began to
settle down. He could feel and accept Joe's empathy; he knew that Joe
really understood. Dan sat down again in his chair, placed his head in
his hands, and let himself begin to grieve. Joe's empathy for Dan's
anger and grief allowed Dan to become present again to the realities he
and Nathan would be facing in the coming days.

The English novelist Dinah Craik expressed the healing power of empathy
this way: Oh, the comfort, The inexpressible comfort Of feeling safe
with a person. Having neither to weigh out thoughts Nor words, But
pouring them all right out, just as they are, Chaff and grain together;
Certain that a faithful hand Will take them and sift them; Keeping what
is worth keeping and, With the breath of kindness, Blow the rest away.
Empathy is based in relationships with other people. The emotional truth
and the meaning of one person's experience have to resonate with the
other person. The attunement has to be accurate; the empathic process
has to verify that understanding --- a "moment of meeting" --- has
indeed occurred, as it had between Joe and Dan. Self-empathy entails
understanding what is happening within ourselves, what has happened in
the past and how that is affecting us now, or how something affected us
in the past. It also entails understanding who we sense ourselves to be
now or who we have believed ourselves to be in the past. In order to
mature toward wellbeing, our current self must understand and be
accepting of all the earlier parts of the self that were conditioned by
previous experiences. True understanding and compassionate
self-acceptance are especially necessary when there are parts of
ourselves that are still caught in negative stories about what has
happened to us --- parts that still feel invisible, misunderstood, not
accepted, or a failure. When we or others relate to these wounded parts
of ourselves with empathy, that empathy makes it safe to allow any
residual emotional pain connected with them to arise. We can stay
connected with our experience in the moment, which is what will allow us
to rewire any less-thanresilient strategies that developed from that
wounding. Without the safety of mindful empathy, we can become
disconnected from these experiences or parts of ourselves. We may lose
touch with our feelings if

we have negative judgments about reexperiencing them or sense danger
about revisiting old pain. We may lose touch with the vital wisdom from
the very foundations of the resonance circuit. We may lose touch with
our inner resources, such as memories of times when we have coped well
before or the faith that if we ask for help, people will respond. This
neural disintegration makes it harder to reconnect with our own
experiences and cope effectively. Ample research shows that blocked or
underdeveloped empathy or self-empathy markedly derails resilience.

Exercise 3: Cultivating Empathy and Self-Empathy 1. Identify a behavior
you've observed in someone, a behavior that you don't like very much, at
least in the moment. Maybe the driver in the lane next to you is yelling
at another driver who just cut him off on the freeway. Your spouse put
off paying the credit card bill, and now he's racking up late fees and
jeopardizing your credit rating. Your best friend arrives fifteen
minutes late to pick up his son from soccer practice and picks a fight
with the coach to cover his chagrin. 2. Notice your own reaction to this
behavior, including any opinions or judgments that may have been buried
in your implicit memory and are now coming to consciousness. Notice,
then set your own reaction to the side for the moment. 3. Begin to be
curious (you're activating your prefrontal cortex here) about what might
be going on in that other person to cause him to act that way. Already
stressed? Swamped with things to attend to? Feeling a lack of
experience, lack of skill, or low self-esteem? 4. Remember a time when
you have acted similarly. For example, I occasionally yell at a driver
who cuts me off on the freeway. Then I remember times when I've
inadvertently done the same thing. I can understand and forgive the
other driver if I put myself in his shoes and can understand and forgive
myself. 5. Remember that any behavior --- in ourselves or others --- is
rooted in learned, conditioned responses that served some

survival purpose for us originally. Knowing this, we can extend some
understanding, compassion, and forgiveness to the other person now. 6.
If possible, communicate your empathic understanding of the other
person's experience to him (maybe not the driver on the freeway, but to
your spouse or your friend) to make sure that your understanding is
accurate and that your empathy "lands," or registers with the other
person. For you, experiencing and communicating empathy strengthen your
prefrontal cortex and thus your ability to respond flexibly and
resiliently. For the other person, feeling that empathy may help him
recognize and rewire his own encoded patterns and become receptive to
changing his behavior.

Empathy requires a capacity that psychologists call theory of mind: the
ability both to know what someone else is feeling and thinking and to
recognize that their thoughts and feelings could be different from our
own in the same moment. Joe could feel Dan's grief through attunement;
he could feel his own grief, too, through self-attunement. Just as
important, Joe could sense Dan's anger, understand it, and convey that
understanding without feeling angry himself. The capacity of theory of
mind allowed Joe to distinguish his own experience from Dan's. That
awareness made it possible for him to be fully present to Dan's
experience without being hijacked by it. By being "affected but not
infected," he could remain helpful to Dan. As you use the tools in this
chapter to strengthen the functioning of your prefrontal cortex, you
will also be rewiring your brain to expand your capacity of theory of
mind, enabling you to respond more effectively to others.

Compassion As your empathy allows you to understand your responses and
those of others to perils and predicaments, you can naturally begin to
experience compassion for the full spectrum of those responses. As
compassion keeps the mind and heart open in times of confusion,
suffering and sorrow, we can remain engaged with what needs addressing
right in front

of us.When your son Johnny bursts into the kitchen wailing because the
boy next door pushed him off his bike, you comfort Johnny, cleaning up
his skinned knee and soothing the mix of fear, hurt, and anger surging
through him, but you try to have empathy and compassion for the other
boy, too. What was going on in him that caused him to behave in such a
belligerent way? When you hear that a friend who has lost primary
custody of his children in a divorce settlement is refusing to pick up
the kids after school, you meet him over coffee to talk and try to
understand --- and have compassion for --- the fear, hurt, and anger
that are causing him to withdraw. We all learn how to react to the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune in different ways. We can have
compassion for the suffering that is part and parcel of being human and
for the suffering that we sometimes cause by our own reactions to that
suffering. Compassion and self-compassion are necessary antidotes to
messages from less-thanoptimal conditioning that have told us it's
selfish, or weak, to stop and say, "This is tough; this hurts." The
power of compassion came into play when Joe visited Nathan a few days
later. Nathan was sleeping, and Dan was sitting in a chair nearby,
slumped in grief and worry. Joe took one of Nathan's hands in his and
placed the other hand in Dan's hand. Nathan stirred slightly as Dan
began weeping. After a few moments, Nathan woke up, heard Dan crying,
and asked Joe, "What did you say to him?" Joe replied, "I didn't say
anything. I just sat with him. I helped him cry." Joe's compassion
helped Dan safely acknowledge and express his own grief. When we can
give and receive compassion, we are cultivating a stance of approaching
experience rather than avoiding it. This "approach" stance creates more
flexibility in the brain that makes it easier to find resolutions to our
problems or to come to terms with what cannot be resolved. Researchers
have found that self-compassion is even more effective in recovering our
resilience than self-esteem.

Exercise 4: Cultivating Self-Compassion 1. Recall a moment when it was
relatively easy for you to feel compassion for someone else's heartache
or sorrow. You saw your neighbor struggling to carry bags of groceries
up the driveway with a recently broken ankle. Your cousin lost

2.

3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  

her luggage two airports back before she arrived at your house for a
weekend visit. Your eight-year-old collapsed in tears after she was late
for an after-school meet-up and the school bus took off for the class
picnic without her. Your cat sprained her hip jumping down from a high
kitchen counter and has limped around the house for three days. Imagine
this person or pet sitting in front of you or perhaps sitting in your
lap. Notice any warmth, concern, and goodwill arising in your own heart
as you sit together. Feel the empathy, compassion, and love flowing from
your body, from your heart to hers. When the feelings of empathy,
compassion and love are steady enough, shift gears a bit and remember a
time when you were facing a difficult situation of your own. However big
or small it was, let yourself experience that pain again for a moment.
Return to the feelings of warmth, concern, and goodwill for the person
or pet you are with now. Without changing anything, simply redirect this
flow of empathy, compassion, and love for her toward yourself. Let
yourself receive your own care and concern, your own empathy and
compassion for your own pain, for whatever has happened, whatever you've
done or failed to do, at any age or level of your psyche that needs to
receive it. You may express this feeling toward yourself in words: "May
this suffering pass. . . . May things resolve for me. . . . May I feel
less upset over time." Let yourself take in the feeling of being
understood and nurtured. Let your own heart relax into a more peaceful
sense of understanding, compassion, and forgiveness. Let this compassion
settle in your body and help to rewire your sense of yourself in this
very moment. Reflect on your experience of this exercise. Notice any new
sense of openness or approach to your own experiences. Notice whether
this approach stance opens up possibilities for change and resolution of
difficulties that have concerned or hurt you before.

As you cultivate an approach stance toward experience, you are
increasing your brain's capacity for flexible response, thus creating
the conditions for more resilience.

Self-Acceptance The curious paradox is that when I accept myself just as
I am, then I can change. --- CARL ROGERS Neuroscientists haven't fully
mapped the function of self-acceptance in the brain yet, partly because
self is such a complex construct. What we call the human personality
encompasses identities, roles, views, and beliefs that evolve over time,
including patterns of coping and defensiveness. But neuropsychiatrists
do know that self-acceptance is a crucial element in the capacity of the
prefrontal cortex to construct a coherent narrative of the self, and we
also know that coherence is essential to resilience. Acceptance involves
no blame or shame: it allows us to honor and accept an entire event and
integrate it into our sense of our self. We can do so by creating a
narrative of the event with the following components: 1. This is what
happened. 2. This is what I did to survive it (understandable, even
brilliant). 3. This has been the cost (compassion makes it safe enough
to even look at that). 4. This is what I have learned (a new narrative
of self that allows us to live with, even be proud of, ourselves). 5.
This is how I can respond to life now (be resilient going forward).
William James, a pioneer of American psychology, wrote of the role of
acceptance in recovering resilience over 100 years ago: "Be willing to
have it so. Acceptance of what has happened is the first step to
overcoming the consequences of any misfortune." We use both mindfulness
and empathy to recognize, allow, tolerate, accept, and finally embrace
and honor who we are exactly as we are, and what is or has been exactly
as it is or has been.

The last time Joe visited Nathan and Dan, he found that Nathan was
trying to come to terms with all the events in his life that had led up
to this passage from life to beyond. He was recognizing and accepting
the choices he had made and the patterns of conditioning that had shaped
those choices, positive and negative. Nathan acknowledged mistakes and
misjudgments; he was also experiencing pride in wise choices he had made
and coping strategies that had worked well. He paraphrased something he
had heard on the radio the day before: "Life is not a journey to the
grave with the intention of arriving safely in a pretty and
well-preserved body, but rather an opportunity to skid in broadside,
thoroughly used up and totally worn out, and loudly proclaiming, 'Wow,
what a ride!'" Nathan was sharing his "What a ride!" moments with Dan
and Joe, coming to an acceptance of himself that was allowing him to
meet his situation openly and resiliently.

Exercise 5: Cultivating Self-Acceptance 1.

You can begin to accept aspects of yourself that you have previously
found unacceptable by pairing a negative message or belief with the
embracing stance of selfacceptance. For example: "Even though I feel
lost and confused right now, I deeply and completely love and accept
myself." "Even though my finances are a mess and I'm in real trouble, I
deeply and completely love and accept myself." "Even though I feel as if
it's all my fault that my wife left, I deeply and completely love and
accept myself." 2. If both the awareness and acceptance seem like too
much of a stretch, head yourself in the right direction with a modified
phrase like "I'm willing to consider trying to deeply and completely
love and accept myself." Let yourself notice that even if you deeply
believe the negative statement about yourself to be true, the deep love
and acceptance of yourself can simultaneously be true as well.

The negative statement may change over time, or it may not change for a
long time. But your relationship to it can change very quickly.

Acceptance and integration of this aspect of yourself can increase,
allowing you to experience more wholeness of self. The five elements of
empathy, based in the neurobiology of the resonance circuit in the
brain, develop and strengthen the functioning of the prefrontal cortex
from the very first moments of our brain's development and continue to
do so all our lives. The prefrontal cortex can integrate the "feeling"
of our experience (largely processed by the right hemisphere) with the
making sense of it to ourselves and then articulating it to others
(largely processed by the left hemisphere). As you learn tools to
strengthen your capacities for resonance, attunement, empathy,
compassion, and acceptance, you are skillfully harnessing the innate
neuroplasticity in your brain that will strengthen the brain itself to
perform those functions. As you practice skills of both mindfulness and
empathy --- observing your experience and connecting to others through
the sharing of experience --- you are enhancing your brain's capacities
to rewire for resilience.

Wiser Self and True Nature In both Western psychology and Buddhist
philosophy, practices of selfawareness, self-reflection,
self-compassion, and self-acceptance lead to the subjective sense of
well-being that I've referred to as our true nature or wiser self. The
mature functioning of the prefrontal cortex allows us to recognize this
sense of wiser self and use it to guide our responses to life's
stressors. There are many ways to develop a relationship with this wiser
self. One is through imagination. The wiser self can be seen as an
imaginary guide who embodies all the positive qualities --- such as
wisdom, courage, resilience, and patience --- that you see yourself
growing into. It is a figure who embodies your highest aspirations and
has succeeded in achieving all your dreams and ambitions: a wellspring
of resilience, equanimity, and well-being. The wiser self is someone who
truly cares for you, is understanding and nurturing, strong, capable and
helpful, willing and able to help you on your journey. Your wiser self
could be someone you know --- a role model, mentor, or benefactor, or it
could be a composite of the qualities of several people. However we
constitute it, we can pose a particular problem or question to this
wiser self and then listen for the answer, which comes from our own
intuitive wisdom.

Exercise 6: Cultivating the Wiser Self 1. Find a comfortable position to
sit quietly. Allow your eyes to gently close. Breathe deeply a few times
into your belly and allow your awareness to come more deeply into your
body. Allow yourself to breathe comfortably. Become aware of relaxing
into a gentle field of well-being. 2. Imagine that you are standing on a
beach where the land and water meet. Imagine the details of the scene
and your presence there in vivid detail. When you are ready, imagine
yourself rising up into the air, floating up above the beach, and
traveling across the water to land on another beach in another land.
This is the home of your wiser self. 3. Imagine the dwelling of your
wiser self: a home, cabin, garden, or any setting that seems fitting.
Picture yourself walking toward the entrance. Notice how your wiser self
greets you. Does she (or he) come out to meet you? Does she invite you
in? Does she shake hands, bow, or hug you? Notice how old your wiser
self is, how she is dressed, how she moves. 4. Imagine yourself sitting
and talking with your wiser self. Notice her presence, her energy, and
how it affects you. Ask your wiser self how she came to be who she is.
Ask what helped her most along the way. What did she have to let go of
to become who she is? Can she share examples of when and how she
triumphed over adversity? You may choose to ask her about a particular
problem or challenge facing you now. Notice what advice your wiser self
offers that you can take with you. Listen carefully to all she has to
tell you. 5. Imagine what it would be like to embody your wiser self.
Invite her to become part of you. Notice how it feels to inhabit your
wiser self from the inside out and to experience your wiser self within
you. When you are ready, imagine your wiser self becoming separate from
you again. 6. Imagine that your wiser self offers you a gift --- an
object, a symbol, a word or phrase --- to remind you of her. Receive
this object into your hand and place it somewhere in your

clothing for safekeeping. Your wiser self will let you know her name;
remember it well. 7. As you prepare to leave, take a few gentle breaths
to anchor this connection with your wiser self. Know that you can evoke
this experience of encountering her any time you choose. Imagine
thanking her for the time you have spent together; imagine saying
good-bye. Walk back to the place where you landed, then imagine yourself
floating back across the water to return to the beach where you started.
Gradually become aware of your surroundings and, when you are ready,
slowly open your eyes. 8. You may wish to write down your experience
with your wiser self to help integrate it into your conscious memory and
to use it any time you need guidance from within about how to be more
resilient. As with any use of imagination to access our deep intuitive
knowing, the more you practice encountering your wiser self, the more
reliably you will be able to embody her wisdom as you respond to the
challenges and difficulties of your life.

Imaginative exercises such as this one actually change the neural
circuitry of our brains, creating new, positive habits of mind that
become genuine resources in coping with anything, anything at all.

Integrating Mindfulness and Empathy Practices of empathy and mindfulness
involve skills drawn from two very different paradigms that understand
the self or nonself differently, that transform or transcend the self
differently, that alleviate suffering differently by strengthening or by
letting go of the self. Yet both are shown by neuroscience to steadily
strengthen the functioning of the prefrontal cortex. Both use embodied
reflection and empathy to access the most deeply embedded patterns of
the brain and hold them in conscious, compassionate awareness. Both of
them use new experiences, and conscious investigation of those
experiences, to catalyze the rewiring of old patterns. The validation of
the efficacy of these practices to

catalyze significant and productive brain change is fueling the emerging
integration of Eastern mindfulness into Western psychology.
Practitioners of each paradigm are coming to understand that neither one
of these paradigms alone is sufficient to rewire our brains for improved
resilience. Both are necessary to fully develop the prefrontal cortex
and allow it to do its job of rewiring our brain to be more integrated
and flexible within itself. The Buddhist tradition considers wisdom and
compassion to be the two wings of the dharma (teachings); some Western
psychologists think of the observing ego and a healing, empathic
relationship as two legs with which to walk the journey of life. So
mindfulness and relational empathy are not just complementary paradigms:
they are completely collaborative. The synergy of these two practices is
what I call mindful empathy. Mindful empathy can safely and effectively
contain and catalyze the powerful processes of brain change. As you
employ the tools of mindful empathy to self-direct the rewiring of your
own brain, you will also come to master the five Cs of coping: to be
calm, to see with clarity, to connect with resources, to become
competent, to be courageous. In the story of Joe, Dan, and Nathan, we
see Nathan finding calm in the midst of his struggles, coming to see
clearly the choices he has made in his life, connecting to resources
like Joe, competently thinking through his choices, courageously coming
to terms with his dying, and coming into resilience and peace.

Pulling It All Together Empathy is a powerful tool of brain change and
one that helps create a safe environment in which to undertake that
change. Practices of resonance, attunement, empathy, compassion, and
self-acceptance activate the resonance circuit in the brain, which
strengthens the prefrontal cortex, enabling it to rewire strategies for
coping with people and life events. • • •

Resonance allows us to pick up the "vibe" of other people. Attunement
allows us to feel our way into another person's experience and feel
their awareness of ours in turn. Empathy helps us share an understanding
of an experience, ours or another's.

• •

Compassion allows us to stay open and engaged with experience so that
the brain can rewire itself, even when that experience is difficult.
Self-acceptance allows us to come to terms with experience, learn from
it, and create new patterns of response.

Together, mindfulness and empathy allow us to experience the true nature
or wiser self that can guide our actions. A synergy of mindfulness and
empathy strengthens the functioning of the prefrontal cortex to rewire
our brains for both stability and flexibility.

CHAPTER FIVE

Five Additional Practices Accelerate Brain Change

That

The difference between try and triumph is a little "umph." --- AUTHOR
UNKNOWN

THERE ARE FIVE additional experiential practices that work
synergistically with mindful empathy to guide and safely accelerate any
process of brain change: cultivating presence, intention, perseverance,
refuges, and resources. Here I describe some of the neuroscience that
explains why these additional practices add a crucial momentum to the
major practices of mindful empathy described in the previous two
chapters. Each of these practices safely speeds up the processes of
brain change we learn to use in the next chapter, allowing us to rewire
our brain for resilience sooner rather than later.

Presence To be present is far from trivial. It may be the hardest work
in the world. And forget about the "may be." It is the hardest work in
the world --- at least to sustain presence. And the most important. When
you do drop into presence•you know it instantly, feel at home instantly.
And being home, you can let loose, let go, rest in your being, rest in
awareness, in presence itself, in your own good company. --- JON
KABAT-ZINN

The brain learns and rewires itself best when it is calm and relaxed,
yet engaged and alert. Becoming present means "showing up," coming out
of absentmindedness or distraction, out of denial or dissociation, into
a mindful awareness of being here, now, in this body, and then gently
sustaining this state of simply being as we rewire the brain's
conditioned patterns of coping. Through the practice of mindful empathy,
it's possible to come into an embodied sense of presence in just a
breath or two. Presence can be a momentary refuge or respite from
worries and concerns: we can relax and simply breathe and be. Presence
is also the gateway to neural receptivity: the brain takes a breather
from doing and creates the mental play space that allows it to explore
something new. Presence allows us to calmly engage with our experience
in order to choose what patterns we want to rewire, and how.

Exercise 1: Coming into Presence 1.

Start where you are. Orient to your environment, noticing features of
your external world: the shape of the furniture in the room, the color
of the art on the walls, the sound of a door opening or closing. 2.
Shift your attention to your internal world, noticing and naming states
of mind, feelings, and thoughts as they come to your awareness:
annoyance at forgetting to answer your cousin's email, anticipation of a
company barbecue this weekend. 3. Let your awareness drop below those
conscious events to a deep inner awareness of being here, in the present
moment. Eyes closed or softly open, focus attention on body sensations
--- your feet on the floor, your back against the chair --- and become
aware of your awareness. 4. Shift your attention to your breathing,
gently in and out. Become aware of your awareness of your breathing. As
this awareness of awareness of your experience in the present moment
deepens, the mind quiets and the chatter stops. You can drop into a
sense of being here, now, in this moment --- into a steady sense of
simple presence. This moment... this

breath... here.. and now. This present moment ...this present
breath...this precious moment...this precious breath... 5. Let your
awareness come to rest in a steady inner peace of being rather than
doing. Stay in this sense of steady presence as long as you can, even if
it's only for a few seconds at first: it's delicious. A sense of
spaciousness, a stillness, or a sweetness is a reliable marker that
you're present. Take a moment to notice any shifts in your consciousness
as you come to that stillness, that quiet of mind, that allows you to
access and listen deeply to the wisdom of your own true nature.

The practice of presence and the trust in the deep inner wisdom that
arises from it can bring a new sense of assurance in your capacity for
wise, resilient action.

Intention And the day came when the risk to remain tight in a bud was
more painful than the risk it took to blossom. --- ANAÏS NIN As chapter
1 shows, focused attention causes neurons in the brain to fire; repeated
focusing on the same object or experience causes repeated neural
firings; and repeated neural firings create a new and stable neural
structure. When we focus our attention on cultivating a particular
pattern of behavior, a character trait, or attitude or lens for
filtering our experience, we incline the mind toward that objective. We
notice more readily the desired trait or behavior, register it more
fully in our consciousness, and direct mental activity toward it. For
instance, when we formulate an intention to become more mindful, more
self-accepting, and more flexible as support for becoming more
resilient, the repeated focus on that intention begins to build new
brain structure and circuitry that support us in achieving the
intention. The brain is primed to make us more likely to act in ways
that will actually manifest that particular intention. We turn a neural
goat path into a freeway.

Researchers have found that, more than half the time, it's the need to
get out of an attitude or circumstance that is causing us suffering or
pain gets us moving on a new course of action. The sincere intention to
develop resilience and well-being can fuel a determination to persevere
in rewiring the brain for more resilience. There is one caveat to keep
in mind when thinking about intentions. Adopting the stance that we
should cultivate a particular behavior or trait sets us up for potential
failure, whereas taking the attitude that we can cultivate it sets us up
for learning. When my client Nigel wanted to overcome his fear of public
speaking, he found venues where he could speak in front of a group if he
chose to, but he didn't ever have to. He resisted the temptation to feel
that he should speak. The possibility of speaking without pressure to
perform allowed him to build his success slowly, at his own pace, but
steadily. The skillful setting of an intention is based on creating
options and possibilities, not forcing ourselves into particular defined
behaviors. Moving from "must" to "trust" of ourselves encourages
learning and more quickly rewires our brain for flexibility and
resilience. When my client Sean was going through a particularly tough
time, waking up every morning in a bit of existential panic, I suggested
he set the intention to not get out of bed until he could bring his mind
and body to a state of calm. Sean began noticing the state he was in
when he first woke up and practiced coming into the state of presence
described in exercise 1. A few weeks later, when he came in to report
his progress, Sean acknowledged that he had to practice self-empathy and
selfcompassion, too. At first, his body and brain needed more than an
hour to come to the state of ease and equilibrium from which he wanted
to launch his day. But within two weeks, he was able to arrive at that
state of calm in forty minutes; soon he was able to reduce the time to
twenty minutes, then five minutes, then the space of just a few breaths.
What a grand day it was when he woke up in that state of calm. Because
setting an intention, and following through with deliberate behaviors to
fulfill that intention, sculpts neural structure in the brain, we need
to choose our intentions carefully. To recover resilience, we can
incline the mind in specific ways: "May I learn to stay grounded in my
body when my sister-in-law picks a fight with me." "May I be patient
with myself as I learn to stay grounded." "May I remember to breathe
when I get startled or upset." "May I pause and reflect before

impulsively fixing somebody." "May I focus on what's right in the moment
at least as often as I do on what's wrong." "May I have compassion for
myself when I forget all of the above." A simple yet powerful way to
practice setting intentions is to set the intention to notice.

Exercise 2: Setting Intention Every morning for the next week, set the
intention to notice what you notice first thing as you say hello to your
child, partner, or pet; as you step outside your home; as you smell your
morning coffee; as you taste the flavors of your sandwich at lunch.
Noticing strengthens your mindfulness practice. Noticing your noticing
strengthens your awareness. Setting an intention, and then noticing
yourself carry out that intention, strengthens your confidence and your
capacity to create new patterns of response to experiences. You are
strengthening a neural mechanism that underlies all resilience.

Perseverance How long should you try? Until. --- JIM ROHN Recovering
resilience in the face of challenges and changes can be difficult and
painful work. Perseverance in our efforts to harness neuroplasticity is
the sine qua non of rewiring our brains. By persevering in the use of
new tools and techniques, we are stabilizing the new neural circuitry so
that it can serve as a reliable platform of resilient behaviors, not
easily overridden by the pulls of the past. Scientists differ in their
assessment of how many times a pattern of neural firing must be repeated
to be reliably encoded in the brain. Some data indicate seventeen times;
another study concluded fifty-six. But even if we don't know exactly how
long we must practice a habit to

stabilize the new brain structure, we do know that a few moments of
practice many times a day is more effective than an hour once a week.
Frequent and regular repetition creates steady neural firing and
rewiring and accelerates the process. We also know that a stance of
willingness --- focusing on possibilities --- is more effective than a
stance of willpower --- focusing on performance. It almost doesn't
matter at first how small the increment of change is. What's important
is that we choose practices that catalyze positive change and that we
persevere. A reporter interviewing Thomas Edison asked him how he felt
about failing two thousand times before he discovered how to harness
electricity in a lightbulb. Edison is said to have replied, "My dear
young man, I did not fail. I did invent the lightbulb. It was simply a
2,000-step process."

Exercise 3: Strengthening Perseverance 1. Set an intention to implement
a practice that will rewire your brain in a way that feels important to
you, such as one of the following (a) to cultivate an attitude you
value, like gratitude; (b) to see circumstances from a new perspective
rather than responding automatically with preconceived notions; (c) to
respond to an ongoing stressor with a new behavior, breaking the cascade
of automatic reactions and deliberately choosing something new. 2.
Create a cue to remind yourself of your intention. There are various
ways to do this: (a) put a sticky note on your computer reminding you to
notice events in the day to be grateful for; (b) shift gears by counting
to three before you answer the phone or the doorbell to give yourself
time to become present and able to respond with a more open frame of
mind; (c) use a common action, like plugging in the coffeemaker or
turning the key in the car's ignition, as a cue to remember your
intention for the day. 3. Identify behaviors that help manifest that
intention and experiment with implementing them. Some examples

include (a) expressing your appreciation to your partner for five
generous things he or she did that day; (b) putting yourself in the
shoes of the person on the phone or at the door and trying to see the
interaction between the two of you from the other person's point of
view; (c) when encountering disappointments, mistakes, or dysfunction,
asking "What's right with this wrong?" as part of framing a skillful
response to the stressor. 4. Repeat the behavior for a week, then
another, then a month. You can experiment with expanding the behavior as
you learn what works to manifest your intention. Here are some ways to
do this: (a) express your appreciation to your child, your sisterin-law,
your coworkers, and the grocery store clerk for any generous behaviors
on their part; (b) shift your perspective, maybe by acknowledging the
sincere motivation of your brother George when he surprised you by
weeding your backyard for your birthday, even though he unknowingly
pulled up all the daffodils along with the weeds; (c) Keeping in mind
that the Chinese written character for the word crisis is made up of the
characters meaning danger and opportunity, find an opportunity in at
least three crises this month. 5. Notice what changes in your brain as
you persevere in your practice.

I once had a client who, after practicing for weeks to stay openminded
rather than cursing when she watched the evening news, told me she had
bounded down the stairs in excitement one day, saying, "I'm growing new
neurons!" The courage to persevere in rewiring our brains toward the
five Cs of coping is supported when we see that our intentional rewiring
is working: we see ourselves getting over the hump and establishing
behaviors that are new or different from before. When we see that we are
learning, changing, and growing, we keep going.

Refuges We do not believe in ourselves until someone reveals that deep
inside us there is something valuable, worth listening to, worthy of our
trust, sacred to our touch. Once we believe in ourselves, we can risk
curiosity, wonder, spontaneous delight or any experience that reveals
the human spirit. --- E. E. CUMMINGS Modern neuroscience confirms what
we can experience on our own: safety and trust are the wellsprings of
resilience, exploration, and growth. They are also essential to healthy
brain development and to rewiring our brains at any age. In the earliest
periods of development, a frightened child seeks safety, protection, and
comfort from a parent; when soothed, he bounces up to go off and explore
again. The brain is open to learning again. The same holds true all our
lives. Experiencing anything within a context that helps us feel safe
also helps us remain resilient and responsive. I spent all forty-five of
the shaking, rocking minutes of the 1989 earthquake and its aftershocks
in San Francisco huddled under a big conference table with six
coworkers, all of us holding hands, offering one another reassurance, as
the earth rippled underneath us. That refuge of companionship allowed us
to stay calm enough to see clearly what was happening and to connect
with each other as resources. When the aftershocks stopped, we went home
to find further refuge in friends and family and maintain our
flexibility to respond as we began to deal with the damage to homes and
possessions and took steps to rebuild. Refuge simply means a safe,
supportive place to be when we are fragile or confused, a safe place to
cry or rant as long as we need to, or somewhere to wait patiently until
a course of action begins to emerge from the chaos. We all need refuges,
safe havens, and sanctuaries, not to escape from the current demons and
dreads but in order to regroup, to pull ourselves together, to "resettle
our molecules," as my friend Phyllis Kirson would say. The calm we find
in those refuges helps us return to calm inside; from there, our brain
can recover its capacities to see clearly and to cope in new and better
ways.

We find refuge in trustworthy relationships, in the sacred spaces of
home or nature, in meditative activities (which can include any activity
done meditatively, like washing the dishes or gardening). We find refuge
in the vitality of our own bodies, in the juiciness of our emotions, in
the clarity of our consciousness, in the wisdom of our true nature. We
learn to create a quiet space, a leisure of time, a retreat from the
Sturm und Drang of daily living to do what I like to call REST --- relax
and enter into safety and trust. In this refuge, we replenish ourselves.
We help our nervous systems return to, or remain in, the state of
physiological calm and equanimity called the "window of tolerance" that
allows us to cope with anything without resorting to our primitive
survival responses. The following sections and exercises illustrate ways
to find simple refuges in people, places, and practices that can help
you return to the process of harnessing your neuroplasticity to learn
even more resilient ways of coping.

Finding Refuge in People We may seek refuge among good friends, people
we can trust to not judge or disdain us when we become emotionally
unglued or our thinking becomes unhinged: people who can simply be with
us until we regroup and are ready to face the world again. We saw how
Joe was this kind of refuge for Dan. These are people whose own
stability and calm we can borrow until we can regain our own. They may
be on our short list of "go-to" people whom we can call at 2 AM,
trusting that we will be held in what the psychologist Carl Rogers calls
"unconditional positive regard," that they will reassure us that we are
(or will be) okay, even though our world is crashing around us. Or we
may find refuge in other people who simply happen to be there when a
crisis arises, as my colleagues and I turned to one another during the
earthquake. If you don't have a lot of people in your life at the moment
who can offer a refuge, don't be discouraged. You can create a genuinely
effective circle of support in your imagination. This circle can include
people you trust and feel supported by, or it may be made up of
imaginary people you would like to meet. Your circle may include a
spiritual figure like Jesus or the Dalai Lama. It may include your own
wiser self. Visualizing ourselves as encircled by real or imaginary
friends who "have our back" can greatly enhance our ease and resilience
as we face an unknown or frightening situation.

I experienced the power of calling on support in my imagination almost a
decade ago, when I chose to have LASIK eye surgery to correct lifelong
nearsightedness and astigmatism. The operation was risky, so I went into
it with understandable anxiety. I had asked friends to think of me that
day, at the time I was actually in surgery, so that I would feel
supported and not alone during the procedure. I had to remain conscious
during the operation, and focusing my eyes on the light above me so that
the laser could track exactly where to reshape the cornea to give me 20/
20 vision. While lying on the gurney, as still as I could, I thought of
all my friends thinking of me; I took in the love and caring that I knew
were being sent my way. About ten minutes into the operation, quite
suddenly, I lost all sense of anxiety. Instead I was flooded with an
overpowering sense of love and belonging. There was nothing to be afraid
of, nothing at all. I remained in that state of serenity for the
remainder of the surgery (which was completely successful). Imagined
experiences can be nearly as powerful as actual events for creating new
brain circuitry. Neuroscientists have discovered that the same neurons
fire in our visual cortex when we imagine seeing a banana as when we see
one for real. When you use the power of your imagination to repeatedly
visualize people supporting you, you are installing a pattern of coping
in your neural circuitry that you can use as a refuge in times of
difficulty or challenge.

Exercise 4: Creating a Circle of Support 1.

Identify a specific situation for which you would like support, such as
going to a supervisor to discuss a complaint or a raise, preparing for
an audit by the IRS, telling your brother and sister-in-law you won't be
joining them for Thanksgiving this year, or confronting your teenage son
about drug paraphernalia stashed in his bedroom closet. 2. Take thirty
seconds to identify several people you would like to have, in your
imagination, by your side in this situation. Imagine them fully present,
fully supportive. You're not alone. Practice evoking this sense of
refuge again and again until it becomes a natural habit of your brain
that you can call on any time you need it.

Evoking refuges and resources in the imagination can feel as real to the
brain as having them physically present. The possibilities of using
imagination to rewire our brains can stretch toward the infinite. The
next time you face an unexpected challenge or crisis, notice any
increased sense of inner safety as you evoke your circle of support to
help you act resiliently.

Finding Refuge in Places The Peace of Wild Things When despair for the
world grows in me and I wake in the night at the least sound in fear of
what my life and my children's lives may be, I go and lie down where the
wood drake rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds.
I come into the peace of wild things who do not tax their lives with
forethought of grief. I come into the presence of still water. And I
feel above me the day-blind stars waiting with their light. For a time I
rest in the grace of the world, and am free. --- WENDELL BERRY We all
need a safe place we can retreat to when the going gets rough ---
wilderness or a garden, a church or temple, our car or office, a
friend's home or our own snug bed --- to reconnect with our wisest, most
resilient self. When a place has repeatedly been used as a refuge, by
ourselves or by many other people, the physical place itself
reverberates with a feeling of welcome and safety. We can sense its
energy and feel ourselves calm down when we enter it. Anywhere can be a
safe place of refuge if it is "ego-syntonic" --- if it suits our
temperament, conditioning, and life circumstances. It may be a favorite
tree in a park or a rock by the ocean to sit on while we search for the
way through a current dilemma. Every time we go to our safe place, we
deepen our sense of being held by a compassion larger than our own

small world; we can come to terms with our losses and difficulties more
quickly and resiliently. My friend Dale lost most of his retirement
savings in the financial downturn of 2008. Understandably distraught, he
went to his safe place, a particular bench in a city park overlooking a
small lagoon. When he showed up afterward at my front door, he said
simply, in his Texas drawl, "That was the most peaceful half hour I have
ever spent in my entire life." Going to his safe place didn't solve
Dale's financial problems, but it did help him recover a relaxed
flexibility in his brain so that he could remember his own capacities to
deal with difficulties and begin the work of doing so. The following
exercise is a guided visualization that will help you cultivate a sense
of refuge in a safe place, one that you can evoke in your imagination
any time you need to.

Exercise 5: Creating a Safe Place 1.

2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  

Sit comfortably and quietly. When you are ready, imagine that you are
standing in front of a gate. Imagine in rich detail how tall the gate
is, how wide, how thick, what it's made of, what color it is. Make this
gate as real as you can in your mind's eye. Then imagine yourself
opening the gate and walking through. When you are on the other side,
visualize what lies ahead: a path, a hallway, a trail, or a street that
will lead you to a place that is very special, just for you. This is
your safe place. Begin to walk along the path. As you walk, notice
whatever you are seeing, hearing, or smelling, or anything you are
simply noticing. After a while, you come to a place that you know is
your safe place. It may be a meadow, a cottage, a special room in a
house, a beach, a garden courtyard, or anywhere that is a special place
for you. Allow yourself to walk up to your safe place and enter. Take
time to look around: notice all the things that help you feel safe and
comfortable here. Relax and enjoy being here; feel the sense of
confidence and inner strength your safe place gives you.

6. If you choose to, find a place to sit down. Add anything you want to
this space to help you feel safer and more at ease. Remove anything you
don't want. You can change anything you want. Then simply relax, feeling
at ease, enjoying your safe place. 7. When it's time to leave, imagine
standing up, leaving the safe place the same way you came in, walking
back along the same path or walkway you took to get here, eventually
passing through the gate, turning around, and closing it. Your safe
place is on the other side, but you know you can return any time you
need to. 8. Practice evoking this safe place in ordinary, nonstressful
moments so that it is available to you when the flak hits the fan.
Recognize that you are using your brain's neuroplasticity to create a
new and reliable resource of coping.

Finding Refuge in Contemplative Practice One day I was meditating in my
office on a break, but I had left the phone ringer on, and when the
phone rang, I answered it. My doctor was calling to say there was an
abnormality in my most recent mammogram; would I schedule an appointment
to come in and have another X-ray? My anxiety went right through the
roof. All the stories about friends' courses of cancer treatment started
rushing through my head. But because I had been meditating and had come
into a state of calm awareness before the phone rang, I could clearly
see my own anxiety go through the roof, see clearly that it was going
through the roof, schedule the appointment for the second mammogram
(which turned out to be normal), and return to my meditating, now with a
different object of awareness but still held in awareness, aware of
being aware. The Buddhist tradition emphasizes the importance of taking
refuge in the practices that lead to wisdom. Practices such as
meditation, yoga, and centering prayer deepen mindful empathy, the
compassionate capacity to hold whatever curveballs life throws at us and
take us further on the process of recovering resilience.

Exercise 6: Choosing a Practice A path of practice is an established
collection of teachings and tools that have been demonstrated over time
and in different cultures and circumstances to be useful guides to
developing skillful behaviors and the conscious awareness and compassion
that sustain those behaviors. 1. Many practices are available in our
modern Western world. The key to finding one that works for you is to
approach practices from a variety of traditions with openness,
curiosity, a sense of exploration and experiment, and willingness to
"see for yourself," as the Buddha taught. 2. Resonance --- tuning into
what feels right for you --- is key to choosing a practice that will
accelerate your process of brain change. 3. It's helpful to try only one
practice at a time rather than diffuse your energy by flitting from one
practice to another. It is also important to give any potential practice
a fair try. The focus and discipline involved in sticking with a
practice allow your brain to rewire more deeply. Discernment and
dedication will help you settle into a practice that can sustain your
process of change over the long haul. 4. You may find it helpful to
identify role models --- people who seem to have the qualities of
resilience you want to develop for yourself --- and ask them what
practices have helped them. Notice which communities of practice most
resonate with you, the you that you are becoming.

All of these refuges --- people, places, and practices --- provide the
conditions of safety and trust that make it easier to bounce back from
trouble or trauma, to cope resourcefully and resiliently. And they
create the conditions your brain needs to most reliably rewire itself.

Resources

Sometimes I go about in pity for myself, and all the while a great wind
is bearing me across the sky. --- OJIBWA SAYING Resources are the safety
net of resilience. Connecting to resources --- seeking support that will
either alleviate a difficulty in concrete, practical ways or that will
nourish and replenish us so that we can persevere in trying to resolve
it --- is one of the five Cs of coping. Resources bring strength and
energy to our endeavors at the very moment we need them, shoring up our
courage rather than letting us fall into depletion or despair. Resources
keep us steady and balanced so that even in crisis, we can try to rewire
our brains in a more resilient direction. It is important to cultivate
multiple layers of resources, so that if one safety net fails we can
rely on another. As you build your resource bank, remember that
resources are interchangeable: a lack of one kind of resource can be
compensated for by an abundance of another.

Material Objects as Resources Prepare for emergencies, big or small, by
keeping helpful objects at hand such as a granola bar stashed in the
glove compartment in case the fatigue of a busy day starts to set in
while we're stuck in traffic; safety pins kept in a desk drawer in case
a shirt button falls off ten minutes before a meeting; extra blankets
stored under the bed in case a power failure means no heat for three
days. They are a form of "saving for a rainy day" that is part of our
intention to create more well-being in our lives.

Exercise 7: Creating Material Resources 1.

Identify one potential emergency that you could be better prepared for
with a little forethought: for example, a power failure that knocks out
your refrigerator. 2. Create at least one material resource to prepare
for that emergency, like storing bottles of water in the freezer to help
keep food cold in the refrigerator when the power goes out. This
preparation will make you more resilient and may save you a great deal
of time and frustration later.

Seeing yourself take action to strengthen your safety nets of resilience
helps develop competence, another of the five Cs of coping. Registering
that increasing sense of competence in your sense of self helps
strengthen your overall resilience.

People as Resources People who serve as role models offer wisdom from
their own experience, giving us keys to crack the code of how to live
resiliently, whether we are observing them, talking with them, or
evoking their presence in our imagination. From them we learn
competencies and values to guide our actions, sometimes through direct
instruction and practical suggestions, sometimes by the "contagion" of
coping: the resonance from spending time with a resilient role model can
call forth the same capacities for resilience in us. And because our
brains can encode new patterns of coping directly from interacting with
other resilient brains, identifying people as resources greatly
accelerates our own brain change. I learned the power of people as
resources when I began seeing clients in graduate school, putting in the
hours of clinical practice required for becoming a licensed
psychotherapist. My emerging resilience was being tested every day by
the chaos and confusion of my clients' lives, but never more so than one
afternoon when a client called to say that her teenage daughter had
committed suicide the night before. Nothing in my training or my life
experience up to that point had equipped me to know how to stay fully
resilient in that moment. I managed to schedule a time to see her that
night, but I was in a state of shock --- not a calm presence, certainly
not yet the stalwart, skillful clinician my client needed to help her
through such bewildering, devastating loss and grief. I told my
supervisor at the clinic what had happened. With two teenage daughters
of her own, she wobbled a bit, too. She went to see the clinic director,
who, a bit more removed and a lot more experienced, was rock solid in
knowing how to handle the situation. She was able to steady my
supervisor and suggest many things to do that would be helpful to me and
my client. With her own equilibrium restored, my supervisor could be
clear and empathic with me about how I could best support my client.

I felt her steadiness, recovered my own, learned some essential skills
for handling such situations, and was able to be quite helpful to my
client that night. The resources we connect to by reaching out to others
can greatly accelerate the rewiring of our coping strategies. My client
Doug grew up in a family that was both dysfunctionally disconnected
within itself and isolated from other families. He had never even
attended a birthday party until his first year of community college, and
no one had ever thrown a birthday party for him. As he approached his
twenty-first birthday, he decided to throw a party for himself. For
Doug, this event was as significant a marker of becoming a competent
adult as knowing how to buy a car or rent his own apartment. He
approached a guy he had met through pick-up basketball games who seemed
to know how to get people together for social occasions. Doug's request
for advice turned into a three-week mentoring project: Neil helped Doug
identify whom to invite, what sort of event to host, and when to hold
it, and coached him on the details --- obtaining the food and drinks and
planning activities and rituals that Doug had only glimpsed from afar.
Doug had a great time celebrating his twenty-first birthday, resourced
by people who could help him figure out how to make his way in the world
in this particular way. And he learned the value of finding a role model
to help him crack the code and rewire his own brain.

Exercise 8: Discovering People as Resources 1. Identify one skill or
capacity of resilience you would like to develop. 2. Identify one person
you could have a conversation with --- a friend, a coworker, a neighbor,
a therapist --- to learn that skill. Or ask these same people whom they
would recommend as a role model. You can even select a role model whom
you may never have a direct conversation with but from whom you can
learn by observation and listening. This conversation could even be a
dialogue with the intuitive wisdom of your wiser self. 3. Initiate the
conversation between yourself and your role model. (If this step seems
challenging, you can even identify

a role model who can help you learn how to initiate conversations.) Or
initiate a period of observation of your role model, learning from
watching and listening. 4. Notice what you're learning from your role
model about the chosen skill. Also notice what you are learning about
learning from people as a resource.

Spirituality as a Resource One summer night, out on a flat headland, all
but surrounded by the waters of the bay, the horizons were remote and
distant rims on the edge of space. Millions of stars blazed in darkness,
and on the far shore a few lights burned in cottages. Otherwise there
was no reminder of human life. My companion and I were alone with the
stars: the misty river of the Milky Way flowing across the sky, the
patterns of the constellations standing out bright and clear, a blazing
planet low on the horizon. It occurred to me that if this were a sight
that could be seen only once in a century, this little headland would be
thronged with spectators. But it can be seen many scores of night in any
year, and so the lights burned in the cottages and the inhabitants
probably gave not a thought to the beauty overhead; and because they
could see it almost any night, perhaps they never will. --- RACHEL
CARSON I love this reminder from Rachel Carson, the noted
conservationist and author of Silent Spring. Moments of awe --- noticing
for even one moment the beauty, harmony, and miraculousness of the life
around us and the life within us --- remind us of the wonder that
anything exists at all. They connect us to the (re)source of all of
existence. Neurologically, in moments like these, we are entering the
"being" mode of brain processing that allows us to see the big picture
and loosen our grip on our accustomed ways of perceiving reality. In
this mode it is much easier for our brains to rewire our patterns of
coping.

One workshop participant shared one of her favorite ways of opening
herself to this resource. Any time Molly noticed sunlight sparkling on
water --- in a drop of water on a leaf, in the flashing diamonds of
ripples on a small lake --- she was transported into spacious awareness.
Both the physical beauty of that scene (processed by the defocusing
consciousness) and her awareness of the facts of the physics --- that
the sparkle of sunlight had just traveled 93 million miles in eight
seconds to reflect off the leaf or lake onto the retina of her eye ---
(processed by the focusing network of the brain) left her in awe of the
mystery of it all. The deep knowing that she, too, was part of that web
of existence became another resource for Molly.

Exercise 9: Connecting to Spiritual Resources 1. Take a moment to follow
the poet William Blake's advice To see a world in a grain of sand, And a
heaven in a wildflower; Hold infinity in the palm of your hand, And
eternity in an hour.

It doesn't matter what object you focus your attention on: it could be
the prism of colors of a drop of car oil on your driveway, the bubbles
in an ice cube, the perfect arc of toenail on your child's foot. 2. Let
your perceptions open to beauty and sense the mystery hidden in the
ordinary. Let your consciousness become extraordinary for a moment.
Notice any shifts in your sense of possibility as you do. An expanded
sense of possibility fosters flexibility and increases your brain's
capacity for resilience.

All of these resources --- material, relational, and spiritual ---
provide the tools and support we need to cope with the unexpected, the
unwanted, the apparently insurmountable. They keep us afloat in a sea of
troubles. They allow us to continue to exercise choice in responding to
life's travails, deciding how we want to manage how we respond and
making it more likely that we will succeed.

To be resilient, we need both the safety of refuge and the courage
provided by our resources. You may notice that the same person, place,
or practice can function as both refuge and resource. That's not a
problem. When we take refuge in a good night's sleep, we also create a
resource for the next day. Virginia Woolf wrote of the need for a room
of one's own --- a refuge --- and five hundred pounds a year --- a
resource --- to support creative and resilient endeavors. If refuge and
resource overlap, creating an integrated platform for resilience, that
is just fine, even efficient.

Pulling It All Together The five practices you have learned in this
chapter --- cultivation of presence, intention, perseverance, refuges,
and resources --- are all helpful in any process of personal growth and
self-transformation. • • • • •

Presence --- showing up and engaging with experience --- is a gateway to
neural receptivity that helps the brain more easily learn and rewire.
Intention inclines the mind toward resilient behaviors and strengthens
the neural circuitry that supports them. Perseverance creates new neural
structure through repetition, making it easier for desired brain change
to last. Refuges create the safety and trust that support brain change
and growth. Resources generate the strength, energy, steadiness, and
balance we need for adaptive coping.

These practices are essential for rewiring your brain for resilience.
Along with mindful empathy, which helps you see clearly, the practice of
presence brings you into a state of calm. When you connect to refuges
and resources, you create more options for coping. When you set
intentions to cultivate practical skills of resilience, and when you
persevere in those intentions, you become more competent. All of these
practices, and the reward of more resilient coping that comes from them,
boost your courage to keep going. These practices are the foundation of
the program of brain change presented in the next chapter: they help

make the changes safe, efficient, and effective. You can look forward to
immediate benefits from rewiring your brain for resilience.

CHAPTER SIX

Self-Directed Neuroplasticity

To exist is to change; to change is to mature; to mature is to go on
creating one's self endlessly. --- HENRI BERGSON

THE PRACTICES TAUGHT in the previous chapters help you establish a safe
and strong neural platform for rewiring conditioned patterns encoded in
your brain's circuitry. Over time, these practices steadily strengthen
the prefrontal cortex to do that rewiring and sustain the changes you
create in your brain circuitry. The actual rewiring, and the
establishment of new patterns of coping, occurs through the three
processes of brain change presented in this chapter: new conditioning,
deconditioning, and reconditioning. All three processes can be used
again and again as you discover more old strategies that you want to
replace with more resilient ways of coping. These processes have a
cumulative effect. The more you rewire into your brain skillful,
resilient patterns of coping, the more competent your brain becomes at
the task. New conditioning creates new neural pathways in your brain.
You learn new, more adaptive coping strategies that will then lead to
greater resilience. We know that new experiences, and repeating those
experiences, cause neurons in your brain to fire in ways that create and
stabilize those neural pathways. To rewire your brain for resilience,
you seek out new experiences that you know will encode these more
adaptive coping strategies into your brain's circuitry and repeat them.
For example, if you want to create circuits in the brain that help you
remain calm, you seek out and practice experiences of being calm, as my

client Sean did with his intention to wake up in a state of calm. If you
want to create the circuitry that supports your competence in
negotiating with customer-care representatives on the phone, you seek
opportunities to teach your brain through experiences of doing that
well. The neural patterns of resilience that result from new
conditioning can, over time, become automatic habits of coping. With
practice, these strategies can even completely override the old, less
functional habits. New habits of coping can become so steady, so
reliable that you behave resiliently without having to think about it
anymore. Deconditioning creates the receptivity and flexibility in your
neural circuitry that reopens your brain to learning and change,
enabling it to unlearn old, less effective coping strategies.
Deconditioning uses the awareness and acceptance that come from a
compassionate mindfulness practice to shift the processing of your brain
to the diffuse, "soft" focus of the defocusing network. The defocusing
network generates a neural flexibility, allowing you to alter even
patterns learned unconsciously and deeply embedded. Deconditioning
creates a new mental "play space" in your brain, making it far easier to
wire in the new strategies as you choose to. Reconditioning helps you
rewire the neural circuitry of an existing strategy by pairing that
strategy with a new, more effective one. When the strategies are paired
in your conscious awareness, the simultaneous firing of neurons encoding
both strategies allows them to deconsolidate (fall apart), then
reconsolidate (rewire) together a fraction of a second later. The neural
firing pattern of the new strategy can supersede the old, often rewiring
it completely, immediately, and permanently. All three processes of
self-directed neuroplasticity, like any conditioning in the brain, are
neutral. They will encode either more resilient or less resilient
patterns. They will more reliably encode better strategies for
resilience when supported by the synergy of mindfulness and empathy ---
awareness of the process and compassionate acceptance of any responses
that the process evokes. These processes have a global impact on brain
functioning. They will help you recover many innate capacities in the
brain in addition to resilience, such as motivation, equanimity,
self-expression, creativity, and altruism. Resilience itself is a
capacity that allows us to recover many others.

New Conditioning New conditioning occurs through intentional learning
from experience. By selecting experiences that can teach us new, more
adaptive coping strategies, we deliberately create new neural
connections --- new pathways and circuits of resilience in the brain. We
must be careful in our choices for that new learning. Rather than
encoding more facts --- cramming more data into the storage locker of
memory --- learning here means training the brain to respond in new and
more effective ways to the challenges of our lives. We learn to take a
moment to breathe, count to ten, focus on "what's right with what's
wrong," and regroup. We learn to listen to our wise mind amid the other
voices of our "inner committee." We learn how to ask for help in ways
that people actually hear and respond to; we learn to receive and
benefit from the help offered. As we expand our brain's capacity to link
the new strategies that come from these experiences into new patterns,
we are learning to be more resilient. And the more we practice new
conditioning, the more we are strengthening those structures in the
brain that do that conditioning and help us learn. When my client Bill
learned to use new conditioning to override one particular old pattern,
he was able to create a more loving connection with his partner, Sharon.
Bill grew up feeling disappointed in his dad, who was never a reliable
provider for the family. Bill's way of handling his disappointment was
with relentless criticism of his dad, which extended to anyone else who
disappointed him. When Bill recognized how automatically and
relentlessly critical he became whenever he felt disappointed by his
partner, Sharon --- maybe twenty times a day --- he realized he had to
do something to change. When he came in for his appointment, we worked
on new conditioning to change his response. Each time Bill noticed
criticism beginning to flare, he was to be aware of what was happening
in his body and brain and compassionately accept that it was happening.
The inner tightening and clutching he felt when he became critical were
a cue for him to pause and be aware. Then he would say to himself the
words "Be kind!" This process broke the old, automatic circuit of
complaining and criticizing, creating a choice point. Bill could then
begin to open up to empathy, compassion, and acceptance for himself and
for Sharon. With

enough good intention and diligent work, the process also opened up the
possibility for them to find a better way through their difficulties.
New conditioned patterns and new habits of behavior can override our
earlier conditioning, especially in realms of feeling, dealing, and
relating to others. We redefine the self in relationship to triggering
events and create a new reference point for coping. And as we develop
and reinforce these new patterns for coping, we grow into our more
competent and courageous adult selves. Although Bill was able to put the
new conditioning into effect immediately, it took six months before it
became automatic. Eventually, he could drop into a sense of kindness
whenever he chose to, and the old pattern of criticism or complaint was
rarely triggered at all. The newly conditioned pattern --- reacting to
feeling critical with kindness --- now lives side by side in Bill's
brain's circuitry with the old pattern of being critical. Most of the
time Bill can rely on it to override the older habit. The success of
this new conditioning and the strengthening of the brain structures he
needed to do it made it easier for Bill to make other changes.
Integrating new conditioning with other old patterns became easier and
easier to do.

Exercise 1: Creating a Better Choice through New Conditioning 1.

Identify a habitual negative reaction --- impatience, boredom, startle,
temper, rejection --- that you would like to use as a cue to practice
rewiring your brain. 2. Identify the new response you would like to
substitute: allowing, exploring something new, calming down, pausing to
reflect, seeing the good. 3. Identify a positive code word or phrase you
will use to break the circuit and cue yourself to change the channel in
your brain: "Allow," "Explore," "It's okay," "Pause," "What's the good
here?" The choice of words is up to you: what's important is to use the
cue as soon as you identify the trigger, to prevent yourself from
falling into your old, conditioned reaction. You may choose a word that
already brings to mind a state of resilience or well-being if you have
one: "Love," "Learn," "Breathe," "Slow down," or "Open."

Practice saying your cue word to yourself while you're in that actual
state so that your brain conditions itself to shift to that state when
it registers the cue. 4. Each time the trigger arises, practice the new
pattern of response: say your cue word and shift to the state you've
chosen as the new experience (for example, a genuine kindness) as many
times as you need to for the new pattern to become the new habit. 5.
Notice as the old pattern fades away into the background and the new
pattern becomes more automatic. You have conditioned new learning in
your brain, and you have learned that you can do so. Take in the sense
of success and mastery as you experience the actual rewiring in your
brain.

Deconditioning As part of his effort to change his old conditioning,
Bill began to practice mindful empathy to open his awareness to the
bigger picture of his relationship to Sharon. As he became more aware of
the compassion and love in their relationship, he could relax and come
into a deeper sense of inner peace and well-being. He felt a sense of
his inner goodness, always accessible underneath all the learned
patterns of coping, which brought him to a greater sense of Sharon's
inner goodness, too. With this new awareness, the grip of the old
patterns of reactivity began to loosen. From the receptivity generated
by his deconditioning, Bill was able to view Sharon with more kindness.

Exercise 2: Entering a Mental Play Space through Deconditioning This
exercise helps you use awareness of experiences of goodness and
well-being to defocus from the worries and concerns of the personal self
and relax into a spacious mental play space where rewiring old patterns
of coping becomes easier to do.

1. Sit or lie down comfortably. Breathe slowly and gently into your
belly, in and out. Breathe in a sense of goodness, a sense of safety and
well-being. 2. Gently bring into your awareness the people and things in
your life you are grateful for. Savor the gratitude throughout your
body. Remember moments when people have been kind to you, and when you
have been kind to others. Savor the feeling of kindness throughout your
body. Remember a moment of feeling loved and cherished by someone, then
remember a moment of your loving and cherishing someone (or a beloved
pet). Savor the feeling of love. 3. Let yourself claim your own
goodness. Notice any feeling of ease and peacefulness as you relax into
this state; know that this state of spacious awareness and acceptance is
the source of kindness, compassion, and goodwill. Trust that from here
it becomes possible to change old patterns in whatever direction you
choose.

Using mindfulness practice to shift to the defocusing network of the
brain helps your brain become more trusting and receptive of new
learning and new possibilities. The larger awareness can also help you
let go of your previous conditioning. As you become more practiced at
entering this defocused play space, you can apply this process of
deconditioning to work past any trouble spot in your old patterns of
conditioning, as discussed in part 2.

Reconditioning Although new patterns of coping generally serve us well,
they can be challenged when we are fatigued, stressed, or overwhelmed.
When the brain switches into survival mode, it can easily revert to the
default coping mechanisms tucked away in implicit memory. Even though we
know better, we find ourselves reacting in old, less resilient ways:
yelling, panicking, criticizing. If that old reactivity becomes dominant
again, we can turn to the third process of brain change: reconditioning.
Bill returned to my office a year after our initial work together.
Sharon had recently lost her job, and the financial strain was taking a
toll

on their relationship. Bill noticed that his old pattern of automatic
criticism and judgment had resurfaced. His perception that Sharon was
failing to be a good enough provider was triggering Bill's old patterns
of disappointment with and criticism of his dad. This time we set out to
use reconditioning to rewire the implicit memories underlying the
habitual criticism. Reconditioning depends on an intricate neural
mechanism that neuroscientists have been able to detect with
brain-imaging technology only in the past ten years. This research shows
that neural networks that constitute any individual memory (or thought
or belief) spontaneously fall apart (deconsolidate) and then
reconsolidate again a fraction of a second later. This is the naturally
occurring process by which memories, thoughts, or beliefs change over
time: for example, it's why ten different people may remember the same
car accident differently years later. It's the strength of our
conditioning --- the repetition of experiences that cause repeated
neural firings, which strengthen neural connections that create entire
circuits of memory --- that keeps us from losing all our learning as a
consequence of this falling apart and rewiring. Neuroscientists can now
demonstrate how, under the right circumstances, we can choose to harness
that natural deconsolidationreconsolidation process to intervene between
the deconsolidation and reconsolidation phases and redirect the
reconsolidation. This is how reconditioning happens. When we
deliberately focus our attention on a negative memory we want to resolve
or dissolve, the focused attention causes the neurons constellating that
memory to fire at every level --- from implicit bodybased and emotional
memories to explicit cognitive thoughts. Neuropsychologists call that
process "lighting up the network," making the old memory available for
rewiring. Using mindful empathy is a critical part of rewiring through
reconditioning. It is essential to be able to observe the old experience
rather than remaining embedded in it, which runs the risk of
strengthening the old memory and retraumatizing us. In Bill's case, we
began by establishing a strong state of mindful empathy to safely hold
this powerful process of rewiring the brain. Once I was sure that Bill
could keep one foot mindfully, empathically, in the present while he
evoked a memory from the past, I asked him to remember one specific
moment of criticism of his dad that

we could use to begin to recondition his brain. Bill remembered a time
when he was eight years old and his dad had come home with news that he
had been laid off from the factory --- again. Bill's mom got upset and
angry; Bill remembered that he had joined his mom in yelling at his dad
and calling him a loser. To light up the networks of that memory, I had
Bill share as many details of his experience as he could: where he was
standing when his dad came home, what he was feeling when his mom got
upset, what he said to his dad, how he felt as he was yelling at his
dad, how he felt afterward when his dad retreated to the garage, and how
he was feeling now sharing this experience with me. Once the memory we
wanted to work on was lit up, I asked Bill to recall a more positive
experience that directly countered the first memory: a happier moment
with his dad, a moment of feeling kindness toward him. Bill remembered a
time at about the same age when he and his dad played catch in the
backyard. Neither one of them was very good at catching the ball, but
they were laughing, goofing off, and having fun. Bill's eyes teared up
as he remembered the simple joy of that afternoon. He had felt kindly
then toward his dad and felt a surge of kindness toward him again as he
shared that memory with me. Once Bill had lit up both the memory of
criticism and the memory of the kindness, we had the groundwork laid for
reconditioning. The key to reconditioning is holding any two
contradictory experiences or memories in awareness at the same time, a
state known as simultaneous dual awareness, and to intensify the focus
on the positive memory while also remaining aware of the negative memory
we have chosen to rewire. This simultaneous awareness requires practice.
If it is challenging at first, you can begin by switching back and forth
between the two memories, always refreshing and strengthening the
positive memory so that it becomes stronger. Eventually there can be a
simultaneous awareness of the two memories. This creates the
simultaneous neural firing that allows the two memories to reconsolidate
together in a new network. As Bill's focused awareness strengthened the
more positive memory of his dad, there came a moment when the firing of
the networks that held that memory trumped the firing of the memory of
criticism. Bill experienced this rewiring as an easing of the intensity
of the emotions he had felt the day that he yelled as his dad: the
memory no longer had the

same emotional charge when he remembered it in session now. We repeated
this reconditioning process several times. Finally Bill reported that
the emotional charge connected with the negative memory had disappeared:
it had gone "poof" in his brain. Once Bill rewired the implicit memory
of criticizing his dad, the emotional charge that had unconsciously
driven his behavior with Sharon was also simply no longer there. No
longer so reactive to Sharon's job loss, Bill was able to work with
Sharon to deal more productively with their financial situation.
Reconditioning doesn't change what happened before, but it changes our
relationship to what happened before. It doesn't rewrite history, but it
does rewire the brain. You can practice this technique with memories
that are not emotionally fraught. Eventually you can use it to resolve
truly traumatizing memories.

Exercise 3: Out with the Old, In with the New through Reconditioning
This exercise is modeled on Bill's experience of using a memory of a
feeling of kindness to recondition memories of disappointment and
critical feelings. You can use the exercise as written, if you wish; you
can choose to recondition the pattern you worked with in the new
conditioning exercise; or you can work with something completely
different. 1. Settle yourself in an awareness of your own mindfulness
and compassion for yourself. 2. Remember a moment when you felt a
genuine kindness in your heart. If you are working on reconditioning a
memory involving a specific person, it could be a feeling of kindness
for that person, but it could also be for anyone else. Evoke the memory
of that moment in as much detail as you can: when and where you
experienced it, what you were doing or saying, what the other person in
this memory was doing or saying. Notice whether you can feel now the
feelings you experienced in your body then. You're lighting up a
resource of a very positive memory first, to stabilize the process of
reconditioning.

3. Let the initial memory of kindness fade into the background. Now
evoke the memory of a moment when you felt critical of the person you
want to work with in this exercise. Evoke the memory of that moment in
as much detail as you can: when and where you experienced feeling
critical, what you did or said, what the other person did or said.
Notice whether you can feel now the feelings you experienced in your
body then. You're lighting up the network of this negative memory as
completely as you can, safe in the container of mindful empathy. 4. Now
imagine feeling kindness toward the person you want to work with in this
exercise. This experience of kindness can be a memory or an imagined
moment. Visualize this moment of kindness in as much detail as you can,
imagining what you're saying or doing --- as long as it directly
counters the negative memory. Let the new experience of kindness become
strong and steady in your awareness, feeling the kindness in your heart
and in your body. You've now created a "neural sandwich" with the
negative or traumatic memory sandwiched between the initial stabilizing
memory of kindness and the countering memory of kindness you are using
to do the rewiring. 5. Hold the negative memory and the new positive
experience together in your awareness --- simultaneously if possible
(this capacity comes with practice), or switching back and forth between
the two if necessary to get started. Refresh the new positive experience
as needed to keep it steady and strong. 6. Eventually let go of the
negative memory and focus your awareness only on the positive experience
of kindness. Notice any shifts in sensations or feelings in your body;
notice any shifts in your thoughts about yourself or the person you are
practicing kindness with. 7. Recall the memory of the critical moment
again; notice any decrease in the intensity or charge of this memory.
Let it go again and return your awareness to the memory of the
experience of kindness.

8. Repeat this process as many times as needed. Eventually the critical
response will no longer be triggered at all or will simply feel like no
big deal.

Reconditioning can be used to fully resolve trauma, whether the early
attachment trauma described in chapter 2 or trauma experienced later in
life. When using reconditioning in therapy with clients, I have
witnessed them finish processing a trauma or phobia and say, literally,
"Well, what was I so upset about?" The fact of the memory is there, but
the feeling of the trauma is no longer encoded in the brain to trigger
distress. When you are using reconditioning on your own, it's best to
begin by practicing with simple negative experiences. If you want to
resolve an actual trauma, you may choose to work with a therapist
trained in one of the trauma therapies based on reconditioning, such as
EMDR. As you rewire your brain, you will learn that post-traumatic
growth can be immediate; moving beyond the trauma can be permanent.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter you have begun to use the three
processes of self-directed neuroplasticity that can be used to
strengthen the prefrontal cortex and establish new patterns of coping. •

• •

New conditioning creates new neural pathways in your brain; you can
apply it by seeking out new experiences that you know will encode new,
more adaptive coping strategies into your brain's circuitry.
Deconditioning creates the receptivity and flexibility in your neural
circuitry that reopen your brain to learning and change, making it
easier to wire in new, more effective coping strategies. Reconditioning
helps you rewire the neural circuitry of an existing strategy by pairing
that strategy with a new, more effective one. It allows you to rewire
old, default coping mechanisms buried in implicit memory.

As you become comfortable using the tools of self-directed
neuroplasticity, you'll find that you begin, in the words of the German

neuropsychologist Gerald Huther, to "use the brain so that the
potentialities built into it become fully realized." As you replace your
brain's old, conditioned patterns of coping with better ones, you will
notice yourself naturally developing the five Cs of coping. In the face
of stressors like challenging bullying at your child's school, you will
remain calm. If your son's life is derailed by drugs, you will see
clearly what steps need to be taken next. You'll immediately know and
connect with the resources you need to bring a divorce to closure or
rebuild a home after an earthquake or fire. You'll have a new
flexibility in your brain to become competent in the skills you need to
rework your finances. You'll have the neural receptivity to find the
courage to face a friend's mortality, or your own. As you learn to use
these tools to direct desired changes in your brain, you'll develop a
sense of mastery that gives you the confidence you need to tackle even
bigger challenges.

PART THREE

RECOVERING RESILIENCE THROUGH RESONANT RELATIONSHIPS

CHAPTER SEVEN

How Bonding and Belonging Nourish Resilience

Love guards the heart from the abyss. --- WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART

RESONANT RELATIONSHIPS HELP US recognize our own deep inner goodness and
feel competent and confident in the world. The film The Blind Side
(2010) offers a good example of how people learn to be resilient through
resonant relationships with others, even after trauma and neglect. This
film is based on the true story of a homeless African American teenage
boy adopted by a socially conscious family in Memphis, Tennessee. Leigh
Anne Tuohy is portrayed as a fierce champion of her new son, Michael
Oher, as he adjusts to life in a wealthy white family. Michael has never
slept in his own room before; he has never even had his own bed. And he
certainly hasn't had the nurturing experiences that would have helped a
growing boy feel resiliently good about himself. Michael is isolated
from others his age and failing in school. The rich connection and
parenting by Michael's new mom give him new experiences of himself and
new ways of seeing himself. The father and younger brother pitch in,
coaching, tutoring, and encouraging. Everyone's faith in Michael's
potential, their reflecting his true self back to him, not only helps
Michael learn to play football but also helps him earn good enough
grades to be eligible to play on high school and college teams --- and
eventually to play as a pro in the National Football League. Connection
--- steady, loving connection --- and others' seeing

Michael for the resilient human being he is, help him recover a sense of
his own innate goodness and fulfill his potential. If your earliest
experiences of attachment and bonding gave you a sense of security and a
sense of yourself as a uniquely resilient human being, that's great
news. Even before you had any conscious choice in the matter, your brain
was able to develop a solid inner sense of safety and trust in those
relationships. The reflection and encouragement from empathic,
responsive people for your true self engendered a sense of trust within
you as well. You learned what it felt like to be a healthy, secure "me"
and knew the innate goodness of that "me." This belief in yourself as
someone who belongs and matters is what allows your inner sense of self
to "gel" and creates a platform of confidence that allows you to explore
yourself and the world, developing all the competencies you need to
realize your potential. Even if you didn't get the full benefit of that
trust, confidence, and resilience from your earliest experiences, it is
possible to recover or develop those capacities now. The brain develops
its hardware and software of resilience, for better or worse, through
engaging with other brains. The prefrontal cortex matures --- and is
repaired --- most rapidly through interactions with other mature
prefrontal cortices. The most effective way to learn resilience is by
interacting with other resilient human beings. We learn the five Cs of
coping from people who embody them. Michael learned to connect to
resources --- such as coaches, tutors, and agents --- from his adoptive
family. You might learn to see additional options in a situation from
other people who can observe it from different perspectives. You might
become more competent at negotiating with other people by carefully
observing people who are skilled at negotiation. Certainly, as you spend
time with people who are consistently calm or steadfastly courageous,
you come to embody those qualities too.

When Past Relationships Make Us Skittish Although relationships can be
healthy, resonant, and conducive to positive brain change, they can
sometimes be oppressively toxic and a cause of less-than-resilient
functioning. Many people with experience of

such relationships may be very wary indeed of relying on relationships
with other people to gain resilience. If we have been hurt, devalued,
betrayed, or exploited, especially by people close to us, the people we
wanted to rely on the most, we may be reluctant to seek any kind of
healing through another person. Love gone sour or scornful can wound our
hearts and break our spirits. Too many of us have experienced or
witnessed deliberate cruelty or violation from other people---the
unconscionable neglect, enmeshment, or abuse that threatens to
annihilate or disintegrate the psyche. Our willingness to rely on others
for comfort, guidance, and support and to learn from others how
relational resilience really works can easily erode if we remember a
sometimes loving, sometimes raging alcoholic father chasing us through
the house with a kitchen knife, or returning home from a vacation with
Dad to discover that Mom had moved out, with no explanation ever given.
Our higher brains can later extend compassion --- and even forgiveness
--- to people whose behaviors have disappointed or wounded us if we come
to understand that they, too, have probably suffered in relationships in
ways that shaped their behavior. And we can recognize that we may also
have disappointed and wounded others along the way. But repeated toxic
experiences in relationships and the wariness that results can skew our
perceptions of ourselves and others, derail our capacities for trust and
self-acceptance, and leave us mired in anxiety and shame. Instead of
processing new experiences with naturally curious engagement, we may
defensively withdraw. These conditioned neural patterns can block our
ability to learn about resilience from healthier relationships.
Nonetheless, if we want to become more resilient, we need to learn how
to use new experiences in genuinely resonant relationships, including
new ways of relating to the self, to rewire our patterns of relating.
This is the choosing part of harnessing neuroplasticity. Developing
resilience requires rebuilding the resonance circuit in our brains that
puts the maturation of the prefrontal cortex back on track. It means
undoing any history of relational troubles and traumas that may still
create mistrust and defensiveness. Resilience allows us to use
relationships as positive resources, instead of relying only on our own
survival responses. We want to move from neural cement or neural swamp
into a more flexible mindset that

lets us develop relational resilience and relational intelligence ---
the interpersonal skills that allow us to meet all the storms and surges
of our lives, not just the relational dramas and traumas. To develop
this intelligence, we need to learn to use interpersonal neuroplasticity
as a powerful agent of recovering relational resilience.

The Power of the True Other At a conference on attachment and
relationships, the keynote speaker told us: "All this talk therapy is
just an excuse to hang out long enough for the relationship to do the
healing." One hour a week with a trained and empathic professional can
be helpful, sometimes essential, but we have more than a hundred waking
hours in the rest of the week to seek out beneficial new experiences on
our own --- with friends, partners, and pets, in memory and in
imagination --- to create new circuitry in our brains that helps us know
and value who we truly are. The speediest and most reliable way to
strengthen the prefrontal cortex, and begin to recover the resilience of
our true self, is through experiences with people who can be, as the
clinical psychologist Diana Fosha puts it, true others to our true self.
True others are those who can see and reflect our true self back to us
when we have forgotten, or perhaps have never known, who we truly are.
They remember our best self when we are mired in our worst self and
accept without judgment all of who we are. True others are not
necessarily the people closest to us, though they may be: they are the
people most attuned to us, those most accepting of our innate goodness,
our essential worth as human beings. For many people, a true other can
be a spiritual figure or deity; for others, it may be a counselor,
teacher, or friend. When someone who is acting as a true other genuinely
sees us at our best, we can see ourselves in that light, too. This
mirroring helps us rediscover our resilient self. The power of the true
other can be seen in the example of the Irish playwright Oscar Wilde
when he was imprisoned in England in 1895 for homosexuality. As Wilde
was walking through the throngs of jeering hecklers on his way to
prison, his publisher and friend, Robert Ross, quietly bowed and tipped
his hat to him. Wilde later recounted in his autobiographical work De
Profundis that his friend's gesture of respect was what enabled him to
endure his two years of imprisonment with his

courage and dignity intact. When Ross acknowledged Wilde's true self,
Wilde's resilience came to the fore. Having other people reflect our
best self to us can happen in the simplest of ways. A few months after I
moved my eighty-one-year-old dad out to live near me so that I could
care for him as his health declined, he had a stroke severe enough to
land him in the hospital for a few days and in a skilled nursing
facility for a while after that. One morning, he became suicidal. That
behavior was more than the nursing facility could take responsibility
for. At 5:30 AM the staff called me to come and pick him up. In his
confused mental state, and despite his frailty, he had managed to climb
onto a second-story deck overlooking the courtyard and had threatened to
jump. When I arrived, my dad was waiting in the lobby. Getting him into
my car to take him home was no problem, but I was completely bewildered
about what to do next. Would he be safe at home? Did I need to move him
to a board-and-care facility? Before I got in the car myself, I burst
into tears. Right there on the curb in the parking lot, I collapsed and
sobbed. All my fear and confusion about his failing health welled up and
spilled over. The nurse who had discharged my dad saw my collapse out
the window, came out of the building, sat next to me on the curb, and
gently took my hand. For the next fifteen minutes, she never said a
word. She just held my hand and gently stroked my back as I cried out
wave after wave of grief and anguish. Eventually, as the tears subsided,
I looked into the nurse's eyes and saw someone simply seeing me and my
pain, caring for my pain and all the pain of all the family members who
had ever gone through what I was going through, all the pain of the
human condition. In that moment I knew that my struggle was completely
seen, understood, and accepted. In that moment, she was the true other
to my true self, and her unspoken empathy allowed me to regroup. Her
presence conveyed to me I that could find my way through this dark time
and helped me recover my confidence. In this instance, I was fortunate
that the true other showed up for me. But rather than just hope or wait
for someone to turn up randomly on their own, you can deliberately seek
out true others; you can deliberately choose the new relational
experiences that will rewire your brain for more inner security and
resilience.

Creating Inner Safety and Trust The process of being seen, understood,
and accepted by an attuned, empathic other engenders a sense of genuine
self-acceptance, a feeling that we are profoundly okay. We feel safe
enough, strong enough, sure enough to venture courageously into the
world and develop the competencies we need to deal with life's
challenges. Among my favorite stories is one I heard from the meditation
teacher Jack Kornfield. A seven-year-old boy and his family went to a
restaurant for dinner. When the waitress asked the boy what he wanted
for dinner, he replied without hesitation, "A hot dog and French fries!"
His mother interrupted, telling the waitress, "He'll have meatloaf with
mashed potatoes and gravy." After the waitress had taken the parents'
orders, she turned to the boy and asked, "Do you want ketchup and
mustard on your hot dog, son?" As the waitress was leaving, the boy
turned to his parents and said, "She thinks I'm real!" When others take
us seriously, honoring our existence, we become real to ourselves.
Through supportive recognition by others, we begin to reap the benefits
of a secure attachment we may not have had early on; we can deepen any
inner security we've been able to encode. The rest of this chapter
discusses skills that help you to do this and presents a series of
experiential exercises to help you remember your own strength,
resourcefulness, and wholeness --- the nature of who you are and were,
deeper than any conditioning that might have obscured or derailed that
essence. Because authentic relationship is critical for restoring this
connection to your true self, all of the exercises involve interacting
with others, whether face-to-face with a real person or in your
imagination. Both are equally effective in conditioning new neural
pathways. Following each exercise is an explanation of the neuroscience
underlying it.

Skill 1: The Healing of Presence and Deep Listening The most basic and
powerful way to connect to another person is to listen. Just listen.
Perhaps the most important thing we ever give each other is our
attention.... A loving

silence often has far more power to heal and to connect than the most
well-intentioned words. --- RACHEL NAOMI REMEN, MD When we want to
listen deeply to another person, we prepare ourselves to give them our
full attention. We temporarily set aside our own needs and agendas. We
stop rehearsing what we#8217;re going to say in response to what we
anticipate they are going to say. We become present, opening our mind
and heart to the person underneath the words, underneath the bragging or
the complaints. We become curious about what the person is saying and
not saying, what might need more time or deeper trust to be voiced. As
Henry David Thoreau said, "The greatest compliment that was ever paid me
was when someone asked me what I thought, and attended to my answer." We
can bring the same attentiveness and contemplative listening to
ourselves. We can practice tuning into our own experience, moment by
moment. We can notice tension, irritation, restlessness, impatience, and
boredom, or calm, peace, delight, joy, and awe. As we listen more deeply
even than the level of our breath, body sensations, feelings, and
thoughts about ourselves, we can drop into a quiet space of no chatter,
no agenda, no nagging doubts, no habits of perceiving or interpreting
ourselves. We can enter a spacious stillness so calm and clear that we
begin to sense the wholeness of our true being. As we learn to listen
skillfully, grounded in that wholeness, we are conditioning in our
brains a new way of being with ourselves and with others, creating the
safety and trust that is part of our psychological platform of
resilience.

Exercise 1: Deep Listening When we shift our attention toward listening,
our whole world changes. Learning to listen is equal to learning to
love. --- RUTH COX This exercise is done with a partner. Decide who will
be the speaker and who will be the listener.

1.

The listener asks the speaker a question (samples below); the speaker
answers as honestly and thoughtfully as she can. The listener listens
silently, though attentively and appreciatively. The listener then
simply says, "I appreciate your letting me know that," and asks the same
question again. The speaker answers the question again from a different
angle or from a deeper level of understanding and inner truth. The
listener listens as before and, when the speaker is finished, again
says, "I appreciate your letting me know that," and again repeats the
question. If the speaker doesn't respond right away, the listener simply
maintains a receptive silence. This questioning and response can
continue for as long as the speaker is still discovering new
understandings or feelings in response to the question. Here are some
sample questions. Choose only one and keep asking it. What brings you
joy in your life? What has brought you sorrow? What worries you now?
When have you found courage in dark times? What are you grateful for?
What are you proud of? 2. When the speaker is done (and thanks the
listener for listening), the two of you switch roles. When you have both
experienced listening and being listened to, you can debrief, sharing
what you noticed about your experience in each role and what you
discovered about yourself. 3. Take a moment to integrate this new
learning into your ongoing sense of self in relationship to others,
creating more safety and trust in relationships. Let yourself take in
the good news that exercises like deep listening are strengthening your
prefrontal cortex and allowing more new conditioning as you go along.

The Neuroscience of Why Deep Listening Creates Safety and Trust in
Relationships

The anterior cingulate cortex --- the structure we use to focus our
conscious attention --- also functions as a switching station between
the brain's left hemisphere (primarily responsible for processing our
thoughts) and the right (primarily responsible for processing our
feelings). The focused attention of deep reflection in response to a
repeated question and being attentively listened to (whether in our own
minds or by someone else) helps integrate the processing of the brain's
two hemispheres and helps us probe our thoughts and feelings at a deeper
level. We often "hear" ourselves in a new way and then, via the
prefrontal cortex, integrate these new understandings about ourselves or
others. This kind of deep listening can lead to the compassionate
receptivity that is needed in moments of great loss, in realizations of
truths we don't want to hear, in times of disorienting change and
transition. Compassionate listening requires us to set aside everything
that is not simply presence and openness. We listen to the whole being
of another with our whole being, and we attend to the whole being of our
own self.

Skill 2: Sharing with Others Kindness is more important than wisdom, and
the recognition of that is the beginning of wisdom. --- THEODORE RUBIN
Sometimes we find it easier to listen to the sharing of another than to
share something about ourselves. The exercise below offers a safe way to
build on the skills of listening you just learned in order to build
skills in speaking from your heart to another.

Exercise 2: Sharing Kindness 1. Invite a friend, an acquaintance, or a
friendly coworker to do this exercise with you. Take two minutes each to
share an experience of kindness that has happened to you today already,
or earlier in the week, or earlier this year, even back in the third
grade: a moment when someone held open the door, picked up something you
dropped, smiled as you

walked down the hallway, sent a supportive email when you were going
through a hard time --- any behavior that registered in your
consciousness as support from the universe, something that gave just a
little lift or a little steadiness. 2. Take another two minutes each to
explore what it's like for you to be sharing this story with your
partner, receiving kind attention, resonance, and support. 3. Take a
moment in silence to notice any effects in your body and mind from doing
the exercise, such as a sense of buoyancy, comfort, or relaxation. You
can do this exercise with variations --- recalling moments of courage,
flexibility, or patience --- with great benefit to your brain and to
your capacities for resilience. Each time you explore a quality
necessary for resilience, you are intentionally conditioning that
quality more deeply in your neural circuitry.

The Neuroscience of Why Sharing with Others Creates Safety and Trust in
Relationships This exercise brings the vagus nerve into play. Its
function in the brain's resonance circuit is to help regulate the lower
brain's assessment of the level of safety, trust, connection, and
belonging you experience in any situation. Every experience of a
positive, nourishing connection with another person improves this
capacity, increasing the sense of ease and well-being in relating to
other people. Sharing these moments explicitly with others, as in step 1
and 2 of this exercise, strengthens the attunement and empathy functions
of the entire resonance circuit in the brain, supporting your resilience
in interacting with others safely, in dealings that seem not so safe,
and in navigating the world in general. As you remember experiencing a
moment of kindness, your brain lights up all the networks of that
memory: the visual image, the emotions, and the body sensations, as well
as the thoughts and beliefs. You convey the entire experience to your
partner through your facial expressions, body language, and tone of
voice as well as your words. As your partner attunes to you, the mirror
neurons in his brain pick up the

nonverbal signals of your inner experience and begin to register in his
brain as his own inner experience of your inner experience. When your
partner shares with you his experience of hearing your story and conveys
empathy for your experience, he is creating what is called an
intersubjective experience of the connection between the two of you,
which both your explicit and implicit processing systems take in. Your
mirror neurons, picking up the signals from your partner, let you know
you are seen, accepted, and understood. Even a few seconds of this
sharing and mirroring strengthen the resonance circuits in each of you,
allowing you to engage more easily and skillfully with other people.
When you and your partner debrief about your experiences, you are
encoding the content of the stories and examples into your explicit
memory and enhancing your relational intelligence. Equally significant,
you are encoding the knowledge of how to do something: strengthening in
your implicit memory the procedural learning of how to create more
safety and trust in relationships. By sharing moments of relating
skillfully, you are strengthening the circuits that will allow you to
rewire old patterns and support your relational intelligence. You become
more competent in connecting to others --- one of the five Cs of coping.
Deep listening and sharing kindness have used new conditioning to rewire
your brain. Repetition of these exercises, or experiences like them,
will reinforce the new learning in your brain's circuitry in the
direction of deeper resilience.

Skill 3: Experiencing the Innate Goodness of Yourself and Others Be
kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a hard battle. --- PLATO Just as
listening to others, listening to ourselves, and being listened to help
us recover a sense of trust and confidence about ourselves in
relationships, experiencing goodness --- in ourselves and others ---
deepens that trust and confidence while creating more openness,
receptivity, and flexibility in the brain. We learn to access that sense
of goodness through deconditioning --- the process of brain change that
allows us to relax old, conditioned patterns of how we relate to
ourselves

and others; letting go of opinions, judgments, and defenses; and
returning to a clear sense of our core innate goodness, coming home to
the innate nobility and wholeness that is an essential component of our
resilience. The two exercises below, drawn from the Buddhist wisdom
tradition, will help you access a sense of this innate goodness, which
will become part of your psychological platform of resilience.

Exercise 3: Cultivating Loving Kindness to Experience Innate Goodness
Loving kindness practice (metta) is an ancient practice of goodwill from
the Buddhist tradition in which we express warmhearted wishes for the
happiness and well-being of other individuals and for ourselves, even
when that's difficult. Through this practice we can learn to keep our
hearts open to people we may dislike and even to parts of ourselves we
may dislike. The practice leads us into a larger consciousness, to a
broader perspective, independent of our personal needs or expectations,
helping us meet events and other people in our lives with more openness,
flexibility, and resilience. Loving kindness practice involves the
repetition of phrases of well-wishing through several categories of
people, from easier to more difficult. Typically it begins with
expressing wishes for ourselves. Because of our conditioning, it is
sometimes easier to feel the flow of loving kindness for someone else
than it is for ourselves. If that is true for you, go ahead and begin
the practice by directing your well-wishing toward a benefactor or
friend, and then include yourself in the practice when you are ready.
The phrases are formulated silently to yourself. However, the meditation
teacher Sylvia Boorstein suggests singing the phrases to yourself: a
simple melody makes the practice easier to remember and more fun to do.
Moreover, singing involves more integrated brain functions than speaking
does. The result of the practice is more peace of mind and heart,
greater contentment and well-being. Over time, we come to

increasingly know and inhabit these states of mind as who we truly are.
1.

Choose three or four phrases of well-wishing to repeat silently in your
mind. The traditional phrases include the following: may I be happy; may
I be peaceful; may I be strong in body and mind; may I have ease of mind
and heart. Practitioners have modified the phrases through the ages to
include: may I be safe from inner and outer harm; may I be free from
suffering, from all causes of suffering, from causing any suffering; may
I be kind to myself; may I trust my goodness; may I love and accept
myself just as I am. You can invent your own phrases; many people do. I
have developed phrases that have worked powerfully for me and for many
clients and students: may I have compassion for myself as I endeavor to
open my heart; may I know that I am held, safe and secure; may I know
that I am able to trust; may I know that I am loved and cherished; may I
know that I am able to love others with understanding, compassion, and
forgiveness. 2. Repeat your chosen phrases of well-wishing for five
minutes, three times a day, for three days, or whatever rhythm fits into
your life. The important thing is the sincerity of your intention to use
the practice to evoke and encode the states of mind and heart that are
full of loving presence, spacious awareness, and openness to the true
nature of ourselves and all beings. With enough practice, these states
of mind become traits of being. 3. Begin another three-day cycle, now
extending the wellwishing to other people. The Buddhist tradition
identifies specific categories of people to receive this well-wishing,
starting with people who are easy to open our hearts to and extending to
people who are more difficult. Choose one specific person in each
category to practice with, repeating the practice again for other
individuals. Benefactors: people who have helped you in some way, who
have seen the best in you and helped you bring out that

best, such as parents, teachers, mentors, therapists, siblings, and
friends. Dear friends: the people who, as one unknown author has said,
"know the song of your heart and hum it back to you when you've
forgotten the words." Neutral persons: people whom you may encounter
regularly but don't know personally: people who deliver your mail, check
out your groceries, walk their dogs in your neighborhood, or vacuum the
carpets at your place of work. You don't know their joys and sorrows.
You don't know if they are good or bad. You only know that they are
human and subject to all the forces and challenges of human life, and
that they have an essential worth as human beings, too. The power of the
practice is to feel the loving kindness flowing from your heart to a
neutral person, not because of who they are or what they may have done
for you, or even in recognition that they are also vulnerable to
suffering of the human condition, but simply to honor their true nature.
Difficult persons: people we are most likely to have negative, even
contemptuous, opinions of and are most likely to contract our hearts
against. They may include the coworker who is always snippy or the
politician whose behavior we find reprehensible. This is where the
rubber meets the road. Sending wishes for strength, happiness, and ease
even to a difficult person can train our minds and hearts to stay open,
calm, wise, and skillful in dealing with them or other people like them.
We come to understand that our state of mind and heart does not depend
on them, on their behaviors, or on their changing their behaviors. If
you lose your focus while practicing with a difficult person, return to
wishing well to an easier category of people, to reestablish the flow of
goodwill from your heart. Build up a head of steam, and try again. All
beings: everyone, near and far, known and unknown. This last step in
traditional loving kindness practice opens our hearts "as wide as the
world." 4. At any stage of this practice, take a moment to notice any
changes in your own well-being. You may feel an ease or

openness that signals more receptivity to other people and to experience
in general. This receptivity occurs at the neural level, too:
deconditioning makes it easier for your brain to rewire.

The Neuroscience of Cultivating Loving Kindness to Experience Innate
Goodness Loving kindness practice concentrates the attention of our
minds, not so much on the person to whom we are offering the
well-wishing (the object of the practice) or on the phrases themselves
(the vehicle of the practice), as on the flow of goodwill arising in our
own hearts that is the reliable outcome of the practice. With practice,
that goodwill can seem effortless. We experience that flow of goodwill
as evidence of the loving, caring, and goodness of our true nature,
deeper than all of our personal conditioning. That flow of goodwill
causes the brain to shift into the defocusing mode of processing, in
which deconditioning takes place: a more spacious and open state of
consciousness. In this state, we can let go of any stories about
ourselves or other people and any personal expectations or needs. This
defocusing mode of consciousness helps our brain stay more receptive to
new experiences, making it easier for us to encode new insights and more
wholesome patterns of relating into our neural circuitry. This new
relationship to relationship supports the development of the five Cs of
coping. With practice, we become calmer, clearersighted, more connected,
more competent, and more courageous.

Skill 4: Honoring the Innate Goodness of Others Loving kindness is
considered in the Buddhist tradition to be one of four "sublime
attitudes," states of mind and heart that develop naturally when you are
in touch with your true nature and that lead to the deepest happiness.
The other three are compassion, joy in the welfare of others, and
equanimity. Together, these four attitudes help you keep your heart and
mind open in the face of all kinds of adversity and suffering. The next
exercise leads you and a partner through an experience of all four of
these sublime attitudes. Although the exercise is done in silence, you
maintain eye contact throughout the exercise. The gazing,

even without words, can evoke a profound sense of intimacy and trust as
you open up to the nobility of your common humanity. This perspective is
important for learning to relate to others resonantly and skillfully.

Exercise 4: Honoring the Innate Goodness of Others 1. Invite a friend to
do this exercise with you. Sit across from each other so that you can
maintain eye contact. Do the entire guided meditation together in a
spacious silence. 2. Simply gaze into your partner's eyes, allowing
yourself to see in her the nobility of her true nature, the innate
goodness and radiance of her being. Silently wish her well, sending the
expressions of loving kindness: may you know the deepest happiness; may
you have ease of mind and heart. Let yourself know that at the same
time, your partner is sending you expressions of loving kindness as
well. Let yourself take in the kindness being offered. 3. Then allow
your awareness to shift. Imagine what human sorrows your partner might
have experienced in her journey, what losses, what griefs, what pain of
the human condition. Silently begin to send her expressions of
compassion: may your sorrows be held in loving awareness; may your
sorrow ease; may you feel my care for your suffering. Let yourself know
that, at the same time, your partner is sending you compassion for your
own sorrow and suffering as well. Let yourself take in the care and
compassion being offered. 4. Then allow your awareness to shift again.
Imagine what human joys your partner may have experienced: what
accomplishments and competencies she might have achieved; what blessings
of abundance and love she might have experienced. Silently begin to send
her expressions of sympathetic joy, happiness for her happiness: may you
fully delight in your delight; may you feel your joy deeply. Allow
yourself to know that, at the same time, your partner is sending you
expressions of joy. Let yourself take in the sweetness of her joy in
your joy. 5. Allow your awareness to shift again, to expressing wishes
for calm abiding and equanimity: whatever happens on your

journey, may you perceive and respond to it with a calm ease of mind and
heart; may you have deep inner peace. Allow yourself to know that, at
the same time, your partner is sending wishes for equanimity and calm
abiding for you as well. Let yourself take in the calming energy of her
wellwishing. 6. Allow your awareness to shift one more time, to simply
being, noticing whatever is going on for you right now: awareness of
your inner experience, and awareness of your awareness. Notice and
reflect on any changes in your inner, subjective sense of self. You may
notice a sense of spaciousness, less defensiveness, more openness.

The Neuroscience of Honoring the Innate Goodness of Others The steady
eye contact of this exercise activates the fusiform gyrus, a small
structure in the right hemisphere of the brain that recognizes faces and
reads their emotional expressions. Research has found a correlation
between high activity in the fusiform gyrus and low activity in the
amygdala when we perceive a sense of safety in another person.
Specifically, the perception of safety and trust in the facial
expressions of another can calm our own nervous system. When you
deliberately maintain eye contact with another person while experiencing
and expressing positive emotional states like kindness, compassion, joy,
and equanimity, you are evoking experiences of safety and trust that
encourage your brain to relax and open into the neural circuitry of a
defocusing state. The deconditioning of this state allows new
experiences of relationship --- of safety, respect, honoring, and trust
--- to be wired into your circuitry more easily.

Skill 5: Rewiring Negative Views of Yourself If we are to rewire our
sense of self to acknowledge our strengths and competencies, we need to
be able to accept the goodness that others see in us. But we may find it
much more difficult to receive the love and compassion in the previous
exercise than to give it. We may "smallify" ourselves, as my friend
Daniel Ellenberg would say, rather than let the

love and goodwill of others nourish and resource us. We may receive
compliments quite regularly: "You handled that attorney's questions
really well." Or "Nice job getting the teachers and parents to talk to
each other." But beliefs we hold about ourselves from previous
experiences in relationships might cause us to block or deflect these
comments and reply, "No, not really; I actually thought I was lousy" or
"Anyone could have done that; it was nothing special." We need to be
able to take in the positive views others have of us and encode them
into our neural circuitry in order to rewire our old views of ourselves,
especially when we might believe something quite different. When you see
someone looking at you with unconditional positive regard, mirror
neurons evoke the sense of goodness within you that the other person is
seeing. I present the next exercise in the form of a guided
visualization so that you can do it easily on your own, anytime,
anywhere. Practicing letting yourself take in the love of others is an
important step in rewiring any negative views of yourself that may
interfere with your resilience and sense of well-being.

Exercise 5: Rewiring Negative Views of Yourself through Seeing the
Goodness That Others See in You 1.

Sit or lie comfortably. Allow your eyes to gently close. Focus your
attention on your breathing. Rest comfortably in the simple presence of
awareness. When you're ready, let yourself become aware of how you are
holding yourself in this moment. Are you feeling kind toward yourself?
Are you uneasy with yourself? Are you feeling critical of yourself? Just
notice, just be aware and accepting of what is, without judgment --- or
if there is judgment, notice that. 2. Then, when you're ready, bring to
mind someone in your life who you know loves you unconditionally,
someone in whose presence you feel safe. This could be a teacher or dear
friend; a partner, parent, or child; or a beloved dog or cat. It could
be a spiritual figure --- Jesus or the Dalai Lama, or your own wiser
self. Or it could simply be a memory from any time in your life when
someone accepted you as you are and loved you.

3.

Imagine yourself sitting with this person face-to-face. Visualize the
person looking at you with acceptance and tenderness, love, joy. Feel
yourself taking in his or her love and acceptance of you. 4. Now imagine
yourself being the other person, looking at yourself through their eyes.
Feel that person's love and openness being directed toward you. See in
yourself the goodness, the sacred humanness that the other person sees
in you. Let yourself savor this awareness of your own goodness. 5. Now
come back to being yourself. You are in your own body again,
experiencing the other person looking at you again, with so much love
and acceptance. Feel yourself taking in that love and acceptance. Take
the love deeply into your own being. Feel it in your body. Notice how
and where you feel that love and acceptance in your body --- as a smile,
as a warmth in your heart --- and savor it. 6. Take a moment to reflect
on your experience. You are learning to recondition past negative views
of yourself. Set the intention to remember this feeling any time you
choose to.

The Neuroscience of Rewiring Negative Views of Yourself This exercise
uses our mirror neurons to do some reverse engineering. When we
intentionally evoke the sense of being seen by someone who loves us and
is looking at us with loving kindness, with appreciation, with
compassion, our mirror neurons begin to fire in response. We can feel
those feelings in our own bodies, even if we are holding quite
different, contradictory feelings about ourselves at the same time.
Imagining the other person's kindness begins to rewire our previously
conditioned views of ourselves. This reconditioning strengthens our
prefrontal cortex in its function of attuning to and being empathic with
ourselves and, of course, with others. Because this form of
reconditioning with mirror neurons is powerful, it's important to spend
time with people who see our goodness, our capacities, our resilience
and mirror them back to us; likewise, it's

important to protect ourselves from people who hold negative views of
us. Chapter 9 picks up this thread again.

Skill 6: Befriending Yourself The psychological self is made up of many
selves, an integration of different patterns of neural firing that
encode various memories or mental representations of different aspects
of the "self." Your self might be made up of the self who was brave
enough to run back into the burning house to save the family dog, the
self who was generous enough to bring casseroles three nights in a row
to the neighbors with newborn triplets, and the self whose nose got
pushed so far out of joint at not being invited to a second cousin's
wedding that you didn't speak to that side of the family for two years.
These many selves can manifest a wide range of resilience in their
connections with others. Resilience depends as much on how skillfully we
relate to all these inner aspects of ourselves as it does on how
intelligently we relate to others. Resilience can be impaired by old
messages that tell us we can't possibly run our own restaurant or can't
start over again when our restaurant burns to the ground, by old voices
that tell us we'll never get a PhD and don't deserve to anyway, or by
old parts of us that are stubborn, shy, mean, devaluing, and not fully
on board with this resilience thing. Resilience requires acknowledging,
allowing, and accepting all of the rebellious or reluctant parts of the
self simply as parts of the self. It requires honoring their reactions
as their best strategies to protect us from harm --- perhaps misguided
or outdated now, but at one time deeply believed to be necessary, even
adaptive and brilliant. Embracing these inner parts and integrating them
into an authentic sense of self is one of the capacities of the mature
prefrontal cortex, one that is essential to strengthening our inner base
of resilience. Befriending ourselves simply means being willing to look
at all parts of ourselves --- the good, the bad, the ugly --- with
honesty and clarity, with kindness and tenderness; to open our hearts
and minds to the truth of this multiplicity of selves, without
flinching, without self-hatred or condemnation, and with an eye to
appreciating how we have come to become who we are. Many techniques are
available to help us become aware of all the patterns we call voices,
parts, aspects, or facets of our selves; engage in a

dialogue with them; and accept, honor, and integrate them into one
coherent narrative of the authentic, whole self---even the ones that
seem harmful or bad at first glance. The next exercise is a simple
guided visualization developed by Virginia Satir, a family therapist who
specialized in self-acceptance and self-esteem. The exercise uses the
wiser self (see chapter 4) to conduct a sophisticated and productive
inner dialogue with these parts. You might want to keep paper and pen
handy to jot down notes as you go through the exercise.

Exercise 6: Befriending Yourself by Accepting the Many Parts of Yourself
1.

Settle comfortably in your seat. Allow your eyes to gently close. Focus
your attention on your breathing. Rest comfortably in the awareness of
simply being. 2. When you're ready, imagine you are outside a theater.
Imagine the building, the doors, the posters outside. Walk up to one of
the doors, open it, and walk into the lobby. Open another door and walk
into the empty theater. Walk all the way down to the first or second row
and take a seat in the center of the row. An empty stage lies in front
of you. All is quiet. 3. Now imagine that the first figure to come out
on the stage is your wiser self, standing in the center. This figure
represents all the qualities you aspire to: wisdom, strength, courage,
compassion, competence, acceptance. 4. Now imagine other characters
coming onto the stage one by one. Each of these imaginary characters
embodies a particular quality in yourself. These characters could be
people you know, yourself at a different age, people you know from the
movies or history or literature, animals, or cartoon characters. The
first character embodies a quality in yourself that you really, really
like. Take a moment to let that character take the stage. Notice and
relate to that character kindly and remember it (perhaps make a note). A
second character comes on stage embodying another positive quality in
yourself. Again let that character

5.

6.  
7.  
8.  

materialize on the stage and remember it. A third character comes on
stage embodying yet another positive quality about yourself. Let the
character materialize, and remember it. Look carefully at these three
characters, which embody three different, positive qualities in
yourself, standing with your wiser self. Take a moment to notice, relate
to, and remember them all. Now bring a fourth character to the stage
that embodies a quality in yourself that you really don't like all that
much. In fact, you wish it weren't part of you, but you know it is. Let
this character materialize and take a moment to notice and relate to it
kindly, and remember it. Bring on a fifth character that embodies
another negative quality in you. Bring on one last character embodying
just one more negative quality in yourself. Take a moment to materialize
all these characters, notice and relate to them, and remember them; jot
them down. Now you have onstage your wiser self, three characters
embodying positive qualities, and three characters embodying negative
qualities. Ask each character in turn what special gift he or she brings
to you by being part of you: ask the positive ones first, then the
negative ones. As you listen to their responses, notice what lessons you
learn from their being a part of you. Each one has some wisdom or
learning to offer. Next, ask your wiser self what gifts and lessons
these parts have to offer you. Listen carefully for the answers. Briefly
thank each character for coming to be with you. Watch as they leave the
stage one by one, the wiser self last. Then imagine yourself getting up
out of your seat and walking back up the aisle, through the lobby and
back outside the theater. Turn around to look at the theater where all
this happened. Then slowly come to awareness again of sitting quietly,
and when you're ready, open your eyes. Take a moment to remember and
embrace the lessons of each of these six characters, especially the
negative ones:

each is an integral part of you, essential to your wholeness.

The Neuroscience of Befriending Yourself When we don't accept all the
aspects of who we are, it requires effort on the part of our prefrontal
cortex to keep the unwanted parts of ourselves out of awareness, outside
the coherent narrative of ourselves. When we deliberately become
receptive to those parts of ourselves we may have pushed away or
forgotten and allow them back into the sense of our authentic self, all
of the energy that was used to keep them out of awareness is available
to use for more fulfilling purposes, helping us be more responsive and
resilient. And any wisdom from their efforts to keep us safe from harm
is now available to guide us rather than derail us. We can take wise
counsel from the thirteenth-century Sufi poet Rumi: The Guest House This
being human is a guest house. Every morning a new arrival. A joy, a
depression, a meanness, Some momentary awareness come As an unexpected
visitor. Welcome and entertain them all! Even if they're a crowd of
sorrows, who violently sweep your house empty of its furniture, still,
treat each guest honorably. He may be clearing you out for some new
delight. The dark thought, the shame, the malice, meet them at the door
laughing, and invite them in. Be grateful for whoever comes, because
each has been sent as a guide from beyond. The prefrontal cortex allows
us to create the coherent narrative of ourselves: this is who I am, this
is how I got here, this is how I choose to develop next. All of the
exercises in this chapter strengthen the prefrontal

cortex to function even more efficiently in encoding new strategies for
resilience. At the same time, the exercises help you deepen your
capacity to trust yourself and others. That trust opens myriad options
and opportunities for well-being.

Pulling It All Together You have just completed an important phase of
learning to use relationships to rewire your brain for resilience and
move in the world with competence and confidence. This rewiring can
happen even when experiences in past relationships have made us wary of
trusting others. • •

•

We can use the power of interactions with a true other to strengthen the
prefrontal cortex and recover a sense of our true self and a secure
inner base of resilience. You can repeat the exercises as often as you
wish to enhance your capacities for deep listening, relational
engagement, loving kindness, honoring the nobility in others, taking in
the goodness that others see in you, and befriending yourself. All of
these exercises strengthen the resonance circuit in your brain, which
creates a sense of safety and trust in relationships, relationships that
you can use in turn to increase your resilience.

CHAPTER EIGHT

Creating Inner Security and Confidence

Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone
deeply gives you courage. --- LAO TZU

IN READING ABOUT less-than-secure attachment styles in chapter 2, you
may have noticed that you missed out on some of the experiences that
would have naturally encoded resilient coping styles into your neural
circuitry. Nearly half of us do. You would have then missed out on some
of the experiences that lead to development of what the attachment
theorist John Bowlby called the internal secure base, the psychological
capacities of resilience that are the outcome of secure attachment. Dan
Siegel, creator of the discipline of interpersonal neurobiology, refers
to these capacities as FACES: the ability to be flexible, adaptive,
coherent, energized, and stable. These capacities, whether instilled
from the beginning of our brain development or because of skillful
rewiring through other relationships later in life, allow us to feel
competent and confident as we navigate the bumps and bruises of the
world. This base of inner security is a vital protection against trauma.
It is also dynamic, more of a flow of processes (a verb) than a solid
entity (noun). Neuroscience locates the neural substrate of that
internal secure base, as you might expect, in the prefrontal cortex. If
you haven't yet had the help of enough true others to aid you in
claiming the birthright of what I call your inner base of resilience,
you can use new experiences in new relationships to recover it now. And
the process builds on itself.

Research studies of the past decade have consistently demonstrated that
this inner base of resilience is marked by specific relational
capacities: • • • •

a sense of safety and trust in relationships with one's self and others,
which supports neuroplasticity in the brain and keeps it open to
learning; a flexible focus of attention on oneself, others, and the
world, which permits flexibility in responses to life events; a flexible
interdependence with others that balances a healthy independence
(autonomy) with a healthy reliance on others (affiliation); an
appreciation that healthy relationships are integral to happiness and a
sense of competence engaging in relationships, believing that
relationships will most likely work out and that you can act in ways
that will make them work out.

The findings of the research are echoed in the words of Tenzin Gyatso,
the fourteenth Dalai Lama: "Consider the following. We humans are social
beings. We come into the world as the result of others' actions. We
survive here in dependence on others. Whether we like it or not, there
is hardly a moment of our lives when we do not benefit from others'
activities. For this reason it is hardly surprising that most of our
happiness arises in the context of our relationships with others." The
exercises presented in the previous chapter --- reclaiming your
goodness, taking in the love and cherishing offered to you now, rewiring
old messages that cause you to doubt yourself --- form a good basis for
developing resilience in relationships. Wiring into your brain new
patterns of bonding, belonging, and relating give you even more options
and choices in how you respond to ongoing catastrophes and kerflooeys in
relationships and in general. This chapter explores ways to evoke the
new experiences of yourself in relationship to others that allow you to
build on this psychological platform of resilience. A sense of inner
security allows you to develop the competencies you need to realize your
potential and to navigate your world.

Skill 1: Nourishing the Inner Base of Resilience

Receiving the unconditional love of another is essential to developing
the "earned" secure attachment that recovers our internal secure base.
The unconditional love of another says, "I may not agree with all of
your ideas or approve of all of your behaviors, but I love you, no
matter what." It's what a securely attached baby receives, whether it's
fussing and refusing to eat or cooing in satisfaction. It's what we can
receive later in life when someone loves and supports us, whether we
just won the big game or lost it by two points. As the prefrontal cortex
processes the experience of unconditional love, it establishes and
fortifies the sense of well-being and goodness that is the base of our
resilience. Receiving the love and understanding of another person for
all aspects of ourselves, including our less positive qualities, may be
a new or rare experience for many of us. That someone else might be
accepting and even loving of our negative aspects may seem completely
counterintuitive, too. But when we create experiences that let us feel
unconditional love, we nourish an inner base of resilience. We begin to
claim our birthright of resilience.

Exercise 1: Taking In the Love of Others to Nourish the Inner Base of
Resilience 1.

Ask a friend to help you in this exercise, someone who knows both your
best and your worst qualities, or enlist someone willing to work from a
list you provide of these qualities you have identified on your own. 2.
Sitting face-to-face, ask your partner to share the positive qualities
that he sees in you, or those you have listed, saying for each, "I see
your \[generosity, open-mindedness, courage\], and I really appreciate
that about you." Maintain eye contact with the partner during this step.
3. Let in the feeling, "This is true about me. This is okay about me. I
can love and appreciate this part of me. I can love and appreciate all
of me." Close your eyes, if you wish to, while you are accepting this
feeling. Notice what happens in your body and mind as you receive this
care from another. 4. Your partner begins to identify your less positive
qualities, saying, "I see that you can be \[stubborn, jealous, bitter\].
I accept this part of you as part of being a human being; I

value this part of you, too, and honor it as an important part of you."
5. Again, your job is to let in the appreciation and acceptance, without
disputing or diminishing what your partner is saying. 6. Continue
receiving the sharing until you feel done. Take a moment to notice any
changes in your inner sense of yourself, and experience any increased
inner sense of wellbeing and goodness. Thank your partner for his
collaboration. (You may switch roles and repeat the exercise if you both
choose to.)

The Neuroscience of Why Taking In the Love of Others Nourishes Our
Resilience When we seek out new experiences in relationships that frame
both our strengths and our vulnerabilities as part of being human, we
create new circuits in the brain that encode these new views of
ourselves (new conditioning). The prefrontal cortex can integrate these
new views into the coherent narrative of the self, using them to rewire
old views we held before. These views become new reference points to
guide future actions. They become the core around which we can
reorganize a sense of ourselves as secure, strong, and resilient. We can
experience trust in ourselves rather than doubt, and pride rather than
shame or devaluing. In addition, feeling safe in the love and acceptance
of others enhances the neural flexibility we need in order to create
other new circuits.

Skill 2: Taking In the Good to Nourish the Inner Base of Resilience
Evolutionarily and culturally, we are hard-wired and conditioned to look
first for what's wrong, what's negative, and what's potentially
dangerous in any situation. Because of the brain's negativity bias, we
can become, and remain, quite negative about other people and our
relationships with them. However, it is possible to rewire our brains
for positivity instead. This is particularly important if our
experiences of others in relationships have been wounding or
disappointing. To strengthen the inner base of

resilience, we need to look for and delight in positive experiences of
ourselves in relationships with others. Rick Hanson, the author of
Buddha's Brain, uses the phrase "taking in the good" to refer to the
process of pausing to let positive experiences sink deeply into the mind
and body. By focusing attention on the moments of generosity, patience,
and honesty that we experience in our relationships with others, letting
those positive moments register within us, our brains develop habits
that move us beyond surviving to thriving. In the next exercise, we
practice deliberately evoking positive experiences in relationships,
receiving them deeply, and then reinforcing them by remembering them
later. All of these steps serve the process of installing new,
significant relationship patterns in the brain, strengthening the inner
base of resilience.

Exercise 2: Taking In the Good to Nourish the Inner Base of
Resilience 1. Practice noticing moments of kindness and understanding as
they happen in your day. For instance, someone lets you cut in front of
him in line at the corner deli when you're desperate to get change
before the meter maid tickets your car. Someone notices that you picked
up the trash left by a park bench and smiles as you walk by. A colleague
stops you in the hall to say "Good job" after a presentation or offers
you a handful of cherries from her lunch. A new neighbor brings you
homemade lasagna after you've spent six hours moving into a new
apartment in the pouring rain, and then checks the next morning to make
sure you're okay. 2. Let the experience register in your mind and body.
Notice how this moment of connection makes you feel: perhaps
acknowledged, included, or happy. 3. Take in the felt sense of this
goodness in your body: a warmth, a relaxation, an opening. Notice what
fills your heart: perhaps gratitude, joy, peace. 4. You can reinforce
the taking in of the good by telling supportive friends about this
moment later, or by imagining telling your circle of support. You can
remind yourself again through journaling or in an end-of-the-day review
of "three

good things I'm grateful for today." This repetition reinforces the
encoding of the event in your neural circuitry; you can draw on it again
and again as nourishment for your inner base of resilience.

The Neuroscience of Why Taking In the Good Nourishes Our Resilience If
we are so busy that we don't take the time to take in the good, we miss
out on vital nourishment for the base of resilience. We receive the good
like water running through a sieve. Research indicates that savoring a
moment of experience for at least thirty seconds strengthens the traces
of neural firing in our memory. Taking in the good encodes networks that
involve body sensations, emotional tone, and visual images as well as
our conscious thoughts, and so we are encoding new circuitry implicitly
as well as explicitly. As we remember and repeat this encoding many
times a day over a sustained period, we create a memory bank of
positivity that becomes a great support to our base of resilience. These
new experiences of taking in the good rewire our sense of
selfacceptance, fill the holes in our heart, and strengthen our inner
stability and flexibility. Through this new conditioning, we create new
understandings about relationships that can contrast sharply with our
previous templates or schemas. It becomes easier to override or set
aside old, ineffective patterns. It becomes easier to feel that we
belong, that we matter, and this feeling deepens our confidence in
ourselves in relationship to the world.

Skill 3: Listening to the Intuitive Wisdom of the Wiser Self My client
Matthew came to his therapy session one evening torn between two
possible courses of action at his job. Both were good opportunities, but
they pulled him in two very different directions. One was a transfer to
Tokyo to manage several new branches of the large retail clothing chain
he worked for. The other was a promotion within the headquarters of his
company; he wouldn't have to move, and the somewhat greater
responsibilities came with slightly higher pay.

The first choice appealed to Matthew's curiosity and sense of adventure
but brought up concerns of selfishness. Was it fair to ask his family to
uproot themselves and live in a foreign country for two years? The kids
would have to adjust to new schools and a new culture. The second choice
appealed to Matthew's need for stability and security and a desire to be
a good provider for his family, but it brought up concerns of going
stale in a job he was already competent at and comfortable with. I asked
Matthew to settle into a comfortable position, take a few deep breaths,
and relax into the state of mindful presence he had practiced with me
many times before. I suggested he call upon his wiser self to listen to
the concerns of each of the competing parts or voices within him: his
desire for adventure, his desire for stability, his worries about
selfishness, his worries about stagnation. After a few minutes, I asked
him to drop below the level of all those voices, past all the layers of
conditioning, roles, identities, and defenses, to the sense of his
essential goodness that his wiser self embodied. In this process of
deconditioning, Matthew could listen to the voice of his wiser self and
let the grip of the conflicting parts of him relax. By the end of our
session, Matthew knew clearly that at this juncture in his life, his
deepest yearning was for adventure. When he presented the result of his
explorations to his family that weekend, they each could feel the
genuineness of his enthusiasm stirring their own enthusiasm as well, and
all readily voted for a two-year adventure together in Japan. We can
listen to the deep, intuitive wisdom of our wiser self for guidance
about conflict within ourselves, as Matthew did, and for guidance in
conflict with others as well. The following exercise shows how.

Exercise 3: Listening to the Intuitive Wisdom of the Wiser Self 1.

Find a time and place to sit quietly without interruption. Settle into a
comfortable position, take a few deep breaths, and relax into a state of
mindful presence. Let any thoughts or concerns fade into the background.
Then bring to your awareness a sense of your wiser self, the part of you
that embodies your essential wisdom and goodness.

2. Bring to mind someone you are currently having difficulties with: a
neighbor who turns up the television too late at night; a coworker who
misses important deadlines; a sisterin-law who dominates every
discussion at the dinner table. Imagine that you can introduce this
person to your wiser self and then stand to the side as you overhear the
conversation between them. 3. Listen to how your wiser self handles the
conversation with the difficult person: what it says, how it handles the
energy of the difficult person. You are overhearing your own inner
wisdom being patient and skillful with the difficult person. 4. When the
conversation between your wiser self and the difficult person is
complete, notice how the difficulty is resolved. Notice what you
overheard, what you learned, what advice you are taking in from your
wiser self. 5. Let the difficult person fade from the scene. Imagine
that your wiser self turns to you, offers you a word or phrase of
advice, and offers you one symbolic gift you can hold in your hand to
remember this conversation by. You may choose to write down your
reflections for future reference.

The Neuroscience of Listening to the Intuitive Wisdom of the Wiser Self
Relaxing into the defocusing mode of processing in the brain allows you
to "surprise the unconscious" and access the intuitive wisdom of your
wiser self. The defocusing network, which operates especially on the
right side of the brain, shifts our focus to the big picture, where we
can comprehend things holistically and connect the dots in a new way.
The right hemisphere of the brain also processes the rules of social
relationships and our sense of self in relation to others. When we relax
into the defocusing network, we can access these rules of relating in a
more flexible way. In that process of decon-ditioning, our wiser self
can intuitively create new options to solve problems in relating. You
may not be able to access this intuitive wisdom very often at first or
to trust it when you do. But the more you practice listening to your
wiser self, the more you strengthen the internal secure base that it
informs and guides.

Skill 4: Rewiring Difficult Experiences in Relationships A teaching
story in the Buddhist tradition can guide us in repairing and rewiring
any troubling experiences in relationship in the present or traumatizing
memories that still hijack us from the past. If you take a teaspoon of
salt, dissolve it in a glass of water, and then take a sip of the water,
the water tastes disgusting --- it's too salty to drink. But if you take
a teaspoon of salt, dissolve it in a large freshwater lake, then dip the
glass into the lake and sip that water, the salt has dissolved in the
larger lake; there's no taste of it at all. We can dissolve teaspoons of
relational upset or trauma in the vast lake of mindful empathy, positive
emotions, and our own deep goodness through reconditioning. Old memories
of difficult experiences seem to dissolve. They no longer have the power
or charge they once had to derail our resilience. Because reconditioning
is a powerful tool for altering the brain's circuitry, and because we
want to make sure we're rewiring old memories and not reinforcing them,
I'm going to remind you of the ground rules before you begin the next
exercise. 1.

Anchor your awareness firmly in the present moment. You are safe here
and now and will still be safe even when you retrieve a troubling memory
of what happened back there, back then. 2. Focus your awareness on your
positive resources: positive selfregard, self-acceptance. Trust your
innate goodness, and evoke the wisdom of your wiser self. 3. Start
small! Work with a teaspoon of trouble, not a ton. Recall one small,
specific relational instance when resilience went awry: • • •

you were chosen last for the neighborhood softball team, and the sting
of not being good enough lingers to this day; you were a little flip in
your response to someone's money worries, responding with a quick slap
on the back and a "Keep your chin up," and now they've ignored you for
two weeks; your sister-in-law just can't seem to hear that you won't be
coming to her house for Thanksgiving, and you resent her obliviousness
to your own wish to celebrate with friends instead.

With practice, over time, reconditioning can indeed dissolve a ton of
salt, but please let your brain feel successful at dissolving the pain
of smaller memories first.

Exercise 4: Imagining a Wished-For Outcome to Rewire Difficult
Experiences in Relationships This exercise creates the resource of a
better outcome to recondition a troubling or traumatizing memory. 1.

Find a time and place to sit quietly without interruption. Focus your
attention on your breath, beathing calmly and deeply into your heart
center. Call to mind a particular moment of ease and well-being, a
particular sense of your own goodness, or a moment when you felt safe,
loved, connected, and cherished. Or think of a moment when you were with
someone who loves and believes in you. Remember this moment in as much
detail as you can, in as many levels of your body and brain as you can:
a visual image, the feelings in your body that the memory evokes, any
thoughts you have about yourself now as you remember the sweetness of
that moment. Let yourself savor this moment in a mindful and
compassionate "holding" of the memory. 2. When you feel bathed in the
good feeling, and still anchored in the awareness of safety in the
present moment, call to mind a moment when things went awry between you
and another person. It might be slight or terrible, but if it's
terrible, break down the experience into little chunks. (Again, start
small.) As you reimagine that moment, remain in your observer role
rather than reliving the experience. Evoke this memory to light up all
the neural networks --- visual images, body sensations, emotions,
thoughts, or beliefs at the time. Recall memories of what you said and
did; what someone else said or did; who else was there; how old you were
and how old the other person was; what you were wearing and what that
person was wearing. Maybe you wish you had said or done something
different at the time.

Maybe you wish someone else had done something different, even if that
could never have happened in real life. 3. Then begin to visualize a
wished-for outcome, even if this never could have happened in real life:
what you would have said or done differently; what the other person
could have done differently; what someone else not even in the original
scenario could have said or done. If you simply wish that none of this
had happened at all, you can imagine what would have happened instead.
Let the new story unfold as you would have wished, in as much detail as
you can. You are creating a scenario that completely disconfirms or
contradicts what happened before. 4. Hold the two scenarios in your
awareness at the same time, or switch back and forth between them,
always refreshing and strengthening the newer, more positive scenario.
After a few moments, let go of the old memory and just rest your
attention on the new scenario. Let your mind play out this new scenario,
and then notice how you feel. Notice any emotions or thoughts or beliefs
about yourself that come up now, and if they are more positive and
resilient, let them soak in. Then bring your awareness back to the
present moment.

The Neuroscience of Rewiring Difficult Experiences in Relationships
Using this technique does not change what happened, but it does change
our relationship to what happened. It doesn't rewrite history, but it
does rewire the brain. This kind of careful reconditioning can rewire a
shamebased sense of self, dissolve self-doubt and smallifying, and help
the inner critic retire. Altering your brain circuitry through
reconditioning creates a stronger neural platform of resilience in the
internal secure base and allows a new relational intelligence to emerge.
The relational intelligence we explore in the next chapter allows us to
deal with even intrusive, withdrawn, or hostile people resiliently in
any situation.

Pulling It All Together

In this chapter, you have learned how to choose new experiences that
help you strengthen your inner base of resilience in order to fully
realize your potential and skillfully navigate your world. •

• • •

Taking in the unconditional love and acceptance of others helps our
neural circuitry encode both the calm and the courage that are part of
our internal secure base. We feel confident exploring new relationships,
new experiences, and new ways of taking care of business in the world.
Taking in the good connects us to the resources of our inner goodness,
inner strength, and inner competence that equip us to face difficult
situations. Listening to our wiser self helps us see options and choices
more clearly as we contemplate big decisions. Knowing how to rewire old,
painful memories stops them from plaguing us and helps us feel competent
and confident about continuing to rewire our brains for resilience.

CHAPTER NINE

Developing Relational Intelligence

The moment we cease to hold each other, the sea engulfs us and the light
goes out. --- JAMES BALDWIN

RELATIONAL INTELLIGENCE is an umbrella term I use for the people skills
that allow us to navigate our world, especially our peopled world,
competently, effectively, and resiliently. Similar to Daniel Goleman's
notion of social intelligence, relational intelligence allows our brains
to create bonds with others that sustain us through thick and thin.
Research shows that these bonds provide us with a deeper sense of
happiness and well-being than anything else in the human experience.
They are among the resources that sustain our resilience. The skills of
relational intelligence include empathic listening and speaking, wishing
for the happiness and well-being of ourselves and others, taking in the
good, and befriending all parts of ourselves and others --- all
presented in previous chapters. They also include reaching out for help,
setting healthy boundaries, negotiating changes in behavior, repairing
ruptures, and being willing to forgive. In this chapter you will learn
to develop these skills. Studies show that these relational intelligence
skills are more predictive of our success as human beings --- meaning
resilience and well-being in the workplace as well as in relationships
--- than IQ. All of these skills build on and reinforce the five Cs of
coping. Reaching out for help keeps us connected to the resources we
need to find a new job or a good doctor or the right tutor for our kid.
Setting limits and boundaries actually helps us stay calm in
relationships,

knowing we won't be intruded upon or have to do something that goes
against the grain or could be harmful to do. Negotiating change builds
our competence in getting our needs met. Knowing how to repair a rupture
in a relationship helps us find the courage to take risks, confident
that we can repair and even strengthen the bond with another person if
need be. Forgiveness requires the mindful empathy that allows us to see
the larger picture clearly, holding our own behaviors and those of
others, resilient or not, in a larger compassion that supports
resilience.

Skill 1: Reaching Out for Help A sense of disconnection or isolation
from other people, not knowing that other people can be a source of
support in times of need, can impair the functioning of our social brain
and undermine our capacity for resilience. We want to be able to act
independently and autonomously --- that is one of the great benefits of
building or restoring our internal secure base --- but interdependence
is integral to human social life, and we also need to feel that it's
okay to turn to other people for support. Researchers at the University
of Michigan conducted a simple experiment to measure the effect of
receiving help on a person's estimate of a difficulty. Participants
standing at the bottom of a steep hill were asked to estimate its
height; their estimates were recorded. Next the same participants were
given heavy backpacks and asked to estimate the height of the hill
again. The estimates were considerably higher. The backpacks were then
removed, and the participants were paired up to climb the hill together.
This time their reported estimates of the height of the hill were
considerably lower than the original estimates. Help... helps. The
biologically hard-wired drive "to seek physical proximity to a caregiver
in times of perceived threat or danger" (see chapter 1) spurs the
attachment behaviors that catalyze the development of all of the human
brain and the maturation of the prefrontal cortex in particular.
Reaching out for help --- for material resources, for spiritual and
practical wisdom, for relational support and guidance --- remains a
cornerstone of resilience lifelong. Our nervous systems have evolved to
be affected by the presence of people around us. This means others can
help us regain our equilibrium when they are more stable and centered
than we are. Someone simply

being present in the same room helps calm our nervous system, even if
she is doing something completely different from us. We're preparing our
tax returns; she is reading the paper. Her presence helps us stay calm
and productive, stabilizing the nervous system so that we can remember
our own inner resources and connect to the resources offered by others.
For many of us, asking for and accepting help is much harder than giving
it. We may not know how to ask for help, we may believe that asking for
help is a sign of weakness, or we may have come to believe, from
experience, that there's no point. At the other extreme, if we have not
developed enough self-sufficiency, we may be constantly asking for help
and driving people crazy. Reaching out for help in relationally
intelligent ways is a sign of resilience. You don't need to wait for
something bordering on catastrophe --- a teenage son arrested for drunk
driving, a muscle spasm in your lower back that keeps you in bed for
three days, a storm that blows a huge tree down onto the roof of your
house --- to practice asking for help.

Exercise 1: Reaching Out for Help 1. Set the intention to focus your
awareness on your automatic tendencies to either reach out for help or
to avoid asking. Recall a time when something you were facing suddenly
turned out to be more complicated or difficult than you expected: the
lost wallet led to identity theft; the strange spot on your hand turned
out to be melanoma. As you evoke your memory of facing something
difficult, notice what your own reflexive response was: turning to
others, turning away, or turning inward. Notice how you feel now as you
remember coping in that way. 2. Then, whatever your automatic style,
deliberately imagine asking others for help and support, and imagine
them responding quickly and skillfully. Their practical help would be
welcome, but just their attention and presence may be enough to help you
feel connected and supported. Notice your response within as you
experiment with reaching out. Have some compassion for yourself if this
new conditioning of reaching out in this way causes any initial
discomfort.

3. Practice this reaching out for help a number of times in your
imagination, in various scenarios. Then gradually, consciously, begin
asking for help from others in your daily life --- trusted others at
first --- to experience the benefit to yourself. Reaching out for and
accepting help get easier with practice and steadily rewire the brain
into a new resilient habit.

The Neuroscience of Reaching Out When we reach out for help, we use our
brain's resonance circuit to activate what is called our relational
engagement system, a complex neural circuit that uses the stability of
another person's nervous system to help us stabilize our own. Once our
own nervous system is back in balance, our prefrontal cortex is free to
look for options and solutions and to use all the resources that are
available. So reaching out for help isn't about finding people with all
the answers, or having other people do everything for us. It's simply
about using the stability of other people's brains to stabilize our own,
so that we can be resilient in finding resources and making choices.

Skill 2: Setting Limits and Boundaries Developmental psychologists have
found that the human brain is capable of distinguishing between self and
others by six months of age. The capacity of theory of mind (see
chapter 1) takes that development further as we mature. More important
for taking our place in the world as independent, resilient human
beings, by four years of age our brains are capable of recognizing and
accepting that other people may be having thoughts and feelings
different from our own. Your thought, belief, impulse, feeling, or
reaction to a topic, event, or reality may be completely different from
mine at the same moment --- and vice versa. And that's okay. Theory of
mind allows us to develop and maintain an inner subjective reality --- a
sense of self --- that is separate from other people's opinions and
expectations of us. It allows us to be ourselves and other people to be
who they are, regardless of our needs or projections.

We each have our own inner subjective reality, whether we're fully or
only fuzzily in touch with it. Theory of mind is essential to the
brain's capacity to differentiate our experience from anyone else's
experience. It is a form of mental clarity that leads to relational
intelligence. If I get irritated at missing a flight and assume that you
are, too, rather than noticing that, in fact, you're not irritated at
all --- you're already talking with an agent to get on the next flight
--- I may miss an opportunity to skillfully negotiate our next steps.
This capacity to differentiate our own thoughts, feelings, reactivity,
and responses from another person's helps us step back from assumptions,
rules, and expectations about how we and others should feel or behave.
Stepping back from "should" is essential for responding flexibly ---
reminding us that different options are available and that they are
valid, a sine qua non of resilience. Setting limits --- trusting that we
can set boundaries, regardless of another person's reactions --- also
allows us to initiate communication and take risks in relationships that
otherwise we might not perceive as safe. We learn to avoid either
responding aggressively to protect ourselves or acquiescing completely
to another person's needs when they do not reflect our own needs. This
experience supports the brain's capacity to stay open to learning and
change. Secure, resonant relationships enhance this capacity of theory
of mind; less secure or unempathic relationships typically don't. So not
everyone fully develops this capacity by age four. The exercise below
uses practice in setting limits and boundaries to strengthen your theory
of mind, which strengthens your relational intelligence and resilience.

Exercise 2: Setting Limits and Boundaries 1. Ask a friend to help you in
this exercise of finding the sweet spot in setting a limit or boundary,
not tapping into aggression or collapsing into being a doormat. The
point of the brain training here is for you to be able to differentiate
your needs and views from another person's and to assert them
skillfully, not reactively. Settle into your own mindful empathy before
you begin. 2. Identify one limit or boundary you've been reluctant to
set: an earlier curfew for your daughter on school nights; a limit

3.

4.  
5.  
6.  

on interruptions from a coworker; saying no to a brother-inlaw who
expects to camp out in your living room rather than stay in a hotel when
she and her family visit. Your friend plays the role of the other
person. Clarify in your own mind how setting this limit reflects and
serves your own values, needs, and desires. Then try to understand the
values, needs, and desires of the other person. Jot down notes if you
wish. Notice any common ground between the two of you; notice your
differences. Notice your own experience; come to a sense of groundedness
and presence in your body. Initiate the conversation about limits with
the other person. Begin by expressing your appreciation for their
listening to you. State the topic; state your understanding of your own
needs and of theirs. Check to see if your understanding of their point
of view is accurate. Coach the friend in the role of the other person as
needed, but keep the focus of the exercise on setting the limit,
independent of the other person's reaction. Refresh your empathy by
tuning into what you are experiencing in the moment and what the other
person may be experiencing; refresh your mindfulness to be aware and
accepting of what is happening. State the terms of your limit, simply,
clearly, and unequivocally. You've already stated the values, needs, and
desires behind the limit, so you do not have to justify, explain, or
defend your position. This is your limit. Reiterate the terms of your
limit as many times as is needed for the person you are talking to ---
your role-playing partner --- to understand and accept it. In this
exercise, your role-playing partner does accept the limit. Notice how
you experience this success: notice any changes in your view of yourself
in relationship and in your view of your skills in relational
intelligence.

The Neuroscience of Setting Limits and Boundaries Theory of mind is a
complex mental capacity that involves the pulling together of functions
of the focusing (self-referencing) network. The

same brain structures we use to construct our own sense of self --- the
prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate, the insula, and the
hippocampus --- allow us to create a mental representation of another
person's self, or at least some aspects of their experience. This
process is known as mentalizing. The focusing network integrates
information we pick up about the other person from brain stem--based
resonance. The reading of emotional meaning by the right hemisphere and
the cognitive understanding of the left hemisphere lead to an empathic
articulation of the other person's experience. Mentalizing involves more
than thinking about; it means being able to generate a clear cognitive
understanding of the other person's reality as different from our own.
As you practice various techniques to strengthen the prefrontal cortex,
you may notice the capacity for theory of mind growing as a result.

Skill 3: Negotiating Changes in Behaviors When we experience conflict or
disagreement in a relationship, often we can see clearly what the other
person is doing wrong, but we find it much harder to see clearly how
what we are saying or doing may be hurting us, the other person, or the
dynamic of the relationship. The other person may be able to let you
know (skillfully) what he sees you doing that is problematic: lacking
clarity about your own needs or limits, withdrawing into a shell instead
of staying engaged in dialogue, or acting in a belligerent way
(strategies that may seem completely natural and justified to you). The
chances are that your part in any impasse stems from habits of reacting
learned from previous relationships. You might tend to keep your own
needs or desires close to the chest to avoid provoking an angry
response; as a result, the other person has no clue where you stand or
what you need. You might have a habit of avoiding a difficult
conversation in order to preserve a relationship, even if the remaining
connection feels increasingly tenuous. Or your automatic response to the
discomfort of a dilemma might be telling the other person off in no
uncertain terms, without giving him a chance to present his side of the
dilemma. If you acknowledge the accuracy of these observations, and
identify the old pattern that isn't working in the current situation,
you

can use the process of reconditioning to undo old behaviors or patterns
of relating by completely rewiring the neural circuitry that underlies
them. In negotiating positive change in any relationship, mindfulness
--- seeing clearly what we are saying or doing, and tolerating what we
are seeing --- is an essential tool. Self-empathy and self-compassion
--- for why we are saying or doing what we are saying or doing --- are
also essential. Taking responsibility for our part in creating any snafu
or impasse in a relationship deepens our relational intelligence and
lays the groundwork for asking for change in another person's behavior
as well.

Exercise 3: Negotiating Changes in Behaviors 1. Identify a problem in
the dynamic between you and another person. Perhaps communication
between you and a coworker has unraveled to the point that deadlines are
being missed. The sting from a careless comment by a friend has strained
the connection between the two of you for more than a week. It's been
two months since you've moved out, but your former landlord still hasn't
returned the security deposit, and your attempts to recover the money
have only led to stalemate. 2. Summoning up your willingness to be
ruthlessly honest and clear with yourself, let yourself see clearly what
you might have said or done that might be contributing to the current
impasse. 3. Make a conscious choice to act in a different way to rewire
the old circuitry. For example, you might experiment with stating your
needs clearly to your coworker. This not only reopens communication but
will also cause your neural patterns to fire in a new, even
contradictory direction, which gives your brain the opportunity to
rewire the old circuitry. You might ask your estranged friend to
participate in some deep listening (see chapter 7), not only to reengage
in a dialogue with a friend who is important to you but also to give
your brain the opportunity to use the new experience (engaging) to trump
the old pattern (withdrawing) and thus rewire or even completely
dissolve the old circuitry. Or you might take a friend with you the next
time you talk with

your former landlord to calm your nervous system as you learned to do in
exercise 1, giving your brain the opportunity to rewire a pattern of
belligerence into a more effective pattern of communication. 4. Notice
any changes in the dynamics of your relationships as you take
responsibility for your part in them and deliberately choose to
recondition the neural circuitry underlying habitual patterns of
reactivity. Notice any changes in your own sense of relational
competency and relational intelligence. All of these changes in your
sense of self are a form of reconditioning.

The Neuroscience of Negotiating Changes in Behaviors Reconditioning
works best when we can light up every channel of the associated neural
network: sensing the body sensations of withdrawal and of engaging,
feeling the emotions of fear or anger and then of trust or calm,
noticing the thoughts that accompany avoidance as opposed to deep
listening, or becoming defiant as opposed to asking for help. In this
exercise, when you choose to think, feel, or act in a way opposite to
the way you have been habitually thinking, feeling, or acting, you are
altering the firing of neurons in your neural circuitry and shaping that
circuitry into new patterns and pathways. Many times, when the new
behavior trumps the old, it triggers major rewiring, too. Suddenly the
new feels so normal that we wonder why we ever thought otherwise. This
skill takes practice, but it pays off in being able to negotiate more
skillfully when the boss asks us to work overtime two weekends in a row
or when talking with an elderly parent about giving up driving.
Resilience opens up options.

Skill 4: Repairing a Rupture Researchers have discovered that even in
"good enough" close relationships, we spend about one-third of the time
in actual relating (attuned connection), about one-third in rupture
(misattuned or disrupted connection), and one-third in repair
(recovering the attuned connection).

Repair is the most important phase of this rhythm, especially in terms
of rewiring our patterns of behavior. Years ago, I was visiting
relatives in northern Minnesota on their summer vacation and witnessed a
brilliant example of repair. My sevenyear-old cousin Marty was fishing
off the dock one morning. His mom, my Aunt Gen, came out to check on
him, noticed his mouth was covered in jelly and crumbs from his morning
donut, and scolded him for being so messy as she wiped his face clean.
Marty's body visibly slumped in a sulk. As Gen started to walk back to
the house, Marty's dad, my Uncle Ted, who had watched the whole scene,
walked over to Marty, put his hand gently on his shoulder, and reassured
him, "That's okay, son. Fish bite better with a dirty face anyway."
Marty gave his dad a smile and a high five and joyfully went back to
fishing. Gen, who had watched Ted's skillful repair to Marty's
self-esteem, decided to try to make amends with Marty, taking
responsibility for causing a rupture in Marty's self-esteem as well as
between the two of them. She went into the house for more donuts. Back
on the dock, she handed one to Ted to eat and ate one herself. Gen
intentionally left crumbs on her face, then asked Marty, "How's the
fishing?" Marty looked at her, understood her attempt at repair,
laughed, and gave her a big hug. Skill in repair strengthens the
security of our connections with others and our sense of mastery in
relating. When we trust our competency at repairing a rupture and
reconnecting in a relationship, we are more willing to take the risks
that build trust in relationships and make them worthwhile. Repairing
connection requires mindful empathy on at least one side of the rupture
--- and ideally on both --- as well as the skills of relational
intelligence already discussed. Through presence and deep listening, you
create the sense of safety that allows the brain to stay open to new
information and new understanding. When you see the goodness in yourself
and the other person, you gain a larger awareness of empathy and
understanding that can help both of you see options and choices. When
you take responsibility for your own part in the rupture, as you do also
when you are setting boundaries and negotiating change, you can more
easily initiate and follow up on the repair. Repairing a rupture is
practice in creating an outcome both of you wish for.

Exercise 4: Repairing a Rupture 1. Identify a person you feel
comfortable asking to practice this exercise with you, and identify a
sense of rupture or disconnect between the two of you that you would
like to repair. The rupture could have been caused by a misunderstanding
or miscommunication. (Small is a good way to begin.) Your focus will be
on repairing the relationship, not repairing the misunderstanding, and
privileging reconnection over deciding who's right or wrong. 2. Sit down
together, face to face, and take a moment for both of you to come into a
state of mindful empathy, each becoming aware of what you are
experiencing in your own body and emotions in this moment, remembering
what you value in this relationship and why you are motivated to repair
it, and feeling compassion for both yourself and your partner. 3. Take
turns expressing your experiences of the events that caused the rupture
and the emotions you have experienced since. Listen deeply and carefully
to your partner's experience of the events that caused the rupture and
the emotions he or she has experienced since. Notice what's happening in
your own body as you begin to understand and empathize with your
partner's experience. 4. Now take turns expressing your understanding
and empathy for the other person's experience. This conveying of empathy
isn't about fixing or even agreeing. It's about conveying understanding,
and experiencing that understanding as it resonates with the other
person. 5. Notice your own experience as you receive your partner's
empathy for your experience. Notice if receiving this empathy leads to a
reengaged resonance, a renewed sense of trust, a sense of reconnection
and repair. Share your experiences. 6. Acknowledge yourself and your
partner for your efforts in this exercise. If there has indeed been a
repair, acknowledge that, too.

The Neuroscience of Repairing a Rupture Mindful empathy and a strong
capacity to differentiate your experience from the other person's
(theory of mind) are crucial to the success of repairing a rupture and
reconditioning your neural circuitry. When you can remain mindful of
your own experience, you can easily use the resonance circuitry in your
own brain to empathize with the other person's experience. Your empathy
also engages the resonance circuit of your partner if that person is
able to acknowledge and accept the empathy. It is that experience within
your partner's resonance circuit, of feeling seen and understood, that
allows the reconnection and repair to occur. The resonance of feeling
seen and understood actually relaxes the neural circuitry, allowing it
to be more flexible and thus open to new information and to repair. When
both people are sincerely trying to repair a rupture, the safety they
create for each other through the reengaging of the resonance circuits
and the resulting flexibility of the neural circuitry make the repair
happen much more easily and quickly. Success becomes selfreinforcing. As
we're learning that we can repair a rupture, we increasingly trust
ourselves to become competent in doing so.

Skill 5: Forgiveness: The Ultimate Repair Forgiveness is not an
occasional act; it is a permanent attitude. --- MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.
Most of us will experience injury, injustice, disappointment, or
betrayal at some point in our lives. Staying caught in those experiences
can block our resilience and our relational intelligence from
developing. Continuing to feel judgment, blame, resentment, bitterness,
and hostility against those who have caused us harm can cause us pain
and suffering ourselves. The same can be true if we haven't been able to
forgive ourselves for harm we have caused others or ourselves. In order
to rewire the behaviors of complaining, criticism, disgruntlement, and
contentiousness we can so easily get stuck in, we can use deconditioning
to open ourselves to the genuine understanding, compassion, grieving,

and forgiveness that are needed to move into resilient coping and
relational intelligence. When we drop below the level of story, below
the level of our personal emotional pain, into the deep inner knowing of
our own goodness, we can remember the inherent goodness in all human
beings, regardless of the conditioning that overlies and obscures it. In
the mode of defocusing, where deconditioning takes place, we access
inner states of kindness, compassion, and goodwill; we evoke the state
of processing in the brain from which it is possible to forgive.
Forgiveness does not mean condoning, pardoning, forgetting, false
reconciliation, appeasement, or sentimentality. It is a practice, daily
and lifelong, of cultivating our own inner peace and wisdom that allows
us to see that our pain is part of the pain of all human beings
universally, to reset our moral compass, and to remain compassionate
even in the face of injustice, betrayal, and harm.

Exercise 5: Forgiveness This formal forgiveness practice is adapted from
an exercise learned from the Buddhist meditation teacher Jack
Kornfield. 1. Sit comfortably, allowing your eyes to close and your
breath to be natural and easy. Let your body and mind relax. Breathe
gently into the area of your heart, letting yourself feel all the
barriers you have erected and the emotions you have carried because you
have not forgiven yourself or others. Let yourself feel the pain of
keeping your heart closed. 2. Breathing softly, move through each of the
following possibilities for forgiveness. Begin reciting the suggested
words, letting the healing images and feelings that come up grow deeper
as you repeat the phrases of forgiveness. 3. Seek forgiveness from
others with the following words: There are many ways that I have hurt
and harmed others, have betrayed or abandoned them, caused them
suffering, knowingly or unknowingly, out of my pain, fear, anger, and
confusion.

Let yourself remember and visualize the ways you have hurt others. See
the pain you have caused out of your own fear and confusion. Feel your
own sorrow and regret. Sense that finally you can release this burden
and ask for forgiveness. Take as much time as you need to picture each
memory that still burdens your heart. And then as each person you have
hurt comes to mind, gently say: I ask for your forgiveness, I ask for
your forgiveness. 4. Seek forgiveness for yourself with the following
words: Just as I have caused suffering to others, there are many ways
that I have hurt and harmed myself. I have betrayed or abandoned myself
many times in thought, word, or deed, knowingly or unknowingly. Feel
your own precious body and life. Let yourself see the ways you have hurt
or harmed yourself. Picture them, remember them. Feel the sorrow you
have carried from this and sense that you can release these burdens.
Extend forgiveness for each act of harm, one by one. Repeat to yourself:
For the ways I have hurt myself through action or inaction, out of fear,
pain, and confusion, I now extend a full and heartfelt forgiveness. I
forgive myself, I forgive myself. 5. Find forgiveness for those who have
hurt or harmed you with the following words: There are many ways I have
been harmed by others, abused or abandoned, knowingly or unknowingly, in
thought, word, or deed. You have been betrayed. Let yourself picture and
remember the many ways this is true. Feel the sorrow you have carried
from this past. Now sense that you can release this burden of pain by
gradually extending forgiveness as your heart is ready. Recite to
yourself: I remember the many ways others have hurt, wounded, or harmed
me, out of fear, pain, confusion, and anger. I have carried this pain in
my heart long enough. To the extent that I am ready, I offer you
forgiveness. To those who have caused me harm, I offer my forgiveness, I
forgive you. Gently repeat these three directions for forgiveness until
you feel a release in your heart. For some great pains you may not

feel a release at first; instead, you may experience again the burden
and the anguish or anger you have held. Touch this softly. Be forgiving
of yourself for not being ready to let go and move on. Forgiveness
cannot be forced; it cannot be artificial. Simply continue the practice
and let the words and the images work gradually in their own way. In
time you can make the forgiveness meditation a regular part of your
life, letting go of the past and opening your heart to each new moment
with a wise loving kindness.

The Neuroscience of Forgiveness Forgiveness is a powerful practice that
begins to ease the shift between the focusing mode of processing in our
brain --- the self-focused, narrowly focused, past- and future-oriented
mode that could be described as the mode of "me" --- to the defocusing
mode of processing --- the more present-oriented (even timeless), more
expansive (even universally oriented) mode that could be described as
the mode of "we." The defocusing mode allows us to see other people's
struggles and suffering as well as our own from a larger and more
compassionate perspective. When we are caught in habitual, self-limiting
patterns of resentment and hostility, we can let ourselves drop into
that merciful spaciousness from which new, more adaptive responses can
emerge.

Pulling It All Together The exercises in this chapter develop many
skills of relational intelligence that help ensure that your actions in
relationships, and your many ways of engaging with the world, are
constructive and effective. •

Increasing mastery of the three processes of brain change develops your
internal resources, allows you to trust yourself to know what to do with
whatever is coming at you, and helps you recover more quickly from
stress or grief. You can feel competent in relating to other people,
setting boundaries when needed, and getting the guidance, comfort, and
support you need to navigate the storms of life.

• •

You can stay open to all life experiences --- whether bumps on a pickle
or full-blown catastrophe --- and respond more adaptively and
resiliently. Research indicates that every resilient behavior we do
ripples out from us, the way ripples spread out from a stone thrown into
a pond, touching first the person most directly affected, and then
another person affected by the first person, and then another --- at
least four people deep. In effect, every time you choose to harness your
brain's neuroplasticity to recover your own resilience, the benefit of
that brain change is reaching others in wider and wider circles.

PART FOUR

KEEP CALM AND CARRY ON: RECOVERING RESILIENCE THROUGH RESOURCES OF THE
BODY

CHAPTER TEN

Losing and Recovering Our Equilibrium

Serenity is not freedom from the storm but peace amid the storm. ---
AUTHOR UNKNOWN

"KEEP CALM AND CARRY ON" was one of the mottoes of the British
government during World War II. When we feel we are under siege
ourselves, enduring our own personal version of the bombings during the
Blitz, we need to call on the CEO of resilience and use body-based tools
(somatic resources) to regulate the progression of worry, fear, and
panic in our nervous system that could cause us to freak out or fall
apart. The somatic intelligence that flows from a well-functioning
prefrontal cortex allows us to stay calm, stay steady in our wise mind,
and deal. That place of calm steadiness that the prefrontal cortex
reliably returns us to is a physiological state known in modern
neuropsychology as the window of tolerance. This is our baseline state
of physiological functioning when we're not frightened, stressed,
overtired, or overstimulated. When we're in this window, we're grounded
and centered, neither overreacting to other people or life events nor
failing to act at all. Being able to meet the storms and struggles of
our lives from that place of steadiness, and being able to return
quickly to that window when we are pushed out of it, is the somatic
prerequisite of resilience. In this chapter, you will learn ways to
strengthen the capacity of the prefrontal cortex to regulate the
reactivity of the lower brain, with its rapid assessments of potential
harm and survival responses of connect --- or fight-flight-freeze,
submit-collapse. You will also learn why it is normal for the prefrontal
cortex to have difficulty in regulating that reactivity and how both the
legacy of early conditioning and our

biological legacy of the stress response can put the prefrontal cortex
temporarily out of commission, sometimes for longer than is good for us.
Chapter 11 offers many experiential exercises that help you quickly
recover the functioning of the prefrontal cortex and return to that
baseline of calm equilibrium --- the window of tolerance. You'll learn
how to: •

• •

•

use body-based resources like breath, touch, and movement to quickly
return your nervous system from overreaction or shutting down to your
baseline equilibrium, the calm that allows you to carry on; resonate
with the calm in someone else's nervous system to calm your own; use
relational resourcing to activate the release of the natural hormone
oxytocin, the fastest-acting mechanism in the human brain to counter the
effects of the stress hormone cortisol and return us to a state of calm
and connection; use body-based tools to rewire old, conditioned
responses to your survival reactions, so that they no longer derail your
resilience.

Chapter 12 shows you how to build on the stable base of your window of
tolerance to use your own body-based wisdom to further develop many
skills of somatic intelligence: •

• • •

priming the brain to be less reactive to stress in the future by
creating both a neurochemical buffer zone and explicitly encoded
"memories for the future" that can protect you from the slings and
arrows of your personal outrageous fortune; using implicit body memories
as well as explicit cognitive memories of previous resilient coping to
help you cope resiliently now; expanding the window of tolerance so that
you're better able to handle stress; working with another important
neurochemical circuit --- the dopamine system --- to help alleviate the
anxiety, fear of failure, and doubt and risk involved in trying
something new.

Once you can use the somatic intelligence of your prefrontal cortex to
manage your body's automatic reactivity to danger or threat and

reliably maintain an inner equilibrium, you can act in the world with
skill and conscious response-ability. You can carry on.

The Window of Tolerance and Equanimity Praise and blame, gain and loss,
pleasure and sorrow come and go like the wind. To be happy, rest like a
great tree in the midst of them all. --- BUDDHA'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION
BOOK Window of tolerance and equanimity are terms from two different
paradigms of brain change. Both refer to the physiological and mental
state necessary to recovering resilience, stabilized by the prefrontal
cortex of the brain. The term window of tolerance was coined a decade
ago by Dan Siegel, based on the past twenty years of research into the
resolution of trauma and the development of new mindfulness-based,
body-based therapies for trauma. In the much older Buddhist wisdom
tradition, the mindful cultivation of the practice of equanimity is a
reliable way to access the same zone of equilibrium. When we are in our
window of tolerance or in equanimity, we do not react disproportionately
to disruptive changes in our circumstances. And if we do react (survival
responses can trigger us to act or collapse in less than a second), we
are likely to remember to pause and become mindfully aware of our body's
initial reactivity. With practice, we learn not to react to our
reactions. When a cup is balanced on the edge of a table, it's in
equilibrium. We have equanimity if we don't lose our own equilibrium
when the cup falls and shatters. With equanimity, we can respond to the
shatterings of life with careful reflection and wise choices. I see the
window of tolerance and equanimity as the physiological and spiritual
constituents of the inner base of resilience (see chapter 8), which also
allows us to stay in our window of tolerance and calmly meet the
stressors and pressures of our daily lives. You may already be able to
sense, at times, a physiological state of peace and ease, of being calm
and relaxed, yet engaged and alert. (One of the exercises below is
designed to help you enter this state.) When the prefrontal cortex is
functioning well, we can easily maintain this natural equilibrium. We're
not too revved up; we're not too shut down.

One lunchtime, my client Serena saw a small group of boys playing soccer
in a neighbor's yard as she rode by on her bike on her way to the gym.
She instinctively slowed down and kept her eye on their game. But
suddenly the soccer ball flew from behind a parked car into the street,
and one of the little boys darted out after it. Serena swerved to avoid
hitting the boy, hit the bouncing ball, and went headfirst over the
handlebars onto the pavement. She landed on her right shoulder,
fracturing it on impact. Serena had had falls from her bike before; she
knew to keep her body still and breathe slowly into the pain. She
managed to think clearly enough to ask one of the older boys to get her
cell phone out of her backpack and to explain to him how to call the
emergency services. By the time a neighbor dashed out to help, the
ambulance was already on its way. Serena asked the neighbor to store her
bike for her and to call and ask her sister Anita to meet her at the
hospital. Serena was able to stay lucid and coherent at the hospital as
the doctors x-rayed her shoulder and fitted her with a sling. She had
Anita cancel the two sales calls she had scheduled for that afternoon;
she even thought to schedule her first physical therapy appointment
before she left the emergency room. Serena's prefrontal cortex managed
her body's stress resiliently, enabling her to ask for and get the help
she needed as quickly as possible.

Skill 1: Maintaining Equanimity For 2,500 years, Buddhist practices that
teach equanimity have helped practitioners such as Serena calm the body
and the mind, allowing them to return to the window of tolerance,
enabling them to perceive events clearly and respond wisely. Here's a
simple practice to help you cultivate a sense of equanimity.

Exercise 1: Cultivating Equanimity 1.

Sit or lie in a comfortable position. Settle your awareness into a sense
of presence, relaxing into this moment, here and now. 2. Notice anything
you are experiencing in this moment --- the pressure of the chair or
floor against your body, a realization that you forgot to buy toothpaste
yesterday, an anxiety about

paying tuition for the college your daughter has set her heart on
attending, concern about early signs of dementia in an aging parent 3.
Notice your reaction to what you're noticing. Notice your reaction to
forgetting the toothpaste, the anxiety about the tuition, your concern
about the dementia. Then notice any further reaction to those reactions,
any judgments or worrying or planning in response to the initial
reactions. 4. Choose to let go of all of that reacting and noticing the
reactions. Return your awareness to simply being in this moment,
breathing here and now. 5. Continue to practice noticing your reactions
and your reactions to your reactions and then letting them go, returning
to the window of tolerance. You are using the process of deconditioning
to retrain your brain; be persistent.

There are many times when it's appropriate and necessary to focus on a
problem and try to resolve it. This exercise is teaching your brain to
choose to return to the window of tolerance as a prelude to any skillful
problem solving later. If it seems impossible to find the calm of the
window of tolerance at all, seek a place in your body that is calm ---
your elbow or your big toe. Find some place out of the vortex of worry
and focus your attention there. Return your attention there when you let
go of your reactions and your reactions to your reactions. When you
first begin practicing equanimity, resting in the window of tolerance
may seem like only a tiny break from all the worry churning in your
mind. Keep practicing; keep retraining the brain. The window of
tolerance is your natural baseline state of equilibrium. When you
persevere in the practice, you can attain a steady physiological state
of equilibrium from which you can begin to solve your problems. Over
time, equanimity practice helps you expand your window of tolerance to
handle bigger stressors with calm; you become more and more resilient.

The Neuroscience of Why Cultivating Equanimity Returns Us to Our Window
of Tolerance

The Buddhist tradition teaches that suffering is inherent in the human
condition: no one is immune to sickness, old age, and death and a host
of other losses. However, as the teachings add, we don't have to add to
our suffering by reacting in ways that are harmful or inappropriate. As
we have learned, every experience of reactivity creates a pattern of
neural firing in the brain. Repeated neural firings reinforce the
pattern of reactivity, adding to our suffering. If we get upset watching
the evening news and then stay upset through dinner, staying in
reactivity is adding to our suffering and possibly to the suffering of
people around us. If we react to being upset by shutting down and
withdrawing, or collapsing into helplessness, then we aren't engaged in
resolving the stressors, either: we're reinforcing the patterns of not
acting. Returning our awareness to our window of tolerance gives the
brain a breather from reactivity. When the firing patterns in the brain
are calm again, yet engaged and alert, we have created the state of mind
from which we can solve our problems wisely and efficiently.

Recovering Our Balance through the Balance of Others We learned in
chapter 1 that fear --- the body's response to a stressor --- triggers
the drive for attachment, our inborn reaching out for help and
protection from another person. If, in our early years, our parents were
able to soothe our fear with comforting touch, words, and behaviors, our
developing nervous system learned to calm down and stay actively
engaged, too. In effect, our parents' prefrontal cortex regulated our
own. Through positive experiences, our developing prefrontal cortex
learned how to perform this most basic function for resilience ---
regulating the stress response --- on its own. When that conditioning
goes well, the developing prefrontal cortex can recognize the rev-up of
stress or the shutting down in reaction to stress. It can direct the use
of neurotransmitters to calm the lower brain's alarm center, the
amygdala, and stay in the window of tolerance. (You will learn in
chapters 11 and 12 to activate the release of these neurotransmitters.)
And the prefrontal cortex can still use the regulation of another person
to stay within the window of tolerance, too.

Skill 2: Resonating with the Calm of Others to Calm Ourselves Down
Because of the efficiency of the relational resonance circuit, which
allows us to pick up the physical and emotional vibe of another person,
just being near a person who is calm, in his or her window of tolerance,
helps us return to our own window of tolerance. For example, Joe's
silent presence and equanimity helped Nathan and Dan return to a calm
state. The nurse who sat with me in the parking lot after my dad's
stroke helped me recover my equilibrium. Someone being present in the
room with us helps us relax and get our taxes done, and the calm
presence of someone else by our side helps us believe we can get to the
top of the hill. It's a wise harnessing of our neuroplasticity to have
someone nearby who can help us stay calm if we've just witnessed or
caused a car accident or there's a bomb scare in the building where we
work. At any moment when we know we are revving up and need to return to
our window of tolerance, we do well to find someone whose calm can calm
us down, too.

Exercise 2: Resonating with the Calm of Others to Calm Ourselves Down
The next time you're in a situation that might cause your own nervous
system to rev up and push you out of your window of tolerance, like
flying during a thunderstorm, you can practice picking up the vibe of
someone else's calm to keep yourself calm. In this exercise, it's the
physical proximity of the calmer person that is helping your regulate
your own nervous system, even if the person is not someone you're close
to personally. Of course, you can rely on the calm of people who know
you well to help yourself calm down, too. You can even use memories of
people who care about you and support you to calm yourself. 1. Pick a
partner for this exercise. If you're in a public place, this person may
not even know you've chosen her. First notice and name the stress
response in your own body --- mild, moderate, or severe.

2. Tune into the calm you can pick up from the other person; synchronize
your breathing with hers, if you wish, and receive her calming energy
into the energy field of your own body. Continue receiving her calming
energy until you do feel calm again. 3. Reflect on your experience.
Notice whatever calming your body was able to do.

Trust the calming; you can learn to do this more and more easily with
practice, and each time you do it, you are rewiring your brain for
resilience. By using the calm of another person to help you calm
yourself, you are developing one of the five Cs of coping --- learning
how to stay calm in a crisis.

The Neuroscience of Resonating with the Calm of Others to Calm Ourselves
Down Dyadic regulation is a term used to describe how the calm in one
person's nervous system can regulate and calm down the nervous system of
another. (Dyad in this context refers to two people interacting with
each other.) Dyadic regulation is the process by which the brain of a
calm, well-regulated parent teaches the brain of a fussy baby to calm
down and soothe itself: it provides the conditioning that enables the
baby's prefrontal cortex to learn to regulate its autonomic nervous
system (ANS). Dyadic regulation is operating any time a friend soothes
another friend over the loss of a romance or the death of a pet. It
operates when a calm person takes charge and leads others to safety from
a burning building without panic breaking out. Dyadic regulation can
also help us reengage with ourselves, with others, or with a stressful
situation when our survival responses take us in the direction of
numbing out or collapsing into helplessness. The reassurance of someone
who is comfortably in his or her window of tolerance can encourage us to
regroup and try again, too. Two structures in the brain contribute to
effective dyadic regulation. One is the vagus nerve in the brain stem,
where all resonance begins. The ventral branch of the vagus nerve
perceives safety, trust, and calm in situations where there might be
danger or life threat and can then slow down our heart rate and
breathing or help us stay connected when our

own response might be to collapse. A strong vagal tone in a calm person
can evoke a similar response in the brain stem of another person. This
vagal regulation is not cognitive or conscious. (Though, of course,
thinking our way to a sense of safety and calm can work, too; it just
happens more slowly.) Strengthening our own vagal tone by interacting
with well-regulated people is one way that the brain learns to regulate
itself and return to its window of tolerance. The other structure is the
fusiform gyrus, the small structure in the right hemisphere of the brain
that the prefrontal cortex uses to recognize facial expressions. Studies
have shown that when one person sees calm in the facial expression of
another person, activity in the amygdala --- the fear center --- in the
first person calms down. The functioning of both of these structures is
developed through eye contact and mirror neurons, as in relationships of
secure attachment and between a true other and a true self.

Losing Our Equilibrium Is Normal; Recovering Our Equilibrium Is
Learnable The involuntary revving up and shutting down that the
prefrontal cortex is regulating are the normal, hard-wired survival
responses of the lower brain that keep us alive, both as a species and
as individuals. (See chapter 1.) The amygdala --- the central alarm
system of the lower brain --- assesses in a very rapid, fairly primitive
way signals of safety, danger, or life threat. If it detects no danger,
we remain in equilibrium: we keep calm and carry on. If it detects
possible danger, it relays that information through the insula to the
prefrontal cortex for a more comprehensive (though slower) assessment.
When the prefrontal cortex decides for itself on the most resilient,
flexible response, including the possibility of connecting to others for
help, it sends its own signals back down to the amygdala, regulating the
unconscious revving up or shutting down of our nervous system and
bringing us back into the window of tolerance. (The prefrontal cortex
gets significant help in its assessment from the vagus nerve in the
brain stem, which can activate the brain's resonance circuit to help us
connect with others and act as a brake on the amygdala.) While the
prefrontal cortex is evaluating information coming from the amygdala,
the amygdala is already activating the two branches of the autonomic
nervous system --- the sympathetic and the parasympathetic

--- to act like the gas pedal and brakes of a car. The sympathetic
activates us to get us moving. The parasympathetic deactivates us to
stop us from moving. (See table 4.)

Table 4. The Window of Tolerance Sympathetic activation Window of
tolerance

Parasympathetic deactivation

When fear is regulated or absent: interest, curiosity, exploration,
play, productivity, enthusiasm

When fear is not regulated: fight-flight-freeze response; too revved up;
agitation, anxiety, panic

Physiological baseline of equanimity: calm and relaxed; engaged and
alert When fear is regulated or absent: relaxation, reverie,
daydreaming, napping, falling asleep after making love

When fear is not regulated: submit-collapse response; fainting,
dissociation, numbness

The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) is the branch of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS) that mobilizes our bodies to act. When the amygdala
responds to a sense of danger with fear, the SNS can move us to connect
with others, if our early experiences in attachment relationships
conditioned the brain to do that. If the brain learned that reaching out
to others led to comfort, soothing, and protection --- which is the
evolutionary function of secure attachment --- then our automatic
survival response will be to connect. The nervous system is calmed down
by the presence of a calm other, and we return to our window of
tolerance. From there we are free to go off and explore and play. When
there's no fear, the SNS can still activate us to move in the world,
experiencing interest, curiosity, enthusiasm, and joy, while remaining
in the window of tolerance. A well-regulated activation is what fuels
creativity, productivity, exploration, play, and all manner of engaging
and bonding with others. Our daughter can be nervous and excited about
her upcoming piano recital but stay within her window of tolerance. She
can feel relieved and relaxed when it's over, still within the window.
We're alert and engaged, but not in trouble. If connection to others has
not become the automatic response to fear, the sympathetic nervous
system moves us into the mode of fightflight-freeze. We move to fight
against the danger: in a car accident, this

might lead to yelling at the driver who rear-ended us. We move to flee
from the danger, perhaps driving away from the scene of an accident if
we hit the other car. Or, even if our nervous system is revved up, our
body might freeze, like a deer in the headlights, not moving or talking
until the police arrive. These automatic survival responses can be
conditioned into habitual responses. We lash out at someone who
disparages our carefully constructed way of being in the world before we
think about consequences or consider his or her point of view. We panic
when we realize our wallet is not in our pocket and start running around
out of an urgent sense that we need to do something, but if we act
without thinking, we might make things worse. If we are locked in
automatic patterns of survival responses because of years of
conditioning or past traumas, we may always walk away from an argument
and refuse to engage, or we may always pour gasoline on the fire of any
argument, yelling and refusing to listen. These are not resilient
responses. The other main branch of the autonomic nervous system, the
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), has a largely deactivating
function: it slows us down or even shuts us down to prevent us from
moving. When there's no fear, the parasympathetic branch relaxes us into
not moving, as in the deep calm we can experience in some forms of
meditation, taking a nap on the beach, and falling asleep after making
love. Our bodies are calm and relaxed, still within the window of
tolerance, but not necessarily engaged and alert. (Mindfulness practice,
as a form of meditation, keeps us very much within the window of
tolerance, calm and relaxed as well as engaged and alert.) When we
experience fear --- and if connection to others has not become the
automatic response --- the parasympathetic branch may act to immobilize
us through modes of submit or collapse. We submit to the danger, not
asserting ourselves with the driver who hit us, or we collapse, numbing
out, becoming paralyzed and dissociated, not "there" to deal. These
automatic deactivating survival responses can be conditioned, too: we
may have learned to give in in an argument without standing up for
ourselves, so that we find ourselves without a backbone when we need
one. When the lower brain senses life threat, a primitive branch of the
dorsal vagal nerve sends signals from the brain stem to the heart,
lungs, and gut to shut down almost completely. People can faint from the

sudden drop in blood pressure caused by this reaction, the body's early
survival response of playing dead so the lion won't eat you.

Why It's Sometimes Difficult to Return to the Window of Tolerance All
these survival responses are normal and, in their own way, resilient:
they keep us alive so that we can thrive another day. But glitches in
these survival responses can make it hard to come back into our window
of tolerance.

Glitch 1: Fast-Track Survival Responses Preempt the Slow-Track
Reflection The brain structures responsible for triggering our survival
responses --- the brain stem, the autonomic nervous system, the
amygdala, and other structures of the limbic system --- operate in
milliseconds, always outside our awareness. For millions of years, our
brains have been hardwired to react instantly to perceived threat or
danger. We can jump out of the way of a speeding car or catch a falling
child without having to think about it. We turn away from someone who
gives us the creeps in onetenth of the time that our higher, "thinking"
brain needs to even register anything about that person. Much as we
evolved to play dead so the lion wouldn't eat us, we can quickly
disappear in a fog of dissociation so no one can find us. The prefrontal
cortex operates on a slow track. It takes three to five seconds to
register that an event has occurred. The advantage of the slower
processing is that the prefrontal cortex has the capacity to complete a
far more comprehensive assessment and generate far more options, far
more choices, far more flexibility in how to respond. Because the lower
brain operates so much faster than the higher brain, it can cause us to
respond to an event before the higher brain even knows anything is
happening. In the time it takes the prefrontal cortex to decide whether
what's lying in our path is a snake or a stick, the amygdala has already
caused us to jump aside. (The slow track can sometimes be very slow:
we've all experienced something taking days to dawn on us, or needing a
week or two to connect the dots between one insight and another.)

Slow-track processing is not a problem if the prefrontal cortex catches
the lower brain's reactivity quickly enough. Sometimes, however, our
survival responses can hijack us into an inappropriate response before
our prefrontal cortex manages to do the necessary reflection. When we
feel threatened, we can reactively shake a fist in somebody's face,
storm out the door, or freeze like a deer in the headlights. Or we might
cave in or fall apart. Training our brains to pause before reacting, to
give the prefrontal cortex the few seconds it needs to process the
situation --- as we learn to do in equanimity practice --- is essential
to responding resiliently. Developing equanimity requires an
understanding of our past conditioning. The amygdala operates entirely
outside of our conscious awareness and can use only past conditioning to
assess a situation and signal the ANS what to do. Given the brain's
negativity bias, the amygdala is more likely to generate a stress
response, perceiving danger or threat even where there may not be any.
The prefrontal cortex has its own conditioned patterns, too. Early
experiences of fears not being regulated may slant its interpretations
and responses toward the negative. This is precisely why the experiences
that conditioned our earliest patterns of response can be so powerful.
For the rest of our lives, both the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex
continue to draw on these conditioned patterns to evaluate new
situations. So our body's stress responses are rooted not in any
particular event but rather in the meaning the brain attributes to that
event and our conditioned response to that perceived meaning. If our
earliest experiences did not condition us to regulate our survival
responses effectively, the prefrontal cortex may have not fully
developed its capacities for self-regulation. We may need hours to calm
our bodies down after an outburst of anger, causing more harm in the
meantime. Or we may have learned survival strategies for coping with
potential harm that were brilliant in the schoolyard but don't work so
well in the office. We may automatically remove ourselves from any
situation that seems threatening, missing out on opportunities to engage
with new people at work or school, or to move our lives forward in a
resilient way.

Glitch 2: Stress Responses Can Knock the Prefrontal Cortex out of
Commission

The hormone cortisol is the neurotransmitter of the stress response. Its
release in the body gets us moving to save our lives. The signal to
release cortisol comes from the amygdala. In perceiving a possible
threat, the amygdala essentially asks, "Have we seen anything like this
before?" It compares the current experience to its bank of implicit
memories and within nanoseconds returns an answer: "This is okay or even
good," or "This is bad or even dangerous." This hypervigilant processing
of experience never stops, even in our sleep. (In our window of
tolerance, it leads to pleasant dreams; outside that window of
tolerance, it results in nightmares.) The amygdala assesses not only
perceived physical or external stressors but also psychological ones,
like a new romantic interest failing to call back, not having enough
money in the bank to pay this month's mortgage, or a gash on the leg
that isn't healing. If it assesses the stressor to be dangerous or
threatening, it immediately activates the release of the stress hormone
cortisol, which immediately signals the body: "Don't just sit there; do
something!" Or, if somewhere along the way we learned that taking action
was itself a dangerous thing to do, that conditioning may stop us dead
in our tracks so that we do nothing. The effects caused by unregulated
surges of cortisol can temporarily knock out the functioning of the
prefrontal cortex. When I'm already late for work and I can't find my
car keys, if I stress about that, for sure I won't be able to see them
even when they're right in front of me. If we're not in our window of
tolerance --- for example, if we're tired or already stressed by other
crises --- a surge of cortisol coursing through our system can cause it
to run amok. The amygdala can release cortisol, but it has no mechanism
to turn it off; that is a function of the prefrontal cortex. When the
functioning of our prefrontal cortex is derailed by a stress response,
even temporarily, we can remain stuck in a chronic state of alarm,
agitation, hostility, rage, panic, or terror --- or stuck in numbness,
lethargy, or depression for a longer period of time than is good for us.
In these states, reality testing becomes impaired, our judgment becomes
compromised, and discernment and planning may be preempted by impulsive
reactivity or by paralysis. Our explicit memories of resilient coping
aren't available to quell the fear response. We have lost our balance;
we have lost our resilience.

There are substantial costs to not being able to regulate the cortisol
flowing through our system. Cortisol suppresses the immune system: the
message to act now to escape a threat puts other systems in the body on
hold. Studies show that chronic stress can increase the risk of
contracting heart disease, lung disease, kidney disease, and cancer.
"Stress kills" is no empty slogan. Cortisol also destroys new brain
cells and new synaptic connections among cells. This cell death
especially affects the hippocampus, where new experiences are encoded
into explicit memory, enabling the brain to learn. To encode new memory,
the hippocampus has to generate new neurons and new neuronal
connections. It is the most neuroplastic of all structures in the brain
and thus one of the most vulnerable to the toxic effects of cortisol. By
damaging the capacity for conscious learning from experience, a poorly
regulated flow of cortisol impairs our ability to develop more adaptive,
resilient responses; we default to the hard-wired survival response,
causing a kind of vicious circle.

Pulling It All Together • •

•

•

Everyone's resilience at times goes awry. There's no shame or blame in
this. Our survival responses are biologically hard-wired, and
less-than-optimal conditioning is the human condition. For the same
reasons, losing our equilibrium at times is inevitable. This chapter
shows the importance of learning to return to the physiological state of
equilibrium --- calm and relaxed, yet engaged and alert --- known as the
window of tolerance, the somatic prerequisite of resilience. The
prefrontal cortex regulates our body-brain's survival responses to
stress --- fight-flight-freeze or submit-collapse --- so that we can
return to the window of tolerance, which allows us to deal with
stressors resiliently. With an understanding of the survival response,
we can use skills of equanimity practice and dyadic regulation to help
us stay both calm and engaged. We can recognize the adaptive activation
of our autonomic nervous system (through the sympathetic branch), which
leads to curiosity, exploration, play, and creativity, and the
fear-based activation, which can lead to the fight-flight-freeze
response.

•

•

We can also recognize the adaptive deactivation of our ANS (through the
parasympathetic branch), which leads to relaxation, daydreaming, and
sleep, and the fear-based deactivation, which can lead to collapse,
numbing out, and withdrawal. Implicit-only, fast-track survival
responses can operate so quickly that they preempt the slower
functioning of the prefrontal cortex to regulate our reactivity, thus
temporarily derailing our resilience. The unregulated flow of cortisol
can further impair our capacities to recover our resilience.

In the next chapter you will learn tools and exercises to overcome these
glitches in our nervous system's responses. The exercises use somatic
(body-based) resources to retain or regain our equilibrium and then to
recondition those responses. This is resilience in action.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Recovering Our Balance through the Body

To touch is to give life. --- MICHELANGELO

THE EXERCISES IN THIS CHAPTER are designed to help you learn to use
body-based (somatic) tools to bring the prefrontal cortex back online
and bring you quickly back into your window of tolerance. Once you have
recovered your balance, you can use more somatic tools to help you
rewire old body-based memories that might derail your resilience now.

When Cortisol Runs Amok, Oxytocin Calms It Down: Activating Oxytocin
Release The hormone oxytocin is the neurotransmitter of the "calm and
connect" response and is the brain's direct and immediate antidote to
the stress hormone cortisol. The fastest way to regulate the body's
stress response and return to a sense of calm is to activate the release
of oxytocin in the brain. When oxytocin is released by the hypothalamus
(in the limbic system) into the brain and bloodstream, cortisol levels
plummet and blood pressure drops. Oxytocin is the neurochemical basis
for the felt sense of safety and trust, of connection and belonging.
When we know how to activate the release of oxytocin, we can quickly
return to our window of tolerance and feel reassured that "everything is
okay; everything is going to be okay."

Stephen Johnson, in his book Mind Wide Open, offers a dramatic story
about the power of oxytocin to keep someone calm and in their window of
tolerance. Stephen's wife had given birth to their son just two days
before the 9/11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center. From their
apartment in downtown Manhattan that morning, Stephen could see debris
and ash floating past the living-room window. While he was pacing the
floor, half-crazed with anxiety, his wife was calmly nursing their son
in the rocking chair. Childbirth and breastfeeding activate oxytocin
release, generating a feeling of devotion between the mother and the
newborn and a sense of blissful contentment. Stephen's wife was
protected from the anxiety Stephen was experiencing by the oxytocin
coursing through her system. Oxytocin is a powerful helper in the
process of maintaining equanimity and can be thought of as the
neurochemical foundation of resilience. Researchers have demonstrated
that a single exposure to oxytocin can create a lifelong change in the
brain. The exercises below offer ways to intentionally activate the
release of this neurochemical balm.

Skill 1: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Touch In a
documentary film about Mother Teresa, I saw a two-minute segment of one
of her nuns in a hospital in Beirut holding an eight-month-old baby who
had been injured by mortar fire. He was screaming and thrashing about,
his eyes darting here and there in pain and terror. The nun was
massaging his chest, cooing and calling to him until his eyes locked on
hers. She continued gazing at him, massaging his heart, soothing him
with her voice. In less than one minute his body relaxed; he calmed down
and steadied his gaze on hers. He was still injured, but he was calm.
The fast way to release oxytocin and mitigate stress, even extreme
stress, is through safe touch and warmth in a soothing relationship. Any
warm, loving touch --- hugs, snuggles, holding hands, partner dancing,
cuddles with a pet, massage, or body work --- can trigger the release of
oxytocin and bring the body back into a state of calm. Even our own
touch, as a reminder of the touch of others, can have this result.

Exercise 1a: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through a Head Rub One
fun way to trigger oxytocin release is a gentle, two-minute head rub.
You can massage your own head, of course, and you can easily practice
this exercise with a partner, friend, or coworker, sensual without being
sexual. Use your fingers to gently massage the scalp, forehead, nose,
jaws, and ears. The touch, warmth, and movement release the oxytocin in
your brain, lowering your blood pressure and calming your racing
thoughts. With a few moments' respite from stress and pressure, you are
primed to cope more resiliently with the next stressor.

Exercise 1b: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Massaging the
Vagus Nerve The vagus nerve, loaded with oxytocin receptors, resides in
the brain stem. You can easily locate that region by placing your
fingers at the back of your skull where the top of your neck nestles
into the skull. A gentle massage to that part of the neck (you can
easily do this yourself ) can be a potent trigger for the release of
oxytocin, increasing feelings of goodness and wellbeing throughout the
day.

Exercise 1c: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Hugs Stan Tatkin
at UCLA has found that when people feel safe with each other, a
twenty-second, full-body hug is enough to release oxytocin in both men
and women. Most of us don't feel comfortable with a full-body hug with
anyone except a partner, immediate family, or closest friends. We do the
A-frame hug of arms around the shoulders at best. The closeness of a
full-body hug maximizes the effectiveness, so exchange a full-body hug
with somebody you're comfortable with as often as you can.

Twenty seconds is about three long, deep breaths, easy for you and your
hug-ee to time on your own. Try changing head positions with each
breath.

All of these exercises prime your brain to release oxytocin before a
flood of excess cortisol knocks your prefrontal cortex out of
commission. Safe touching with loved ones is the best possible antidote
to stress and a great buffer against trauma.

Skill 2: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Loving Connection We
may not always have someone around to give us a hug when we need it
most. Fortunately, we are learning from neuroscience that we can also
activate the release of oxytocin, calm down our stress response, and
return to our window of tolerance by connecting or remembering
connections with others. Feeling safe and loved in turn activates the
release of oxytocin in the brain. We can intentionally change our
neurochemistry to change our physiological state. The earliest survival
response to fear is to connect --- in John Bowlby's words, to "seek
physical proximity to a caregiver in times of perceived threat or
danger." We can regulate our fear response by immediately turning to
others for help in regulating our distress. When Samantha's mom calmed
her down after Barney's over-exuberant doggy greeting, the regulating
effect of oxytocin was at work. Even calling, emailing, or texting
someone who is a touchstone of safety, asking for a response, can
release the oxytocin if we are securely attached enough to that person.
We can give our brains baths of oxytocin whenever we are with someone we
truly love and who truly loves us. Neuroscientists have demonstrated
many times that even remembering or imagining someone we love, by whom
we feel loved, is enough to release small but regular doses of oxytocin.
This effect can come from feeling "held" by a spiritual figure or
religious deity as well. When the oxytocin is flowing throughout our
system, when we again feel safe in our body and in our world, we can
once again think clearly and respond wisely.

As Dan Goleman says in Social Intelligence, "Repeated exposures to the
people with whom we feel the closest social bonds can condition the
release of oxytocin, so that merely being in their presence, or even
just thinking about them, may trigger in us a pleasant dose of the good
feelings that this molecule bestows. Close, positive, long-term
relationships may offer us a relatively steady source of oxytocin
release; every hug, friendly touch, and affectionate moment may prime
this neurochemical balm a bit. Small wonder office cubicles are papered
with photos of loved ones."

Exercise 2: Activating the Release of Oxytocin through Hand on the Heart
We come into the steady calm of our window of tolerance by experiencing
moments of feeling safe, loved, and cherished and letting those moments
register in our body and encode new circuitry in our brain. This
exercise offers a way to evoke those feelings. 1.

Begin by placing your hand on your heart, feeling the warmth of your own
touch. Breathe gently and deeply into your heart center, taking in a
sense of calm, peace, goodness, safety, trust, acceptance, and ease. You
may elaborate these feelings as you wish. Breathe in a sense of
contentment, well-being, kindness for yourself, gratitude for others,
self-care, and self-love. 2. Once that's steady, call to mind a moment
of being with someone who loves you unconditionally, someone you feel
completely safe with. This may, of course, be a partner, child, or
parent; but if the dynamics of those relationships are complicated and
the emotions mixed, you may choose any true other to your true self: a
dear friend, a trusted teacher, a close colleague or neighbor, a
therapist, your grandmother, a spiritual figure like Jesus or the Dalai
Lama, or your wiser self. Pets are also great for this exercise. 3. As
you remember feeling safe and loved with this person or pet, see if you
can sense in your body the positive feelings

and sensations associated with that memory. Really savor a feeling of
warmth, safety, trust, and love in your body. 4. When that feeling is
steady, let go of the image and simply bathe in the feeling itself for
thirty seconds. Savor the rich nurturing of this feeling; let it really
soak in.

You can do the first part of this exercise --- quickly placing your hand
on your heart --- thirty times a day if you need to: when you hear bad
news on the phone, when you're about to open an envelope from the IRS,
when you're stuck in gridlock, when you realize you just left your
laptop on the bus, when you see the disappointment in your son's face
after telling him you can't take him to the baseball game tonight after
all. You can incorporate the second part of the exercise --- feeling
loved and cherished --- at least a dozen times a day: before you get out
of bed, over your first cup of coffee, before a serious conversation
with a parent or a boss, regrouping after a potential contract or
romance falls through. A variation of this exercise comes from the
Buddhist meditation teachers and authors James Baraz and Tara Brach:
place your hand on your own cheek and say gently, "Oh, sweetheart!" The
touch and kind intention of yourself toward yourself will also release
oxytocin. I teach couples to practice this exercise any time things feel
calm and loving between them. (One couple did it every time they passed
each other in the hallway.) By practicing it when things are going well,
you can wire in a new coping strategy that can then be brought into play
any time your old coping strategies flare into a fight (survival
response) or bring you to the precipice of one.

The Neuroscience of Activating Oxytocin through Hand on the Heart
Breathing deeply, gently, and fully activates the calming branch of our
autonomic nervous system, the parasympathetic branch. The
parasympathetic modulates the body-brain's fight-flight-freeze response
when we feel threatened or agitated, helping to keep us in our window of
tolerance. Breathing, or pranayama, has been a core practice in yoga and
meditation to relax the body and steady the mind for over 3,500 years.
Breathing positive emotions into the heart center steadies the heart
rate, restoring the equilibrium of the body so that we can remain
present

and engaged. Neural pathways from the heart to the brain signal the
brain directly to release the oxytocin, which evokes a sense of safe
connection with others; the oxytocin immediately reduces our stress. In
evoking a memory or image of feeling loved and cherished, we activate
the prefrontal cortex, which triggers the hippocampus to search for
explicit memories of moments when we have been held, soothed, protected,
encouraged, believed in, times when we have reached out for help and
received comfort and support. In chapter 5, I tell the story of the
calming effect of using an imaginary circle of friends to alleviate my
anxiety during eye surgery. Thinking of my friends caused the release of
oxytocin in my brain; the calm caused by the release of oxytocin lasted
through the entire surgery. That event in turn has become a memory I can
use to soothe my anxiety in any new situation. Through safety and trust
in connection, we come back into our window of tolerance. From there,
with our higher, thinking brain calm and alert, we can mobilize quickly,
act skillfully, and take care of business.

Other Body-Based Ways to Return to the Window of Tolerance Besides
activating the release of oxytocin, there are other, slower-acting tools
that help you to return to your window of tolerance: body-based tools
that "remind" the prefrontal cortex how to come home to this state of
calm and reinforce our steadiness there. Although these are somatic
exercises, your higher brain has a role to play, too: a sense of mindful
awareness and compassionate acceptance will make the exercises easier
and more effective.

Skill 3: Somatic Resourcing through Breathing The autonomic nervous
system regulates our heart rate, our rhythm of breathing, and our
digestive processes without any conscious processing whatsoever ---
thank goodness. But we can consciously use our breathing to activate the
parasympathetic branch of the ANS. We do this in meditation and yoga
when we breathe deeply to calm the body and the mind. We can consciously
affect our heart function: researchers have found that when we breathe a
sense of positive emotions --- goodness,

safety --- into the heart, the heart rate not only slows down but comes
into a stable and coherent rhythm that reliably supports resilience.
When we intentionally slow down and deepen our breathing, we are
activating the parasympathetic branch of the nervous system in a
positive way. We are conditioning the brain to calm down and return to
our window of tolerance. Breathing slowly and deeply can deescalate a
fullblown panic attack in a matter of minutes. Doing it throughout the
day helps us establish calm rather than stress as our new baseline.

Exercise 3a: Deep Breathing to Relax the Body 1.

Lie comfortably on your bed or on the floor, closing your eyes if you
wish. Take a moment to come into a sense of presence, being here, in
this moment, in this body. Notice the sensations of your head, your
back, your pelvis, your legs, and your heels touching the bed or floor,
feeling the groundedness of the earth itself supporting you. Place one
hand on your heart, the other hand on your belly. You can also place a
small pillow under your back behind your heart center, corresponding to
the hand on your heart in front. Awareness of the space in your torso
between the pillow and your heart can evoke the sensations of ease and
well-being. 2. Notice the sensations and movement of your breath filling
your belly as you inhale, rising through your lungs and chest to your
throat and nose, then releasing through your throat, chest, and belly as
you exhale. (Your heart actually rests on your diaphragm, so these long
deep breaths give a gentle massage to the base of your heart as well.)
3. Notice the pauses between inhaling and exhaling. Allow your breath to
expand, filling every part of your body, moving into your shoulders,
arms, and hands, your sacrum, your legs, your feet. (When you focus the
awareness of your breathing on a particular area of your body, you can
consciously release tension in parts of your body that have been
tightened by implicit memories of stress or trauma.) Become aware of
your entire body breathing.

Over time, this exercise conditions a new, more relaxed pattern of
breathing you can use in any posture --- sitting, standing, and walking
as well as lying down. As you bring a compassionate awareness to your
breathing, notice whether you experience a spontaneous welling up of
gratitude for simply being alive as well.

Exercise 3b: Breathing to Create Resonant Connection Here's another
simple exercise that uses breathing and touch to create a resonant
connection between you and another person that can relax your reactivity
and help you return to your window of tolerance. After two to three
minutes you and your partner can switch roles. 1.

Have your partner lie down comfortably on the floor with eyes closed.
Sit comfortably on the floor nearby. Come into a sense of presence, of
being with this person, here and now. Place one hand on his hand or
forearm, the other hand on the crown of his head. Your partner breathes
slowly, deeply. Begin to synchronize your breathing with his breathing.
Simply breathe together for two to three minutes, noticing the life
force of the breath entering and leaving his body and yours. You are
strengthening the capacities of your resonance circuit and dropping into
a shared equilibrium, an equanimity for two. 2. A variation of this
exercise is to contemplate the reality that the molecules of air
entering and leaving your lungs are the same molecules of air entering
and leaving your partner's lungs, and indeed, the same molecules of air
entering and leaving the lungs of anyone in the same room, in the same
car or bus or plane, in the same office or store or theater or world. To
open up to this kind of intimacy with beings all over the planet can
radically expand our minds and open our hearts, creating a larger
perspective and relaxing our bodies into the window of tolerance.

Skill 4: Using Somatic Resources to Rewire Old Somatic Memories The body
stores somatic memories of previous stress and trauma: the tension in
our arms if we have had to protect ourselves from intrusion; a clenching
in our fists or jaw from when we wanted to strike out or speak out in
self-protection but learned it wasn't safe to do so; the collapse in our
gut when we have been shamed or humiliated. We can use the exercises
below to release these implicit memories, without even needing to bring
them to conscious awareness to do this reconditioning. These somatic
exercises help us return to and stay in our window of tolerance and
rewire old patterns held in the body that might push us out of that
window of tolerance. From our regained equanimity, we can choose how we
want to consciously address any past stress and trauma as well as
current stressful situations.

Exercise 4a: Rewiring Old Somatic Memories through a Body Scan This
exercise is a simple and reliable way to increase both awareness and
compassionate acceptance of whatever you might be experiencing in your
body at any given moment. 1. Lie comfortably on your bed or on the
floor. Feel the back of your head, your shoulders, your back, your hips,
the backs of your legs, and your heels touch the ground. Let your body
relax and sink into the ground supporting it. 2. Begin by bringing your
awareness to your feet. Say hello to the big toe of your right foot,
listening for any aches or pains in the toe, compassionately wishing it
a sense of comfort and ease. Say hello to all the toes on your right
foot, the arch, the ankle and heel, carefully noticing the sensations in
each part of the foot. Do the same thing slowly for every part of your
body up through your torso, hands and arms, and every part of your face
and head; to each ear, each eye, your nose, all the tender parts of your
mouth; to the hair outside of your scalp and to the phenomenal brain
inside your scalp that is allowing you to be mindful and

compassionate in this moment. As you scan your body, bring a
compassionate caring and acceptance to any part of it that needs comfort
and ease. You can slow way down, mindfully notice, and send
compassionate caring to each knuckle if you have arthritis, or to scars
from an old football injury. The body scan is a practice to mindfully,
lovingly inhabit all parts of you, to become safely aware of every
experience of your entire body. 3. Practice being especially mindful and
compassionate toward sensations in the belly, in the heart center, in
the throat and jaw, and in the genitals, areas where we can hold
unconscious somatic memories of tension, shame, anger, or fear. Use your
mindfulness and compassionate acceptance now to hold any distressing
sensations or memories. Say hello; listen for aches and pains, physical
or psychological, and send care and the intention for comfort and ease
to any troubled memories held in the body. 4. End this practice by
becoming aware of the energy field of your body as a whole --- your
whole body breathing, in equanimity, alive, relaxed, and resilient.
Creating a larger awareness and acceptance of your body creates a safe
setting for working with any somatic memory that arises and then
deconditioning or dissolving it.

The Neuroscience of Rewiring Old Somatic Memories through a Body Scan
The anterior cingulate cortex is the brain structure we use to focus
attention on anything --- in this case, on physical and emotional pain.
You may have noticed places in your body that felt tight, rigid, or
painful. When we focus our awareness on physical sensations, we are also
helping areas that hold emotional pain to relax and release tension. We
don't even have to know the story behind the pain or give it a name: the
mindful empathy of the body scan is rewiring the circuitry that holds
the pain. A variation of the body scan is the relaxation-response
exercise, popularized by Dr. Herbert Benson, a cardiologist at Harvard
Medical School and pioneer in mind-body medicine. It takes advantage of
the fact

that our bodies cannot be anxious and relaxed at the same time. The
alternating tension and release of tension in the muscles of our bodies
helps bring the entire autonomic nervous system back into the window of
tolerance. Allow seven to ten minutes for this exercise. It can be done
sitting (great for a long bus or train commute) or lying down. Many
people eventually become so relaxed doing this exercise that they fall
asleep before completing it. In time, you will strengthen your capacity
to stay in the window of tolerance, both deeply relaxed and fully alert.

Exercise 4b: Rewiring Old Somatic Memories through the Relaxation
Response 1. Breathing gently and fully, begin by curling the toes of the
right foot, holding that muscle tension for the count of seven. Slowly
release the tension as you count to fifteen, breathing gently. Then curl
the entire arch of the right foot as though pointing the foot, holding
that muscle tension for the count of seven. Gradually release the
tension as you count to fifteen. Then flex the foot, toes back toward
the leg, holding that muscle tension for the count of seven. Slowly
release as you count to fifteen. 2. Continue tensing and relaxing
various muscles of the body, progressing through your entire body as you
tense and count to seven, then gently release as you count to fifteen.
The counting focuses attention, allowing the worries and concerns of the
day to fall away. Breathing into each area of the body as you let go of
the tension helps that area relax. 3. Tense the lower right leg, and let
that go; tense the upper thigh of the right leg, and let that go. Tense
the hip and buttocks muscles of the right leg; let them go. Repeat for
the left leg. Move through the torso, tensing and relaxing parts of the
chest and belly in turn. Tense the fingers of the right hand into a
fist, then relax them; tense the forearm, the upper arm, the shoulder,
then relax; repeat for the left hand and arm. Tense the muscles of the
back, the neck, the face, and release. You can also reverse the
exercise, starting at the head and working down to the feet.

4. End the session by blowing air through your fluttering lips ---
blowing a nice raspberry. This is yet another way to activate the PNS
(who knew?). Savor the sensations of relaxation as you breathe gently.
Rest one full minute --- or longer --- in this relaxed state.

Exercise 4c: Moving the Body to Rewire Difficult Emotions This is a
simple experiential exercise I learned from the psychologist Natalie
Rogers to mindfully and compassionately use varying body positions to
rewire (recondition) difficult emotional and mental states. 1.

Identify an afflictive state that you would like to explore, process,
and shift. It could be an emotion like fear, anger, or sadness; it could
be a mental state like confusion or agitation. Come into awareness of
the body sensations, images, feelings, and thoughts of this state. 2.
Allow your body to lead you and come into a body posture that embodies
this state. Stay in this posture for thirty seconds. Don't do a lot of
thinking or figuring out here: just let your body express what you are
feeling, or the state of thinking you are working on. For example, you
might allow your body to assume the posture of collapse: perhaps bending
over, curling shoulders inward, hiding your face in your hands. Feel
your way into your body's experience of this posture. 3. Now, without
thinking, without going to your head at all or putting anything into
words, allow your body to lead you into a posture that is the opposite
of this state. Remain comfortably in this second posture for thirty
seconds. For example, your body might select a posture opposite to
collapse that involves standing tall, spine straight, arms outstretched
in exuberance. Feel your way into your body's experience in this
posture. 4. Without thinking, return to the first posture, and hold it
again for fifteen seconds. Then resume the second posture

again and hold it for fifteen seconds. 5. Allow your body to find its
way into a posture that is midway between the first two. The middle
posture may incorporate elements of the other postures, or it may feel
entirely new. 6. Take a moment to notice the sensations and feelings in
this middle posture. What are you experiencing? Notice any differences
between the postures, between the states they embodied. Reflect on your
experience. What shifted? What state are you in now?

The first time my client David did this exercise, he began by exploring
an embodied sense of depression. "I expected the opposite of my feeling
of depression would be joy, or something that felt happier. But it
wasn't. It was reverence. I never would have thought of that; I never
expected that. But it felt right somehow." David's experience of
reverence helped him be more flexible and resilient in coping with his
down moods. From this bodily experience of moving through depression to
reverence, he also knew that he could choose to rewire his mental state.

The Neuroscience of Moving the Body to Rewire Afflictive Emotions The
body has its own wisdom and knows how it needs to move to "correct"
something. You use this somatic wisdom intuitively when you take a break
from working too long at your desk or from weeding too long in your
garden and get up and stretch or go for a brisk walk around the block.
We can access this intuitive body wisdom by letting the body move first,
without thinking, and then reflecting on what the movement might mean.
This exercise is a prime example of how we can use our body's wisdom to
rewire our brains from the bottom up.

Skill 5: Rewiring Negative Body Memories Part of what determines whether
we are able to choose adaptive strategies in a moment of threat, like
activating the release of oxytocin,

or fall into default patterns of reactivity, with cortisol coursing
through the body, is the implicitly encoded patterns of response we have
learned. Our resilience can be thrown off when old, trauma-based somatic
memories push us out of our window of tolerance, sometimes without our
even knowing what has happened or why we're suddenly so reactive. My
client Andrea created her own somatic resource to recondition her
survival response to problems involving technology. She had already done
a lot of work on early childhood traumas and had come to a fairly strong
place of equanimity. And yet she could still have a sudden startle
response when a document she was working on at the computer suddenly
disappeared into cyberspace, or her plane reservation disappeared from
the check-in screen at the airport. The revving up of Andrea's nervous
system and the subsequent cursing at the computer --- not pretty, not
equanimous, not useful --- was creating a technophobia that was
derailing her resilience in coping with modern life. We began by
searching Andrea's explicit memory for an early, frightening experience
involving machines or appliances. One memory came readily to Andrea's
mind: her family had moved to a new home when she was three and a half.
The living room was empty except for a radio. Andrea thought she must
have accidentally turned the volume on the radio up rather than down,
for her dad suddenly came charging into the living room and pulled the
plug from the wall. Her mom was in the bedroom on the other side of the
living-room wall, not feeling well, and her dad may have feared that the
loud music would disturb her. His dramatic reaction had clearly upset
Andrea. We began searching for positive memories related to that event
that Andrea could use to recondition any lingering trauma from it. She
remembered how she used to stand on her dad's toes so that the two of
them could dance. We speculated that perhaps Andrea had turned up the
radio that morning so she and her dad could dance together around the
empty living room. The somatic memory of Andrea dancing on her dad's
toes, and the accompanying sense of love, safety, and trust, could evoke
the flow of oxytocin that could calm the automatic startle response in
her brain to difficulties with technology. Andrea began practicing
lifting up her toes as though she were dancing on her dad's toes, saying
out loud, "Toes up!" and then pairing that physical gesture with the
surge of oxytocin from remembering the joy of those moments with her
dad. The next time Andrea's body went

into a startle response at the computer, she lifted her toes off the
floor, telling herself, "Toes up!" and the reaction instantly stopped,
leaving her calm and able to cope. Andrea had found a somatic way to
break the pattern.

Exercise 5: Rewiring Negative Body Memories You can experiment with a
very simple form of reconditioning for rewiring those body-based
negative memories, based on the technique of somatic experiencing
developed by Dr. Peter Levine. 1. Identify a place in your body where
you might be holding a somatic memory of a trauma or something that
simply feels negative or unpleasant: a churning in the stomach, a tense
jaw, a tightening in your back or shoulders. Notice the physical
sensations. 2. Now locate a place in your body that is not feeling any
distress or trauma at all --- maybe your elbow or your big toe. Notice
the physical sensations of being in the window of tolerance: feeling
calm, relaxed, at ease. If you are currently experiencing the body-based
sensations of any trauma, this window might be quite small. Focus
attention on that calm, untraumatized place in the body, steadily
feeling the sensations there of ease and relaxation. 3. Now switch your
attention back and forth between the physical sensations of the place in
the body that is not traumatized at all and the physical sensations of
the place in the body that is holding the network of the trauma memory.
When you switch between awareness of the two different body parts, you
are practicing a technique called pendulation (like the pendulum of a
clock swinging back and forth). It's a way for you to recondition a
trauma memory through body sensations alone.

The Neuroscience of Rewiring Negative Body Memories

As you focus your attention on the physical sensations in your body, you
are lighting up the networks encoding the memory of the experience, a
process essential to rewiring it. As in the reconditioning described in
chapters 2 and 3, when the sensations of the untraumatized place in the
body are stronger than the sensations of the trauma memory, the trauma
memory can be rewired. With practice, you can draw on a somatic resource
to completely dissolve a trauma memory held in implicit memory in the
body.

Pulling It All Together You have just learned nearly a dozen body-based
skills that will help you stay in, or quickly return to, the state of
equilibrium in your body-brain so that you can respond to the startles
and upsets in your life with greater equanimity and resilience. •

• •

You have learned how to activate the release of oxytocin --- through
touch and loving connection --- to use the brain's direct and immediate
antidote to the stress hormone cortisol to help you return quickly to
your window of tolerance. You have learned to use somatic resources like
breathing, body scanning, progressive muscle relaxation, and movement to
remind the prefrontal cortex how to regulate the body into calm. You
have learned ways of strengthening the prefrontal cortex to use positive
somatic resources to rewire negative experiences held in body memory.

Being able to remain calm in the face of difficulties is one of the five
Cs of coping, and it makes it far easier for your brain to learn new
strategies of deploying the other four Cs. Somatic resourcing also
creates a platform for learning additional skills of somatic
intelligence, priming your brain to preempt your reactivity before it
even arises, to learn more self-confidence from previous experiences of
competence, and to be willing to risk making mistakes and trying
something new. As you practice these techniques, they keep rewiring your
brain for more resilience.

CHAPTER TWELVE

Developing Somatic Intelligence

You can't stop the waves, but you can learn to surf. --- JON KABAT-ZINN

A MASTER MONK is meditating in a temple with other monks. Suddenly a
fierce bandit storms into the temple, threatening to kill everybody. The
other monks flee, but the master monk remains, calmly meditating.
Enraged, the bandit shouts, "Don't you understand? I could run you
through with my sword and not bat an eye!" The monk calmly replies,
"Don't you understand? I could be run through by your sword and not bat
an eye." This teaching story from the Buddhist tradition has always
struck me as the epitome of how priming the brain prepares a
practitioner to maintain calm in a crisis. This is one form of the
somatic intelligence --- wisdom of the body --- we are building in order
to recover our resilience. However metaphorical and however great a
stretch of the practice of equanimity it represents, the story
illustrates how priming can regulate our reactivity, even in the most
extreme situations. The monk's brain was primed by years of mindfulness
and compassion practice to remain calm in the face of life threat;
modern neuroscience might say that his prefrontal cortex could regulate
any reactive response from his amygdala. While we might not strive for
that level of equanimity, and hopefully we will never face such a dire
situation, we can learn to use our own mindful empathy and compassionate
reflection to strengthen our equanimity by learning to prime our brains,
too.

Skill 1: Priming the Brain to Remain Calm in a Crisis Priming simply
means preparing the brain to feel a certain emotion or a physiological
state that could be adaptive in an anticipated situation: to feel proud
or confident before walking into a meeting with the boss, to boost your
assertiveness when defending yourself in court, to remain grounded and
open-minded when hearing your doctor discuss results of the latest lab
tests. There are many strategies for managing emotions and physiological
states after they arise. Priming is different: it's preemptive, creating
an emotional or physiological state that prevents fear or anger or shame
from arising. Here we set the intention to remain calm and then use
priming as a tool to do so. We can effectively prime the brain to meet
stressful situations by achieving a state of calm and equilibrium
beforehand. We can use the oxytocin response in particular to prime the
brain to be less reactive to future stress because the release of
oxytocin, activated whenever we remember someone we care for or who
makes us feel cared for, acts as a buffer against stress even before it
occurs. An excellent example of this kind of priming was reported in a
study by James Coan at the Laboratory for Cognitive and Affective
Science at the University of Wisconsin. In the study, three groups of
women subjects knew they were going to be administered a slight but
unpleasant electric shock on their ankles. Their brain functions were
monitored using an fMRI scanner. The control group of women subjects,
who were left alone in the scanner, registered anxiety before and pain
during the test. Women holding the hand of a stranger (the lab
technician) registered less anxiety and less pain. But the group of
women holding the hands of their husbands registered the least anxiety
and pain, and in some cases, no anxiety or pain at all. The pleasurable
security of holding the hand of someone who loved them released
oxytocin, reduced their stress, and overrode both anxiety and pain.
These women instead reported experiencing peacefulness throughout the
procedure. Holding hands with someone they felt safe with primed or
conditioned their brains to remain in the calm and relaxed, yet engaged
and alert, state of the window of tolerance. It turned off the threat
switch in the brain and overrode anxiety and pain, even in a situation
that was stressful to others.

Phil Shaver discovered similar benefits to priming before stress in a
study at the University of California, Davis. Subjects were shown
photographs of disturbing material. Those who were instructed to think
of a situation in which they felt safe and loved before seeing the
photographs showed far less stress reaction than subjects in the control
group who were not primed in this way. Consistently, the oxytocin
released in remembering someone the subjects loved or felt safe with
acted as a buffer against a stressful trigger a few minutes later. My
client Claudia shared with me a dramatic example of the power of
priming. Late one night she had to drive home through a pelting
rainstorm. She had touched base by phone with her partner before setting
out, so oxytocin was already flowing in her brain and body. As she was
driving in the fast lane of the freeway, the left front tire of her car
suddenly caught the shoulder of the road. The car skidded onto the
shoulder. Claudia overcorrected, and the car swerved across four lanes
of freeway traffic to stop in the mud off the shoulder on the other
side. It was all over in fifteen seconds. No one was hit, no one was
hurt, and no damage was done. Claudia simply got back on the freeway and
drove home. She felt grateful for the miracle of her life and grateful
to be going home to a loved one. But she felt no trauma or stress, not
even for a minute. Her brain was primed and her nervous system was
buffered by the oxytocin. Sue Carter of the Chicago Psychiatric
Institute, one of this country's primary researchers on oxytocin,
reports, "People under the influence of oxytocin don't have the same
stress response that others do; bad news rolls off them more easily."
One way to prime your brain to face a challenging situation that you
know is coming --- such as a medical or legal procedure or confronting a
difficult person or group --- is to cultivate a virtual circle of
support to call on in your imagination. Priming the brain in this way
makes it easier for you to stay in your window of tolerance when an
accident or catastrophe takes you by surprise.

Exercise 1a: Prime the Brain by Beginning the Day in Loving Connection
Beginning the day with a sense of loving care and connection is a
fantastic way to build our brain's buffers against stress. It's as
important for our emotional health as a nutritious breakfast is

for our physical health. It's great if you can wake up in the morning
cuddling a sweetie, or immediately hug your children or a pet, or wrap
your arms around yourself with a squeeze of self-acceptance and
encouragement. The touch provides a sense of comfort and connection
before you meet the challenges of the day; you're primed to live the day
from your window of tolerance.

Exercise 1b: Prime the Brain by Beginning the Day in Ease and Well-Being
If that sweet send-off is not available in the morning, it can still be
an excellent practice to not get out of bed until you can evoke within
yourself a sense of loving connection from the past, or even a fantasy
about the future, that evokes a sense of ease, safety, and well-being.
As with Sean, whose story appears in chapter 5, that may take a few
breaths, or a few minutes; sometimes it can take thirty minutes or more.
But it's worth priming the brain to meet the challenges of the day from
a place of calm, relaxed engagement. Set the intention to start the day
in your window of tolerance, no matter what happens later.

As we practice staying in our window of tolerance to meet the challenges
we anticipate throughout the day, we are priming our brain to stay calm
when called upon to face challenges we don't anticipate, as well.

Exercise 1c: Prime the Brain by Returning to Your Window of Tolerance 1.
A simple introductory practice is to check in with yourself periodically
to discern whether, in fact, you are in your window of tolerance. If you
are, your body feels calm, relaxed, yet engaged and alert --- not
agitated, not shut down. You feel present, settled, and balanced. When
you're

not in your window of tolerance, you notice the unease; you feel "off."
With practice, you can learn to recognize the difference instantly. 2.
When you notice you're not in a state of equanimity, stop doing what
you're doing as soon as you can --- there's not much point and some risk
if you're moving forward without being grounded in your base of
resilience. 3. Breathe and place your hand on your heart to calm your
body. Draw on your practices of mindfulness and selfacceptance. Hold
whatever is happening in the moment with as much awareness and
compassionate understanding and empathy as you can muster. Call on your
relational resources. Evoke the memories of feeling safe and loved until
you saturate yourself with oxytocin. You'll probably return to your
window of tolerance quite suddenly, because once the oxytocin reaches an
effective level, its effect is immediate.

Doing this usually isn't hard; it's remembering to do it that's hard.
Perseverance teaches us that these practices do work, and when we know
that they work, we're more likely to remember to do them the next time
we need them. When I first began checking in with myself in this way, I
had to stop every five minutes and intentionally return myself to a
state of equanimity. But each time I did the practice, the interval of
feeling calm lasted longer. As you become more successful at returning
to your window of tolerance, take in the good feeling of the inner calm
and peace before rushing off to do the next thing. Give your brain the
thirty seconds it needs to rewire this experience of calm into its
circuitry so that staying within your window of tolerance becomes a new
habit, a source of new resilience.

Skill 2: Developing Current Confidence from Previous Competence I once
hiked with my friend Donn up a steep trail on Mt. Tamalpais, near my
home, following many switchbacks for more than half an hour to

reach a grand viewpoint. Belatedly I realized that if we were to take
the same switchbacks down the mountain, I would get back to the parking
lot too late to pick up my goddaughter at her gymnastics practice. Donn
asked if I could bushwhack straight down the mountain. After years of
backpacking in the high Sierra, my automatic response was "Sure I can!"
Down the steep hillside I went, surefooted; Donn quickly followed. We
arrived at the parking lot in less than fifteen minutes. Saying "Sure I
can!" is an important somatic resource of resilience. Researchers have
found that the greatest predictor of success --- in anything --- is a
previous track record of success --- in anything. In other words, we
don't have to have faced the same challenge before to feel confident
that we can deal with what we're facing now. We have resilience when we
know that we have dealt successfully with anything before. The feeling
of confidence about bushwhacking down a mountain becomes an inner
resource encoded in the neural circuitry of our brain that we can call
on whenever we need to bushwhack through any difficult terrain: getting
an aging parent to write a will or tracking the thousands of details
involved in moving overseas. Confidence is a somatic memory of
competence. Interestingly, research shows that even if we have an
inflated sense of that earlier competence, it still serves as a resource
of confidence now. We get through an "uh oh!" by remembering "uh oh!s"
we've gotten through before and by evoking the visceral feeling of "Sure
I can!" that came from that success. We may experience that feeling of
"I can!" as a feeling of groundedness, a trust, a security. Standing
tall, sensing our weight through our spine and hips and anchoring our
feet on the earth can ground in the body this resource of trust and
reassurance in our competence and mastery. Research also shows that for
purposes of somatic resourcing, it's not so much the size of a previous
success that matters as the genuine sense of competence or mastery that
comes from it. Succeeding at something we accomplished all on our own
(painting the living room, repairing a broken lawnmower, helping an
athlete feel better about herself after her mistake cost the team the
game) creates a sense of ownership of the success. Once encoded in the
neural circuitry, that feeling can be even more effective at creating
confidence (and thus resilience) than playing a small part in a larger
organizational effort with no sense of ownership of the final outcome.
If we're hammering nails in a Habitat for Humanity

building project, it's the "Sure I can!" from the three walls and a door
frame that we built ourselves --- the sense of competence in our own
work rather than the sense of accomplishment at the completion of the
entire house --- that becomes the somatic resource of confidence that we
can draw on later when we need to rebuild a business or a marriage.

Exercise 2: Wiring In Current Confidence from Previous Competence 1.

Identify areas of your life where you would like to have more of the
feeling of "Sure I can!" They might include returning to school after
thirty years in the workforce, buying into a franchise, or facing an
empty nest when your youngest child has moved away. 2. Identify three
moments in your life when you actually had that sense of "I can!" in
your body --- a visceral sense of confidence arising from a moment of
competence. Reflect not so much on what you did, because that will
change with circumstances, but on how you felt when you realized that
you had done it. Remember, we're talking moments here, not major events:
opening a stuck jar lid for your mom, intuiting which way to turn to
find the train station in a strange city, knowing just what to say when
your child experienced a disappointment. Modest but genuine successes
can mean just as much for rewiring the brain as those that are more
dramatic. 3. Focus on the sense of mastery those successes brought you.
How does that remembered sense of mastery feel in your body now? Take in
the feeling of "I did; I can" as a bodybased resource. 4. Try to bring
that visceral sense of "I did; I can" into the present and apply it in
the areas where you would like to feel this confidence more often. Even
the slightest success at doing this reconditions your brain toward
resilience.

The Neuroscience of Wiring In Confidence

Our brains begin encoding experiences of mastery into schemas or
templates of "I can!" almost from the moment we're born. A baby can
typically grasp a toy at two months of age, reach for people at four
months, hold its own bottle at six months, and give a hug and walk with
support at twelve months. Each of these successes conditions the pattern
of "I can!" into the developing brain, providing a neurological
underpinning for the inner sense of trust and security that builds the
base of resilience. As we intentionally create an archive of explicit
memories of successful coping, we are strengthening that base and thus
our capacity for resilient coping now. Any time the prefrontal cortex
accesses a memory that carries with it the somatic sense of "Sure I
can!" it can send an inhibitory transmitter --- GABA --- to the
amygdala. This inhibits the firing of the amygdala, signaling, in
effect, that the prefrontal cortex is taking care of business and that
the amygdala does not need to activate a survival response. Remembering
a moment of previous coping when we're facing a daunting task or
situation can help us return to our window of tolerance, where we can
cope more resiliently.

Skill 3: Reframing Incompetence as Competence One of my favorite Calvin
and Hobbes cartoons is an inspiring moment when Calvin trips and falls
down the stairs and lands in a heap at the bottom, dazed and confused.
Then he stands up, throws his arms up in the air as though welcoming
applause, and says, "Ta da!" My meditation teacher Sylvia Boorstein
tells this story of one of her own "Ta da!" moments. She had arranged to
meet a friend for an evening performance at Lincoln Center in Manhattan.
She didn't want to take the subway from her hotel, but she thought the
traffic was too heavy for a cab to get her there on time. She started to
walk the twelve blocks. Realizing she was going to be late, she began to
run. Sylvia started to feel embarrassed when she pictured herself as an
old lady running down the street. Then she realized: "I'm 70 years old,
and I can run down the street! In high heels! Great joy!" You bounce
back from adversity any time you discover or claim your competence
within seeming incompetence, any time you reframe a

potentially embarrassing moment as a moment of triumph. Your own
reframing or perspective draws on a healthy sense of pride. You claim a
sense of competence. "Sure I can!" "I am someone who can."

Exercise 3: Reframing Incompetence as Competence 1.

Evoke a sense of confidence in your body, perhaps by remembering a "Sure
I can!" moment. Take a moment to feel the strength in your body from
this memory. 2. Then call to mind a moment of incompetence that might
have caused some discomfort, embarrassment, or inconvenience: leaving
the tickets for the concert on your desk at home or mixing up the
birthday gifts you gave your two best friends. Notice any deflation of
your body energy or collapse in your body posture as you remember this
moment. 3. Pairing the memory of incompetence and the accompanying
sensations of deflation or collapse with the memory of competence and
the sensations of energy and strength may be enough to recondition and
rewire the feeling of incompetence and bring you back into your window
of tolerance. If so, great. If not, evoke a sense of "Ta da!" to help
reframe that moment of incompetence as simply held in the context of
your many competencies overall, not enough to undermine your resilience.
You can acknowledge this moment as part of being human and still stay in
your window of tolerance.

The Neuroscience of Reframing Incompetence as Competence A sense of
incompetence, real or imagined, can trigger our autonomic nervous system
into the survival responses of submit-collapse. (For a discussion of the
role shame plays in this collapse, see chapter 14.) In response to a
sense of threat to our psychological survival, the parasympathetic
branch of the ANS is overactivated, and this response deactivates the
normal functioning of the sympathetic branch. The body

begins to immobilize, shutting down for self-protection. The energy of
the psyche begins to deflate. Pushed out of our window of tolerance, we
lose momentum and our capacity to act. When we reframe our behavior and
our view of ourselves as competent, or even use a gesture of "Ta da!" to
recover a sense of healthy pride despite a slipup, we reactivate our
nervous system, recover our energy, and move back into our window of
tolerance.

Skill 4: Training Our Brains to Risk Something New Yes, risk-taking is
inherently failure-prone. Otherwise, it would be called sure
thing--taking. --- TIM MCMAHON Whenever we're about to venture into
something new --- moving across the country, getting married again,
taking on a new job, finally fixing the leaky showerhead --- we can feel
a hesitancy, a pullback within --- a somatic feeling of "Uh oh! Strange
territory! Don't know if I should be doing this!" --- even though,
consciously, we might very well want to forge ahead. Our resilience goes
on hold. Using the skills already presented in this chapter, we can get
ourselves over the fear of failure or of making a mistake. We can use
the beneficial effects of oxytocin from the support of other people to
help us cross the somatic threshold between the comfort of the familiar
and the discomfort of the new and uncertain. But there is also another
powerful neurotransmitter whose effects we can harness to cross that
threshold in the brain: dopamine. Dopamine is the neurotransmitter of
pleasure and reward. With the release of dopamine in the brain stem we
feel good, we feel alive and energized, and we want more. Dopamine is
actually partly responsible for the way we get into ruts, doing what
makes us feel comfortable, getting better at what we've always been good
at. The neurochemical reward we get from repeating successful patterns
of behavior can hold us back from trying new strategies, from
discovering new ways of being and coping.

The release of dopamine can lead to addictive behaviors, too: wanting
more of what made us feel good before, even if it's not good for us.
Maybe shopping makes us feel happier, so we run up charges on our credit
card until our debt is out of control, or we try to relieve our stress
with too much social drinking. Mindfulness is the key here --- awareness
that always involves discernment of the wholesome from the unwholesome
and the effect of our choices on our resilience. Dopamine operates on
the basis of expectation. When the brain experiences what it expects to
experience --- when we turn on the kitchen faucet and water comes out
--- dopamine levels stay steady. If something unexpected happens --- we
turn on the faucet and no water comes out --- the expectation is
disrupted. The disruption switches off the dopamine and generates a
slight unease in the body. A mistake has been detected. The brain
directs us to stop moving forward until we know things are okay. The
insula, the structure of interoception that reads what's going on in the
body, communicates this unease to the anterior cingulate cortex, the
structure that focuses our attention and tracks errors internally as
well as externally. Spindle cells in the anterior cingulate cortex ---
the fastesttransmitting neurons in our brain --- pick up the unease of
this disruption of dopamine release and instantly saturate the rest of
the cortex with that feeling of unease. (Some neuroscientists refer to
this function of dopamine as the "Oh shit!" circuit.) Read Montague,
professor of neuroscience at Baylor University, tells us, "You're
probably 99.9 percent unaware of dopamine release, but you're probably
99.9 percent driven by the information and emotions it conveys to other
parts of the brain." We can interpret this feeling of unease as anxiety,
which can automatically lead to refusing or deferring new challenges. It
feels like a risk to try something new. We might talk ourselves out of
trying a new entrée at a new restaurant in a new city, visiting a
foreign country, or venturing into the foreignness of a new career or a
new relationship. If we want to move forward, we need to come back into
our window of tolerance. We need to know how to work skillfully with our
dopamine system so that we are not stopped in our tracks by warning
signals from our lower brain. Bill Bowen, the developer of
psychophysical psychotherapy, has studied resilience and the creative
process for thirty years. He suggests

that when confronted with anything new, our responses range from the
survival reactions of fight-flight-freeze, which halt any positive
activation, all the way to adaptive activation and the free-flowing
expression of creativity. Somewhere on that continuum there is a somatic
threshold that we feel viscerally, where our body and brain chemistry
stops us from going forward even though consciously --- mentally,
emotionally, and spiritually --- we are ready to dive in. It can take
the form of writer's block; cold feet on the morning of the wedding; or
the last-minute justification of "I don't know anybody at the party, and
I'm too tired anyway." This somatic marker is the disruption of the
dopamine circuit, which is telling us, "Uh-oh, this is not what was
expected." That's true: it's not. It's new. But that doesn't necessarily
mean we should stop abruptly. "Do one thing every day that scares you"
was Eleanor Roosevelt's sage advice. Wise practice from a stellar role
model of resilience, who coped with the hardships of the Great
Depression, the tragedies of World War II, and the infidelity of a
husband who happened to be president of the United States. When we
deliberately face our fear of doing something new or risky, or confront
deep doubts about ourselves as human beings, we come to the somatic
threshold that might block us from moving forward. As the meditation
teacher Jack Kornfield says, we can read that anxiety not as a warning
to retreat to the familiar and comfortable but as a signal that means
"About to grow!" By facing the fear and intentionally crossing the
threshold into action, we are deliberately choosing to evoke new
experiences that recondition the anxiety in our nervous system. By
pairing an old pattern of fear or block with a new, more positive
pattern of courage and action, we contradict the old and rewire it. This
is reconditioning at its finest.

Exercise 4: Do One Scary Thing a Day to Train Your Brain to Risk
Something New 1. Identify one scary thing to do today to practice
crossing that somatic threshold of anxiety and experience something new.
For example, apologize to your teenager for not keeping a promise;
create a realistic budget of income and expenses and then talk with your
spouse about it; go up into the attic

with a flashlight to see what's scurrying around up there at night; make
a doctor's appointment to find out what's really going on with that
persistent cough; ask your boss to make good on a promise of time off
for the extra time you put in last month. 2. Practice facing the fear
today, and then practice doing one new, different scary thing a day
every day for the next thirty days. Crossing the threshold into action
at least once a day rewires into the brain a new default feeling of
"Sure I can!" or "Wow! I did it!" 3. As you repeat this practice of
doing one scary thing a day for several weeks, notice any shifts in the
messages your body is sending you as you prepare for the scary thing and
after you've done it. Notice any emergence of the sensation of "Sure I
can!" Facing fear is ultimately easier than constantly navigating around
situations that provoke it. We reset the default to honesty, courage,
and resilience.

Skill 5: Wiring for Resilience by Making Mistakes Knowledge rests not
upon truth alone, but upon error also. --- CARL G. JUNG Resilience is
based on learning new, more adaptive ways of coping. Researchers have
found that one of the best tools for recovering resilience now is to
learn from mistakes in the past. The wisdom of Mullah Nasruddin's saying
"Good judgment is based on experience; experience is based on bad
judgment" can be a comfort when we're faced with AFGO (another fricking
growth opportunity) or fear of one. Our brain rewires from the
experience of making a mistake. When our choices turn out to be
problematic for ourselves or others, we can learn from them by asking,
"What did I not see? What could I have done differently? What can I do
differently now?" As the neuroscience writer Jonah Lehrer says, "We turn
a regrettable moment into a teachable

moment." We can learn to find the gift in the mistake in the form of a
belief that "I am learning; I am coping." It helps to debrief after a
mistake by talking it over with other people. Different perspectives
help us discover the gift in the mistake and reduce our agony or
self-condemnation over it. When we're having to deal with consequences
that we would never wish on ourselves or anyone else, we can find some
equanimity in knowing we are strengthening our capacities to cope. We
may not wish to have to become so bravely, tenaciously adaptive in our
lives, but we can rejoice that we are.

Exercise 5: Wiring for Resilience by Finding the Gift in the Mistake
Failure is not fatal, but failure to change might be. --- JOHN WOODEN 1.

Ask a small (safe!) group of friends to come together to "look for the
gift in the mistake." 2. Each person shares common mistakes first, the
sort of mistakes that anyone might make: getting distracted and running
a red light; accidentally deleting all the emails confirming travel
reservations; forgetting to enroll in a health insurance plan by the
deadline and now having to appeal. Find some comfort (not judgment) in
the universal imperfections of being human. 3. Expand your sharing to
include mistakes that had bigger external consequences --- putting off
going to the doctor until "just a cough" landed you in the hospital with
pneumonia for a week --- or internal consequences --- the guilt you feel
because that hospitalization caused you to miss your daughter's
graduation from college. 4. Let the compassionate reflection of others
in the group, as well as your own, allow each person to "own" their
mistake, discern what lesson could be learned from it, and find the gift
in it, according to the following narrative: this is what happened; this
is what I did to survive;

this has been the cost; this is what I have learned; this is how I can
respond to life now.

Even if the gift is simply a deeper intention to pay closer attention as
we careen through our days, or to be kinder to ourselves in our
imperfect humanity, we have found the gift.

The Neuroscience of Finding the Gift in the Mistake One of the major
functions of the prefrontal cortex is to integrate the many messages and
stories we tell about ourselves and our behaviors --- who we are, how we
got to be here, what we're proud of, what we regret --- into one
coherent narrative. We have to come to terms with the whole shebang in
order to rest easy in our window of tolerance. Reframing our mistakes as
learning not only helps us learn --- preparing us to cope more
skillfully and resiliently the next time --- but also helps us relax
into the self-acceptance that contributes to our equanimity, enabling us
to keep calm and carry on.

Pulling It All Together Through the exercises in Part 4, you have
learned many practical tools of somatic resourcing to regulate your
survival responses and return to the window of tolerance --- the
physiological state of calm and ease --- and to strengthen your
prefrontal cortex to use somatic resources to rewire old patterns that
can derail resilience. These tools include: • •

•

ways to prime the brain to remain calm in a crisis through activating
the "calm and connect" properties of oxytocin; ways to use previous
competence (at anything) to wire in the sense of "Sure I can!" to face
new challenges, to reframe a potentially embarrassing moment as a moment
of triumph, to reframe potential incompetence as actual competence, and
to transform a feeling of deflation or collapse from shame into a
healthy pride that keeps you mobilized and able to deal; ways to train
your brain to risk something new by doing one scary thing a day; you
practice repeatedly crossing the somatic

•

threshold that could block your taking resilient action; ways to find
the gift in the mistake, learning the lessons of experience in order to
make better judgments and choices.

As prime minister of England during World War II, Winston Churchill
epitomized for many the capacities to keep calm and carry on. He taught
us: "Success is not final; failure is not fatal. Success is moving from
one failure to another without loss of enthusiasm. It is the courage to
continue that counts." Through these exercises, you are creating a bona
fide somatic intelligence that allows you to carry on with confidence
and trust in your competence.

PART FIVE

RECOVERING RESILIENCE THROUGH EMOTIONAL WELLBEING

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

How Neuroscience Is Revolutionizing Our Thinking about Feelings

I don't think there's such a thing as a bad emotion. The only bad
emotion is a stuck emotion. --- RACHEL NAOMI REMEN, MD

ONE EVENING MY CLIENT Curt came to session fuming because his
nineyear-old daughter, Cathy, had been punished at school for a soap
fight in the girls' bathroom that she had neither instigated nor
participated in but merely witnessed. Cathy had been hauled into the
principal's office that morning along with three other girls. Her
protestations of innocence were ignored, and she was made to pick up
trash on the playground at afternoon recess as her punishment. Curt
wanted to throttle the principal, haul him in front of the school board,
and sue the district for what he perceived as the school
administration's shaming and bullying of his daughter. Every one of us
has had our emotional well-being derailed by worry, irritation, or envy
from time to time. We may have a pattern of comparing ourselves with
colleagues or neighbors to determine our status in the pecking order. We
may find ourselves hypervigilant any time we have to travel to a new
part of town. Many of us also have our resilience derailed for long
stretches by the toxic biggies: anxiety, anger, depression, shame,
guilt. We may carry a fear of failure or potential embarrassment into
new projects. We might be hypersensitive and reactive to even casual
remarks about our parenting. Or we may feel stuck in a low-grade sense
of the blahs. In these states, our capacities to

see clearly, to find the courage to claim our competence, and to connect
to the people and resources we need to create new options are thrown
off. Our resilience is derailed. In the preceding chapters, you learned
ways to develop your somatic intelligence to resiliently manage your
stress responses and return to the calm that can lead to coping well. In
this chapter you will learn how to develop your brain's capacities to
skillfully manage strong emotions like Curt's and prevent them from
swamping your resilience. Chapters 14 and 15 offer techniques for using
those emotions as gateways to resilient action and strengthening the
emotional intelligence that allows you to relate to yourself and others
flexibly, adaptively, and resiliently. The desire to get rid of these
problematic surges of uncomfortable feelings and move on is natural in
the human psyche. For millennia both Eastern and Western philosophies
and psychologies have taught that we can conquer our "primitive
passions" or "destructive emotions" through the governance of the
"higher," rational brain. Today, however, neuroscientists who study
feelings and thinking (affects and cognitions) are reversing that
propensity to privilege the higher, rational brain over the lower,
emotional brain to guide our most important decisions. They are
discovering that we are not evolved to be exclusively rational
creatures. Our emotional brain is as important to decision making as our
capacity for reasoning is. The emotional brain can make decisions faster
than the rational brain, based on information that the higher brain
can't directly comprehend. According to Daniel Goleman, author of the
landmark book Emotional Intelligence, "Emotions streamline our decisions
at the outset by eliminating some options and highlighting others.
Emotions guide us in facing predicaments and tasks too important to
leave to intellect alone: danger, painful loss, persisting toward a goal
despite frustrations, bonding with a mate, and building a family. When
it comes to shaping our most important decisions and our actions, the
emotional brain is as involved in reasoning as is the thinking brain."

Emotions as Gateways to Resilient Action This chapter follows the lead
of the most recent scientific discoveries, taking the view that our
emotions are unparalleled mechanisms of human connection: they fuel the
affections that bond us deeply to other people

and reveal the vulnerabilities that are part of our common humanity.
Emotions fuel the vitality that makes us feel fully alive and "juicy"
and are themselves powerful catalysts of brain change. Our emotions,
from the most basic --- mad, sad, bad, glad --- to the most complex ---
resentment, jealousy, pride --- are motivational systems in and of
themselves. Affects --- the neurobiological roots of what we call
feelings or emotions --- are simply waves of body sensations that signal
us, from the bottom up, "Pay attention! Something important is happening
here!" These sensations are filtered through the primitive emotional
processing center of the amygdala. This, with its inherent negativity
bias, can lay a bad rap on the meaning of these sensations as they pass
through the insula to the more complex discernment of the prefrontal
cortex, which can consciously perceive, process, and respond to them
resiliently, perhaps with a different, more favorable interpretation.
Our task is to learn when to listen to these emotions as guides to
adaptive behaviors --- as when our unease helps us establish a boundary
against someone's repetitive, intrusive phone calls --- and when to
manage them, so that we return to our window of tolerance and respond
wisely. If someone else is selected to present the concerns of our local
environmental action group to the board of supervisors, we might cope
with our disappointment by staying engaged in the cause anyway, rather
than withdrawing in a huff. We also need to learn when to realize that
these emotions are based on an implicit memory of a previous situation
that is no longer true, so that we don't have to react now the way we
did then: just because the family we grew up in never talked to us
directly about Uncle Fred's cancer and silenced our questions after he
died, that doesn't mean we shouldn't tell our spouse what the doctor has
told us today. Our response flexibility around our emotions allows us to
harness their energy toward resilient action. A story I heard from
Heather Martin, a Canadian teacher of mindfulness, illustrates the
harnessing the energy of emotions toward resilient action. A few winters
ago, a huge snowstorm downed large trees and closed major roads in
Toronto. One woman driving west to see her newborn granddaughter in a
hospital on the other side of town found the road blocked by a large
fallen oak tree. Another woman, driving in the opposite direction to see
her dying father in another hospital, was stopped on the other side of
the same tree. The two women got out of their cars and began sharing
their common plight with each other.

After a few minutes of discussion, the two women decided they could
trust each other enough to trade car keys. (If one of them had had a
prior bad experience of trusting a stranger with something as important
as their primary means of transportation, this story might have gone in
a different direction.) Each one drove the other's car to the hospital
to see her loved ones; they exchanged cars again once the storm had
passed and the roads were cleared. In this case, the capacities of the
two women to read and trust their own emotional signals led to a
resilient solution to their dilemma. All emotions are, in essence,
impulses to act: e-motion. When processed and expressed well, all
emotions lead to resilient action. For instance, anger can lead us to
protect ourselves and our loved ones from attack, injustice, and
oppression. Sadness can lead us to reach out and connect with resources
that make life bearable and meaningful. Fear can cause us to stop,
assess, regroup, and choose wisely. Healthy shame can help us learn the
values and norms that keep us fully accepted by the society we live in
and benefiting from its wisdom and resources. Once we learn that we can
reliably process and manage the information each emotion is giving us,
we no longer have to disregard our emotions or defend ourselves against
them. We don't need to hide our innermost selves out of fear of shame or
embarrassment; we don't need to automatically blame others for our own
imagined inadequacies; we don't need to "go along to get along" when
doing so diminishes our healthy pride in our own gifts and talents.
That's the beauty of emotional intelligence. We become open to all of
our experience, all of our feelings, our full humanness. The prefrontal
cortex is the manager of emotions. As you strengthen it to regulate your
feelings, you can also allow it to incorporate the wisdom of emotions
into your brain's decision-making apparatus. The prefrontal cortex can
increasingly discern when it's appropriate to respond to a specific
emotion with decisive action and when it's better to acknowledge it,
move through it, and choose to experience other emotions that might be
more effective guides to resilient actions.

Managing Emotions to Produce Resilient Actions

As you know, the prefrontal cortex integrates communication between the
structures that process our feelings and the structures that process our
thoughts. It connects the "feeling" right hemisphere with the "logical"
left; it also links the subconscious, intuitive limbic system of the
lower brain with the conscious, reflective cortex of the higher brain.
This integration allows us to choose our actions wisely from both the
bottom up and the top down. When Curt's daughter Cathy arrived home from
school in tears, Curt patiently listened as Cathy sobbed out her story.
As he did so, the resonance circuit in Curt's brain was picking up all
the cues. Mirror neurons in his brain were firing to evoke in his own
body what Cathy was feeling in hers: bewilderment, hurt, and shame.
Curt's insula was conveying signals of those body sensations to the
right hemisphere of his higher brain, which interpreted their emotional
meaning. When Cathy told him about having to pick up trash from the
playground during recess, Curt noticed a shift in his own body. His
amygdala was activating the survival response of fight. He wasn't
feeling Cathy's anger: he was feeling his own. And even in that moment
it felt like something more than simply a good dad wanting to protect
his precious daughter from undeserved punishment. As Curt sat in my
office that evening, I could see he was still in fight mode. From across
the room I could almost feel his blood boiling. I asked him if he was
willing to try a couple of things to calm down. Even thought he was
still in a state of "fume," he nodded agreement. We started with Curt
placing his hand on his heart and slowly breathing into his heart center
a sense of the love and tenderness he was feeling for Cathy underneath
the anger. As I noticed his face soften and his body relax, I asked him
to simply notice and name whatever he was feeling in that moment: the
enduring anger, his concern for Cathy, his desire to protect her,
whatever else he could become aware of. Focusing on the experience of
the present brought his prefrontal cortex and the closely related
anterior cingulate cortex back into action. I asked Curt how far back he
could trace feeling this particular flavor of anger. Now Curt's
prefrontal cortex was drawing on explicit memories stored by the
hippocampus, asking, "Have I seen this before? Was it good or bad?" It
was matching those signals --- calls to action --- with memories of how
he had responded before and how well his responses had worked. Curt's
eyes widened in surprise. He had forgotten that he

had once been bullied in kindergarten by a couple of older kids. He had
pushed back against those older boys until a teacher rushed out onto the
playground to stop the fighting. Curt's right hemisphere could readily
associate his experience of being bullied with his perceptions of
Cathy's being bullied. His anger wasn't only a natural impulse to
protect his daughter: it was what had fueled his actions to protect
himself. As I began to convey my empathy for Curt's experience in a way
that resonated with him, Curt could begin to feel some empathy for
himself. The meaning making of the left hemisphere began to kick in.
Curt's anger today made perfect sense. He was gearing up to protect
Cathy from what he perceived as bullying by the principal, fueled by his
own implicit memories of having to do the same for himself. Now, as we
explored the event more deeply, Curt's prefrontal cortex went to work
integrating the meaning of his emotional experiences, past and present,
with the rational search for the appropriate response. We finished the
session by exploring how Curt could channel his anger into some wise
action: how to use the energy of his anger to go to bat with the
principal on Cathy's behalf. Curt decided to stop by Cathy's school the
next morning on his way to work and ask for Cathy to be released from
class to meet with him and the principal. He told me later he managed to
keep his cool in the principal's office, hearing the principal's side of
things but also speaking up for Cathy, modeling for her how to speak up
for herself. Curt was firm, clear, and persistent, finally persuading
the principal to apologize for not listening to Cathy carefully enough
the previous day and acknowledging that the punishment might have been
excessive and embarrassing. Curt would have liked a public apology in
front of an entire school assembly but was satisfied with what he had
accomplished and modeled for Cathy about channeling his anger
resiliently to get some good results.

Developing the Prefrontal Cortex as the Manager of Emotions The
prefrontal cortex learns to manage or self-regulate all the information
coming from our emotions that leads us to actions, resilient or
otherwise --- you already guessed --- by the experience of having those
emotions managed by the prefrontal cortices of the people we

interacted with when our brains were first developing (through
conditioning). As we mature, other people continue to help us regulate
our emotions until we really get the hang of it. Let's say a baby in a
high chair drops a favorite toy and then gets cranky because the toy is
out of reach. The baby's crankiness is an early form of emotion
signaling the need for resilient action. If the parent picks up the toy
and gives it back to the baby, maybe with a smile of understanding, the
retrieval of the toy by an attentive and empathically responsive parent
soothes the baby, bringing her back into her window of tolerance. The
parent's prefrontal cortex is regulating the baby's prefrontal cortex
and teaching it how to regulate its own emotions. Over time, experiences
like this help the baby develop a strong neural platform for regulating
her own emotions. And if stress disrupts her self-regulation, she will
have learned from a securely attached relationship that it's safe to
turn to others for help in regulating herself until she recovers and
regulates herself again. This early empathic regulation also teaches the
baby's prefrontal cortex the value and the process of paying attention
to the signals that prompt the need for action. Over time, the baby
learns to take her own wise actions to bring her emotions back to
baseline equilibrium. From the empathic regulation of the parent (or
other closely engaged brains), her prefrontal cortex learns about the
role of emotions and stays open to being guided by them. When there's a
lack of empathic responsiveness from the parent, however, that lack can
affect the baby's developing prefrontal cortex in two ways. First, if
the baby's crankiness and its call for action are ignored by an overly
busy or emotionally clueless parent --- or, worse, the growing child is
criticized or shamed for wanting these important signals for action
addressed --- her prefrontal cortex does not learn either the value or
the process of perceiving, interpreting, and responding to these
signals. Instead, rather than keeping the neural connections between the
feeling right hemisphere and the rational left hemisphere strong,
flexible, and "plastic" so that they can communicate easily, the
developing brain shrinks those circuits to prevent us from drowning in
feelings it doesn't know how to regulate. Neural connections between the
higher and lower brain are similarly affected. As the underlying neural
circuitry becomes less flexible, less teachable, and less "plastic," and
more like neural cement, the signals of

emotion no longer pass through the circuitry to communicate the need for
action. In fact, because the developing prefrontal cortex has not been
guided well in learning how to manage those signals, it develops a
repertoire of defenses to make sure it doesn't receive them. Defenses
--- psychological barriers against feelings --- can become as rigid and
unteachable as the neural circuitry that underlies them. When our brains
refuse to listen to the information coming from our emotions (or the
neural connections to do so remain underdeveloped), our ability to use
our emotions wisely to guide our actions --- our response flexibility
--- is greatly diminished. We don't receive the signals telling us to
leave a bad marriage or a deadend job; we don't receive the emotional
signals that would tell us to reach out for help or repair a rupture
with a good friend. Second, if the baby's parents tend to be overly
emotional and not well regulated themselves in response to the baby's
emotions, if they are too preoccupied to respond well to her crankiness
and her call for action is lost in the flood of their own emotions, or
if the parents are too involved in the need to act for themselves and
are unable to act on her behalf, the baby's prefrontal cortex simply
fails to develop its own capacity to hold and manage the emotional
signals coming from its limbic system. The neural channels in the brain
stay open, but the circuits developing between the prefrontal cortex and
the limbic system don't stabilize enough; her self-regulation is weak
and ineffective. The actions informed (or misinformed) by the chaos in
the nervous system (sometimes described as "neural swamp") may
themselves seem chaotic and unpredictable rather than wise or resilient.
She might impulsively begin or end a relationship, certain that real
happiness lies just around the corner either way. She might adore
someone one moment, then turn away in a rage when that person
disappoints her the next. When the prefrontal cortex cannot fully
regulate emotions, we can develop all kinds of less-than-resilient
strategies to cope with emotions we mistakenly experience as problems.
When asked by a spouse not to raise her voice in front of the children,
for example, someone might respond belligerently, "I am not angry!" ---
a response completely disconnected from her own signals that she is
indeed angry. Someone lost in the heartbreak of a romance gone south can
fail to engage in any reflection on the meaning of the breakup or fail
to mobilize the wise action that would let him engage in a new, more
meaningful relationship.

We're all vulnerable at one time or another to having our resilience
hijacked by powerful emotions. The tools you will learn in the rest of
this chapter help you strengthen your prefrontal cortex so that it can
function competently to manage your emotions and act resiliently. Your
prefrontal cortex has a big job to do reading and regulating the
emotions perceived by the right hemisphere of your brain (body
sensation, affect) and integrating the meaning of those signals with the
rational left hemisphere (language and thoughts). In this section, you
will learn to use techniques drawing on the three processes of brain
change --- new conditioning, deconditioning, and reconditioning --- to
develop proficiency in using both hemispheres to determine the most
skillful response. You begin, once again, with learning new ways to
safely regulate emotions to catalyze new conditioning of neural pathways
in the brain.

Skill 1: Noticing and Regulating Your Emotions Anyone can become angry
--- that is easy. But to be angry with the right person, to the right
degree, at the right time, for the right purpose, and in the right way
--- that is not easy. --- ARISTOTLE Mindful empathy uses the circuit of
reading emotions, described earlier, to attune to our body's experience
of any emotion so that we can "read" our own emotional signals more
accurately. For instance, as Curt discovered, the more familiar you are
with the many nuances of anger --- irritation, annoyance, indignation,
wrath, outrage --- the more comfortable you'll feel learning how to
express or act on that particular flavor of anger. The exercise below
offers practice in noticing and regulating the flavor of another emotion
--- sadness or disappointment.

Exercise 1: Noticing and Regulating Your Emotions 1.

Sit quietly, letting your awareness settle comfortably into your
presence in the moment. Breathe a sense of ease and well-being into your
heart center.

2. When you're ready, recall a small, simple memory of feeling sad or
disappointed. Say your best friend is traveling on sales calls all the
time now, and while you're happy for his success, you miss hanging out
with him. 3. Notice what you feel when you evoke this memory, where in
your body you're feeling it, and how it feels: maybe tight, heavy, or
sluggish. If you wish, you can describe it in terms of color, size,
shape, texture (hard, soft, squishy?), and temperature. 4. Next, while
remaining aware of this feeling, let yourself feel your own care for
yourself, your own self-empathy. It's not easy being a human being, and
sometimes this is what being a human being feels like. 5. Return your
awareness to your being in the present, sitting quietly and receptively.
Notice any changes in your feeling of sadness or disappointment as you
recall the memory now. Notice that you can hold this feeling in the
larger awareness of your mindfulness and in the loving acceptance of
your self-empathy.

You can practice holding moments of all kinds of feelings, such as
frustration, boredom, or uneasiness. The point here is to attune to the
feeling in your body. Attuning to the feeling in different sensory
dimensions helps generate the sense that you are managing the emotion
--- able to contain it, name it, and describe it --- rather than
perceiving it as something so big, bad, and amorphous that it is driving
you or that you need to push it away. Calling on self-empathy reminds
you that there's nothing wrong or bad about feeling as you do: in fact,
the feeling indicates your own healthy yearning or longing for something
you would like to have happen differently. Persevering in this practice
strengthens your prefrontal cortex to help you manage your emotions
without being derailed (neural swamp) or having to defend against them
(neural cement). You are also conditioning a new, deeply felt sense of
self, a confidence based on competence: I can do this; I can experience
my feelings; I can manage them well, and I can use them wisely as
gateways to action.

The Neuroscience of Noticing and Regulating Your Emotions Studies show
that repeated noticing and naming of our emotions increases cell volume
in the corpus callosum, the integrative fibers linking the two
hemispheres of the cortex, making it easier to integrate the intuitive
meaning of the emotion with the cognitive understanding of it.
Self-empathy makes this process safe, even with difficult or "negative"
emotions.

Skill 2: Expressing Your Own Emotions and Reading the Meaning of Others'
Emotions Both expressing your emotions to others and reading others'
emotional signals are essential for accurate and efficient communication
among friends or foes. Curt was able to read Cathy's emotions, manage
his own in response, and then use that understanding to guide his
actions and structure his conversation with the school principal.

Exercise 2: Expressing Your Own Emotions and Reading the Meaning of
Others' Emotions This exercise requires a partner in order to activate
the resonance circuit we use to read and express emotions well. You will
practice feeling five of the most basic emotions and then conveying your
experience of those emotions to your partner: anger (from irritation to
rage), fear (from worry to terror), sadness (from "Oh, pooh" to
overwhelming grief ), joy (from delight to euphoria), disgust (from
annoyance to contempt). The exercise is done without words to strengthen
the ability of the right hemisphere of the prefrontal cortex --- the
emotional brain --- to comprehend and interpret these signals without
help from the language-processing part of the brain. Practicing with
core emotions builds our capacities for attunement, which can then be
refined later to read more nuanced emotions such as disappointment,
jealousy, guilt, and curiosity.

1.

2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  

Decide the order in which you will evoke each of five emotions ---
anger, fear, sadness, joy, and disgust --- without telling your partner.
Recalling previous experiences of each emotion is a quick and easy way
for you to experience the emotion again internally. Tune into your own
experience of the first emotion you've chosen to work with, and then let
your body wordlessly express the chosen emotion for ten seconds.
Maintain eye contact with your partner. You can use gestures, facial
expressions, and sounds --- just not words. You may find yourself
exaggerating your expressions at first; that's okay. Your partner notes
which emotion he is reading from your expression but doesn't disclose it
yet. Notice what happens inside you --- self-attunement --- as you
communicate your own feelings to someone else. Notice whether the sense
of the emotion increases, decreases, or changes into something else.
Without discussion yet, turn your attention inward again. Release the
emotion you've been expressing with a few gentle, deep breaths into your
heart center, evoke the next emotion on your list, and then display that
second emotion to your partner for ten seconds. Again, your partner
notes the emotion, but the two of you don't discuss anything. Still
without discussion, refocus your attention inward, evoke the next
emotion on the list and display the feeling to your partner. Repeat the
process for each emotion. When you have displayed all five emotions,
your partner shares his best guess at the emotion you were displaying
each time. Switch roles, so that your partner also displays five
emotions in sequence. As you observe them, notice what signals you pay
attention to --- facial expressions, body language, the tone or rhythm
of sounds --- to distinguish one emotion from another. And notice what
happens inside you as you perceive your partner's feelings. When your
partner has finished, reveal how you identified each emotion. Discuss
any discrepancies.

This is a practice in developing empathy. Your expression of emotion is
meant to convey meaning to the other person, and the attempt to read the
other person's expression of emotion calls on the capacity of
attunement. If all the guesses were accurate, congratulations to both of
you! If there were discrepancies, take the chance to discuss what you
perceived in each other's expressions of emotion that led you to a
different interpretation. You are each strengthening the prefrontal
cortex's capacities for expressing and attuning to emotions, the
foundation of building more competence in communicating what you need,
in developing the skills you need to get those needs met, and in
empathizing with others as they express their needs.

The Neuroscience of Expressing Your Own Emotions and Reading the Meaning
of Others' Emotions We all rely on the fusiform gyrus in the right
hemisphere of the brain to read the facial expressions of another
person. The direct eye contact of empathic, responsive parenting
stimulates the development of this structure in the baby's brain; we can
strengthen the functioning of this structure through eye contact with
other people lifelong. Research has shown that when our right hemisphere
reads safety and trust in the facial expressions of another person, the
amygdala calms down, and the stress response is reduced. Being able to
read emotion in the facial expressions and body language of another is
key to knowing how to respond to the behaviors driven by those emotions.
Despite the importance of communicating emotion, studies have shown that
people don't always know what their facial expressions are
communicating, because we can't read our own expressions unless we're
practicing in a mirror. Exchanging feedback with another person can
provide valuable information we might not have otherwise about whether
the emotional messages we send are consistent with what we intend. If we
grew up in a household where empathic, emotional communication was not
practiced or valued, then we might not have learned how to read someone
else's expressions, either. Reading even positive emotions can seem
challenging. (For people who have not developed this capacity through
life experience, there are computer programs available that train the
brain in how to read specific emotions, one by one.)

Skill 3: Managing and Shifting Emotions A wave of emotion lasts only
eight seconds on average, flowing through the body quickly. However, we
can sustain the emotion, for good or ill. We can fan the flames of
anger, for instance, by dredging up thoughts and stories that keep it
foremost in our mind and even intensify it, blocking its evolution into
a guide for resilient action. (We can also choose to sustain and
reinforce positive feelings like joy and contentment. The skills and
benefits of doing that are presented in the next chapter.) Curt could
have fueled his anger at the school principal by remembering other times
he had gotten angry at the same principal, or a different principal, or
with anybody in authority. But because he was learning to be resilient,
once his brain signaled him that he could take effective action, he
could let go of his anger and focus on his skillful response. That is
resilience: paying attention to the information coming from our
emotions, regulating the emotions, then choosing how to respond.
Processing an emotion entails perceiving it, acknowledging it, being
with it, taking whatever information is useful from it, and then letting
the wave move through the body (as it naturally will if we don't grip it
or feed it). One way to develop skill in this area is to expand our
field of awareness to a consciousness that is larger than any belief or
story about the emotion: not just to the big picture of the moment,
although this is helpful, but to the context of all of life. We can
access this bigger context through the process of deconditioning. When
we drop into that state, we can still listen for the wisdom of the
emotion --- what it is signaling us to attend to and what action would
be adaptive to take --- but we don't have to wallow in the emotion
itself; we don't have to drown in the neural swamp. One of my clients
was going through an emotional upheaval that was far more overwhelming
than Curt's. Within a two-month period, Monica lost her income when the
owner of the hardware store where she had worked for seven years sold
the store to a national franchise, which replaced all the staff; her
husband left her for another woman; and her beloved dog died. Wave after
wave of fear, anger, and grief led to sleepless nights and a kind of
paralysis about what to do next. Monica was able to manage those waves
using several of the exercises presented here, including the one below,
adapted from the Tibetan Buddhist

practice of tonglen --- a practice of compassion to relieve one's own
suffering and that of others.

Exercise 3: Managing and Shifting Emotions by Practicing Compassion 1.

2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  

Identify one particular challenge in your life, then identify one
specific emotion arising from this challenge that you would like to be
able to live with, but not be overwhelmed by. Find a place to sit or lie
comfortably where you won't be disturbed for ten minutes. Come into a
sense of presence in your body; find a place in your body where you can
sense peacefulness and ease. (This may be your heart center; it may also
be your elbow or your big toe.) Let your awareness drop below any
stories, any worries, any concerns, into a sense of inner peace and
rest. (Some practitioners describe this part of the practice as dropping
below the storms on the surface of the ocean to the gentle flow of deep
water thirty feet under the surface.) From this place of peacefulness,
call to mind your wiser self, the imaginary resource who knows you and
loves you, who has compassion for your situation, who can empathize with
all the emotions you are experiencing. Experience yourself as your wiser
self, holding and managing with mindful empathy any heavy emotions you
will be working with. Establish a rhythm of breathing: as you inhale,
breathe one small portion of the fear, anger, grief you are feeling into
the larger sense of empathy and compassion that can hold it. As you
exhale, breathe out that small portion of the negative emotion, sending
empathy and compassion to yourself as you release the emotion. (A slow
breath takes about eight seconds, about as long as it takes a wave of
emotion to course through your body --- a nice evolutionary coincidence
that we use to our advantage in this exercise.) Continue this rhythm of
breathing for five to ten minutes, simply letting in your emotion,
letting it be, and letting it go.

6. As you bring this compassion practice to a close, notice any changes
you may feel in your body, any deeper peacefulness from tapping into the
mindful empathy and compassion that is larger than any of the emotions
moving through it.

The Neuroscience of Managing and Shifting Emotions through Compassion In
this deconditioning exercise, we're focusing on the power of shifting
the processing of an emotion to the spacious, timeless consciousness of
the defocusing network in the brain, where the emotion seems less solid
and the story fueling the emotion begins to lose its definition. We
begin to experience space between the waves of emotion. This awareness,
enhanced by the empathy of our wiser self, allows the charge of the
emotion to dissipate. The activation of the defocusing network in the
right hemisphere also allows us to access our intuitive wisdom in order
to choose what to do next. The next chapter discusses the neuroscience
of the "left shift": how the practice of prosocial emotions like
compassion can increase neural activity in the left hemisphere of the
brain. That engagement of the more rational left hemisphere allows us to
regulate the negative emotions that can dominate the processing of the
right hemisphere and to choose actions more wisely.

Skill 4: Resolving the Shutdown of Emotions Depression, which is
currently a major derailer of resilience for 20 percent of Americans, is
technically not one discrete emotion. It is a physiological state that
is a defense against feeling any emotions that might be too painful or
distressing to bear. People experiencing depression tend to isolate
themselves, because even the feelings of other people can seem
overwhelming or intolerable, as can the feelings that their presence
might evoke. The shutting down of all emotions leads to collapse.
Depression effectively blocks any actions that our emotions would
typically lead to. We become immobilized. Modern science is discovering
many ways besides medication to get people moving again when they are
stuck in chronic depression: therapy, exercise, reaching out to help
others in the community, and learning

something new, like speaking a foreign language or playing a musical
instrument. We can also use the power of emotions to get us moving
again. If we can allow ourselves to feel them, even negative emotions
like anger can initiate action. In modern psychology, depression is
considered anger turned inward --- the caving in of the fight response
to the point of inertia or collapse. Anger is one of the emotions people
most commonly use to fuel themselves out of a depression and get
themselves moving again. Declaring "I'm so mad I could spit nails" gives
us more energy than retreating under the covers for weeks at a time. But
other emotions work to reverse depression, too, especially those
emotions that reconnect us to others, to our feelings for others, and to
their feelings for us. We can recondition the pathway in the brain that
leads us toward collapse and the shutting down of feelings by pairing a
feeling that leads to connection or action with the beginning of that
slide. Similarly, we can pair a directly contradictory emotion with the
desolation of the depression, if we're already in it, to help us back
into connections with others and engagement in the world. It might seem
counterintuitive to use delight to recondition despair, but that's
exactly what Monica did to cope with the loss of her beloved border
collie. After Dewey died, I urged her to dig deep and find every memory
of her delight in their connection: his exuberance when chasing a
Frisbee in the park and leaping into the air to catch it; his
friendliness when greeting other dogs and owners on the hiking trails
near her home; the joy in her heart on hearing his bark as she came home
after a long day at work. As Monica chose to recondition the despair
that could have overwhelmed her, she again and again remembered the
bubbling up of happiness and paired the feeling of those memories with
the grief of her loss. Over time, the feelings of happiness and
appreciation for all the good times took up more of her emotional and
mental bandwidth, allowing the grief to fade and opening her heart to
feelings of love. Soon she was ready to act: she brought a border
collie--shepherd mutt home from the Humane Society to bring new joy and
delight into her life. Reconditioning her despair over losing Dewey was
an important step for Monica in coming to terms with her other losses.
Though it took longer, she was able to use a similar reconditioning
process, focusing on love of family and friends, to release the
incapacitating pain of her husband's leaving. Her growing skills in
managing her losses eventually

opened her up to reconnecting with friends and colleagues in her
community and helped her find a job at a new solar-energy company.

Exercise 4: Resolving the Shutdown of Emotions This exercise strengthens
your capacities to feel and deal with your emotions. It requires
preparation. The emotions you are going to work with may be painful, and
you're experiencing them because of many different causes and
conditions. Take a moment to get in touch with your own care for
yourself. Acknowledge your own innate goodness. At first glance, this
might seem impossible: when we're in the murk of grief, despair, or
depression, we may feel unable to think of anything remotely resembling
goodness, ease, well-being, or self-worth, and we might resent anyone
asking us to try, as though they don't see our pain as real. 1.

Anchor your awareness firmly in mindful empathy and compassion for your
experience in this moment. Repeat to yourself: "May this suffering ease.
May this suffering cease." 2. Evoke the presence of your wiser self to
help you remember moments of goodness: joy in playing with a grandchild,
satisfaction in changing the oil in the car or planting bulbs. Allow a
sense of goodness to arise in your heart center, even in the midst of
the difficult emotions. It's the body's sense of this goodness --- along
with joy, delight, satisfaction, and contentment --- that will repair
and rewire the grief, despair, or any other afflictive emotion, bit by
bit. 3. Evoke one particular moment or aspect of the difficult emotion
you want to work with. If even one moment seems overwhelming, identify
manageable chunks of the overall reality, and work with just one piece
of the experience at a time. Focus your awareness on this one experience
to light up all the networks of this one moment of the difficult
emotion: sensations, images, the feeling of the feeling itself, thoughts
about the emotion or about yourself for having it.

4.

Evoke one particular memory of a moment that directly contradicts or
disconfirms the moment of the difficult emotion you are working with: a
moment of loving connection with a good friend, the joy of a winter
sunset, the ease of relaxing in a hot bath. Imagine it as fully as you
can to light up the associated networks of this opposing emotion, too.
5. Now hold the feelings of the two opposing emotions in your awareness
at the same time (or switch back and forth), always using mindful
empathy to strengthen the more positive, more resilient emotion.
Gradually let the sense of the more difficult emotion fade or dissolve
and rest your awareness in the experience of the more positive emotion
and positive connection. 6. Repeat this exercise, pairing the same
original moment of grief or despair with several different emotional
experiences that directly contradict it until the charge of the
afflictive memory fades or dissolves. Repeat this exercise with other
moments of grief, despair, or depression connected to this particular
event or situation until the emotional charge of the entire situation is
manageable. You are no longer derailed: you can take effective action.

The Neuroscience of Resolving the Shutdown of Emotions When our brains
are learning how to regulate and manage emotion and strengthening the
circuits that do so, they develop that ability through connections with
other brains. Part of that learning is that any emotion can be managed
and borne when we're not alone with it. What is shareable is bearable.
The connection with other, wellregulated brains regulates our brain and
strengthens the circuits we need in the prefrontal cortex to
self-regulate. When we pair a memory of feeling connected to resilient,
regulated others, or evoke a memory of our own resilient and regulated
wiser self or true self, we are drawing on the strength of those
connections as resources. Our brain registers that we're not isolated or
alone. Combined with mindful empathy that holds and cares for us in the
process, we learn

we can bear any emotion if we practice a little bit at a time. When that
competency is strengthened, we don't have to disconnect from any
emotion. We don't need to defend ourselves against emotions. We can
integrate even intense and formerly painful emotions into our
experiences of ourselves and into the neural circuitry of how we make
decisions.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter, you have learned skills to: • •
•

help you experience, express, and manage your own emotions and read the
meaning of your own emotions and those of others --- new conditioning
--- that will help guide wise action; hold, or decondition, emotions in
a larger awareness that will dissipate the charge of them so that wise
action can intuitively emerge; choose to recondition afflictive emotions
that block wise action, freeing up energy that lets you move in the
world resiliently.

All of these skills help you move toward the five Cs of coping: staying
calm the next time your boss criticizes your work or your mother-in-law
criticizes your parenting; connecting to resources of people and
practices the next time a sudden loss leaves you feeling bereft and
alone; seeing clearly your neighbor's emotional needs for help and care
the next time he has a hissy fit over garbage cans left in the driveway.
These skills can guide you to an empathic and reflective response. Over
time, as you become more adept at managing emotions, including deeply
difficult ones, you recover a sense of emotional competence, realizing,
"I can do this; I am doing this; I am learning to deal with emotions
skillfully." Claiming that sense of emotional competence creates a
stable platform that helps you recover resilience and well-being and
creates a solid foundation for emerging emotional intelligence.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

How Positive Emotions Build Resilience

A person without a sense of humor is like a wagon without springs ---
jolted by every pebble in the road. --- HENRY WARD BEECHER

THE POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY MOVEMENT has gained momentum in recent years
because of the research data showing the effect of positive emotions
like joy and delight in enhancing our mental, emotional, and physical
health and thus our capacities to cope. Scientists have demonstrated
that cultivating positive emotions can actually undo the constricting
effects of negative emotions on our behaviors, moving us beyond the
narrow band of our default survival responses to more resilient options.
Deliberately cultivating positive emotions can broaden and build our
repertoire of possibilities. Joy can spark the urge to play, to push the
limits and be creative. Interest can spark the urge to explore, take in
new information and experiences, and expand the sense of self in the
process. Laughter breathes some space into grief. Contentment creates
the urge to savor current life circumstances and integrate that savoring
into new views. Positive emotions that broaden habitual modes of
thinking or acting also build personal resources that last beyond the
moment of the emotion itself, such as stronger social bonds and social
support and deeper insights that help place events in a broader context
and alter worldviews. They even promote brain development and rewiring.
Positive emotions are not simply an outcome of skillful coping; they are
an instrument for building resilience.

Even more compelling data are available on the cultivation of prosocial
emotions, that is, emotions evoked specifically in the context of
relating to other people. Because the brain is a social organ, we are
already hard-wired to use the emotions evoked in interactions with other
people (or even remembering the emotions of interacting with other
people) as gateways to prosocial behaviors and thus to wise, competent
action. When we feel grateful, we are more likely to be altruistic to
others. When we trust others, we are more likely to be generous. When we
feel compassion, we are more likely to act on behalf of others. And,
since new experiences and new conditioning create new circuitry in the
brain, by choosing to focus attention on prosocial emotions, we evoke
the brain's neuroplasticity to begin rewiring the brain in a more
positive direction.

Skill 1: Cultivating Positive Emotions to Wire In New Patterns In over
one hundred studies to date, researchers have found that people who have
a daily gratitude practice consistently experience more positive
emotions; they are more likely to accomplish personal goals (thus
demonstrating resilience); they feel more alert, energetic, enthused,
alive; they sleep better; they have lower blood pressure; and they live
an average of seven to nine years longer. Gratitude practice helps block
toxic emotions like envy, resentment, regret, and hostility; it diverts
attention away from stress and worry; it brings closure to unresolved
traumatic memories; it strengthens social ties, letting people feel more
connected to others, less lonely and isolated; and it improves a sense
of self-worth. A year ago, my sister-in-law phoned to tell me that my
sixty-year-old brother had been rushed to the hospital with shortness of
breath and pain in his chest. He was diagnosed with a blood clot in his
right lung and several clots in both legs. When Mary handed the phone to
Barry, I dove right into telling him how much I loved him, how glad I
was that he was still alive. And then, in the midst of all the
uncertainty and dreadful possibilities, I began to feel my own gratitude
for our connection: although we were two thousand miles apart, he was
still present in my life. With his life depending on an intravenous drip
of blood thinner, it occurred to me to suggest he try a gratitude
practice. (I'm a nerd

immersed in the science of gratitude, I know, but I'm a quick-thinking
nerd.) Barry is a standoffish kind of guy, not inclined toward
self-awareness practices of any kind. To my surprise, he started in,
right there on the phone, grateful that Mary was there by his side, that
the doctors clearly cared and seemed to know what they were doing, that
his beloved poodles were safe at home, that the nurse brought him a
drink of water as soon as he asked for it. It was a five-minute litany
of everything he was grateful for, even as he hovered at death's door.
Barry didn't die, though the doctors insisted that he could have. The
clots cleared two days later. My brother later told me he noticed a
"disturbance in the force field" from so many of my friends sending
prayers and blessings for his recovery. When he returned home, he became
far more compliant with his doctor's suggestions regarding sleep, diet,
and exercise. Whether or not Barry's gratitude practice actually saved
his life, it certainly contributed to the conditioning of more resilient
behaviors in his brain.

Exercise 1: Cultivating Gratitude to Wire In New Patterns At times our
own light goes out and is rekindled by the spark from another person.
Each of us has cause to think with deep gratitude of those who have
lighted the flame within us. --- ALBERT SCHWEITZER 1. Take five or ten
minutes to think of people who have helped you keep your life going:
someone who helped you find your reading glasses when you were hurried
and distracted; a friend who sent a supportive email when your nephew
crumpled a fender on your car; the grocery clerk who promptly swept up
the jelly jars your exuberant three-yearold knocked off the shelf; a
coworker who took over your duties when a nasty flu simply would not let
you get out of bed. 2. Focus on any feelings of gratitude these memories
evoke. Notice where you feel the sensations of gratitude as you let them
resonate in your body.

3.

Expand the circle of your awareness to gratitude for the people in the
larger community who also help keep your life going: for example, those
staffing your local hospital right now, ready to care for you if you
slip in the bathroom and have to be rushed to the emergency room. You
might include people staffing airports, pharmacies, fire stations, and
gas stations and those testing water quality at your municipal
reservoir. (For years my brother, Barry, was on call in his hometown to
drive the snowplow at 3 AM so folks could get to work at 7 AM. I know
how deeply he appreciated being appreciated for that humble service.)
Practice gratitude for the people growing your food and recycling your
garbage, for the entire web of life. 4. Reflect on your experience of
practicing gratitude and the feelings your practice evokes. Notice any
changes in your own emotions or thoughts about yourself as you focus on
experiencing gratitude.

You can set the intention to do a three-minute gratitude practice every
day for thirty days, focusing your attention on the people,
circumstances, and resources that sustain your well-being every day.
Over time, this practice will lead you to experience other positive
emotions more often, as well, and it will expand your choices of actions
to be more positive, more resilient.

The Neuroscience of the "Left Shift" to Wire In New Patterns
Neuroimaging has revealed that cultivating experiences of positive and
prosocial emotions such as gratitude, and focusing attention on those
experiences, causes an increase in neural activity in the left
hemisphere of the brain, exceeding the activity in the right hemisphere.
This "left shift" indicates a shift in the brain from a stance of
"avoid" to a stance of "approach" in responding to experience. Because
the right hemisphere of the brain develops significantly earlier than
the left and thus has more neural connections to the survivaloriented
lower brain, when it comes to processing emotions and

responding with action, the right hemisphere and its negativity bias
(engendering anxiety, depression, and shame) can block resilient action.
Because the left hemisphere is less connected to the lower brain than is
the right, it is less affected by the lower brain's orientation toward
survival. And because it can draw on memories from later in life when
our coping has (hopefully) become more resilient, the left hemisphere
can more objectively evaluate safety or danger in a new experience, and
so it tends to respond more optimistically than the right. Positive
emotions strengthen the capacity to approach rather than avoid
challenges and catastrophes we and others face. They increase curiosity
and engagement with circumstances and support more openminded,
optimistic, creative coping. They undo lingering negative physiological
responses, helping us return to our window of tolerance. The approach
stance or sense of openness to experience not only makes us feel better
but also creates a flexibility in the processing of our brains that
makes it far more likely that we will find a solution to our problems.
Focusing on positive emotions tends to fuel resilience by overcoming any
learned helplessness, moving from languishing to flourishing, building
enduring personal resources that rewire the brain in an upward spiral of
greater well-being. Focusing on positive and prosocial emotions is not
meant to bypass or suppress dark, difficult afflictive emotions, not at
all. We persevere in our practices of mindful empathy, learning to hold
and process those afflictive emotions. We deliberately cultivate
positive, prosocial emotions as a way to turbocharge the conditioning of
new circuits and new habits, new states of mind and heart, so that they
become enduring traits of resilience leading to resilient action. Jack
Gilbert counsels us in his poem "A Brief for the Defense": "We must have
the stubbornness to accept our gladness in the ruthless furnace of this
world." When we intentionally and continually evoke experiences of
gratitude, or other prosocial emotions like acceptance, patience, and
equanimity, we strengthen the parts of our brains that allow us to
respond to life events with an open heart rather than a contracted one,
with resilience and care rather than fear, with approach and acceptance
rather than withdrawal and shutting down. We get the benefit of feeling
less worry, agitation, and depression and more joy, delight,
satisfaction, and contentment.

Skill 2: Hanging Out with Emotionally Healthy Brains Dan Siegel, the
author of The Mindful Brain, once said at a conference focused on
resilience and well-being, "Why are we all here at this conference today
when we could be home learning everything we want to learn from a book?
Because our brains learn better in the resonance, in the dialogue, with
each other." Dan was pointing to an important key for positive brain
change. Neuropsychologists know that resonant interactions with others
prime plasticity in the brain. In contrast, isolation and lack of
challenge and stimulation are the enemies of neuroplastic processes and
brain health. Because our brains are so profoundly influenced, for
better or worse, by the quality of interactions we have with other
brains, it's truly smart to spend time with other people who are intent
on being and becoming resilient. Just as we can choose to engage in
practices that create new neural circuitry to support new habits of
emotionally positive and prosocial behaviors, we can choose to spend
time with others who have shown by their behaviors that they have
trained their brains toward those habits. Because our brains are so
exquisitely hard-wired to pick up the emotional state of other human
brains, we can use another person's deep joy or contentment to shift our
emotional state in their presence. This dyadic deconditioning arises
from the resonance of shared positive emotions. Again, focusing on the
positive emotions does not mean that we bypass or dismiss the dark and
difficult. Researchers have found that people who have cultivated
genuine happiness and joy experience that happiness because of a deep
appreciation and contentment with life; they feel joy no matter what.
Paul Ekman, a noted researcher and author of fifteen books on emotions,
describes his struggle with intractable anger and rages: he had three or
four "regrettable" episodes a week, by his own count, until he met the
Dalai Lama in the year 2000. Paul was part of a Mind-Life Institute
conference of Western scientists and Buddhist practitioners meeting in
Dharamsala, India, to explore different perspectives on destructive
emotions. On the third day of the conference, observers were invited to
ask questions of the Dalai Lama. Paul's twenty-year-old daughter, Eve,
asked, "Why do we get the angriest at the people we love the most?" The

Dalai Lama answered Eve's question (about expectations and the
destructive compassion of an overprotective parent) while he simply held
the hand of Paul sitting on the other side of him. He didn't speak to
Paul directly as he talked with Eve; he simply offered the gentle touch
of someone listening with compassion to another person's suffering. Paul
said he experienced his whole body filling with a radiant warmth,
absorbing the caring of the man whom many people believe to be the
embodiment of compassion in this world. Paul later reported that after
this experience, he did not have another "regrettable" episode of anger
for the next seven months --- not even an impulse. As time has gone on,
he sometimes feels the impulse of anger, but he feels no need to act on
it. It's gone. Done. His personal reactivity has changed forever.
Absorbing the Dalai Lama's deep peacefulness rewired the patterns of
neural firing in Paul's amygdala, immediately and permanently. We may
not all have the opportunity to cultivate our prosocial emotions by
holding the hand of someone as sophisticated in benevolence as the Dalai
Lama. But we can deliberately seek out people whose capacities for
prosocial behaviors are more developed than ours. We might find groups
of people gathered for this purpose in churches and synagogues, yoga and
meditation classes, and personal-growth and wellness workshops. Simply
being in connection with people who are emotionally healthy can shift
our emotional state and reprogram our circuitry. Almost fifteen years
ago, I consulted a homeopathic doctor about stress. He recommended that
when I came home after a long day of seeing patients, I brew a full pot
of hot tea and read poetry. I happened to be having six friends over for
dinner that very weekend, so I emailed them suggesting they bring poetry
to read together. That was the humble beginning of our Gourmet Poets'
Society, which has flourished for a decade and a half, with upwards of
fourteen people meeting quarterly for a potluck dinner --- with
chocolate fondue as the staple dessert --- and hours of reading poems
aloud. The themes run the gamut of the human condition --- love, death,
delusion, celebration, injustice, triumph. However poignant the topic,
there is always a buoyancy that comes from sharing tears as well as
laughter. And everyone goes home with their circuits rewired toward love
and gratitude.

There are many ways for us to rewire each other's brains, but sharing
poetry is uniquely effective. Poetry's use of words to convey emotions
through images and metaphors integrates the communication channels of
the left and right hemispheres of the brain, helping us be receptive to
the power of our emotions while simultaneously strengthening our
capacity to regulate them. Reading (and writing) poetry is a reliable
way of deconditioning old patterns of thinking and feeling, thus opening
up new neural receptivity and allowing us to change more easily. The
poet and anthologist Roger Housden reminds us: "Great poetry calls into
question not less than everything. It dares us to break free from the
safe strategies of the cautious mind. It amazes, startles, pierces, and
transforms us. Great poetry happens when the mind is looking the other
way; the heart opens, we forget ourselves, and the world pours in."

Exercise 2: Finding Emotionally Healthy Brains to Connect With These
days, more and more connection with other people happens through social
media. In rewiring your brain for resilience, it's truly more effective
to find ways to spend time in the physical presence of other people. But
if that's not possible in a busy life, or if the people you feel close
to live a great distance away, connecting by phone or email can still
rewire your brain in a positive direction. The following exercise helps
you make the most of those connections with others. 1. Identify someone
with whom you would like to share your experiences of positive emotions,
to broaden and build your resilience repertoire. Ask this person to be
your gratitude buddy or joy buddy, someone you will share resilience
building with. 2. Arrange a regular process for checking in. Once a week
for coffee? Once a month for a walk in nature? Every evening by email?
Experiment and discover what works best for both of you. 3. When you
check in, share moments of the positive emotion you're working with ---
laughter in the midst of trouble or uncertainty; contentment in the
midst of upheaval and

change; friendliness in a hectic day. Recall how you felt when you
experienced the laughter, contentment, or friendliness; notice how you
feel now as you recall it. 4. Listen to your buddy checking in: notice
how you feel hearing her experiences. It's most helpful when this
sharing stays open and receptive, and focused on the positive emotion;
this is not a time for giving advice or solving problems. 5. Notice how
you feel after checking in. Take in the good of the experience to
reinforce the rewiring in your neural circuitry. 6. Thank each other for
the positive experience. You can notice the positive emotions continuing
as you schedule the next time to check in.

Because cultivating specific positive emotions tends to lead to
experiencing a broader range of emotions in general, and experiencing
all emotions more frequently, you may notice that other positive,
prosocial emotions develop --- feelings of affection, respect, even love
for your partner --- as a result of this practice.

The Neuroscience of Connecting with Emotionally Healthy Brains People
who have intentionally cultivated the left shift in their brain (though
they might not choose to call it that) tend to have a more optimistic
approach to problems and challenges in life. They are most likely well
connected to the inner resources that allow them to cope well with the
vicissitudes of daily living. Finding ways to spend time with people who
seem to demonstrate the left shift gives you an opportunity to absorb
some of their capacities to rewire your brain. By checking in with your
buddy in this exercise, you are using your entire resonance circuit to
encourage your brain to shift to the left as well, to become more open
to experiencing positive, prosocial emotions on a regular basis and,
over time, gaining the benefits for yourself of better-regulated, more
optimistic coping.

Skill 3: Using Positive Emotions to Heal Toxic Shame Love makes your
soul crawl out of its hiding place. --- ZORA NEALE HURSTON We cultivate
positive emotions to increase our capacities to take wise and resilient
action in the world. In my work as a psychotherapist, I often see that
resilient action is completely dragged down by the undertow of toxic
shame. The next exercise shows how to harness the power of positive
emotions, positive connections, and the innate neuroplasticity of your
brain to recondition the neural pathway of shame: not to defensively get
rid of it, but to proactively rewire it. A client once asked me if I
knew anything about "swamp." I replied, somewhat flippantly, "I have a
PhD in swamp." I don't have a PhD in swamp or anything else, but I do
have a long professional career of helping folks out of the emotional
swamp that is the most powerful destroyer of our resilience: the sense
of inadequacy and failure, of feeling not good enough or unlovable that
is the territory of toxic shame. Shame is not always toxic. Healthy
shame can lead us toward actions that are resilient, as can its cousin,
guilt. Both shame and guilt can arise when we feel we are or have done
something that might exile us from our kin or tribe. Early in our
evolution, exile or shunning was a death sentence: no one could survive
alone on the Serengeti. We learn the norms of acceptable behavior
through the conditioning of others' responses to our behaviors, our
emotions, and ourselves. We learn to fit in. We internalize the values
and moral precepts of our society and culture, and our reward is the
feeling of safety that comes from belonging to that society. If we sense
we are violating those precepts, the shame and guilt we experience tend
to get us back on track. Learning to be resilient through healthy shame
and guilt is supported early on in experiences of secure attachment. We
learn to feel seen, understood, and loved for who we are, even if we do
something bad as we are learning the cultural code. Developing a healthy
pride in and acceptance of our essential, lovable self helps develop the
neural circuitry that leads to trust, openness, more learning and
growth, and more resilience. Toxic shame takes root whenever we feel
judged, criticized, rejected, or put down not only for what we do but
for who we are. If we feel we

have to be a certain way in order for somebody else to feel good about
who they are, our developing sense of self can feel ignored, uncared
for, or neglected completely. There are actually neural cells around the
heart that can feel the rupture of disconnection. The feeling of being
unlovable or "bad," of having a "hole in our heart," has some
physiological basis. When this happens, all the innate goodness we are
programmed to develop goes into exile. As a colleague of mine says, all
the eagerness and innocent exuberance with which we naturally move in
the world gets "slammed mid-pirouette." If this toxic shaming or
guilting begins early enough, continues long enough, and remains toxic
enough, we begin to smallify ourselves: the experiences build a
self-reinforcing negative loop in our neural circuitry. We begin to
perceive all of our experience through a filter of shame or guilt. When
you think you've done well on a test and the grade comes back as a
C-minus, the instant message from the inner critic is, "I told you you
were stupid!" When you slip on a rug and fall down three steps before
you catch yourself, another message comes: "What a klutz!" When you get
distracted by a phone call and burn the steaks on the grill, it's "Can't
you do anything right?" With enough negative experiences, we go into
what the clinical psychologist and meditation teacher Tara Brach calls a
"trance of unworthiness," experiencing a constant sense of failure
rather than the pride in competence and mastery that leads to
resilience. Researchers have identified four processes that take place
in the brain in the downward spiral of shame: 1. External criticism,
rejection, or humiliation or the put-downs of the internalized inner
critic shock or startle the sympathetic nervous system into a survival
response, preparing us to defend ourselves or to flee a toxic situation.
2. The shock rapidly activates the parasympathetic nervous system's
submit-collapse response, which cancels the response the sympathetic
branch set in motion. Instead of mobilizing for action --- fight-flight
--- we demobilize, collapsing or caving in for protection. 3. This
collapse can evoke implicit memories conditioned by previous
experiences. We land in the abyss of deficiency, the

swamp of feeling "bad," unworthy, inadequate, or a fraud. 4. With enough
repetition, the brain's response to these messages is to dissociate: to
go numb, check out, or disappear. If no one can find us, no one can hurt
us. We can even hide a shameful or guiltridden experience from our own
awareness --- split it off into its own disconnected memory pocket. We
can "forget" that something we experienced ever happened and act as
though nothing is wrong at all. This defensive hiding out, even from
ourselves, contributes to our psychic survival, but the cost is high for
ourselves and for those we relate to. The neural disintegration caused
by toxic shame makes it extremely difficult to mobilize ourselves for
any action at all. We undermine ourselves and close ourselves off from
the love and support that would bring us back into connection and
action. My client Richard had set out driving to his best friend's
engagement party in a pretty good mood. His job was satisfying: he was
climbing the ladder as a regional division manager of a biotech company.
His body was strong and healthy: he was one of the fastest swimmers in
his master swim class. The tomatoes were ripening robustly in his
garden. And he was making good time traveling, despite the crowded
mountain highway. He was happy for his friend Toby, who was getting
married to the woman he adored. Suddenly, Richard felt a pang inside, as
if someone had opened the door to a dark room. He could expect some
teasing by a mutual friend at the party about his two failed marriages.
Why couldn't he get it together? Richard began to slip into a cascade of
misgivings and self-doubt. Should he have tried harder? Was there
something wrong with him that caused two women to leave him? Would
everyone at the party know he was a failure? The hope he harbored of
meeting someone new at the party, having another chance, began to fade.
Even though Richard tried to switch the channel and think of something
else, or even remember the good things about himself that he was
recounting earlier, he began to sink into a black hole. His inner critic
was relentless. Who was he kidding? He'd never be good enough to meet
someone at the party today. In his fog, Richard didn't notice that the
car in front of him had stopped abruptly. He "woke up" too late to put
the

brakes on and rear-ended the car in front. No one was hurt, but he
totaled his small car and seriously dented theirs. Even though a friend
quickly came and rescued him, and everyone at the party was
understanding and concerned about the accident, Richard found it
impossible at first to take in their love and acceptance. He was sunk in
a swamp of shame. Shame has been called the "great disconnector." The
best way to crawl out of the swamp of shame is to come into connection
with another person who loves and accepts us exactly as we are, even if
we sometimes have to conjure up that person in our imagination, and then
to build on that love to come into our own love and acceptance of
ourselves exactly as we are. As my colleague Ken Benau says, "To be seen
or not to be seen; that is the question, and the answer." Richard
managed to find a few moments alone with Toby at the party and told him
what had really caused the car accident. Toby had been Richard's friend
since college, through all the dating, getting married, getting
divorced, trying again, and "failing" again. Toby knew Richard's
deep-down goodness, his sincere intentions to be kind and loving, and
his willingness to learn what was getting in the way of those
intentions. Toby also knew Richard's tendency to collapse into a "poor
me" attitude rather than an empowered feeling of "I can do this." As
they talked, Toby reminded Richard of all the trust, affection, and
respect they had shared with each other over the years. Richard could
begin to listen as Toby framed Richard's longing to be in a healthy
relationship as itself a healthy sign. "Look, man, after all you've gone
through, you're still willing to take a risk again. I'm betting my money
on you for sure; it will happen." At the end of the conversation, Toby
suggested that Richard join a men's group that he knew about, which was
focused on connecting in healthy relationships. Because Richard could
take in the sincerity of Toby's acceptance and affection for him, he
could see the possibilities for healing and awakening in the suggestion.
He was able to come out of his shame swamp and rejoin the party. Within
a few weeks he had joined the men's group and began, in effect, hanging
out with emotionally healthy brains. He also enrolled in several
workshops on being authentic in intimate relationships, learning to
focus on being his true self and seeing the true selves of other people.

You may think I'm making this next part up, but I'm not. After six
months in the men's group and those workshops, learning many skills of
healthy relating and accepting himself as a good enough potential
partner, Richard hit it off with Lucy, the sister of one of the guests
at Toby's wedding. They have now been happily married for eleven years.

Exercise 3: Healing Toxic Shame through Love and Acceptance This
exercise uses reconditioning to rewire old patterns of toxic shame. As
always when working with reconditioning, it's important to prepare
yourself carefully, to avoid reinforcing negative feelings and patterns.
1.

Settle into your own mindful empathy, your willingness to see and your
willingness to care. Evoke a sense of your wiser self. Bring to mind a
moment of your own understanding and acceptance when you had deep
compassion for someone else's struggles: when someone missed qualifying
for a state athletic tournament by two points, or when a colleague left
at home the videos he had planned to show at a regional training
meeting. Notice the caring compassion of your wiser self flowing from
your heart to his. 2. With the resource of your own compassionate
acceptance of another in the background, bring to your awareness a
memory of a small moment of your own guilt or shame. You forgot to leave
the car windows cracked when you dashed into the drugstore, you were
delayed, and your new puppy in the backseat almost collapsed from
heatstroke. At your daughter's preschool, you blurted out the news of a
teacher's cancer diagnosis in front of a group of parents. You got a
speeding ticket with a potential client in the car. Shame and guilt can
carry such an intense charge that incidents like this may not seem at
all small. If that's the case, just bring to mind the first moment or
one small piece of the experience. As you light up the networks of this
memory, small but vivid, keep the compassionate awareness of your wiser
self

3.

4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  

steady. You want to be with your experience but not in it, affected but
not infected. When this memory is vivid, bring to mind a memory of
feeling genuinely seen and deeply loved and accepted by another person
(or a pet), of being seen for real. Let yourself receive this love and
acceptance and feel it in your body. Hold both the memory of shame or
guilt and the memory of love and acceptance together in your awareness
at the same time. Or switch between the two, as you have learned to do,
always strengthening the memory of love and acceptance. When this
simultaneous awareness of the paired memories is steady, bring to the
foreground your initial feeling of understanding and compassion for
someone else who was feeling shame or guilt. Begin to direct that same
flow of love and acceptance you felt for him toward the shame or guilt
in yourself. The memory of shame or guilt is pairing with your love and
acceptance of someone else and also pairing with the self-love and
self-acceptance of your own wiser self. After a moment, let go of the
pairings and let your attention rest solely in the experience of
self-love and self-acceptance. Take a few moments to savor the resting
in this self-love and self-acceptance. Reflect on your experience.
Notice any shifts you experience from doing this exercise. Repeat this
process of reconditioning as many times as you need to in order to fully
dissolve the shame or guilt connected with a particular memory. The more
often you practice this process with specific memories, the more you
will be reprogramming those deep neural networks associated with toxic
shame. You may share this experience with your gratitude buddy or joy
buddy as a way of taking in the good of rewiring your brain toward more
emotional competence. Notice any gratitude or joy as you share.

The Neuroscience of Healing Toxic Shame with Love and Acceptance

Just that action of paying attention to ourselves, that I care enough
about myself, that I am worthy enough to pay attention to, starts to
unlock some of those deep beliefs of unworthiness at a deeper level in
the brain. --- ELISHA GOLDSTEIN As we intentionally work with the
memories of feeling bad because of who we are (shame) or because of
something we did (guilt), it's helpful to remember that implicit
memories can feel completely true in the present, with no sense
whatsoever that they are memories from the past. As we recondition, we
pair explicit positive feelings of pride or of loving, caring
acceptance, recognizing these as experiences in the present, with the
negative toxic memories that we recognize as belonging to the past. This
reconditioning can also happen in therapy; in healthy intimate
relationships; with an attuned friend, a beloved benefactor, or a
devoted partner; and in our imagination. Repeating this process
strengthens the neural circuitry until the love and acceptance become
the new normal. Sometimes what's even harder than finding the love is
taking it in. If we haven't had enough love and acceptance in our lives,
oxytocin receptors may not have fully developed in the brain: it's hard
to feel love. The repeated, deliberate calling forth of those positive
experiences, even when they are hard to feel at first, helps restore the
ability to feel connection, love, and trust. Our growing capacity to
evoke and feel love and acceptance becomes the superhighway of
resilience; old shame and guilt become the country backroad we don't
have to go down anymore.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter you have learned techniques to:
•

•

broaden and build your repertoire of emotions, thoughts, and actions by
evoking and savoring positive emotions like joy, gratitude, and
contentment that help you build deeper social bonds and increase
insights and perspectives; rewire your own brain by spending time with
others' emotionally healthy brains;

•

dissipate the charge of intense afflictive emotions by pairing them with
other, stronger, more affirming emotions and holding the distressing
emotions in a larger field of understanding and compassion.

When you integrate your feelings into all of your communication and
decision-making processes, your emotions become powerful allies in
rewiring your brain for resilience.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Developing Emotional Intelligence

I've learned that people will forget what you said and people will
forget what you did, but people will never forget how you made them
feel. --- MAYA ANGELOU

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE is a phrase used by Daniel Goleman almost two
decades ago to describe a range of skillful behaviors that allow us to
navigate our peopled world with effectiveness and resilience. Curt used
it when he channeled his anger into constructive action, meeting with
the school principal and obtaining an apology to his daughter. The two
Canadian women put it to work when they decided to trust each other with
their cars so that they could get through the snowstorm to their loved
ones. Toby used it when he expressed loving acceptance that brought
Richard out of his swamp of shame, and it helped Monica hold the grief
of her several simultaneous losses with compassion. My brother, Barry,
put emotional intelligence to work when he was willing to try a
gratitude practice to help get him through a medical crisis. In this
chapter, you will learn to apply the skills you have learned in previous
chapters in three broad-reaching exercises that use emotions as gateways
to resilient actions and to further develop emotional intelligence. This
emotional intelligence continues to move you toward the five Cs of
coping. You can trust the calm and deep, intuitive knowledge that arises
from that intelligence, which contributes to your overall clarity. You
can become more competent in navigating the complex worlds of other
people and their decision making, even when their emotions are not well
regulated. You can trust your emotional

intelligence to inform effective communication with others and to get
things handled.

Skill 1: Sustaining and Being Sustained by Love and Appreciation I first
heard this story from the mediation teacher Jack Kornfield, though I've
heard variations of it from many other sources since. When a fifth-grade
teacher's class became especially disruptive one day, throwing spitwads,
calling each other names, and shoving each other in the aisles, the
teacher demanded silence, then instructed everyone to take out one sheet
of paper. She told the students to write down the name of every other
student in the class, one name per line, down the left-hand side of the
paper. Then she asked the students to write a brief description of
something they appreciated about each student in the space next to the
student's name. Silence took over as the students concentrated on the
task. At the end of the class period, she gathered all the papers and
told the students she would give further instructions the next day.
After school, the teacher cut apart the comments, reassembling them into
one scotch-taped piece of paper for each student. At the beginning of
class the next day, she handed each student a list with twenty-three
comments of appreciation about him- or herself. The students read the
sheets --- most of them quietly, some with giggles, a few wiping tears
from their cheeks. Many of them had had no idea that they were regarded
positively by their classmates until that moment. The exercise became an
important opportunity to take in the good about themselves that their
classmates had shared and to know, too, that they were contributing to
their classmates' feelings of being nourished by appreciation. But the
story doesn't end there; nor do the lessons about emotional
intelligence. A decade later, one of the students was killed in combat
in Vietnam. After the memorial service, the father of the young man came
up to the teacher and handed her a neatly folded piece of paper. It was
the young man's list with his classmates' comments from that lesson in
the fifth grade. His father said, "They found it in the chest pocket of
his uniform the day he was killed." Overhearing that, a former classmate
came up to them both, opened her purse, and pulled out her sheet of

paper. "I've always carried this with me; today was an especially
important time to remember." We all are sustained by the love and
appreciation of others. We all need to be reminded regularly of that
sustenance. Any time we share our appreciation of another, we are using
our emotional intelligence to sustain that person, too.

Exercise 1: Carry Love and Appreciation in Your Wallet Daniel Goleman
cofounded the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning
(CASEL) to promote the teaching of skills of emotional intelligence and
emotional resilience in the classroom. This simple exercise can help you
develop these skills on your own. 1. Identify a group of people who all
know each other --- your coworkers at the completion of a project, your
monthly book club or golfing buddies, family members at Thanksgiving ---
and suggest everyone send a card or email to everyone else in the group
with a sentence or two acknowledging something they appreciate about
that person, something positive and true. You can simplify this
exercise, if you are comfortable doing so, by asking ten people you know
--- friends, coworkers, or neighbors, even if they don't know each other
--- to send you a card or email with a simple phrase or sentence of
appreciation. (You may already collect comments like this if you write
down what people have written on birthday cards or congratulatory
cards.) 2. Assemble the comments sent to you into one piece of paper you
can fold and carry in your wallet or tape to the bathroom mirror. Read
through this list of emotional nourishment at least once a day for
thirty days --- a month of steadily resourcing and taking in the good.
3. Each day, after you read through your list, notice how you feel about
yourself as you take in and savor the appreciation. Notice where you
feel any warmth or glow in your body from reading the list.

4.

Set the intention to return to this warm glow of selfappreciation as you
move through your day, checking in with yourself periodically. Pause and
remember the list (look at it again if you need to) and recall that
selfappreciation. 5. At the end of the month, reflect on how reviewing
your list of appreciations every day has strengthened your resilience in
coping with the new, the difficult, the stressful or hurtful. You may
add to the bottom of your own list an appreciation of your growing
capacities to create resilience for yourself.

This practice is especially helpful at times when your sense of
selfworth is being challenged. You're using your own emotional
intelligence to create a resource of support as you remember the
appreciation of other people.

The Neuroscience of Sustaining and Being Sustained by Love and
Appreciation Practices of self-appreciation have been shown to diminish
bouts of anxiety and depression. Taking in the love of others and
cultivating love for ourselves activate the release of oxytocin,
creating calm in the body and enhancing the neural receptivity in the
brain that allows us to learn more resilient strategies of coping. It
also provides all the benefits of cultivating positive emotions: putting
the brakes on negativity and deepening the wellsprings of optimism,
connections to others, resilience, and fulfillment (see chapter 14).

Skill 2: Using Self-Compassion to Answer the Inner Critic Kristin Neff,
PhD, suggests in her book Self-Compassion that selfcompassion is the
complement of self-appreciation, the other side of the coin. Both are
self-nourishing practices of emotional intelligence and resilience and
gateways to resilient action. Self-appreciation helps us celebrate our
strengths and positive attributes, intentions, and choices.

Self-compassion helps us recognize and use our frailties, flaws, and
vulnerabilities as opportunities for proactive self-care. We especially
need to practice self-compassion and self-care when our inner critic
starts to pummel us with harsh, negative self-talk. "What a goofball!
You can't even pay your taxes on time, let alone save ahead!" We tend to
feel compassion when we see other people relentlessly beating themselves
up or putting themselves down, but we might not be aware how many times
a day we do the same thing to ourselves. Chapter 4 includes an exercise
for generating feelings of compassion for someone else's struggles and
then directing that same flow of compassionate caring toward yourself.
In the exercise below, you learn to use the device of writing letters to
yourself to access the wisdom of your wiser self in caring for yourself.

Exercise 2: Using Self-Compassion to Answer the Inner Critic 1.

Identify a typical comment or running commentary from your inner critic
that causes you to feel bad about yourself: a habitual pattern of
self-criticism or self-contempt that derails your resilience or at least
tries to drag your efforts to be resilient through the mud. "How come
you're still trying to get approval from your dad (or wife, or son)?
Don't you know you're a lost cause? You don't even like yourself half
the time!" Write down the comment as you typically hear it. 2. Write a
letter to a trusted friend about this comment and your struggles with
it. (You won't actually mail the letter.) Describe what usually triggers
this self-criticism; your typical reactions --- body sensations,
feelings, and thoughts --- to hearing this inner voice; any fears of a
germ of truth in the criticism; your wishes and desires for
understanding and support in dealing with this repetitive pattern. 3.
Putting yourself in the place of the friend you wrote to, write a letter
back to yourself. Writing in your friend's voice, convey empathy for the
pain of being pummeled by these repetitive criticisms. Acknowledge how
hard it is to be vulnerable to this particular form of suffering.
Include an appreciation of your own wholeness and your goodness, all

your strengths, all your weaknesses, including the ones your inner
critic is currently harping on. Include your friend's love and
acceptance of you, exactly as you are, with all of your human
imperfections, and her understanding of all the events that created your
way of being and your particular flavor of the universally human inner
critic. You can include any suggestions you imagine your friend might
add in the letter; be sure to include her care for your well-being and
her wish that you find your way to wise action and relief from this
suffering. 4. After writing this second letter, put it aside for a
while. When you read it again, let yourself receive and take in the
compassion you have conveyed for yourself to yourself. 5. After you have
taken in the self-compassion from the second letter you wrote, write a
third letter, this time back to your friend, thanking her for her
support and reflecting on what you have learned from her letter. Make a
note of any new behaviors of self-care you can now follow up with, based
on the encouragement you have received through these letters.

The Neuroscience of How Self-Compassion Answers the Inner Critic
Mindful, empathic recognition of suffering you're experiencing as you
focus attention on the messages of the inner critic allows the neural
networks of those repetitive patterns to light up in the brain, making
it easier to rewire them and change your relationship to them. Even the
beginning step of focusing on a wish or desire for understanding and
support activates the parts of the brain that can begin to respond to
that wish with compassion. Neuroscientists have observed, using fMRI
scanning, that a strong compassion practice activates the left shift to
the "approach" mode of the left prefrontal cortex, and areas of the
motor cortex prime the brain to act in response to the sense of
compassion. Writing letters as though to and from a good friend is a way
to surprise the unconscious. You're evoking the wisdom and compassion of
your wiser self, and you're letting yourself hear your own intuitive
wisdom.

Skill 3: Compassionate Communication At times our habitual lenses of
perception and reactivity can make responsible speaking and empathic
listening almost impossible. Both people in a conversation can be caught
in a mind-set of "me versus you," "us versus them," or "always or
never." The differences feel intolerable, and frustrations run high.
Learning to communicate your fears and wishes to other people, and
receiving their communication about their fears and wishes in return, is
a practice of emotional intelligence that will sustain resilience for a
lifetime. When two people meet in mindful empathy, their emotions can be
expressed in a fairly straightforward way. This honesty opens the door
to perceiving another person's needs, even in a conflict, facilitating a
mutual understanding or at least a respect for differences.

Exercise 3: Compassionate Communication This exercise is adapted from a
method originally known around the world as nonviolent communication
(NVC), developed by Marshall Rosenberg, and now called compassionate
communication. To some, the method can feel structured and mechanical,
but when a conflict needs to be expressed and dealt with, it can be
worth its weight in gold. When both people become adept at the protocol,
they can identify the emotional needs that must to be addressed and
choose appropriate actions to address them. 1.

Stating the intention. One person begins the conversation with: "There
is something happening that's affecting our relationship. I would like
to talk about it. Are you available?" Mechanical! But it does close the
exits. If the listener is not immediately available at that moment
because he's out the door on the way to work, or needs to be on an
important conference call in five minutes, or is simply frazzled for the
day, he can say no, but he must agree to be available within twenty-four
hours. The speaker never has to nag or pursue once the agreement to meet
has been made.

2.

Creating the conditions to be heard. Choose a time and place where there
will be no distractions or interruptions. With the two sitting
face-to-face, the speaker states the topic in one sentence, and the
listener repeats the topic back word for word. The listener then asks,
"Is there more?" That's it. No commentary, no rebuttal, no resistance,
no incredulity. This method completely prohibits any shame, blame, or
name-calling. Safety and mutual respect are the priorities. 3. Speaking
and listening. The speaker then begins sharing her experience. The
listener agrees to listen respectfully until the speaker is done. The
speaker frames the experience along the following lines: "I felt really
hurt when I perceived (or thought or believed) you were flirting with
Sandy at the block party last night." She acknowledges any of her own
subjective impressions or thoughts that may have contributed to the
experience. The listener listens, repeats the statement word for word,
so the speaker feels heard: "You felt hurt when you thought I was
flirting with Sandy at the block party last night." The listener
expresses no defensiveness, no editorializing, no retaliating, no
sharing of his experience. It can be much harder to be the listener than
the speaker! The speaker continues until she is done, focusing on the
feelings and needs underneath the facts of the events. Rather than
express the problem as a thought --- "I feel as if you're not interested
in me anymore" --- she tries to get down to the feeling underneath ---
"I'm worried, and I'm scared." Getting to the heart of the matter
usually takes far less time than one would expect when the focus is
placed on the feelings driving the speaker's own behaviors. 4. Summary
of concern. The listener gives a brief summary of the entire concern,
and the speaker clarifies until both can agree on a clear statement of
it. In this case, it might be: "When you experience me paying attention
to other people and not paying enough attention to you or to us, you're
worried that I don't love you as much as I did, that I'm not really
there for you."

5. The request for change. The speaker articulates the request that
would address the emotional need underneath: "I need to hear from you
that you still love me; that you're in this 100 percent." She then
identifies three things she is willing to do herself to address her
emotional needs, for example: "I will check in with you at least once in
the coming week to hear how you feel we're doing as a couple." "I will
remind myself that I am loved by you before we go to the football game
with Sandy and Jim two weeks from now." "I will pull you aside and speak
to you right away the next time I experience any worry about your
behavior." The speaker identifies three things the listener could do
that would help address her emotional needs, such as: "I ask that you
spend five minutes with me every night this week telling me three things
you appreciate about me." "I ask that you include me in at least one
conversation you have with Sandy in the coming month." "I ask that you
spontaneously give me a big hug and tell me you're glad to see me at
least once in the coming week." The speaker and listener each choose one
of the three behaviors to do in the specified time period. The requests
must be for changes in behaviors (not changing personality or character,
but behavior) that are positive (specifying what is wanted rather than
what is not wanted), specific, measurable, and set in a specific time
frame, so that both speaker and listener know when they have been
accomplished. 6. Following through. As the pair implement the change
requests, the speaker is responsible for acknowledging and showing
appreciation when a request for change has been met. If the change
didn't address her emotional need after all, she can use the method
again to get clearer and more on target. The listener then takes his
turn, using the same formula that lets him create the conditions to be
heard, communicate his feelings and needs, and present his six requests
for change. If each person does one new behavior every week for a year,
the two will have instituted more than

one hundred positive changes in their relationship in that year. Pretty
resilient!

The Neuroscience of Compassionate Communication The mechanical formula
of this communication tool prohibits the shaming, blaming, and
name-calling that might otherwise activate the threat response in either
person and preempts the consequent reaction --- either a counterattack
or withdrawal and stonewalling. When we're not feeling threatened, the
prefrontal cortex is not hijacked by a threat response or by the
defenses to that perceived threat. The prefrontal cortex stays active,
using the resonance circuit so we can listen to and empathize with the
other person in order to reach a resolution. Learning to stay open and
respond to requests for changes in behavior strengthens confidence in
our ability to resolve complaints and conflicts. That reconditioning in
turn further strengthens the functioning of the prefrontal cortex.

Pulling It All Together The skills of emotional intelligence you have
learned and applied in this chapter allow you to relate to yourself and
to others through compassionate communication and connection. Operating
from this base of emotional well-being allows you to move naturally into
the five Cs of coping. •

•

You can return more quickly to calm and equanimity --- to your window of
tolerance --- no matter what is going on around or within you, and no
matter how you initially reacted (following old patterns). You can see
more clearly what needs to be done and how to effectively do it. As the
functioning of your right hemisphere becomes more integrated with the
functioning of the left, your feelings are more integrated with your
thoughts. You have more gut intuition and the energy of your passions to
draw on, as well as more skill at analyzing your situation and planning
your actions in response.

•

•

•

The "left shift" you trigger by cultivating positive and prosocial
emotions shifts your brain to an "approach" stance, making you readier
to reach out for help rather than carrying the burden all by yourself.
As you become more competent at navigating your own emotional storms and
dismantling your emotional walls, you also become more skillful at
relating to other people's difficulties. You can be affected by other
people but not infected. You can apply this resilience immediately in
more direct, honest, effective communication to reach understanding and
solve problems. The growing competency helps you become more confident:
whatever storms you face, you can cope.

PART SIX

SHIFT HAPPENS: RECOVERING RESILIENCE THROUGH REFLECTION AND RESPONSE
FLEXIBILITY

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Using Reflection to Identify Options

Between a stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our
power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our
freedom. The last of human freedoms is to choose one's attitude in any
given set of circumstances. --- VIKTOR FRANKL, Austrian psychiatrist,
survivor of Auschwitz

WHEN A BUDDY at a summer barbecue accidentally spilled a beer all over
Darron's new blue jeans, Darron didn't react with annoyance as he might
have done some months before. Instead, he deftly responded, "No worries!
These jeans need a good washing anyway." For most of us, it takes
practice and rewiring of the brain to be this flexible in our responses,
especially when faced with bigger troubles: To be able to say at the
loss of a job, "Maybe I need to look at the direction my life is heading
anyway." Or, if the bank is threatening to foreclose on the house, "It's
time to think through our finances again." Or, on being told about
soaring blood pressure, "It's time I learned more about taking care of
my health." Rather than remaining mired in thoughts that see such life
events as disruptive --- which they certainly are --- or traumatic ---
which they certainly can be --- we can choose to take them as cues to
learn new responses: to find ways to respond to a trigger or a stressor
with new behaviors rather than out of automatic, reactive habits, to
shift perspectives, create options, and choose among them wisely.
Researchers have found that people who exhibit high degrees of response
flexibility also exhibit high degrees of resilience. Flexibility in the
neural circuitry of the prefrontal cortex allows them to vary their

responses to life events depending on their judgment of what will work
best now, not simply on what has worked before. Response flexibility is
the essential neural platform from which we can choose to cope
differently, more adaptively, and more resiliently. It is the
neurobiological basis of resilience. If you have practiced the skills
presented in previous chapters, you have steadily created more neural
flexibility in your brain. The exercises in chapters 16--18 teach you
skills in reflection: noticing and naming patterns, shifting
perspectives, modifying patterns and creating options. They create
pathways within the brain that will allow you to greatly enhance your
response flexibility. This chapter focuses on reflection and options.
You have to be able to see clearly what's what before you can make wise
choices and changes in your behaviors. Exercises in mindful empathy
strengthen the prefrontal cortex in its capacities to generate steady
awareness, clear reflection, and deep self-awareness, even in the face
of all the issues you don't want to look at, the things you don't want
to see as true. Empathic self-awareness allows you to clearly identify
your patterns of response as patterns of response and to take your
reactivity to any moment of experience as a cue to practice rewiring
your brain. Chapter 17 explains how to use the processes of new
conditioning, deconditioning, and reconditioning to monitor and modify
those patterns of response. The rewiring creates more flexibility in
your neural circuitry so that you can shift perspectives and challenge
your encoded beliefs about the absolute truth of the way things are.
From this fresh vantage point, you can discern options and choices that
were invisible before. In chapter 18 you learn to disengage yourself
from any conditioned neural circuitry that would automatically send you
down the same old pathways and block your resilience. You cultivate the
capacity of discernment --- considering wisely which choices will work
best in the current circumstances. The response flexibility thus created
in the brain allows wiser, more creative choices and behaviors.

Using Reflection for Day-to-Day Resilience It's all well and good to
become mindfully aware of moment-to-moment experience when sitting
quietly on a meditation cushion at home or at a peaceful meditation
retreat, or when we have a few moments at our desk

or on the front porch to reflect on our current state of affairs. It's
not so easy to maintain that calm awareness when we're in the throes of
meeting the unexpected: when our job is suddenly outsourced or our
twenty-year-old son is asking us to post bail for his arrest for petty
theft. We practice mindfulness specifically to strengthen the capacities
of the prefrontal cortex to reflect and see clearly no matter what is
going on. One way to begin is through the practice of noticing and
naming, which keeps the prefrontal cortex engaged and allows us to stay
calm as emotions flare up. This practice of noticing and naming lays the
groundwork for shifting perspectives and discerning options when the
going really gets tough.

Skill 1: Noticing and Naming Creates Options Years and years ago, I was
on a two-week vacation with my friend Sara in the Canadian Rockies; we
were hiking, biking, and driving the Icefields Parkway through Banff and
Jasper National Parks. One sunny morning, I had neglected to fasten my
bike securely on the bike rack of the car; ten miles down the road, it
flew off onto the highway. Hitting the road at 60 mph, the front wheel
was badly skewed, making the bike unrideable. I flipped out. My friend
was calm and patient. No one was hurt; the wheel could probably be
fixed; it was a beautiful day in a beautiful part of the world. Sara's
steadiness helped me notice, name, and thus manage my own anxiety about
the wheel not being fixable and spoiling our trip. I put my hand on my
heart; we breathed together deeply, and her steadiness helped bring me
back into equanimity. That recovered equanimity helped alleviate my
guilt about my carelessness spoiling our day. It also helped me
surrender and accept the situation as it was. The guy at the bike shop
wasn't as empathic. "This is just a bump on a pickle," he told me. But
he did guarantee he could fix the wheel in four hours. As Sara and I
settled ourselves at a nearby lake for a leisurely picnic, I began to
reflect on the event more deeply. Maybe the bike-shop guy was right. In
the bigger picture, was this really such a big deal? Would I be upset
about this five years from now? Next week? By dinner? Stepping back and
reflecting helped me put the whole event into perspective. What was, was
just fine.

Coming to an inner peace and acceptance of what was happening allowed me
to reengage with Sara. The chance to relax and talk for four hours,
rather than racing each other up and down hills on our bikes, was a
luxury. By the time we picked up my repaired wheel, we realized it was
one of the best times of our trip.

The Neuroscience of Why Noticing and Naming Creates Options Sara's calm
helped me come back into my own window of tolerance. Through my insula I
could notice the physiological sensations of the anxiety in my body;
through the connection to safety and trust in my friendship with Sara, I
could activate the release of oxytocin in my brain and calm myself down.
By evoking the mutual compassion in our shared resonance circuits, I
could look at the episode with more kindness toward myself. By calmly
focusing my attention on my anxiety in the moment, I activated my
anterior cingulate cortex, enabling it to focus on other reactions that
were beginning to cascade in response to my initial reactions: the fear
that the wheel might not be fixable, my guilt at spoiling our trip. My
insula and anterior cingulate cortex were feeding information into my
prefrontal cortex. By naming the experience, I was activating the
prefrontal cortex to reflect on the meaning of the experience of this
bump on a pickle, strengthening my brain's capacity to make sense of it.
My prefrontal cortex could draw on memories explicitly encoded by my
hippocampus of previous moments of coping: knowledge of what I had done
or what others would do in situations similar to this. Through the
shared reflection and brainstorming with Sara, I could begin to discern
options and choose how we would cope with the snafu. I was strengthening
my response flexibility.

Exercise 1: Noticing and Naming to Create Options 1. Imagine you're
walking down the sidewalk of a busy street in your neighborhood. You
notice a friend walking toward you on the other side. You wave and call
out "Hello!" but the friend does not respond. Notice your own
split-second

reaction to that lack of response: a contraction in your body, a drop in
energy. Notice whatever thoughts might begin to cascade in response to
your body's reaction. Maybe you think, "Hmm, that's unusual. I'd better
try again." Or, "Whew! He has a lot on his mind. I wonder if I should
even bother him?" Notice any reactivity to those thoughts. "Gee, he
seems a little stuck-up today." Or "Oh, no! What have I done wrong?"
Notice whether your thoughts follow a pattern that you have noticed
before, such as feeling bad about yourself or wanting to reach out even
more. 2. Now imagine that your friend sees you and, on his own, waves
and calls out "Hello!" to you. Again, notice your own split-second
reaction to his connecting with you: maybe a smile, an uplift of energy.
Bring awareness to any shifts in your body, notice any shifts in your
thoughts: "He noticed me!" Or "I'm glad we weren't disconnected after
all." As you reflect on your experience, notice whether your thoughts
follow a pattern that you have also noticed before, perhaps of relief or
gratitude. 3. Take a moment to name the reactions and the patterns you
discovered, with compassion for any reactions that may have been
triggered by the noticing. With every moment of practice in noticing and
naming, you are strengthening your prefrontal cortex. And by pausing to
do this, you are conditioning your brain to create choice points, giving
yourself the chance to respond with more flexibility and choose a
different response the next time.

Deepening Our Skills in Reflection When our awareness is steady enough,
we can focus our attention on our reactivity as soon as it happens. We
can begin to use mindful empathy immediately to notice patterns. This
sets the stage for rewiring them, which in turn creates more response
flexibility in our neural circuitry. Our brain has already encoded
millions of moments of experience into thoughts, ideas, beliefs, and
rules about who we are and how the world works. Those encoded beliefs
and rules filter our perceptions now,

moment to moment. Some of them are accurate and helpful, especially if
our early learning from experience was guided toward clear seeing,
taking responsibility, and making wise and skillful choices; if we had
role models for facing reality without flinching; if we learned from
others early on how to acknowledge and face up to our responsibilities
and problems; if we saw for ourselves the value of doing one scary thing
a day and developing competencies, even through mistakes. Some of our
thoughts, ideas, and beliefs, of course, are not so helpful. Some
perceptions can be quite distorted, especially if our early learning
from experience was shaped by rules, assumptions, and projections that
are not, in fact, representations of who we truly are or reliable guides
to how the world actually works. For example, thoughts such as the
following are simply not true in any objective sense: "I never finished
high school, so no one will ever hire me." Or "My dad was right; I'll
never amount to anything." Or "What's the point of trying? The rich only
get richer, and the poor only get poorer." These self-limiting thoughts
can completely derail our sense of competence and resilience, leaving us
caught in suffering. Negative thoughts can be so self-reinforcing that
they can block any new learning, any new choices or options. Identifying
our patterns of conditioning leads to the clarity and insight we need to
begin to change them.

Skill 2: Naming Patterns as Patterns Mindful empathy allows us to be
present to the experience that is happening in the moment, aware of it
but able to step outside it. With practice, we can notice any thought as
a thought, any pattern of thoughts as a pattern. We can notice any
feeling as a feeling, any cascade of feelings as a cascade. The same is
true for any state of mind, even multilayered, richly complex (tortuous)
states of mind; for any process of the brain --- planning, organizing,
evaluating, worrying --- and for any story that we've told ourselves
since we were five, or twelve, or since we got married or divorced. We
can know that any view, no matter how forcefully compelling or
stubbornly held in this moment, is not --- does not have to be --- true
in all moments. We can be aware of changes and inconsistencies in
ourselves: sometimes I think this way, sometimes I don't. I'm thinking
or feeling this way now, but I wasn't ten minutes ago or yesterday. We
can appreciate the power of the human brain to generate

the complex, comprehensive stories that it does and still realize that
what we're seeing is not the ultimate truth but tracings, or the
entrenchment, of patterns of neural firing in the brain. Mary, a student
in one of my meditation groups, told me this story. The afternoon after
her first meditation retreat, she found herself getting into a very
spiritually incorrect snit because all the washers in the local
Laundromat were full when she wanted to do her laundry on the way home.
It took less than a minute to stir herself into a full snarl of "Why
can't people do their laundry some other time!" before she remembered to
pause, perceive, and reflect. She realized that all the washers were
being used because a local Girl Scout troop had just come out of camp,
and two of the mothers were valiantly trying to cope with two weeks'
worth of laundry for twenty-seven ten-year-olds. Mary might have gone on
home in a less cantankerous but still slightly disappointed funk, but
one of the mothers graciously found her an empty washer in the back.
Getting to do her laundry after all gave Mary a chance to notice her
emerging chagrin at her self-absorption and the time to get curious and
explore what had just happened --- over nothing! On retreat she had
learned a specific form of mindful empathy called the ABCs of
mindfulness: to be aware, to be with, with compassion. As Mary put her
clothes in the washer, she applied these ABCs to her snit. She reflected
on the response that started the chain reaction. It wasn't even a
complete thought, just an internal exclamation of "Oh no! I can't do
what I want!" She became aware of her immediate response: a flare of
resentment at someone else's laundry getting in her way. So she was able
to step back and ask herself, "Since when do I have the right to get
angry just because someone else has needs, too, and I might have to wait
my turn? What's this anger at feeling thwarted?" By the time the washer
started the first spin cycle, Mary was beginning to see a pattern of
getting angry when she felt thwarted: road rage at stalled traffic when
she was already late to work; a pissy moment when the store where she
always bought fresh pasta had run out and she had to go all the way to
another store to get some (as though, she thought, that's a hardship
when 10 percent of the world's women have to walk three miles to get
drinking water every day). By the time her clothes had gone through the
second rinse and spin cycle, Mary could simply be with her anger and
notice that her pattern of

experiencing an instant flare of anger at being thwarted was a frequent
one. It was a deeply conditioned and often unconscious response by now.
Nobody else even had to be involved except as a catalyst to her own
reactivity. As Mary moved her clothes from the washer to the dryer, she
found the compassion to see that any pattern of response, including her
pattern of responding to being thwarted with anger, is only a pattern
that can be changed. By the time her clothes were dry and ready to fold,
she could let go of exploring the pattern for the time being and return
to the simple, calm awareness she had experienced while on retreat.

The Neuroscience of Naming Patterns as Patterns When we become fully
aware of any phenomenon --- a feeling, a thought, a mental state, a
pattern of behavior, a view, a belief --- as Mary became aware of her
pattern of response of anger at being thwarted, we light up the entire
neural network of that phenomenon: the entire constellation of body
sensations and impulses, the pleasantness or unpleasantness of the
feelings, thoughts, and the beliefs about ourselves for having that
experience. That awareness and lighting up of the network of the pattern
allows you to rewire it if you choose. When we shift our full awareness
of that integrated state to a full awareness of another integrated
state, as Mary did when she shifted back to the calm she had experienced
on retreat, we are shifting among entire neural networks of various
states of being, not just our conscious thoughts about them. Noticing
and naming the various states of being, as well as noticing and naming
the shifts among them, keeps the prefrontal cortex of the brain engaged,
so that we can step back and reflect on them as patterns or states that
can be shifted. We no longer have to be embedded in them or wholly
identified with them. When we're not tangled in commentary, we can find
a calm center, the eye of the hurricane. We use the process of
deconditioning to begin to find the space among the states of being, the
choice points where we can choose how we want to relate to these states
of being and intentionally shift among them.

Exercise 2: Naming Patterns as Patterns

1. Take ten to fifteen minutes to identify five different states of
being that inform your views or perspectives on things. Examples include
being lonely, discouraged, down; being friendly, warmhearted, generous
in spirit; being exuberant, energized, ready to tackle an army; being
thoughtful, contemplative, in a reverie; being interested, curious,
openminded. As you identify these different states, make sure one of the
five states of being is your wiser mind or your wiser self. This state
of compassionate reflection can help you apply the ABCs of mindfulness
to all the other states you are identifying. When we first become
compassionately aware of our habits and filters of mind, the parade of
realizations can seem like one horror show after another. So many ways
we've behaved can make us cringe now: the disappointment or hurt we've
caused, or the failures we've experienced. It takes great courage and
compassion to become aware of relational goof-up 173 or
remorse-to-the-core episode 89. Refresh your experience of your wiser
self as often as you need to in order to stay steady, able to notice and
name. 2. Sometimes it's helpful to think of people who fully embody
these states of being in order to evoke them in our awareness more
clearly: people we know, literary characters, historical figures,
creatures in film or fantasy, ourselves at different ages and stages of
development. They may be people who embody being cantankerous, grouchy,
irritable; being playful, delighted, happy; being caring, compassionate,
committed; being critical, judgmental, complaining; being focused,
clearheaded, wise. 3. Brainstorm states of being with a friend. The
relational resonance creates a mental play space between the two of you
to generate more ideas. You can probably come up with at least twenty.
4. When you've identified at least five different states of being that
could inform your views or perspectives, practice shifting among them.
Just as you can walk around any piece of furniture in your home and see
it from different angles, you can walk around any phenomenon or event in
your life

and see it, and your experience of it, from different angles, from
different states of being that inform different perspectives. Focus on
one of these for a few moments, then shift to another. 5. Notice that
you can shift your awareness among these different views. Begin to
notice different states as you shift among them throughout your day.
Notice them, name them, reflect on whether they are true and useful to
you, and then choose to shift to another state or view. You're
conditioning your brain to practice that shifting.

This exercise harnesses the capacity of the prefrontal cortex to see any
phenomenon as a phenomenon, to help you identify any state of being that
informs your perspectives and views as simply one state of being. With
practice, you can identify the perspectives through which you tend to
filter your experience most often and then choose to respond to life
events from perspectives that are more flexible, more adaptive, and more
resilient.

Skill 3: Recognizing Opportunities to Shift Old Patterns and Create
Options My client Shirley told me this story about preparing her taxes
last spring. She began early in the morning, and within thirty minutes
got caught in an old mind-set: "This is confusing; this is overwhelming;
this isn't workable. I don't know what I'm doing; I never was good at
numbers; I can't do this!" Because Shirley had been practicing a form of
compassionate reflection for more than a year, she noticed her state of
mind. That noticing broke the automatic pattern of her reactivity. She
noticed her annoyance at her state of mind. She quickly realized that
being caught in this state wasn't helpful. She also realized that she
didn't have to stay caught in the old mind-set now. Shirley took a walk
around the block to clear her mind, came back to her desk, and took
another five minutes to create a different mind-set for herself. Could
she use preparing her taxes as an opportunity to practice? Shirley
brought her mindful empathy to bear on the issue, noticing every moment
that she stayed in her wise mind --- open-minded and curious

about how her mind was responding to the task of preparing her taxes.
She noticed and named moments when she was learning something new --- a
changed rule about depreciation, a better way to categorize her
expenses. She also noticed and named moments when her mind began to
contract in the face of something she didn't know. She did call her
neighbor Tom, a retired accountant, for advice three times that
afternoon, but she managed to finish her taxes by dinnertime. She also
noticed her sense of pride in mastering the task that had threatened to
overwhelm her that morning, enjoying the deepening trust in herself and
her practice; she noticed her gratitude that she noticed her initial
patterns of response and took them as a cue to practice. The noticing
and naming kept her prefrontal cortex functioning well and brought her
out of confusion into clarity.

The Neuroscience of Recognizing Opportunities to Shift Old Patterns and
Create Options By framing every moment of experience as an opportunity
to practice noticing and naming, we are breaking a previously
conditioned automatic pattern of response that carries us along in old
automatic patterns of behavior. Creating opportunities for awareness and
discerning choice points is essential to being able to choose a
different response. When we recognize an opportunity to practice mindful
empathy, we have activated the capacities of the prefrontal cortex to
reflect, to ask, "Is what I'm feeling, thinking, or doing right now
skillful or unskillful, effective or ineffective, an efficient or a
costly use of resources?" We are conditioning a new habit in the brain
of mindful (and compassionate) reflection that enables us to create new
options going forward.

Exercise 3: Recognizing Opportunities to Shift Old Patterns and Create
Options 1.

Identify five situations in which you might be triggered to respond from
an automatic conditioned pattern: it's after midnight, and your spouse
hasn't called or come home; you receive a notice from the IRS in the
mail; you're due for an annual physical checkup or visit to the dentist;
you just ran a

2.

3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  

red light; your boss dismissed as irrelevant a project you had worked
hard on and felt was significant. The next three times events like these
occur, even though you might be feeling strong emotions at the same time
(notice and name those, too!), use the perspective of your wise mind or
wiser self to practice pausing, noticing, and naming what's happening.
Practice noticing, reflecting, and discerning what you are feeling,
thinking, and doing before you decide what to do next. Notice whether
viewing this event through the lens of the wiser self shifts your
perspective of the event or creates any choice points for responding
differently. Recall the views of the different states of being you
identified in exercise 2. Experiment with applying these views to the
event. Notice any shifts in your view of the event caused by shifting
perspectives. Notice how viewing the event from these different states
of being is different from viewing it from the perspective of your wiser
self. Experiment with applying the different views or perspectives
generated by different states of being to one particularly troubling
event in your life: a child custody hearing, accidentally hitting the
neighbor's dog as it dashed in front of your car, your luggage being
lost at the beginning of a two-week vacation in a foreign country, half
of your savings lost in a real estate deal gone sour. As you apply
several different states to one particular event, notice any shift in
your perceptions, interpretations, feelings, or thoughts about yourself.
Notice which states allow your patterns of response to be more open and
flexible. Always practice inhabiting your wise mind, or wiser self, as
one of the perspectives from which you're viewing the situation. Set the
intention to develop a new habit of perceiving life events, especially
stressors, as opportunities to practice waking up and growing up, to
notice patterns of response and states of being so that you can begin to
create choice points and respond differently, more resiliently.

As the Buddhist teacher Pema Chödrön advises: The Buddhist teachings are
fabulous at simply working with what's happening as your path of
awakening, rather than treating your life experiences as some kind of
deviation from what is supposed to be happening. The more difficulties
you have, in fact, the greater opportunity there is to let them
transform you. The difficult things provoke all your irritations and
bring your habitual patterns to the surface. And that becomes the moment
of truth. You have the choice to launch into the lousy habitual patterns
you already have, or to stay with the rawness and discomfort of the
situation and let it transform you, on the spot.

Your strengthened prefrontal cortex can do that transforming on the
spot.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter you have learned mindfulness
skills that allow you to: •

• •

step back and reflect on experiences that are triggering old, reactive
responses. When you notice and name those responses, you are
strengthening your prefrontal cortex in its function of self-awareness,
which is essential to creating new options. recognize moments when you
can shift your state of mind or behavior and practice the reflection and
seeing clearly that will allow you to do so. develop response
flexibility in your brain --- the neurobiological platform of
resilience.

In the next chapter you will learn how to use the capacities of your
prefrontal cortex to reflect on, shift, and transform any patterns you
choose.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Shifting Gears: Modifying Our Patterns of Response

The truth is that our finest moments are most likely to occur when we
are feeling deeply uncomfortable, unhappy, or unfulfilled. For it is
only in such moments, propelled by our discomfort, that we are likely to
step out of our ruts and start searching for different ways or truer
answers. --- M. SCOTT PECK

I WAS DEEP in a worrisome thought one day, not paying attention to where
I was walking, when I blithely stepped ankle-deep into the wet cement of
a freshly laid crosswalk. I was startled, then horrified. Negative
reactions started cascading inside me, including, "How careless! How
could you have been so asleep at the wheel!" I was just about to fall
into an all-toofamiliar pattern of berating myself for being so clumsy
when another inner voice piped up, "Wait a minute! So I was preoccupied!
I'm sick and tired of winding up feeling lousy about myself when I was
just unconscious for a moment. For once I'd like to just deal with
something and not make it all about my being clumsy." I stood there in
the cement, noticing all these different reactions cascading. Years of
practice helped me realize I did have a choice about how I was going to
handle the situation. I lifted my feet out of my stuck shoes and stepped
onto dry ground as construction workers headed over to help me. As I
lifted my shoes out of the cement, I tried for a little bit of
compassion for myself. "Shit happens! I'm probably not the only person
on the planet who made a mistake today because I wasn't paying
attention. Sure, I'm a little embarrassed in front of these guys, but
that

doesn't mean anything more about me than I just wasn't paying
attention." I walked over to a convenient outdoor faucet on the wall of
a nearby apartment building to wash my shoes and feet. As I began to
have some hope that I might even save my shoes (I did), I noticed
feeling some pride that I was coping well --- with the outer event and
with my inner reactions to it. By the time one of the construction
workers gave me some paper towels to dry my shoes and feet, my
prefrontal cortex got it together and it dawned on me: "Yes, shit
happens. Life is happening in this way in this moment. But 'shift'
happens, too." I could open to the lesson of the moment: choosing to
shift my perspective allowed me to cope resiliently. The experience also
taught me, once again, that shifting perspectives and responding
resiliently is possible in any moment at all. One of the hallmarks of
resilience is to be able to shift gears and recalibrate our responses
quickly. Once we notice the automatic patterns that are filtering our
reactions and thus shaping our responses, as Shirley did with her
anxiety about her taxes, or as I did with my harsh selfjudgment about
stepping into the wet cement, we can choose to immediately shift those
perspectives in ways that will rewire them. In his book The Mindful
Therapist, Dan Siegel uses the phrase "monitor and modify" for noticing
and then initiating changes in perspective and behavior that will
harness our neural plasticity to accomplish that rewiring. Each of the
three exercises below uses one of the three processes of brain change
--- new conditioning, deconditioning, and reconditioning --- to expand
the brain's capacity to respond flexibly. As always, use the practice of
mindful empathy to safely "hold" and catalyze the rewiring of your
brain.

Skill 1: New Conditioning to Shift Perspectives I saw the movie The
Sound of Music five times as a teenager. The wisdom of the song "My
Favorite Things" appealed to me long before I had ever heard of positive
psychology, discerning the wholesome from the unwholesome, cognitive
behavioral therapy, or affirmations: When the dog bites, when the bee
stings, When I'm feeling sad,

I simply remember my favorite things, And then I don't feel so bad. Many
of us have learned to think of something positive to redirect our
thoughts when we're feeling bad. Sitting in the dentist's chair, we
might remember our son's scoring the winning goal in soccer last week.
Anxious about stepping out on a stage to deliver a public talk, we
redirect our thoughts to the fun we had with our friends on our last
vacation. Almost every day, new findings in neuroscience are published
that validate the power of positive thoughts, or even different
thoughts, to interrupt automatic, negative thoughts, activate different
circuits in our brains, and shift our view. The practice of refocusing
our attention, shifting our view, and eventually reframing our
experience, over and over, strengthens the brain's capacity for response
flexibility and thus resilience.

Exercise 1: Shifting Perspectives by Replacing ANTS with APTS This
exercise uses new conditioning to replace automatic negative thoughts
(ANTs) with automatic positive thoughts (APTs). 1.

Identify one habitual negative thought you would like to replace. You're
sick of it, like I was when I stepped ankledeep in wet cement and almost
fell down the rabbit hole of calling myself clumsy. 2. Brainstorm
several alternative thoughts to counter your negative thought. The
alternative may be a directly opposite thought: for example, "I'm lazy"
can be countered with "I'm motivated when I'm interested." The
alternative may be in a different realm of thought entirely: "I'm lazy"
may become "I'm so looking forward to Greg and Diane coming over on
Saturday; I wonder what I'll cook?" Or it may be simply a thought about
someone who loves you that lets you take refuge in feeling that love, or
remembering a moment of feeling "Sure I can!"

3.

When you notice the habitual negative thought arising, practice using
your alternative thought immediately.

The point of this exercise is not to block any future thought of "I'm
lazy." It's to interrupt the cascade of self-deprecation that
immediately and reflexively follows that thought. Sending the brain in
another direction gives it a few moments to recalibrate itself.
Cultivating an immediate positive response to a negative thought creates
the space to shift perspective, supporting more flexibility and
resilience. And, every time we do it, we are conditioning our brain for
more resilience.

The Neuroscience of New Conditioning to Shift Perspectives Harnessing
the neuroplasticity of your brain --- choosing to learn or condition
new, more adaptive patterns of response --- is choosing to become more
competent at being resilient. The longer you dwell or ruminate on an
old, negative thought, the more deeply grooved it becomes in your
circuitry. Perseverating usually does not solve the problem; it actually
reduces the flexibility in our thinking that could solve the problem.
"Switching the channel" by redirecting your attention to more positive,
optimistic thinking helps shake the brain loose of the old habit. You
can learn examples of more positive thoughts --- specific content ---
from role models, teachers, coaches, therapists, and friends. By
repetition and perseverance, your brain learns the process of making the
new thoughts the new normal. The new states of mind and thoughts become
enduring traits of mind and behavior. Repeatedly shifting perspectives
--- regardless of the content --- creates more flexibility within your
neural circuitry to keep doing so. Choosing to shift becomes the new
habit of the brain, and perceiving yourself as making choices not only
shifts the content of specific patterns but also shifts your perception
of yourself as choice maker.

Skill 2: Deconditioning to Shift Perspectives The only real voyage of
discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes but in having new eyes.

--- MARCEL PROUST This quote from Proust has been one of my favorites
for a long time. It points to the necessity of creating new perspectives
--- learning to see things differently, with new eyes --- in order to
open our minds and heart to new discoveries. But modern neuroscience
shows that one of the best ways to keep our brains open to new learning
and new ways of seeing things is, in fact, to seek new landscapes. All
of us have learned to seek new landscapes to clear the cobwebs from our
minds: we go on vacations, retreats, weekend hikes, sightseeing trips.
The latest findings in neuroscience demonstrate that taking ourselves
out of a familiar environment, even temporarily, wakes the brain out of
patterns of perception that have become routinized. New scenery and
scenarios activate new neural circuits in our brains. New experiences
open us up in ways that can lead to new learning and new views, to
seeing the "big picture": they can help us shift the processing of our
experience to the defocusing network. We loosen the grip on our old ways
of thinking and create more flexibility in the brain to more easily
shift our perspectives. We can practice shifting perspectives in small
as well as large, lifechanging ways. Years ago I was hiking in the
backcountry of Yosemite National Park, seeking new landscapes to get a
new perspective on some old problems. Seven miles along the trail, I
came upon a park ranger with a small group of hikers sprawled on the
ground, each of them completely absorbed in observing one square foot of
ground from a height of six inches. Each person was simply focusing
attention on everything he or she could see in that square --- plants,
lichens, bugs --- and everything that was happening in it for five
minutes. The ranger called this an exercise in "belly botany." I was
astonished when I tried it myself. I saw life, death, stillness,
aggression, and beauty, all on a tiny scale. I was even more astonished
when I looked up again and saw the eight-thousand-foot peaks all around
us. My view expanded exponentially: every square foot of these hundreds
of square miles of wilderness was full of the things I had been present
to in my small bellybotany patch. This quantum shift from micro to macro
scales can quickly change our view of our place in the larger scheme of
things and open our minds to new possibilities. You can try this
exercise almost anywhere.

Exercise 2: Using Belly Botany to Shift Perspectives 1.

Find a one-square-foot patch on a favorite beach, in a meadow, in a
forest, in your own backyard, in a flower box, or in a city park. Lie
comfortably on your stomach so that your eyes can focus on your patch
from a height of approximately six inches. Come into a sense of
presence. Defocus on any sense of self: concentrate your attention on
your patch and notice any activity, any stillness, any change of the
light and shadows, the relationships of things one to another; notice
harmonies of colors and shape; notice oddities. 2. After five minutes
(or more), stand up and focus your attention on the larger landscape.
Notice the sudden change in scale. Maintain the defocusing on your sense
of self in this larger view for a few minutes, noticing the shapes and
colors, harmonies, and oddities in what you see. 3. Bring your attention
back to yourself and notice any changes in your view of yourself, any
new perspective on the place of your life among the small and the vast.

With practice, you can access this tool of shift any time you need to
gain a fresh perspective. Focusing attention away from yourself
encourages a defocusing in the circuitry in your brain that allows new
views and new perspectives to emerge.

The Neuroscience of Deconditioning to Shift Perspectives When we focus
our awareness on things at a small scale and then shift our awareness to
the vast, the shift in focus in the visual cortex helps us begin
switching between the focusing network in the brain, which engages with
experience more concretely by focusing on specific objects, tasks,
activities, or perspectives, and the defocusing network, which engages
with experience more diffusely from a spacious, "simply being"
perspective. The shift to the defocusing network shifts our processing
from the structured and the concrete to the more fluid and unfolding.
This creates

a neural receptivity that allows new perspectives and new insights to
emerge out of a deeper, intuitive knowing. The subjective experience of
these moments of insight often feels like an "Oh!" or "Aha!" moment and
carries with it a "truth sense": "Oh, now I get it; this is what's
true." From our new viewpoint, we can make new choices.

Skill 3: Reconditioning to Shed Old Identities Development involves
giving up a smaller story in order to wake up to a larger story. ---
JEAN HOUSTON A few years ago my client Karen shared with me a
distressing insight about one of her conditioned patterns of
relationship, or rather, her lack of pattern. On a rare sunny afternoon
over the weekend, she had been reading a book in Golden Gate Park in San
Francisco. She noticed a young woman pushing a young girl on the swings.
The two of them were laughing and talking and seemed to be having a lot
of fun together. Karen assumed they were a nanny and her charge and went
back to reading her book. After fifteen minutes or so, Karen overheard
the young girl say, "Mommy, Mommy! Let's go see the puppy!" As the woman
and girl skipped away to meet a Dalmatian puppy and its owner, my client
saw --- with some horror --- a huge hole in her understanding of play in
relationships. It had never occurred to her that this woman and young
girl were mother and daughter. Nothing in her life experience had told
her that this kind of playful interaction could happen between a mother
and daughter. Her own experience of being with her mother, or even with
the mothers of her childhood friends, while adequate in many other ways,
hadn't included much lighthearted play or fun. Karen's distress was
acute. She wanted to have her own family someday. But her realization
that she was missing this template or internal working model of a
healthy parent-child relationship was jarring. What kind of mother would
she be if she hadn't grasped that playing with her own child could be
fun? We had to bring a lot of mindfulness and empathy to this dilemma.
Karen had to anchor her investigation of what was missing in her
experience, and thus in her conditioned view of herself, in the mindful

empathy of her wiser self. Her longing to have children was sincere, and
her dedication to her own growth was fierce. She had to find ways to
create new experiences of herself with children that would supply those
missing experiences of play and fun between an adult and a child. She
had to choose to repair her conditioned messages about motherhood with
the new views and perspectives she would gain from those new
experiences. Her wiser self would have to hold both her wholesome
yearning to be a loving mother and the deep grief over her missed
experiences and conditioning about motherhood and play. We began to look
for ways that Karen could spend time with young children and with adults
who knew how to play with them. These included hanging out on play dates
with married friends and their own young children; volunteering at a
local preschool one afternoon a week; and helping to coach a girls'
soccer team. As she engaged in these new experiences, she worked on
always allowing the new views of herself that they brought to counter
the old views, and always holding the process in the compassionate
reflection of her wiser self. It took about a year and a half for Karen
to completely recondition her sense of self in relationship to young
children and to form the sense that she herself could become a playful,
loving mother. She told me at the end of that phase of our work
together, "I didn't even know this piece of the puzzle was missing until
that day in the park. But, somehow, I knew I could recover it. I mean, I
could learn to be playful and enjoy being playful, by doing it over and
over and over. I guess somehow it's sunk in, and now. . . well, now I
know I can be playful myself and stay open to being playful with a
little child. I'm not afraid anymore that I won't know how to do this
with my own kids. It's a miracle."

Exercise 3: Reconditioning to Shed Old Identities 1. Focus your
attention on being present in this moment. 2. Call to mind your wiser
self: the wise, resourceful, capable embodiment of your truest self.
Anchor your awareness there. Evoke this experience of comfortably
inhabiting your wiser self at every level of neural encoding: a visual
image; positive states of ease, trust, and well-being that your wiser
self embodies; the sensations and movements of your body

3.

4.  
5.  
6.  
7.  

that help ground the sense of your wiser self; the name you use for your
wiser self; the thoughts that arise about yourself as your wiser self.
You're lighting up the integrated networks of your wiser self as a
resource. Identify a negative perspective you have of yourself that you
identify with as "you" and that you would like to change or rewire.
(Positive, wholesome beliefs, of course, we strengthen as resources.)
Recall a specific experience that embodies this perspective. After you
identify the perspective or belief or identity, park that identity in
the background of your awareness. From the perspective of the wiser
self, imagine yourself in a new identity, embodying the desirable new
views and beliefs. Begin to imagine the thoughts you would think and the
actions you would take from this new identity. Imagine the emotions you
would feel; let yourself feel them now in your body. You're lighting up
the neural networks of the new identity you will embody. Parking both
the wiser self and the new identity on the periphery of your awareness,
take a moment to evoke the felt sense of the old identity you have
chosen to rewire. Light up as many of the neural networks as you can by
remembering the thoughts, the feelings, and the states of being of this
old identity. Evoking the mindful empathy of the wiser self, bring both
the old remembered identity and the newly imagined identity into your
awareness simultaneously. Either steadily hold both the old and new
views of self in your mindful and empathic awareness at the same time,
or mindfully alternate between the two many times. Whenever you need to,
you can take a moment to refresh your awareness of your wiser self.
Refresh the sense of the new identity too, as many times as you need.
When it seems as if the sense of the new identity, is consistently
stronger than the old, let go of the old identity and rest your
awareness solely in the new identity, held in the larger awareness of
the wiser self.

8.

After a few moments of anchoring your awareness only in the new
identity, reevoke the old identity once more, and notice whether that
network lights up as strongly as before.

Sometimes we can notice a significant difference, sometimes only a
slight one. With enough practice and repetition, the old identify will
fade. Experiencing success in rewiring an old identity, even once,
empowers us to practice this reconditioning again and again.

The Neuroscience of Reconditioning Old Identities When we deeply believe
any idea about ourselves, we can become so closely identified with that
belief that we don't even see it as a construct: we see it as an
integral part of our nature, not a choice or pattern that was learned
and can be unlearned. Sometimes a pattern is established so early that
it gets encoded only in implicit memory; we don't even know we believe
it. That view of the self has become invisible to us. When we create new
experiences that evoke a new perspective of ourselves and then pair that
new view with an old one, as Karen did, and as we continue to create new
experiences that evoke and reinforce the new view, the neural encoding
of both the old view and the new view repeatedly falls apart and
reconsolidates. Over time, the new view completely rewires the old.
Eventually we may even have trouble remembering the old view of
ourselves, or remembering the power that identity once had in
determining our behavior. The practice of separating from old
identities, dismantling the neural encoding that underlies them, is
crucial for increasing our capacity for flexible response. We can
identify so strongly with old, less resilient coping strategies that
relinquishing them feels like losing ourselves. We need to recondition
or rewire the old view so that we can shift to a more empowered, more
resilient sense of self. That shift generates the neural flexibility we
need in order to create more options of response. The psychologist and
philosopher Jean Piaget distinguished between assimilation --- adding
new experiences to an old construct of ourselves without disturbing the
construct --- and accommodation --- rewiring the circuitry so that we
dismantle the original construct. What we're attempting here is
accommodation through reconditioning. The process

is not always comfortable: we often don't bother to try it until some
pain or anguish compels us to. Rachel Naomi Remen testifies to this
truth: Crisis, suffering, loss, the unexpected encounter with the
unknown --- all of this has the potential to initiate a shift in
perspective. A way of seeing the familiar with new eyes, a way of seeing
the self in a completely new way. The experience that I have in watching
people with cancer is that the more overwhelmed someone is at the
beginning, the more profound the transformation that they undergo.
There's a moment when the individual steps away from the former life and
the former identity and is completely out of control and completely
surrenders, and then is reborn with a larger, expanded identity.

The more practiced and competent we become at using our tools and
resources to transform our sense of self through reconditioning, the
more courageously we can tolerate the growing pains of this process of
brain change and rewiring for resilience.

Pulling It All Together In this chapter you have learned that: •

•

•

once we've experienced the confidence that we can monitor and modify our
perspectives, our beliefs, our patterns, our behaviors --- that we can
intentionally shift an entire state of being, even once --- we create
the most significant shift of all, from a helpless "poor me" to an
empowered "I" that knows it can generate options and choose among them
wisely; this empowered "I" can move more fully toward the five Cs of
coping, as when I stopped my slide into my habit of self-criticism over
stepping into the wet cement and chose to shift my perspective toward a
healthy pride in how well I was coping; the same thing can happen as you
become more empowered and competent at replacing an automatic negative
thought that threatens to disempower you with an automatic positive
thought, or when you skillfully connect to resources, as Karen did when
she empowered herself to connect to new experiences with children in
order to rewire her old, sabotaging beliefs about herself.

This empowered "I" allows you to find the calm and the courage to
discern wise choices and respond flexibly. We use our calm, clarity, and
connections to generate the competence and courage of resilience.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Discerning Wise Responding Flexibly

Autobiography in Five Short Chapters I I walk down the street. There is
a deep hole in the sidewalk. I fall in. I am lost . . . I am helpless It
isn't my fault. It takes me forever to find a way out. II I walk down
the same street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I pretend I don't
see it. I fall in again. I can't believe I'm in the same place But, it
isn't my fault. It still takes a long time to get out. III I walk down
the same street. There is a deep hole in the sidewalk. I see it is
there. I still fall in . . . it's a habit. My eyes are open, I know
where I am. It is my fault.

Choices

and

I get out immediately. IV I walk down the same street There is a deep
hole in the sidewalk. I walk around it. V I walk down another street.
--- PORTIA NELSON

NEW PERSPECTIVES HOLD THE KEYS to our growth and freedom. Choosing to
harness our brain's neuroplasticity and rewire our conditioned responses
and perspectives toward flexibility and resilience means we get to walk
down another street. We don't have to, but we can choose to. Now we have
the neural capacity to perceive options where we saw none before,
discern which options might be most productive, and choose wisely among
them what course of action to take.

Skill 1: Creating Options, Discerning Choices, Choosing Wisely Every
moment brings a choice; every choice has an impact. --- JULIA BUTTERFLY
HILL We have already learned to refrain from shame and blame about
resilience gone awry or about past decisions gone awry. Here we teach
ourselves to refrain from self-critical faultfinding about that past.
The acknowledging of fault in stanza 3 of "Autobiography in Five Short
Chapters" entails taking responsibility. We take responsibility for past
experiences to learn what options might make the most sense now, not to
derail our resilience by judging ourselves harshly for them, or to
unthinkingly continue them in order to avoid negative judgments about
ourselves if we change course now.

Rather than beating ourselves up, as I began to do about my bicycle
flying off the back of the car or blithely stepping into wet cement, we
open up a reflective inquiry: "Well, why did this happen? What do I need
to pay more attention to here?" Shifting the perspective from "How could
I?" to "Well, actually, why did I?" allows us to come to a clear
comprehension of what's happening and what needs to change. In this
sense, good judgment means forming an opinion objectively, based on
learning from past experiences, and staying open to new experiences
without shutting ourselves down by devaluing, criticism, or
condemnation. A couple of months after Darron demonstrated his response
flexibility at the party by calmly realizing he could simply wash the
beer out of his jeans, the bank notified him that he was two months
behind on his mortgage payments and that it would begin proceedings to
foreclose on his home if he didn't send in the amount he owed within
thirty days. Darron had been laid off from his job as a foreman on a big
condominium construction project six months before, when the downturn in
the economy sent shock waves through the housing industry. He and his
family had responded flexibly enough at first: they were getting by on
savings, his wife's income from working at the local deli, and Darron's
picking up small remodeling jobs here and there. When Darron's mom
needed emergency dental surgery a few months later and his parents
couldn't pay for it, to Darron the only choice seemed to be to foot the
bill and figure out later how to keep up with the mortgage payments. By
the time Darron came in to see me after he got the foreclosure notice,
he realized he needed to walk down another street. Darron and his wife
looked over their finances for the past twelve months and projections
for the next twelve months. Darron met with a mortgage broker at the
bank and, with the help of a financial planner, began to educate himself
about options. With me, he explored his own history of putting his
parents' needs above his own and the effect of that conditioning on his
decision making. Darron, his wife, and two brothers met one Saturday
afternoon to brainstorm ways to come up with the mortgage payments in
the next thirty days. Even impossible-seeming solutions, like giving up
the house and moving in with Darron's parents, were on the table. As
more options

were put forward than Darron could have come up with on his own, he
began to have more confidence that the dilemma could be solved. In
sessions with me, Darron came to realize that he had developed a
strategy of giving to his parents --- in the forms of time, attention,
work on their house, and money for bills when times were hard --- in
order to "earn" their time, attention, and love in return. When his mom
asked for help in paying for her dental surgery, Darron agreed out of
habit, without thinking through the effect on his own finances. We had
to dig deeper to find the root causes of his decision to skip two
mortgage payments in a row. What became clear was Darron's deeply
implicit expectation that, after all he had done for his parents, they
should know when he needed help without his having to ask for it.
Darron's unconscious hope that his parents would pay back the money for
the dental surgery without his having to ask overrode his own common
sense about asking for repayment so that he could pay his own debts. We
examined Darron's core values, the moral compass that had helped guide
him to these choices and actions. Darron told me that among his core
values were being kind to other people, being helpful, and being
generous. He came to see that there was no need to change those values,
but he needed to refocus those values more on himself and his own
family, not exclusively on his parents. We also framed his reluctance to
assert himself and let his parents know when he needed help as an old,
conditioned survival strategy --- if I don't bother you, I'll get to
stay on your good side --- masquerading as a core value. Darron began to
realize that taking care of his own family was also a core value and
that he could begin to act accordingly. I asked Darron to review the
various options he had generated in his family brainstorming, while
keeping in mind his value of taking better care of his family and
breaking his old habit of not asking for help. When we came to the
possibility of asking his parents to repay the money he had given them
for the dental surgery within thirty days so that he could square up his
mortgage payments, he burst into such a spontaneous grin that we both
laughed at the suddenness and the sureness of it. Darron later told me
that he had felt so sure of this decision that he went to his parents'
house the next afternoon, taking along both of his brothers for moral
support, and made his request for repayment politely

but assertively. To his surprise, his parents actually seemed relieved
and anxious to help. Darron had not only changed his own behaviors; his
certainty that he was doing the right thing catalyzed change in his
parents, too.

Exercise 1: Creating Options, Discerning Choices, and Choosing Wisely 1.

Assess what is happening as clearly as you can. This includes getting
all the facts about the situation you are being asked to cope with;
getting expert opinions and perspectives from competent, resilient
others; seeing clearly the circumstances and past decisions that
contributed to the situation; and assessing your own patterns of
resilience to see what's helpful and unhelpful to you now --- where you
are open to new learning and where you might be defended against new
information or in denial. Assessment requires resources --- of time,
help from other people, open-mindedness. Assessment is essential to
cultivating response flexibility; without it, we have no options except
to react as we have reacted before. 2. Identify options. Brainstorming
is a useful tool of deconditioning that can free our brains temporarily
from old rules and preconceptions. Creating neural receptivity within
the brain allows new associations or linkages to form spontaneously and
come to consciousness. Here's one approach: (a) Ask a small group of
friends to meet with you to identify options. The open-minded exchange
of ideas, and the associations they lead to, will spark more ideas than
brainstorming by yourself or with just one other person. (b) All of you
generate as many ideas as you can as quickly as you can, without any
judgments or evaluations allowed. You may notice that the intuitive side
of your brain can generate ideas as quickly as the analytical side. Let
your brain generate new ideas by association with what has already been
suggested.

3.

4.  
5.  
6.  

<!-- -->

(c) Once your group runs out of steam for generating new ideas,
    categorize the ideas by topic, still without judgment or evaluation.
    Identify holes in the sidewalk and walk around them. Identify any
    self-limiting beliefs or automatic patterns of response (see
    exercises 2 and 3 in chapter 16) that might have contributed to the
    situation you find yourself in or that might be derailing your
    ability to generate and choose among options now. When you can
    clearly see these habits of belief, these inner saboteurs, take the
    clarity as a cue to walk down another street --- to adopt new
    perspectives, especially the perspective of your wiser self, that
    can approach the situation with optimism and courage. Identify the
    core values that will guide you in choosing among the options. We
    all live by a moral compass, conscious or unconscious, that guides
    our choices of behavior. It is part of the conditioning we get from
    our parents, peers, teachers, coaches, role models, and culture and
    society at large about what's right or wrong. Your wiser self, for
    now, embodies the highest values of that moral compass. Consult your
    wiser self. Find a time and place where you can come into a sense of
    presence and have a heart-to-heart talk with your wiser self. State
    your dilemma and the options you have generated by yourself or with
    your friends. Simply listen to the deep wisdom of your wiser self
    speaking to you --- not necessarily yet about which options to
    choose, but about which values matter to you most in choosing. It's
    this "truth sense" that will guide you in choosing options. Bring
    your awareness back to the present moment; register this guidance
    from your wiser self in your awareness as you make your choices.
    Discern which options best serve your values. With a clear
    understanding of your core values to guide your choices, you can
    begin to discern which of the options you've generated best fit
    those values: which ones feel right and which feel "off," are a less
    ideal match, or don't fit at all. As strange as it may sound after
    this long, mindful process,

sometimes you can help your brain figure out which option is best by
tossing a coin. It's not that the coin toss makes the decision for you,
but in the split second when you realize which way up the coin is
landing, you can experience a quick gut reaction: "Uh-oh; this isn't
what I wanted," or "Phew! I'm glad it turned out this way." That is the
voice of your intuitive wisdom. 7. Choose wisely. This is the natural
culmination of the steps above. There's always the possibility that you
would choose differently if you had more information or if circumstances
changed and opened up more options. You are aiming for the wisest choice
possible in the current circumstances.

Whatever choice you make and whatever the consequences, you have created
more response flexibility in your brain. That is the neurobiological
platform of resilience that will allow you to make wiser and wiser
choices in the future.

The Neuroscience of Creating Options, Discerning Choices, and Choosing
Wisely The prefrontal cortex makes its decisions by integrating input
from many parts of the brain. It uses both the processing of the
focusing network, which can focus on facts and details, and the
processing of the defocusing network, which can link old ideas together
in new ways. The prefrontal cortex has to weigh input from the rational
left hemisphere of the brain with input from the emotional and intuitive
right. The prefrontal cortex draws on many different explicit memories
encoded by the hippocampus with the intuitive wisdom or gut sense of the
wiser self. It may even use social support to activate the release of
oxytocin to create enough safety and trust in the brain to make a
decision possible. The stronger the functioning of the prefrontal
cortex, the more thoroughly we can assess all the elements of what is
happening, understand what needs to happen, identify options and blocks
to those options, identify the values that we want to shape our
decision, and then decide what is the best thing to do.

Pulling It All Together You have now completed a series of exercises
that train your brain to respond more flexibly to life events. The new
neural flexibility allows you to: • • •

reflect with awareness on habitual behavior patterns and perspectives;
use the three processes of brain change to monitor and modify those
perspectives; shift or rewire them for more resilient responses; assess
what is happening, identify options, identify and shift blocking beliefs
(that is, to walk around the holes in the sidewalk), identify core
values you want to inform your choices, decide which options best serve
those core values, and then choose among your options wisely.

This new response flexibility in your neural circuitry is the
neurobiological platform of resilience. When you learn that you can be
flexible, you move steadily toward the five Cs of coping: remaining calm
in a crisis, as I learned to do with my bent-out-of-shape bike; seeing
clearly, as Mary learned to see her pattern of anger in response to
threat; staying connected to resources to create options, as Darron did
with me, his family, with experts; becoming competent, as Shirley did
when she took getting caught in an old mind-set as a cue to practice;
and deepening courage, as Karen did to give up an old identity and grow
into a new one. Having developed your capacities for response
flexibility and strengthened this neurobiological platform of
resilience, you have just one more step to take on the journey to rewire
your brain for more resilience. In the next chapter, you will learn
tools to integrate the entire brain more fully, creating an enduring,
stable platform for lifelong resilience.

PART SEVEN

RECOVERING RESILIENCE THROUGH SIMPLY BEING

CHAPTER NINETEEN

Resting in the Wisdom of Being

Wisdom tells me I am nothing. Love tells me I am everything. Between the
two, my life flows. --- SRI NISARGADATTA

IN 1971, THE APOLLO 14 astronaut Edgar Mitchell became the sixth human
being to walk on the moon. On the return flight to Earth, this
MIT-trained aeronautical engineer experienced a radical shift in
consciousness. As Mitchell watched the Earth "rise" from behind the moon
into the black emptiness of space, he suddenly saw the preciousness of
this blue jewel of a planet we call home and the oneness of everything
living on it. Mitchell's epiphany about the interconnectedness of all
life on Earth led to his founding the Institute of Noetic Sciences two
years later to research how shifts in consciousness such as the one he
experienced --- the noesis, or deep inner knowing, that comes in the
form of epiphanies, revelations, and sudden insights into the true
nature of reality --- could be cultivated. Neuroscientists are now
beginning to unlock the mystery of what happens in the brain in these
moments of epiphany and what could explain the radical shifts in
consciousness that they lead to. They are also beginning to see that
extraordinary states of consciousness can lead to a greater neural
integration, greater harmony, and greater synchrony in the physical
brain. This deeper brain integration can create a platform of resilience
that is almost unshakable. It gives the brain the flexibility and
bandwidth to cope with anything at all.

Much remains to be learned. The neurological mapping of shifts in states
of consciousness is very new. But techniques for shifting consciousness,
drawn from the Buddhist contemplative tradition, have been validated
through thousands of years of practitioners' experience, and related
practices are used in contemporary Western psychology. In this chapter
you will learn to use tools that help create the conditions for
epiphanies, allowing you to experience insights into your own true
nature and to move toward the deeper brain integration that rewires the
brain for maximum resilience. First, you use the awareness you have
cultivated through all the exercises in this book to notice how the five
Cs of coping are being integrated into your behaviors of your personal
self --- resilient behaviors that you used the focusing network of your
brain to condition or recondition. Then you use the defocusing network
of the brain, used in the process of deconditioning, to temporarily
suspend the prefrontal cortex's guardianship of that personal self and
open your awareness into a state of reverie that allows new ideas and
new associations about the self to emerge. That state of reverie creates
opportunities for "Aha!" moments, epiphanies or intuitive insights about
yourself and your patterns of coping. Those insights can radically alter
the ways you think about yourself. You then open your awareness through
the defocusing network and the process of deconditioning even further,
to an experience of the unconditioned, as though you were dropping below
all the layers of conditioning into what Dan Siegel calls a "plane of
open possibilities." The insights and epiphanies you experience in that
plane, which many people experience as the nonself (see chapter 3), can
radically rewire or recondition your established patterns of self,
especially negative ones. Using the prefrontal cortex not just to switch
between the focusing and defocusing networks, between the self and
nonself, but also to fully integrate the experiences of self and nonself
can rapidly integrate all the levels of functioning of the entire brain.
Brain scans of people who have experienced this process of neural
integration confirm that radical changes take place in the specific
patterns of neural firing that encode a particular response. The scans
also show that neurons all over the brain fire at a higher frequency
(processing signals more rapidly) and in greater synchrony (with greater
coordination). The whole brain itself becomes more resilient.

Awareness of the Whole Self We learned in chapter 3 to develop the
awareness that all emotions and sensations of the body are transient, as
are all contents, processes, states, and traits of mental activity.
Awareness --- the state of mind that observes all of that coming and
going as coming and going --- is itself not coming and going. Our
awareness of that greater awareness may come and go; most of us lose
awareness of awareness in our busy daily lives. But the awareness itself
is ever present, always ready to be rediscovered any time we choose to
focus our attention. When we find the space between the stimulus and the
response, we alter the rhythm of our doing; we wake up and create space
for being. Awareness is the knowing, not the contents that are known. We
can experience it as a vast sky that can hold all the clouds and storms
moving through it. We usually pay more attention to the contents of
clouds and storms than to the sky that contains them. As the Zen
teaching tells us, when we are in a contracted state of mind, it's like
looking at the sky through a pipe. With mindfulness of awareness, we
become adept at putting down the pipe and looking at the whole sky
again. In this chapter you will learn to alternate between the awareness
of the self managed by the prefrontal cortex and the awareness of that
spacious, unconditioned nonself that allows you to see the sky whole
again. When the experiences of self and nonself are mindfully
integrated, we enhance the integration of the whole brain and tap into
the deep, intuitive wisdom of our whole self.

Exploring the Contents of the Personal Self We begin the process of
shifting from the focusing network to the defocusing network, and from
the focusing on the self to the defocusing of nonself, by using the
prefrontal cortex to focus our awareness on our experience of the
moment, basic mindfulness and acceptance of what is, including our basic
sense of self. We know that all snowflakes share the same basic,
six-sided crystalline structure, yet no two snowflakes are identical. We
know that human thumbprints share the same basic whorl patterns, yet no
two human thumbprints are identical. Human brains share the same neural
structures and mechanisms for processing experience and information,

yet no two human brains are identical, either. All human selves share
elements of personality style, roles, identities, beliefs, and values,
yet no two selves are identical, ever. The prefrontal cortex is
instrumental in maturing the sense of a unique self as the brain
develops, recognizing patterns of self as "I," even as those patterns
evolve over time. With the reflective selfawareness of the prefrontal
cortex, we can begin to notice and name the patterns of memory that
constitute our personal history, patterns of coping that underlie our
style of personality, and patterns of conditioning --- some chosen, some
circumstantial --- that inform our identities and our values.

Exercise 1: Exploring the Contents of the Self Even as They Evolve 1.
Settle into a sense of presence and stillness in your body, a sense of
calm and ease in your mind. Evoke a sense of mindful empathy to create a
state of awareness and acceptance of any contents of self, any pattern
of conditioning, any facet of your personality that may emerge. For this
exercise, you are focusing your awareness on aspects of your resilient
self, but other aspects may come into consciousness as well. 2. Begin by
recollecting moments when you experienced each of the five Cs of coping,
in turn. Start with calm: call to mind a moment when you remained calm
in a crisis or were able to return to a state of calm after a crisis.
Perhaps your building was burgled or your car was stolen. You were able
to connect to your resources, see the situation clearly, feel competent
in how you were handling things, and return to your window of tolerance
fairly quickly. Savor this moment of calm: let yourself really feel it
in your body for a minute or two. 3. Next, recollect a moment of
clarity, when you saw clearly what was happening and what needed to
happen next. This memory could be a recent one --- from this morning or
this past week --- or it could be a memory from last year or in your
early twenties or back in the third grade. Perhaps it was

a moment when you saw a disaster coming --- financial or relational ---
and were able to see right away what needed to be done to avert it.
Again, light up the networks of this moment of clarity: let yourself
savor it fully in your body for a minute or two. 4. Repeat this process
with each of the remaining three Cs in turn. Recall a moment of being
connected to resources --- either people or other resources --- and
calling on people who knew better than you did how to handle a
situation, such as dealing with a belligerent customer. Recall a moment
of competence --- the sense of "Sure I can!" or "Wow, I just did!" Maybe
you drew on the skills you've cultivated for setting boundaries and
negotiating change to handle the disruptive customer yourself. Recall a
moment of courage facing a difficulty while remaining anchored in calm,
clarity, connection, and competence. That might mean simply showing up
day after day to do what needs to be done. You always have at least one
memory of each of these capacities to draw on: it doesn't matter how
small, only that it is genuine. 5. As you light up the network of each
memory in turn, savor the sense of it in your body for a minute or two.
For each of these memories of your resilient self, notice how the brain
creates associations to additional memories on its own. You don't have
to make those associations happen: in fact, you probably can't keep them
from happening. These associations may give you even more information
about yourself and how you cope. 6. If you wish, cycle through memories
of your five Cs of coping a few more times. Notice how easily your brain
can shift from the contents of one memory to the contents of another.
Notice your awareness shifting from the contents of the self to the flow
among those contents, which you experience as your "self." Notice how
the sense of self evolves: it's fluid, not fixed. Notice how the sense
of self emerges: it's multiple, not monolithic. You can ask certain
aspects of the self to step into the background and other aspects, like
your wiser self, to step forward. Notice your

brain's neuroplasticity in action as you do this. You can choose how to
focus your awareness; you can choose how to modify and shift your sense
of self.

The Neuroscience of Exploring the Contents of the Self The mature
prefrontal cortex uses the focusing network of the brain to hold the
sense of self together --- the brain structures of "selfing." A stable,
secure sense of self is essential to our well-being; a neural swamp is a
flimsy basis for building resilience. But with the steady practice of
mindfulness, we see that experiences of self may also be fluid. The self
is an ever-changing flow of patterns, none of which are, or should be,
fixed forever. (Neural cement is not a good platform for building
resilience, either.) As the American architect, inventor, and futurist
Buckminster Fuller said, "I seem to be a verb." That is a more accurate
description of our "self."

Gaining Insights into the Self through Reverie When we feel stable and
secure enough in the flow of ourselves, we can safely relax the mind's
grip on the self and shift into a mode of consciousness in which the
sense of selfing temporarily dissolves. We do this fairly regularly in
daydreams or in a reverie, where our awareness can just float. We
similarly let go when we relax and fall asleep. The state of reverie
arises from the brain's defocusing mode of processing. In this state,
rather than being occupied with analysis and problem solving, the brain
is free to meander and wander: to dream if we're asleep, to play if
we're awake. The metaphorical, holistic right hemisphere of the brain in
particular is free to find new associations between one idea and
another, or one memory and another, to connect the dots in a new way.
The state of reverie creates the conditions for new insights --- "Aha!"
moments --- to pop up into consciousness out of the blue.

Exercise 2: Relaxing in a Reverie; Gaining Insights into the Self

1. Find a place where you can settle into a calm state of body and mind.
Resting on the sofa is fine; a walk in the woods or along a beach works,
too. 2. Allow your brain to let go of the constant constructing of your
sense of self that we do through planning, remembering, worrying, and
comparing. Let yourself relax into the awareness of simply being, into a
sense of having nowhere to go, nothing to do, no one to be. 3. Allow
yourself to stay absorbed in this reverie for anywhere from ten to
thirty minutes. 4. When you feel stable in the defocusing mode of the
reverie, you may choose to bring into this reverie a mishap in coping, a
moment of less-than-resilient response to a situation. Simply notice and
name that moment, and then let it percolate in the reverie. Your brain
is not solving problems, just playing. 5. With practice and growing
trust in the process, you may suddenly gain a new insight into that
mishap --- a new angle, a new perspective, a new take. Notice both the
content of this insight and the phenomenon of the epiphany itself.
Notice the "truth sense" that accompanies it: "Oh, that's right!" or "Of
course!" It's the intuitive rightness of the insight that lets us know
an epiphany has occurred. 6. When you come out of your reverie, jot down
some notes about it. Writing down the experience shifts the processing
of the insight from the right hemisphere of the brain, where it was
generated, to the left hemisphere, where it can be articulated in words,
and helps integrate it into your circuitry.

As you relax into this state of reverie, you need not fear losing
yourself completely. None of the hard work we've done to establish a
resilient sense of self is ever lost. (Unfortunately, we can't so easily
lose an unresilient sense of self, either.) If there's any sense of
alarm, the brain will reconstitute your sense of self, resilient or
unresilient, literally in a heartbeat. If your brain doesn't generate an
epiphany during your

first practice reverie, be patient. Cultivating a sense of openness,
curiosity, and interest, without judgment, is helpful.

The Neuroscience of Relaxing into Reverie, Gaining Insights into the
Self Neuroscientists have discovered that even when the brain is not
focusing on anything at all, neural activity does not cease. Neurons are
still firing all over the brain in what is called a default network. The
default mode of operation of our brain seems to be to search for
something new to focus on, something to play with, something to make
associations to. This is why daydreaming can be such a wellspring of
creativity: the defocusing creates a mental play space where new ideas
and associations can link up. By defocusing, we deflect the attention of
the left hemisphere of our brain from analysis of a problem and shift
into the processing mode of the right hemisphere, which specializes in
creating original associations, connecting the dots in new ways. This
creates the conditions for a new insight to emerge in our awareness, for
our own deep knowing to come to consciousness. Through fMRI scanning,
neuroscientists have discovered that the anterior superior temporal
gyrus, a small fold of brain tissue located in the same part of the
right hemisphere that connects the dots, is unusually active just
seconds before an epiphany. It's possible that this activity is the
neural correlate of insights occurring in the brain.

Dissolving the Self into the Nonself of Simply Being We join spokes
together in a wheel, but it is the center hole that makes the wagon
move. We shape clay into a pot, but it is the emptiness inside that
holds whatever we want. We hammer wood for a house, but it is the inner
space

that makes it livable. We work with being, but nonbeing is what we use.
--- LAO-TZU Translation by Stephen Mitchell Exercise 1 involves using
our awareness to explore the contents of the personal self and how those
contents can come and go, shift and evolve. Exercise 2 offers practice
in coming into a state of reverie that creates a mental play space where
we can "dissolve" the grip of our conditioned patterns and generate new
insights into the self. The exercise below offers a technique for
shifting into the defocusing mode of consciousness again, to allow our
awareness to expand further, free of the limitations of any
conditioning, into an experience of the unconditioned. In this state, a
sense of nonself or simply being can arise. This vast, unconditioned
consciousness is not a philosophical concept but an embodied experience.
In the steady experience of spaciousness or formlessness, we experience
the plane of open possibilities. Nothing is formed; anything can be
imagined; anything can happen. The experience of nonself or simply being
can catalyze powerful epiphanies about the true nature of the self. It
can also generate a frequency of brain waves that can help integrate the
entire brain and lead to more resilient functioning. By focusing our
awareness on awareness, we are giving the brain something to do as we
gently encourage it to do less and less. As awareness approaches
nondoing, only being, the mind can come to rest in unconditioned
awareness, with only awareness happening. Focusing attention on
breathing in this exercise gives the brain an anchor in reality, even as
everything else disappears. There is only being, and our awareness of
being. A note of caution: Using the process of deconditioning to
dissolve the self into the realm of the unconditioned involves repeated
deconsolidation and reconsolidation on a large scale. As in other
exercises that use these processes, it is important to create a safe
context for them. In this exercise, we first come to an awareness of our
internal secure base (see chapter 8). From this inner base of resilience
and security, letting go of the carefully constructed, hard-won personal
self doesn't drop us into an existential void but leads us into
wholeness.

A second note of caution: The defocusing network involved in this
large-scale deconditioning tends to be more active in the right
hemisphere of the brain than the left. It's important to pay attention
to your experience to avoid being overwhelmed by the negativity bias of
the right hemisphere. If you do experience a sense of being dropped into
a void or black hole, bring your awareness back to connecting with a
true other or your true self, with your wiser self, or with your own
innate goodness. Shift your attention to what is stable and supportive
to bring you back into your window of tolerance; draw upon your refuges
and resources, as described in chapter 5. When you feel stable in your
awareness of your experience in the present moment, and reassured and
comfortable, it's safe to resume the practice.

Exercise 3: Dropping into the Unconditioned: Dissolving the Self into
the Nonself 1. Sit comfortably. Allow your eyes to gently close. Focus
your awareness on your breathing, gently in and out. As you follow your
breathing, notice your own awareness of your breathing, the awareness
that allows you to know that you are breathing. 2. When that awareness
of your breathing is steady, begin to notice the breathing of any people
around you, or people you imagine being around you. There's no need to
do anything; just notice or imagine other people breathing as you are
breathing, and notice your awareness of that. Notice what you are aware
of in your own being as you rest in this awareness. 3. Staying anchored
in an awareness of your own breathing, expand your awareness of
breathing to include the breathing of more people you know, who are not
necessarily physically near you. Notice your awareness of your awareness
of everyone breathing. Notice your awareness of your own being as you
remain aware. 4. Still anchored in an awareness of your own breathing,
expand your awareness further to include people you don't know, outside
the building you are in, perhaps elsewhere in

5.

6.  
7.  
8.  

the neighborhood, throughout the city, across the region. Become aware
of all of them breathing together. Notice your awareness of your
awareness: you are simply being, being aware. Continue to expand your
awareness to include people all over the country, all over the planet,
all breathing. Expand your awareness to include all living creatures
breathing in the parks, the forests, underground, in the lakes and
rivers, in the oceans, the sky, of all sentient beings breathing
together. Notice your awareness of your awareness of existence, and your
awareness of simply being. Expand your awareness to include all forms of
existence, some breathing, some not --- the air, the water, the rocks.
And notice your awareness of your awareness of the breathing, and your
awareness of simply being. Expand your awareness beyond our planet to
other planets, other stars, other galaxies, and the space between the
planets and stars and galaxies. Expand your awareness as far as you can
possibly imagine; notice your awareness of your awareness expanding.
Rest comfortably, safely, in this vast spacious awareness, in this vast
simply being, for as long as you choose. Take your time. Gently bring
your awareness back to your awareness of sitting in the room you are in,
in this moment, breathing. Focus your awareness on simply breathing.
Take a moment to shift gears and reflect more fully on your experience
of simply being. You may experience a lightness, a spaciousness, or an
openness in your being.

This is the spaciousness where new insights can occur spontaneously.
Even if they don't occur right away, this vast, open awareness of the
unconditioned creates the conditions for revelation. We can reliably
access this defocused, diffuse mode of consciousness through awareness
practice. We can also refocus our attention on our immediate situation
in an instant. On the human plane, it's essential to be able to do that.
As the spiritual teacher Ram Dass cautioned, even in a bliss state, it's
important not to forget your ZIP code.

The Neuroscience of Dissolving the Self into the Nonself Scans of the
brain waves of meditators adept at achieving states of transcendental
awareness, such as the awareness of awareness that is possible to
achieve in the exercise above, reveal a dramatic increase in gamma waves
in their brains as they meditate. This is the highest brainwave
frequency, indicating high levels of concentration, a unity of
consciousness, even bliss. Other researchers have observed a measurable
spike in gamma waves just milliseconds before an insight breaks through
into consciousness. When we concentrate our awareness on awareness, we
are actually creating the conditions in the brain for revelation.

Reflections on Experiencing the Unconditioned I am larger and better
than I thought. I did not think I held so much goodness. --- WALT
WHITMAN Neuroscientists have not yet fully mapped the brain activity
that occurs in the silence and stillness of unconditioned awareness, but
consciousness researchers report with consistency and accuracy the
phenomenon of epiphanies, or insights into the deep meaning and nature
of reality. Epiphanies carry with them the profound "truth sense" that
Isaac Newton experienced when the bonk on the head by an apple led to
his sudden understanding of the force of gravity, or the certainty that
led the Greek mathematician Archimedes to leap from his bathtub to run
through the streets of Athens crying, "Eureka!" (I've found it!) when he
suddenly understood the physics of volume and displacement. Epiphanies
vary from person to person and from tradition to tradition. They are
often characterized by a sense of awe or mystery that has been referred
to by many different names in many traditions over the ages: a
perception of essence, spirit, the divine, the sacred. People often
describe feeling a profound sense of benevolence, or loving presence, a
feeling of the self being at one with all of existence, similar to the
sensation Edgar Mitchell experienced on his return trip from the moon.
Of particular value for building resilience is a deeply felt realization
of the innate goodness of our own true nature.

This sense of innate goodness is validated by 2,500 years of training
and practice in the Buddhist wisdom tradition. There is a sense of
coming home to the true nature of our being, a sense of abundant
enough-ness, a profound sense of well-being --- the spiritual platform
of resilience. We don't have to seek this sense of innate goodness: it
comes when the mind and brain are quiet, when everything else falls
away. This experience carries with it the truth sense of an epiphany. We
know it to be true in the heart, in the gut, at the cellular level. It
becomes a powerful resource for rewiring any conditioned patterns,
including less-thanresilient patterns of coping. If we try to skip this
stage of awakening to and aligning with true nature as our true home, if
we bypass simply being and escape into doing, we lose the freedom that
this mental, emotional, and relational play space offers us to create
something entirely new. We miss out on a huge opportunity to wake up and
grow up; it's all too easy to repeat the conditioned patterns we have
learned before.

Integrating the Self and Nonself There is a natural and inviolable
tendency in things to bloom into whatever they truly are in the core of
their being. All we have to do is align ourselves with what wants to
happen naturally and put in the effort that is our part in helping it
happen. --- DAVID RICHO Steadily experiencing the unconditioned, abiding
in the spacious formlessness of the unconditioned, could bring a person
very close to a state of ultimate enlightenment if one persevered in the
practice. Here on the human plane, the brain's capacity to access the
defocused state of mindful presence, get the big picture, be open to and
comfortable with the unknown and the uncertain, and then shift between
defocused and focused processing allows us to radically rewire patterns
of self. This change can be described as a quantum shift in our
understanding of self. It creates deeper integration in the brain: our
mental activity becomes less scattered, less fragmented, more
interconnected and whole. As we alternate between a very coherent,

individual self and a self dissolved into the oneness of existence, we
come to a deeper knowing of our own true nature as a unique individual
expression of the universal energy that sustains all of existence. From
this integration and alignment with our true nature we gain more mental
capacity to handle the vicissitudes of life, to solve problems without
hesitation or floundering, to be creative and innovative, to come to
terms with a situation that may seem unresolvable. Our consciousness has
opened up. We create a resilient connection with life in general, facing
it with awareness, acceptance, and emergent wisdom.

Exercise 4: Integrating the Self and Nonself When the extraordinary
consciousness of the true nature of your unconditioned nonself is strong
enough, you can use it to reconsolidate the ordinary consciousness of
your conditioned personal self, rewiring many old, conditioned stories
and beliefs about yourself. Who you understand yourself to be and how
you respond to life's events are now informed and guided by this deep
knowing. In this exercise, this expanded consciousness becomes a tool
you use to transform your sense of self. 1.

Evoke the awareness of awareness you experienced in exercise 3. Try to
evoke the sense of the true nature of your being that you might have
experienced through that exercise as well. If this seems too much of a
stretch at first, simply evoke your sense of your wiser self, your
personal manifestation of this true nature. 2. Bring to mind a pattern,
a belief, an identity of your personal self that you might like to
rewire: an old sense of inadequacy, a lack of trust in your competence
or creative potential. Light up the networks of this pattern by evoking
all the layers of neural firing associated with it: body sensations,
feelings, thoughts about yourself. 3. Try to bring this sense of your
personal self into the spacious awareness of awareness, or into the
sense of well-being or wholeness of your true nature. If that's too much
of a stretch, begin by alternating between these two modes of
consciousness, always strengthening or refreshing the sense

of awareness of true nature. When the sense of true nature seems
stronger, let go of the sense of personal self and rest in your
awareness of your true nature. 4. After a moment, reevoke the pattern or
sense of personal self you were attempting to rewire. Notice any changes
in that sense of personal self now that it is held, informed, and guided
by your true nature.

My mentor Diana Fosha reminds us: "People have a fundamental need for
transformation. We are wired for growth and healing, and we're wired for
self-righting and resuming impeded growth. We have a need for the
expansion and liberation of the self, the letting down of defensive
barriers, and the dismantling of the false self. \[We stretch\] toward
maximal vitality, authenticity, and genuine contact. In the process of
radical change we become more ourselves than ever before, and recognize
ourselves to be so."

Exercise 5: Experiencing the Whole Self We can now use the integrative
capacities of the prefrontal cortex to help us experience our whole
self. The following exercise involves recognizing the multiple, complex
layers of self we want our prefrontal cortex to integrate. Sometimes I
imagine these layers of self nesting inside one another like the Russian
wooden dolls my grandmother kept on the mantelpiece. 1.

Go through the list of layers of self below. For each one, remember a
moment or incident that exemplifies it. (Your example of the last layer,
the unconditioned, may come from exercise 3 above.) 2. Allow your
awareness to flow among all five layers of self. All of these layers
make up your whole self and define who you are at any given moment,
whether or not you are always fully conscious of them. (a) Inner child.
This is the realm of early implicit and explicit patterns of coping that
become encoded as parts, facets, aspects, and states of ourselves. Some
of these we

admire and are proud of; some we don't like and may even loathe; some we
may be too ashamed of to identify with; some, whether they were
resilient or not, may have become lost or forgotten. (b) Adult. This is
our grown-up personal self, doing the best it can to navigate the world
with what it has learned about how the world works, how people work, and
who the self is. The adult self is the personal self that chooses how to
use the strengthened prefrontal cortex to rewire the patterns of the
inner child; the stable yet flexible personal self that harnesses the
neuroplasticity of the brain to experience, embody, and express the five
Cs of coping; and the everevolving self that calls on the resources of
the wiser self to inform and guide its actions. (c) Wiser self. This is
the imagined resource of our strongest, most loving, most compassionate,
most generous, most resilient self, our own personal flavor of the
innate goodness and well-being of universal true nature. It is the part
of us that has kept persevering in our intentions and our choices to
recover resilience. It guides the choices of the adult self with wise,
intuitive knowing. When we align the adult self with the qualities and
virtues of our wiser self, our capacities for resilience are infused
with greater energy. The adult self becomes more confident about its
capacities to cope. (d) True nature. This is the realm of the sacred
into which we dissolve the adult self. We experience universal qualities
such as kindness, gratitude, joy, generosity, and equanimity as our true
home. Our true nature is the reservoir of universal goodness and
well-being expressed by the wiser self, and the gateway to the larger
awareness that holds all the nouns and verbs of existence. Aligning our
adult self with our true nature anchors all of our resilience in
integrity and courage and gives us a moral compass to guide our course
of action. (e) The unconditioned. This is the vast spaciousness of
awareness itself, the nothingness that all things arise from and pass
away into. It is the realm of the mental play space

we access through deconditioning, where there's space and flow for new
choices to emerge.

When we begin to skillfully flow among these five layers of self, we are
free, not caught in a particular role or identity or in the patterns of
response encoded at five years of age, or twelve, or twenty-seven. The
flexibility of navigating these layers of self sustains flexibility in
our coping. At any given moment, we can recognize which layer we are
inhabiting; we can choose where we want to focus; we can change our
response to life events.

The Neuroscience of Integrating the Self and Nonself The brain operates
differently with focused attention than with open, spacious awareness.
The tasks are different and the outcomes are different; we carefully
cultivate and integrate both to maximize our resilience. So far,
neuroimaging has shown that focused attention most fully activates the
ventral medial (forward and central) part of the cortex. (The prefrontal
cortex is located in this region.) This is the part of the brain that
constructs and holds the sense of self together. Through neuronal
pathways connecting to the motor cortex of the brain, it also sends
signals to take action. When we allow our awareness to relax or dissolve
into a more spacious, bare awareness, by contrast, we activate the
dorsal lateral part of the cortex (toward the rear and both sides). With
this increased neural receptivity, the brain can create new associations
more readily. The brain organically rewires and reorganizes itself. We
have been reconditioning patterns of response in the brain, or
conditioning new patterns, through the focused (self ) mode of
processing; we have approached the experience of the unconditioned or
nonself through the defocused mode of processing and deconditioning. We
can switch between these two networks of processing and two modes of
consciousness. As we become more grounded, more centered in the
unconditioned true nature of who we are, we can learn to return to this
state of awareness whenever we lose our way, when we become hijacked by
an unresolved trauma or befuddled by the new territory we're moving
into. The more familiar we become with this sense of loving presence as

our true home, the sooner we can notice when we're off course and bring
ourselves back. Eventually we become so attuned to the state of our
inner state that we can do this in the space of a breath.

Deeper Brain Integration When we integrate the patterns of neural firing
we use in the focusing network with the patterns of neural firing we
experience in the defocusing network, we set in motion a radical process
of transformation within the brain. Using the defocusing network to
access the unconditioned helps the brain fire at its highest frequency
of brain waves --- gamma waves. Gamma waves are produced when many parts
of the brain are firing rapidly and in synchrony. This activity creates
new, complex neural networks and greater neural harmony in the brain. We
have learned to use tools to harness the brain's neuroplasticity to
strengthen the prefrontal cortex to manage our emotions and calm our
nervous system when we're startled or frightened, quelling the fear
response of the amygdala; to tune into the inner experience of others
and ourselves; to see clearly our reactions to any experience, internal
or external; to generate options of response; and to choose wisely and
flexibly among them. Through this learning process, the brain
productively rewires old, conditioned patterns of response to stress and
trauma. New experiences in relationships, in our body, in our emotions,
and in our thoughts and perceptions can increase the flexibility of our
responses to stressors and traumas. As we rewire old patterns, those
patterns become more adaptive and resilient; therefore, we experience
greater health and well-being. This neural harmony supports increased
integration by the prefrontal cortex at all levels of the brain. The
prefrontal cortex integrates our bodily sensations and emotions with our
thoughts, reflections, and conscious decisions about them; it also
integrates the right hemisphere's felt sense of our emotions with the
left hemisphere's rational assessment of them. It integrates our
conscious and unconscious memories; it integrates various ego states or
parts of the personal self to create a coherent narrative of the self
that supports our resilience.

What Deeper Brain Integration Makes Possible Mastering the art of
resilience does much more than restore you to who you once thought you
were. Rather, you emerge from the experience transformed into a truer
expression of who you were really meant to be. --- CAROL ORSBORN As we
learn to navigate between the spaciousness of simply being (nothing to
do, nowhere to go, no one to be) and our sense of self (I have things to
do! I'm expected to show up and be responsible! I am somebody!), we
continue to let go of habitual patterns of coping that simply don't work
well, and we intentionally practice skills that will help us create the
life we want for ourselves and our loved ones, with many, many
repetitions so that they do actually create new brain circuitry. As we
continue to rewire internally, we can generate more authentic, creative,
wholesome options for ourselves and develop the internal integrity and
alignment that will help us realize our dreams.

Pulling It All Together Learning to work skillfully with the brain's
defocusing mode allows you to: • • •

• •

experience the awareness that holds all the constructs of the self as
stable and coherent, yet ever changing and ever evolving; create the
conditions of reverie --- the mental play space of deconditioning ---
and an expanded awareness in which epiphanies, insights, and revelations
can occur; use that expanded awareness to enter a mental "plane of open
possibilities" where you can more easily experience the phenomenon known
as nonself --- the unconditioned nature of reality prior to any
conditioning; recognize this state of simply being as your true home;
integrate the experiences of nonself or true nature into a sense of
whole self, experiencing a flow among the inner child, the adult self,
the wiser self, your true nature, and unconditioned awareness. This
integration can create greater neural integration,

harmony, and synchrony within the brain itself, strengthening the
resilience you need to handle all the vicissitudes of life. Take a deep
breath and acknowledge to yourself how much good work you've done to
recover your birthright capacities of resilience and well-being.
Completing the experiential exercises in parts 3--7 helps you develop a
brain better prepared to respond well to life's ongoing stressors. These
practices can help you rewire a variety of old, conditioned responses to
trouble and trauma and strengthen your prefrontal cortex. They can help
you boost your relational, somatic, emotional, and reflective
intelligence and recover the innate capacities of your brain to respond
skillfully and adaptively to life's storms and struggles. You can now
reliably experience more calm, more clarity, stronger connections to
resources, increased competence, and greater courage, all of which will
allow you to cope with anything, anything at all.

PART EIGHT

LAUNCHING INTO A MORE RESILIENT LIFE

CHAPTER TWENTY

Moving Resilience beyond the Personal Self

A ship is safe in harbor, but that's not what ships are for. --- GRACE
HOPPER

HAVE WE ARRIVED? In a way, yes. The wise effort we have already put into
using self-directed neuroplasticity to rewire our brains, and the more
complex neural integration that results from that effort, has set us up
for the continued learning, growth, and transformation that are
fulfilling in themselves as well as beneficial for our resilience. The
neural platform of resilience gives the psyche a kind of safety net: the
brain is now rewired and primed to meet the unpredictable but inevitable
challenges of life adaptively, with courage, optimism, and creativity.
Even when difficulties threaten to overwhelm our expanded capacities to
cope, the brain itself is more resilient and better prepared to meet
them. More complex integration of brain circuits and structures means
more channels of communication within the brain, more synchrony in
neural firing patterns, and calmer frequencies of brain waves. There's
more give and flex in the entire body and mind system. Thus prepared, we
can be realistically optimistic. We will always face uncertainties and
unknowns, and sometimes we will encounter true catastrophes. But as we
become more skillful in facing them, our resilience becomes more
effortless. Jon Kabat-Zinn, developer of mindfulness-based stress
reduction, describes our strengthened capacities for resilience this
way: "We all accept that no one controls the weather. Good sailors learn
to read it

carefully and respect its power. They will avoid storms if possible, but
when caught in one, they know when to take down the sails, batten down
the hatches, drop anchor and ride things out, controlling what is
controllable and letting go of the rest. Training, practice, and a lot
of firsthand experience in all sorts of weather are required to develop
such skills so that they work for you when you need them. Developing
skill in facing and effectively handling the various 'weather
conditions' in your life is what we mean by the art of conscious
living." This conscious, resilient living requires that we continue
learning from experience, keep experimenting. The "use it or lose it"
principle applies to our brains, especially our prefrontal cortex, as
well as our muscles: we need to work on maintaining the brain cells,
neural circuits, and capacities to respond flexibly in our brains
throughout our lives. We also have to keep challenging our brains by
taking on new and difficult tasks that draw on and extend all our
capacities for learning. Challenges such as learning to play a musical
instrument, learning to speak a foreign language, and memorizing poetry
are often recommended by brainfitness experts because they require the
integration of functions in both hemispheres of the higher brain.
Problem solving, which requires input from our intuitive, holistic right
hemisphere as well as from our rational, analytical left hemisphere, is
another excellent way to push the brain to maintain its capacities of
resilience. Years ago my friend Ted worked as an electrical engineer at
SRI International (Stanford Research Institute International), a large
engineering consulting firm. A plaque at the entrance to the electrical
engineering lab read: We have not solved your problems. In fact, we have
more questions than when we started. But we believe we are confused at a
higher level and about more important things. Recovering resilience can
feel a bit like that. We set our intentions, draw on our resources,
learn the tools and techniques, and then wonder why this is taking so
long. Am I doing it right? Would something else work better? Rest
assured, the tools and techniques presented here are exactly the tools
you need to keep rewiring your brain for resilience. Developing and
maintaining resilience requires that we continue to cultivate qualities
and behaviors that support it. We can choose to make

resilience a central organizing principle of our lives --- not just an
interesting hobby or occasional lifesaver, but the core that everything
else aligns around, that increases our happiness and well-being.

Learning Model for Resilience The following model is taught all over the
world to cultivate qualities and behaviors that particularly support
resilience. In this model, we move through four phases of competence and
awareness of that competence, from a complete lack of the competence or
even knowledge of our need for it to full knowledge and mastery of it.
1.

Unconscious incompetence. We don't know how to do something, and we
don't even know that we don't know. We're innocent or clueless; the
brain is in homeostatis. This was the situation for my client Karen (see
chapter 17) when she initially failed to grasp that a young woman and
child playing together could be mother and daughter. This is the
"ignorance is bliss" phase of learning --- except, of course, when it
isn't. 2. Conscious incompetence. This is an "Oh shit!" circuit. We
don't know how to do something, and we suddenly realize we don't know.
Becoming aware of this may cause chagrin and horror, as it did for
Karen. If ever our resilience is going to derail, it's right here. Old
patterns of fear of failure, passivity, or shame may resurface. We can
get past any denial or blocks to learning by reframing this step as the
beginning of gaining competence, as Karen did. When we harness the
innate drive for mastery --- to recover any missing competencies and to
learn new skills --- we can be proud of taking steps to recover our
resilience. 3. Conscious competence. This is the phase in which we know
how to do something, and we know that we know. Through all of our new
experiences, resources, tools, and techniques, we are learning. New
patterns of response are being rewired in the brain. We are becoming
masterful and competent. We spend a lot of our adult lives in this
phase, of course. We are confident that we know, in spite of old,
negative stories about ourselves that might linger. We don't go back to
the old stories; we persevere in the new, taking in the good as Karen
did with her comment, "Now I

know I can be playful . . . I guess somehow it's sunk in." We are
deepening and solidifying the circuits of the competency and of
learning. 4. Unconscious competence. Once we know how to do something
well and practice doing it again and again, the new skill becomes wired
into our implicit procedural memory. Our wise effort becomes
increasingly effortless. It's like learning to ride a bicycle: we don't
even have to think about it anymore. Once playing with kids became
second nature, Karen could let go of her worries about motherhood once
and for all.

Exercise 1: Learning Resilience 1.

Identify one attribute of resilience you would like to cultivate or a
behavior that your resilience is now strong enough to support your
growing into: assertiveness, determination, purposefulness,
collaboration. Assertiveness is used as an example here, but you can
focus on any attribute of your choice. 2. Identify areas of your life
where assertiveness seems to be lacking; maybe it hasn't even occurred
to you that being assertive in these areas would be useful. They could
include negotiating with your spouse over household chores; talking to
the bank manager about financing a car purchase; persuading the city
council to install a needed stop sign in your neighborhood; or writing
to your congressional representative about health-care reform. 3.
Identify moments in your life when you could and should have been
assertive but had no clue how to do that. Maybe you still don't. Hang in
there: don't retreat or procrastinate. Now is the moment to set the
intentions to master this useful life skill. Set the intention to learn
assertiveness by practicing and experimenting with it. Set a second
intention to see yourself, and feel proud of yourself, as someone who
intentionally cultivates capacities of resilience. 4. Whatever means you
use to develop your assertiveness --- attending workshops, practicing
with friends, putting it to use in real-life situations --- notice your
skills steadily

developing. The awareness of competence is essential to wiring that
knowledge of your assertiveness into your sense of yourself. 5. Recall a
moment when you realize you were assertive, this morning or last week.
Take in the fact that you exercised that skill without even thinking
about it. Congratulations. You've mastered another competency supporting
your resilience.

You can repeat this exercise as many times as you wish, with as many
qualities you wish to cultivate for more resilience. You are learning
from experience rather than concepts, from experiments rather than
instructions. That's what keeps rewiring the brain in the most
integrated and resilient fashion, lifelong.

What Resilient Learning from Experience Opens Up As an irrigator guides
water to his fields, as an archer aims an arrow, as a carpenter carves
wood, the wise shape their lives. --- BUDDHA Shaping our brains to be
increasingly resilient and, beyond that, shaping our lives to be
increasingly fulfilled and meaningful can take people in many different
directions. Whatever direction we choose, we rely on the skillful use of
our prefrontal cortex --- and the brain integration it makes possible
--- to seek, discern, and settle into what gives meaning and purpose to
our lives, to move beyond coping and surviving to creating change and
thriving.

Big Organizing Principles (BOPs) How we live our days is, of course, how
we live our lives. --- ANNIE DILLARD

We've learned that one capacity of the prefrontal cortex is to create a
coherent narrative of our sense of self. Another way of describing that
coherence is to say that we come to see clearly the big organizing
principles (BOPs) that guide our actions: the wholesome patterns of
coping we choose to live by, or what philosophical traditions call
values and virtues. Among my clients, Betty, a single mother of three,
identified her BOPs as patience, faith, and planning. Neil, a retired
surgeon, chose curiosity, gratitude, and awe. David, a car mechanic
learning computer skills at the local community college, steered his
course by hope, steadiness of purpose, and the love of his family.

Exercise 2: Identifying Your BOPs 1. Identify three principles from this
list that resonate with you as BOPs. accountability commitment
cooperation courtesy creativity dependability determination discipline
faithfulness focus forgiveness frugality helpfulness honesty humility
idealism inclustriousness joyfulness kindness knowledge love loyalty
magnanimity

mercy modesty obedience orderliness patience prudence purposerulness
reliability resourcefulness respect reverence simplicity tolerance 2.
Identify three arenas where you are able to manifest these BOPs (or
others that you choose) regularly: For example, helping kids with
homework calls for patience; working with customers takes courtesy;
volunteering at the homeless shelter once a week calls on your
selflessness. Acknowledge your conscious competence or even your
unconscious competence in applying these principles. 3. Identify one
more BOP from the list, or another quality from your own list of values,
that you would like to cultivate and that would be a stretch for you to
cultivate. Set the intention to look for opportunities to manifest this
BOP every day for the next month. 4. As you manifest this BOP more in
your daily life, notice how your view of yourself as an agent of change
in your own life develops as you wisely shape your life and become
competent.

Finding Keys for Cracking the Code of Life All truly wise thoughts have
been thought already thousands of times; but to make them truly ours, we
must think them over again honestly, until they take root in our
personal experience. --- JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE

We can find guidance about which BOPs lead to the deepest happiness and
meaning for each of us, the greatest sense of fulfillment and wellbeing,
through many different models and paradigms. These are systems that help
us crack the code of life, showing us how to move through suffering and
struggle to strength and well-being. One such paradigm is the eightfold
path of the Buddhist tradition, which influences many of the practical
tools and techniques offered here. Understanding what causes suffering
and what leads to the end of suffering leads to wise intention (one of
the practices that accelerates the rewiring of the brain), which leads
to wise mindfulness (seeing clearly, always with empathy and compassion
rather than judgment) and wise concentration (steadiness of mind,
steadiness of purpose, perseverance). These practices in turn lead to
wise effort (letting go of the unwholesome, cultivating the wholesome,
deconditioning and reconditioning coping strategies that don't work,
conditioning new strategies that do) in learning practices that lead to
wise action, wise speech, and wise livelihood --- the ways we engage and
thrive in the world. Sylvia Boorstein adds wise relationships as a ninth
step on this path --- her deep wisdom reverently reshaping an ancient
and revered path of practice. In addition to the Buddhist model, many
other models can help us find our moral compass: other spiritual
traditions, modalities of therapy and personal growth, philosophies of
politics and business, customs of culture. It matters that we find a set
of values or principles to live by so that we don't drift, get lost, or
sink. It matters that we settle ourselves into living those values and
principles, experimenting to see how they really work and how they might
need to evolve.

Exercise 3: Finding Keys for Cracking the Code Finding your key for
cracking the code, or finding an organized system of BOPs to live your
life by, is similar to finding a path of practice (see chapter 5). 1.

Identify the core values you already live by and seek out role models or
paradigms of practice that can lead beyond them to something even more
truthful and useful.

2. Ask friends, colleagues, and mentors whose lives exemplify the
qualities you would like to cultivate more in your life what paths and
practices they follow and how you might experience them for yourself. 3.
Approach any model with a sense of openness and curiosity. Apply the
teachings to the needs and circumstances of your life with a sense of
exploration and excitement. See what works, what fits, and leave the
rest. You can choose for yourself whether to follow the entire model to
the last dotted i and crossed t of its teachings.

Here's the way I remember a lovely Aesop's fable from my childhood that
illustrates this practice of applying what's useful from a model to your
own life. A magpie announces that she is giving a free seminar on nest
building to all the birds of the forest. So the birds gather. The magpie
lays a bowl of twigs on a branch in a tree, and the oriole says, "Oh!
That's how nests are built!" and goes off. That's how orioles have been
building their nests ever since. The magpie then daubs the bowl of twigs
with some mud to seal the cracks, and the jay says, "Oh! That's how
nests are built!" and flies off, and that's how jays have been building
their nests ever since. The magpie then lines the caulked bowl of twigs
with some soft downy feathers, and the robin says, "Oh! That's how to
build a nest!" And that's how robins have been building their nests ever
since. The magpie continues teaching throughout the day, and various
birds continue to fly off until the end of the day, when the only birds
left to learn how the magpie is building a nest are the other magpies. I
used to think the moral of that fable was that if you didn't stay until
the very end, you wouldn't learn everything there was to learn about
building a nest, and that would be a failure. But now I think it shows
that every single species of bird did learn how to build a nest, and
what they learned was good enough for them to survive and thrive as a
species. You decide when you've learned what you need to from a model or
paradigm, when it's enough to help you to survive and thrive as the
unique individual that you are. The crafting of a resilient and
meaningful life doesn't stop with crafting "more" for the personal self.
Researchers have found that

practices that move the concerns of our resilience beyond our personal
self immeasurably enrich our own lives and the lives of others when we
maintain our intention to practice them.

Altruism In every community there is work to be done. In every nation,
there are wounds to heal. In every heart, there is the power to do it.
--- MARIANNE WILLIAMSON Patti Quigley and Susan Retik were "ordinary"
suburban Boston housewives, both pregnant, when their husbands were
killed on the planes that were flown into the World Trade Center on
September 11, 2001. In interviews, both Patti and Susan stressed how
important it was to them to respond to the tragedy of 9/11 and their
husbands' deaths "out of love rather than hate." They channeled their
anguish into a three-day fund-raising bike ride from Ground Zero in
Manhattan to Boston, raising \$140,000, which was distributed to
economic development projects to benefit Afghani women through Care
International: women widowed by decades of conflict in Afghanistan, from
the Russian invasion through the Taliban occupation to the American
military presence. Three years after 9/11, Patty and Susan traveled to
Afghanistan to meet with some of the women who had used these funds to
start their own businesses. This personal statement of international
reconciliation continues to ripple outward still. Altruism --- an
unselfish concern for the welfare of others --- is one of those
qualities that we can express when we feel resilient. A natural outcome
of mindful empathy, altruism is also fueled by the release of oxytocin.
When we feel the plight of another through our resonance circuit and are
moved to act, our behavior is partly motivated by the "tend and
befriend" function of oxytocin. And when we have come into earned secure
attachment, we can maintain a balanced focus on self, other, and the
world. Moving flexibly between independence and interdependence, between
autonomy and affiliation, allows us to act generously and
compassionately in this world. We can find inspiring examples of
altruistic behaviors through books, magazines, film and television, the
Internet, and the stories we

pass on to each other: American schoolchildren who contribute pennies to
buy paper and pencils for schoolchildren in rural India; a Canadian
teenager who researched the effect of unclean water on health for a
school science project and then spent three years raising money to build
272 wells in rural Africa; high school students in America who ran half
marathons to raise funds to build a girls' high school in Nicaragua; a
church group from England that spends one week every spring rebuilding
homes around the world destroyed by hurricanes, earthquakes, and
tornadoes. My grandmother became blind from glaucoma when I was two
years old. I grew up learning to "read" Braille with my eyes as my
grandmother and I sat on the living-room couch and she read the pages
with her fingers. I learned to set aside the sharp knives as we did the
dishes together and learned how she kept bills of different
denominations in separate compartments in her wallet so that she could
know how much money she was handing to the store clerk. After my
grandmother died, I found a way to contribute to the restoration of
people's vision that has brought me deep satisfaction for more than
thirty years. I save all my receipts from dining out during the year,
and at the end of the year I contribute the same total amount to Seva, a
nonprofit organization that trains doctors in developing countries to
perform cataract surgery, saving the eyesight of more than 3 million
poor people to date. Could I do more? Probably. And sometimes I do. But
this steady practice is one of the ways altruism has become one of the
big organizing principles of my life.

Exercise 4: Practicing Altruism 1.

Take five minutes to identify an opportunity for your resilience to move
beyond your personal self in an act of generosity or altruism:
participating in an environmental cleanup day at a local park; becoming
a counselor at a summer camp for children with life-threatening
illnesses; tutoring in an adult literacy program. 2. Notice any changes
in your experience of yourself as you decide which action to take,
prepare to do it, and implement your plan. Notice changes as you take in
the feeling of your own generosity, simply knowing that you acted out of

compassionate caring, whether or not you learn of the outcome of your
efforts. Notice how you feel if you learn of the ripple effects of your
action from someone's email or card. Let the experience of altruism
broaden and build your resources of resilience.

Compassionate Action: Becoming an Agent of Change I long to accomplish
great and noble tasks, but it is my chief duty to accomplish humble
tasks as though they were great and noble. The world is moved along, not
only by the mighty shoves of its heroes, but also by the aggregate of
the tiny pushes of each honest worker. --- HELEN KELLER Our mature
resilience --- the ability to courageously meet challenges and solve
problems as they arise --- supports us in taking compassionate action in
the world. We become agents of change who evoke changes in others. Our
resilience fuels the generativity that can change the world. And we
change the world one person, one program, one committed action at a
time. One colleague, after coming to terms with her own grief at being
diagnosed with bipolar disorder, found a way to apply her research
skills to improve services at the mood disorders clinic of the local
medical school. Another colleague, the mother of a son with autism,
offered free weekend workshops every month for a year to other parents
of children with autism, sharing what she had learned about coping
lovingly and skillfully with her own child and about reducing her
burnout through self-compassion and self-care. The son of yet another
colleague chose to celebrate his thirty-fifth birthday by recruiting his
buddies to spend one exhausting but exhilarating weekend building a home
in a neighboring county for a family of five displaced by a recent
flood. But it's also possible to share compassion and effect change in
small ways.

Exercise 5: Becoming an Agent of Change

1. Take a moment to identify a cause or purpose that stirs your sense of
caring and your willingness to act: protecting the environment,
volunteering in an after-school art program. 2. Either in a moment of
reverie on your own or brainstorming with friends, begin to imagine ways
in which you can create change in the world through your own resilient
efforts. In the coming weeks and months, find a way to express that
intention as a part of your resilient growth, and treasure your growth
and fulfillment as you do.

Pulling It All Together Resilience is your birthright. Throughout
Bouncing Back you have learned to use tools and techniques that enable
you to: • • • • •

improve the moment-to-moment functioning of your brain; use three proven
processes of self-directed neuroplasticity to change old patterns of
coping and create new, more resilient ones; create the conditions,
resources, and practices that help you rewire your neural circuitry most
reliably and most safely; choose the new experiences --- in interactions
with other people, in reflections and imagination, in simply being ---
that rewire your neural circuitry most efficiently and effectively;
develop confidence in your own competence to return to calm in a crisis,
to see clearly what needs to happen to resolve the crisis or to come to
terms with it, and to connect to the resources that give you the courage
to carry on.

You'll notice your strengthened capacities to bounce back operating
everywhere as you adjust to challenging situations, make tough
decisions, and embark on new adventures. To bring all of these teachings
back down to earth as you continue to maximize your resilience and
well-being, here's a final teaching, from the cartoon beagle Snoopy. It
is printed on a flag that hangs in my garden --- a gift from my brother,
Barry, who practiced gratitude with me while he was in the hospital:
Live well, laugh often, love much.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I BEGAN WRITING A DECADE AGO, to reconcile the paradox I was living at
the time of simultaneously strengthening the self in my role as a
licensed psychotherapist and letting go of the self as a dedicated
practitioner of vipassana, or insight meditation. Neuroscience helped me
build the bridge between Buddhist mindfulness practice and Western
relational psychology. I have been blessed to be guided by many skillful
mentors and teachers, people whose brains I've been privileged to
interact with along the unfolding path, wise elders who taught me how to
rewire my brain for resilience and well-being, who profoundly shaped and
guided my thinking, and who themselves embody aliveness and wholeness:
Bonnie Badenoch, James Baraz, Sylvia Boorstein, Tara Brach, Lou
Cozolino, Janina Fisher, Diana Fosha, Ron Frederick, Christopher Germer,
Daniel Goleman, Rick Hanson, Sue Johnson, Jon Kabat-Zinn, Dacher
Keltner, Jack Kornfield, Jonah Lehrer, Ben Lipton, Marsha Lucas, Kristin
Neff, John O'Donohue, Pat Ogden, Mary Oliver, David Richo, Candyce
Ossefort-Russell, Frank Ostaseski, Stephen Porges, Kim Rosen, Richard
Schwartz, Dan Siegel, Ron Siegel, Rich Simon, David Wallin, David Whyte,
Danny Yeung. I've learned lessons of resilience --- showing up and
saying yes to life in the face of adversity --- from many patients,
students, workshop participants, interns, and readers of the monthly
e-newsletter Healing and Awakening into Aliveness and Wholeness.
Although they are not named here, their contributions to the
transformations in my own thinking and being have been profound. I
deeply bow. There are those who, in their own wisdom and compassion,
have helped me craft a life in alignment with all I have learned and
seek to teach: Peter Baumann, Judith Bell, Dan Clurman, Andy Dreitcer,
Daniel

Ellenberg, Patricia Ellsberg, Terri Hughes, Alice Jacobsen, Bonnie
Jonsson, Daniel Lappin, Richard Miller, Rose Saint John, Charlotte
Siegel, Terry Trotter, Cassi Vieten. Three places served as refuges and
resources for much of my writing and mulling: Wilbur Hot Springs in
Northern California --- a "sanctuary for the self" whose respectful
staff and fellow guests made rejuvenating in the mineral waters and
writing away on the deck pure joy; Spirit Rock Meditation Center in
Woodacre, California, a refuge for letting go of the self, where the
teachings of wisdom, compassion, and liberation from suffering are
deeply lived and celebrated; and my own beloved garden, where every
string that trains the wisteria has been a prayer for a friend --- a
peaceful sanctuary that helps me balance the creative flow with focused
productivity. I deeply thank Shoshana Alexander and Caroline Pincus,
experienced editors whose deep faith nurtured this book from before the
beginning, who could hear my voice more clearly than I could, who
patiently translated the Latin of my neuroclinical jargon into clear,
everyday English. I'm also grateful this book landed in the capable
hands of Jason Gardner at New World Library, as well as those of
copyeditor Erika Büky. Both provided skillful editing and polishing of
the entire manuscript. I also thank Marilynne Chophel and Gaylene
Newquist, readers who early on brought sparkle and wisdom to the stories
and exercises, and Brad Reynolds, whose illustrations of the brain
brought a much needed clarity to the concepts in the text. I thank dear
friends and family, including my beloved brother, Barry, who gave me the
title of the book --- "Resilience. What's that? Oh, I know. It's
bouncing back from the terrible" --- and others who provided daily
encouragement: Margaret Deedy, Michael Goldberg, Karuna Graham, Barb and
Bob Hirni, Cherry and Emma Jones, Phyllis Kamrin and Elijah Goldberg,
Rhea Loudon, Katherine Mapes-Reznik, Steve McKiernan, Lorrie Norby,
Marianne and Stan Stefancic. And from the depths of my heart, I express
my gratitude for the love and support of my Gourmet Poets' Society: Dina
Zvenko, William Strawn, Eve Siegel, Lynn Robinson, Lynne Michelson,
Cariadne MacKenzie-Hooson, Phyllis Kirson, Gary Horvitz, Marilynne
Chophel, Paul Basker --- and Bette Acuff, who gave me the small figurine
that sits by my computer, a Buddha with a laptop.

ENDNOTES

Introduction xix

Researchers have found. . . Philip Moeller, "Happier People Deal Better
with Hardships," Huffington Post, April 11, 2012, citing research of
George Bonanno at Columbia University,
www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/11/happiness-andhardships_n_1417944.html.
xix "Blessed are they". . . Debra McKnight-Higgins, yoga instructor,
Fairfax, CA, class instructions, April 29, 2011. xx capacities for
resilience...Louis Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships:
Attachment and the Developing Social Brain (New York: W. W. Norton,
2006), 21--33. xx Only in recent years. . . Daniel J. Siegel, The
Mindful Brain: Reflection and Attunement in the Cultivation of
Well-Being (New York: W. W. Norton, 2007), 31--32. xxii "Based upon
everything we know". . . Richard Davidson, "Project Happiness," Common
Ground, August 2012.

Chapter 1 4

4 6 6 6 6 7 7 8

Resilience, like all innate capacities. . . Daniel J. Siegel, "Awakening
the Mind to the Wisdom of the Body," paper presented at conference "The
Embodied Mind: Integration of the Body, Brain and Mind in Clinical
Practice," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 4, 2006.
When our conditioning. . . Bonnie Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise
Therapist: A Practical Guide to Interpersonal Neurobiology (New York: W.
W. Norton, 2008), 52--75. The human brain. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 10--14. a human infant. . . Baby
Center, "Milestone Charts: What You Can Expect from Birth to Age 3,"
www.babycenter.com/milestone-charts-birth-to-age-3, accessed October 1,
2012. Interactions in the early environment. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 37--47. prefrontal cortex. . .
Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 21--30. John Bowlby
proposed. . . John Bowlby, A Secure Base: Parent- Child Attachment and
Healthy Human Development (New York: Basic Books, 1988), 3. The parents'
response. . . David Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy (New York:
Guilford Press, 2007), 26--28. "permanent psychological significance". .
. Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 146--48.

8

8 9 10 10 11 13 13 14

14 15 15 15 16

17

18

19 19 19 19

"Secure attachment is the strongest inoculator". . . Pat Ogden,
"Integrating the Body in Trauma Treatment: A Sensorimotor Approach,"
transcript of interview by Ruth Buczynski, National Institute for the
Clinical Application of Behavioral Medicine, May 16, 2012, p. 4,
www.nicabm.com/trauma-therapy, accessed May 16, 2012. When a parent. . .
Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy, 86--88. An ancient Chinese proverb.
. . Jon R. Stone, ed., The Routledge Book of World Proverbs (New York:
Routledge, 2006), 394. Focusing our attention. . . Daniel J. Siegel, The
Developing Mind: How Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape Who
We Are (New York: Guilford Press, 1999), 23--31. neuroscientist Donald
Hebb. . . Siegel, The Developing Mind, 26. Conditioning. . . Cozolino,
The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 81--93. neuroplasticity. . .
Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 31--32. All mental activity. . . Rick Hanson
and Richard Mendius, Buddha's Brain: The Practical Neuroscience of
Happiness, Love and Wisdom (Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications,
2009), 8. "If you want to lift a hundred pounds". . . Norman Doidge,
"Neuroplasticity: The Possibilities and Pitfalls," transcript of
interview with Ruth Buczynski, National Institute for the Clinical
Application of Behavioral Medicine, March 30, 2011, p. 13,
www.nicabm.com/thebrain2011, accessed March 30, 2011. Getting to Know
the Brain. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 29--50; Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 50--62; Hanson and Mendius,
Buddha's Brain, 6--7. The brain learns to be resilient from both the
bottom up. . . Pat Ogden, Trauma and the Body: A Sensorimotor Approach
to Psychology (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006), 21--25. "downstairs". . .
Daniel J. Siegel, The Whole-Brain Child: 12 Revolutionary Strategies to
Nurture Your Child's Developing Mind (New York: Bantam, 2012), 37--65.
The lower brain controls. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 29--50;
Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 50--62. Figure 1.
Based on Rick Hanson and Richard Mendius, Buddha's Brain: The Practical
Neuroscience of Happiness, Love and Wisdom (Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications, 2009), 54; Bonnie Badenoch, Being a Brain-Wise Therapist:
A Practical Guide to Interpersonal Neurobiology (New York: W. W. Norton,
2008), 15; Daniel Goleman, Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human
Relationships (New York: Bantam Books, 2006), 81; Louis Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships: Attachment and the Developing
Social Brain (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006) 52--53. Table 1. Based on
Louis Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships: Attachment and
the Developing Social Brain (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006), 51--62;
Bonnie Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist: A Practical Guide to
Interpersonal Neurobiology (New York: W. W. Norton, 2008), 12--28;
Daniel Goleman, Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human
Relationships (New York: Bantam Books, 2006), 64--70, 352. Figure 2.
Based on Louis Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships:
Attachment and the Developing Social Brain (New York: W. W. Norton,
2006), 67; Bonnie Badenoch, Being a Brain-Wise Therapist: A Practical
Guide to Interpersonal Neurobiology (New York: W. W. Norton, 2008) 17.
It integrates information coming from the lower brain. . . Badenoch,
Being a Brain-Wise Therapist, 28--33. As a result of its integrative
capacities. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 42--44. enable us to
efficiently rewire our brains. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human
Relationships, 199--209. All of these executive, top-down functions. . .
Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 66--75.

20 22

23 23 24 25

25

Table 2. Based on Bonnie Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist: A
Practical Guide to Interpersonal Neurobiology (New York: W. W. Norton,
2008) 28--41. Table 3. Based on Louis Cozolino, The Neuroscience of
Human Relationships: Attachment and the Developing Social Brain (New
York: W. W. Norton, 2006), 41, 66--75; Bonnie Badenoch, Being a
Brain-Wise Therapist: A Practical Guide to Interpersonal Neurobiology
(New York: W. W. Norton, 2008), 12--22. hippocampus. . . Badenoch, Being
a Brain- Wise Therapist, 16. childhood amnesia. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 57. the discovery of mirror
neurons. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 59.
focusing network. . . Norman A. S. Farb, Zindel V. Segal, Helen Mayberg,
Jim Bean, Deborah McKeon, Zainab Fatima, and Adam K. Anderson,
"Attending to the Present: Mindfulness Meditation Reveals Distinct
Neural Modes of Self-Reference," Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience 2 (August 2007): 313--22; Rick Hanson, "Dual Mode Theory,"
paper presented at neurodharma study group, San Rafael, CA, October 5,
2009; Jonah Lehrer, Imagine: How Creativity Works (New York: Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2012), 29--32. Despite difficulties with quoted
sources in Imagine, Lehrer still provides an accessible presentation of
well-researched, cutting-edge neuroscience. This defocusing network. . .
Farb et al., "Attending to the Present"; Hanson, "Dual Mode Theory."

Chapter 2 30 33 33 36 38 38 39 41 41 42 43

Insecure-avoidant, insecure-anxious, and disorganized attachment styles.
. . Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy, 88--91, 91--93, 93--96. The
first 2½ years. . . Louis Cozolino, "The Social Brain," paper presented
at conference "The Wholeness of Mind, Brain, Body and Human
Relatedness," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 7,
2010. four general styles of attachment and coping. . . Cozolino, "The
Social Brain." 80 percent of the neural instructions. . . Siegel, The
Developing Mind, 28--34. Researchers know that the coping styles we
learn. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 57. At the
same time. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships,
66--72. The negativity bias. . . Rick Hanson, "Taking In the Good,"
seminar, Greater Good Science Center, University of California,
Berkeley, October 15, 2011. As Eleanor Roosevelt said. . . Eleanor
Roosevelt, You Learn by Living: Eleven Keys for a More Fulfilling Life
(New York: Harper Perennial, 2011), 29. Trauma is different. . .
Francine Shapiro, EMDR: The Breakthrough "Eye Movement" Therapy for
Overcoming Anxiety, Stress and Trauma (New York: Basic Books, 1997),
23-- 25. Repeated traumas, if left unresolved. . . Bessel van der Kolk,
"Clinical Implications of Neuroscience Research in PTSD," paper
presented at conference "Healing Moments in Trauma Treatment," Lifespan
Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 13, 2011. Neuroplasticity has
always existed. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships,
81--93.

Chapter 3 50

"self-directed neuroplasticity". . . Jeffrey M. Schwartz and Sharon
Begley, The Mind and the Brain: Neuroplasticity and the Power of Mental
Force (New York: Harper Collins, 2002), 21--53.

50 51 51 51

52 53

53

53 54 55 57 58 58 60 60 60 62 62 62 62 65 66

All mental activity creates new neural structure. . . Hanson and
Mendius, Buddha's Brain, 5. Mindfulness --- the steady, nonjudgmental
awareness. . . Jon Kabat-Zinn, Coming to Our Senses: Healing Ourselves
and the World through Mindfulness (New York: Hyperion, 2005), 24.
Empathy --- a wholesome practice of connection. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 203--4. Research is increasingly
showing. . . Sara Lazar, "The Mindful Brain: Reflection and Attunement
and the Neuro-plasticity of Mindful Practice," paper presented at
conference "Mindfulness and Psychotherapy," Lifespan Learning Institute,
Los Angeles, CA, October 6, 2007. The practice of mindfulness. . . Jack
Kornfield, presentation at conference "The Wise Heart and the Mindful
Brain: Buddha Meets Neurobiology," San Francisco, CA, June 8--9, 2007.
Mindfulness of Breathing. . . Sara W. Lazar, Catherine E. Kerr, Rachel
H. Wasserman, Jeremy R. Gray, Douglas N. Greve, Michael T. Treadway,
Metta McGarvey, et al., "Meditation Experience Is Associated with
Increased Cortical Thickness," Neuro Report 16 (2005): 1893--97. Taxi
drivers. . . Eleanor A. Maguire, David G. Dadian, Ingrid S. Johnsrude,
Catriona D. Good, John Ashburner, Richard S. J. Frachowiak, and
Christopher D. Firth, "NavigationRelated Structural Change in the
Hippocampi of Taxi Drivers," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 97 (2000): 4398--4403. Research also shows that mindfulness. .
. Lazar et al., "Meditation Experience Is Associated with Increased
Cortical Thickness." Exercise 1. Based on teachings of Sylvia Boorstein,
Spirit Rock Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA. "That which is aware of
fear". . . James Baraz, meditation retreat, Spirit Rock Meditation
Center, Woodacre, CA, September 1--5, 2005. Guy Armstrong. . . Guy
Armstrong, training in loving kindness practice, Spirit Rock Meditation
Center, Woodacre, CA, September 18, 2004. Exercise 2. Linda Graham,
created for course "Deepening Joy," March 12, 2010. when our minds
contract. . . Cariadne MacKenzie-Hooson, personal communication, April
23, 2004. This true nature. . . Kornfield, presentation at "The Wise
Heart and the Mindful Brain." Neuroscientists have begun. . . Farb et
al., "Attending to the Present." A second circuit. . . Farb et al.,
"Attending to the Present." tools of self-reflection. . . Christopher
Germer, Ronald Siegel, and Paul R. Fulton, Mindfulness and Psychotherapy
(New York: Guilford Press, 2005), 28--51. attention training. . . See,
for example, The Mindfulness in Schools Project,
http://mindfulnessinschools.org, accessed November 21, 2012.
stress-reduction. . . See, for example, Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care, and Society, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, "Stress Reduction Program,"
www.umassmed.edu/cfm/stress/index.aspx, accessed November 21, 2012. take
it all seriously,. . . Andy Dreitcer, presentation on centering prayer,
neurodharma group, San Rafael, CA, May 6, 2012. Exercise 3. Linda
Graham, created for workshop "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal," Esalen Institute, Big Sur, CA, September 1, 2012. Marianne
Williamson. . . Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love: Reflections on
the Principles of "A Course in Miracles" (New York: Harper Collins,
1992), chap. 7, section 3.

Chapter 4 69 69 71 72 72 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 84 87

Research shows that five elements of that empathy. . . Badenoch, Being a
Brain-Wise Therapist, 52--75. Resonance. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience
of Human Relationships, 200--201. Frank Ostaseski. . . Frank Ostaseski,
training in compassionate caregiving, Zen Hospice Project, San
Francisco, CA, April 1998. Exercise 1. Adapted from Daniel J. Siegel,
seminar "Attachment and Interpersonal Neurobiology," Summit Medical
Center, Oakland, CA, October 14, 2001. Attunement. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 201--3. 55 percent of all emotional
meaning is conveyed. . . Albert Mehrabian, Silent Messages: Implicit
Communication of Emotions and Attitudes (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1972),
44-- 45. Exercise 2. Linda Graham, training on the neuroscience of
attachment, Marina Counseling Center, San Francisco, CA, February 28,
2006. Empathy works through the prefrontal cortex. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 203--4. The English novelist Dinah
Craik. . . Dinah Craik, A Life for a Life (London: Hurst and Blackett,
1985), 264. Self-empathy entails understanding. . . Cozolino, "The
Social Brain." Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the Art of
Self-Care," workshop at Psychotherapy Networker symposium "Creating a
New Wisdom: The Art and Science of Optimal Well-Being," Washington, DC,
March 22, 2012. empathy requires a capacity. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 195-- 98. As compassion keeps the
mind and heart open. . . Kristin Neff, Self- Compassion: Stop Beating
Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind (New York: Harper Collins,
2011), 9--13. Exercise 4. Based on Rick Hanson, Just One Thing:
Developing a Buddha Brain One Simple Practice at a Time (Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger Publications, 2011), 22--25. Neuroscientists haven't fully
mapped the function of self-acceptance. . . Daniel J. Siegel, Mindsight:
The New Science of Personal Transformation (New York: Bantam Books,
2010), 188--89. William James, pioneer of American Psychology. . .
Robert I. Fitzhenry, ed., The Harper Book of Quotations (New York:
Harper Collins, 1993), 17. Exercise 5. Adapted from John Freedom,
individual training in emotion freedom technique, San Rafael, CA, July
22, 2005. Wiser Self and True Nature. . . Kornfield, "The Wise Heart and
the Mindful Brain." Exercise 6. Adapted from Coaches Training Institute
training, San Rafael, CA, August 19, 2005. Practitioners of each
paradigm. . . Jack Kornfield, Bringing Home the Dharma: Awakening Right
Where You Are (Boston: Shambhala, 2011), 245--49.

Chapter 5 90 90 90

The brain learns and rewires itself best. . . Janina Fisher, training in
sensorimotor psychotherapy, Sensorimotor Psychotherapy Institute,
Berkeley, CA, January 25--27, 2008. Becoming present means. . . Tara
Brach, "Opening Our Heart in the Face of Fear," paper presented at
conference "Mindfulness and Psychotherapy: Cultivating Well-Being in the
Present Moment," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, October
5, 2007. Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, February 12,
2010.

91 92 92 93 94 94 95 97 97 99

99 100 101 103 105 107 109 109 110

Intention. . . James Baraz and Shoshana Alexander, Awakening Joy: 10
Steps That Will Put You on the Road to Real Happiness (New York: Bantam
Books, 2010), 7--28. more than half the time. . . Marilyn Mandala
Schlitz, Cassandra Vieten, and Tina Amorok, Living Deeply: The Art and
Science of Transformation in Everyday Life (Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications, 2007), 34--40. Adopting the stance that we should. . .
Wray Herbert, "The Willpower Paradox," Scientific American Mind, July
2010, www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=the-willpowerparadox.
Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, February 12, 2010. By
persevering in the use of new tools. . . Siegel, The Developing Mind,
26. A reporter interviewing Thomas Edison. . . Baraz and Alexander,
Awakening Joy, 19. Exercise 3. Linda Graham, created for workshop
"Neuroscience and the Art of Resilience," CorStone, Sausalito, CA,
September 11, 2010. Modern neuroscience confirms. . . Wallin, Attachment
in Psychotherapy, 86--88. "resettle our molecules". . . Phyllis Kirson,
personal communication, January 17, 2004. Neuroscientists have
discovered. . . Daniel J. Siegel, "Awareness, Mirror Neurons, and Neural
Plasticity in the Development of Well-Being," paper presented at
conference "The Healing Power of Emotion: Integrating Relationships,
Body and Mind," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 10,
2007. Exercise 4. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the Art of Self-Care."
The Peace of Wild Things. . . Wendell Berry, Collected Poems (New York,
Northpoint Press, 1984), 69. Exercise 5. Based on Francine Shapiro, EMDR
Institute training, South San Francisco, CA, July 14, 2000. Exercise 6.
Based on Jack Kornfield, A Path with Heart: A Guide through the Perils
and Promises of Spiritual Life (New York: Bantam Books, 1993), 228--43.
Exercise 7. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal"
workshop. Exercise 8. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal" workshop. Exercise 9. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course,
November 12, 2010. "To see a world in a grain of sand". . . William
Blake, "Auguries of Innocence," in The Oxford Book of English Mystical
Verse, ed. D. H. S. Nicholson and A. H. E. Lee (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1917), 57 Virginia Woolf wrote. . . Virginia Woolf, A Room of One's Own
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1929), 172.

Chapter 6 113 New conditioning. . . Based on Siegel, The Developing
Mind, 24. 114 Deconditioning. . . Based on Farb et al., "Attending to
the Present"; Lehrer, Imagine, 31-- 36, 44--52. 114 Reconditioning. . .
Based on Bruce Ecker, "The Brain's Rules for Change: Translating
Cutting-Edge Neuroscience into Practice," Psychotherapy Networker,
January--February 2012, 35--38. 117 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "The
Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal" workshop. 118 Exercise 2. Linda
Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, November 12, 2010. 119 Reconditioning
depends on. . . Goleman, Social Intelligence, 78. 122 Exercise 3. Linda
Graham, "Neuroscience and the Art of Self-Care" workshop. 125 "use the
brain". . . Gerald Huther, The Compassionate Brain: How Empathy Creates
Intelligence (Boston: Shambhala, 2004), 17.

Chapter 7 130 If your earliest experiences. . . Siegel, The Developing
Mind, 89--92. 131 Past Relationships. . . Diana Fosha, The Transforming
Power of Affect: A Model for Accelerated Change (New York: Basic Books,
2000), 71--88. 132 True others. . . Fosha, The Transforming Power of
Affect, 169--71. 133 As Wilde was walking. . . Oscar Wilde, De Profundis
(Los Angeles, CA: Indo European Publishing, 2010), 1. 134 The process of
being seen. . . Siegel, The Developing Mind, 101--3. 134 Among my
favorite stories. . . Jack Kornfield, Spirit Rock Meditation Center,
Woodacre, CA, February 1998. 135 As Henry David Thoreau said. . . Henry
David Thoreau, "Life without Principle," Atlantic Monthly, October 1863,
v. 12, 484. 136 When we shift. . . Mark Brady and Jennifer Austin Leigh,
The Little Book of Listening Skills: 52 Essential Practices for
Profoundly Loving Yourself and Other People (Grand Rapids, MI: Paideia
Press, 2008). 136 Exercise 1. Based on training with Jon Kabat-Zinn on
mindful parenting, Spirit Rock Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA, March 4,
2000. 137 The anterior cingulate cortex. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience
of Human Relationships, 55. 138 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience
and the Art of Self-Care" workshop. 139 This exercise brings the vagus
nerve into play. . . Steve Porges, "Neuroception: A Subconscious System
for Detecting Threats and Safety," paper presented at conference "The
Healing Power of Emotion: Integrating Relationships, Body and Mind,"
Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 10, 2007. 140 As you
remember experiencing a moment of kindness. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 186--98. 140 When your partner
shares. . . Daniel A. Hughes, "Psychological Treatment through
Relationships: Attachment and Inter-subjectivity," paper presented at
conference "The Wholeness of Mind, Brain, Body and Human Relatedness,"
Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 6, 2010. 141
Exercise 3. Based on Sylvia Boorstein, metta retreat, Spirit Rock
Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA, January 6--13, 2006. 143 "know the song
of your heart". . . Contributed by Shoshana Alexander, personal
communication, July 18, 2008. 144 Loving kindness practice. . . Farb et
al., "Attending to the Present." 146 Exercise 4. Based on Jack
Kornfield, training on the Brahma Viharas, Spirit Rock Meditation
Center, Woodacre, CA, July 2003. 147 The steady eye contact. . . Allan
Schore, "Relational Trauma," paper presented at conference "Current
Approaches to the Treatment of Trauma: The Shift from Cognitive to
Affect Regulation, EMDR, Sensorimotor and Other Evidence-Based
Treatments," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 7,
2009. 148 We may "smallify". . . Daniel Ellenberg, personal
communication, October 11, 2008. 148 Exercise 5. Linda Graham, based on
individual study with James Baraz, May 2004. 150 When we intentionally
evoke the sense. . . Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy, 76--77. 150
The psychological self. . . Jerry Lamagna, "Of the Self, By the Self and
For the Self: Internal Attachment, Attunement and Psychological Change,"
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration 21, no. 3 (2011): 280--307. 151
Exercise 6. Based on Virginia Satir, training at Marina Counseling
Center, San Francisco, CA, January 1992. 154 "The Guest House". . .
Rumi, The Essential Rumi, trans. Coleman Barks (San Francisco: Harper
Collins, 1995), 109.

Chapter 8 157 you missed out. . . Bowlby, A Secure Base, 11--12. 157
FACES. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 78. 157 This base of inner
security is a vital protection. . . Ogden, "Integrating the Body in
Trauma Treatment." 157 locates the neural substrate. . . Siegel, The
Mindful Brain, 164. 158 specific relational capacities. . . Phil Shaver,
"Secure Attachment Primes Secure Relationships," paper presented at
conference "Anatomy of Intimacy: Desire, Monogamy and the Neurobiology
of Intimate Attachments," Lifespan Learning Institute, Irvine, CA,
November 9, 2008. 158 The findings of the research. . . His Holiness the
Dalai Lama, Ethics for the New Millennium (New York: Penguin Putnam,
1999), 17. 159 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, August
13, 2010. 160 When we seek out new experiences. . . Daniel J. Siegel,
"An Interpersonal Neurobiology Approach to Psychotherapy," paper
presented at conference "Toward a New Psychology of Interpersonal
Relationships," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 9,
2012. 161 Rick Hanson. . . Hanson and Mendius, Buddha's Brain, 67--77.
162 Exercise 2. Based on Hanson, Just One Thing, 17--21. 162 If we are
so busy. . . Hanson and Mendius, Buddha's Brain, 67--77. 164 Exercise 3.
Based on Jack Kornfield, training in wise speech, Spirit Rock Meditation
Center, Woodacre, CA, February 2001. 165 Relaxing into the defocusing
mode. . . Farb et al., "Attending to the Present"; Lehrer, Imagine,
31--36, 44--52. 166 A teaching story in the Buddhist tradition. . .
Sylvia B oorstein, metta retreat. 167 Exercise 4. Based on Diana Fosha,
immersion course in accelerated experiential dynamic psychotherapy,
Adelphi University, New York, July 28--August 1, 2003.

Chapter 9 171 these bonds provide us. . . Daniel Gilbert, This Emotional
Life, PBS series, January 4, 2010, available online at
www.pbs.org/thisemotionallife. 172 more predictive of our success. . .
Goleman, Emotional Intelligence, 42--45. 172 Researchers at the
University of Michigan. . . James Coan, "Our Social Baseline: How
Healthy Relationships Increase the Efficiency of Our Thoughts and
Actions," paper presented at conference "Toward a New Psychology of
Interpersonal Relationships," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles,
CA, March 9, 2012. 173 Our nervous systems have evolved. . . Robert J.
Neborsky, "Brain, Mind and Dyadic Changes Processes," paper presented at
conference "The Healing Power of Emotion: Integrating Relationships,
Body and Mind," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 10,
2007. 173 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal" workshop. 174 When we reach out. . . Porges, "Neuroception."
175 Developmental psychologists. . . Baby Center, "Milestone Charts:
What You Can Expect from Birth to Age 3." 175 Theory of mind. . .
Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 195--98. 176 Exercise
2. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal" workshop.
177 Theory of mind is a complex mental capacity. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 195--98. 179 Exercise 3. Linda
Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience" workshop.

181 even in "good enough" close relationships. . . Ed Tronick, "Rupture
in Relationships," paper presented at conference "Toward a New
Psychology of Interpersonal Relationships," Lifespan Learning Institute,
Los Angeles, CA, March 11, 2012. 182 Exercise 4. Linda Graham, "The
Neuroscience of Resilience" workshop. 184 Most of us will experience
injury, injustice. . . Jack Kornfield and Fred Luskin, "The Science and
Practice of Forgiveness," Greater Good Science Seminar, University of
California, Berkeley, May 15, 2010. 185 Exercise 5. Based on Kornfield
and Luskin, "The Science and Practice of Forgiveness." 187 Forgiveness
is a powerful practice. . . Farb et al., "Attending to the Present." 188
every resilient behavior. . . Gilbert, This Emotional Life.

Chapter 10 193 195 198 198 199 200 200 200 201 204 204 206 207

window of tolerance. . . Siegel, The Developing Mind, 253--258.
Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, November 12, 2010.
Because of the efficiency. . . Porges, "Neuroception." Exercise 2. Linda
Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal" workshop. Dyadic
regulation. . . Fosha, The Transforming Power of Affect, 61--66. One is
the vagus nerve. . . Porges, "Neuroception." The other structure. . .
Schore, "Relational Trauma." Losing Our Equilibrium. . . Porges,
"Neuroception"; Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships,
88--93. Table 4. Adapted from Janina Fisher, training in sensorimotor
psychotherapy, Sensorimotor Psychotherapy Institute, Berkeley, CA,
January 25--27, 2008. Fast-Track Survival Responses. . . Cozolino, The
Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 317--19. The prefrontal cortex
operates on a slow track. . . Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human
Relationships, 317--19. Stress Responses Can Knock the Prefrontal
Cortex. . . Fisher, training in sensorimotor psychotherapy. Cortisol
also destroys new brain cells. . . Sharon Begley, "The Emotional Styles
of the Brain," transcript of interview with Ruth Buczynski, National
Institute for the Clinical Application of Behavioral Medicine, April 18,
2011, p. 17, www.nicabm.com/thebrain2011.

Chapter 11 209 The hormone oxytocin is the neurotransmitter. . .
Goleman, Social Intelligence, 164. 210 Stephen Johnson. . . Stephen
Johnson, Mind Wide Open: Your Brain and the Neuroscience of Everyday
Life (New York: Scribner, 2004), 107. 210 a single exposure to oxytocin.
. . Sue Carter, "Oxytocin in Prairie Voles; Oxytocin in Humans," paper
presented at conference "Anatomy of Intimacy: Desire, Monogamy and the
Neurobiology of Intimate Attachments," Lifespan Learning Institute,
Irvine, CA, November 7, 2008. 211 Any warm, loving touch. . . Dacher
Keltner, Born to Be Good: The Science of a Meaningful Life (New York: W.
W. Norton, 2009), 182. 211 Exercises 1a and 1b. Based on Keltner, Born
to Be Good, 187. 212 Exercise 1c. Adapted from Stan Tatkin, "Bottom Up
Techniques to Use with Your Couples," presentation at conference
"Intimacy and Couples," Lifespan Learning Institute, Irvine, CA,
November 7--9, 2008. 212 Safe touching with loved ones. . . Keltner,
Born to Be Good, 205.

213 213 213 215 215 215 215 216 216 217 218 218 219 220 221 222 224 224
225

We can give our brains baths. . . Goleman, Social Intelligence, 244. As
Dan Goleman says,. . . Goleman, Social Intelligence, 216. Exercise 2.
Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the Art of Self-Care" workshop.
Breathing deeply. . . Hanson and Mendius, Buddha's Brain, 81. Breathing
positive emotions. . . Institute of Heart Math, "Science of the Heart:
Exploring the Role of the Heart in Human Performance,"
www.heartmath.org/research/science-ofthe-heart/emotional-balance-health,
5, accessed October 1, 2012. Neural pathways from the heart to the
brain. . . Institute of Heart Math, "Science of the Heart." In evoking a
memory or image. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist, 156. The
autonomic nervous system. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist,
20. When we intentionally slow down. . . Hanson and Mendius, Buddha's
Brain, 81. Exercise 3a. Based on personal study with Terry Trotter,
Albany, CA, May 14, 2009. Exercise 3b. Adapted from Frank Ostaseski,
training in compassionate caregiving, Zen Hospice Project, San
Francisco, CA, April 1998. The body stores somatic memories. . . Ogden,
"Integrating the Body in Trauma," 3. Exercise 4a. Based on Mark
Williams, John Teasdale, Zindel Segal, and Jon Kabat-Zinn, The Mindful
Way through Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic Unhappiness (New
York: Guilford Press, 2007), 104--6. The anterior cingulate cortex. . .
Cozolino, The Neuroscience of Human Relationships, 104--9. Exercise 4b.
Adapted from Marsha Davis, Elizabeth Robbins Eshelman, and Matthew
McKay, The Relaxation and Stress Reduction Workbook (Oakland, CA: New
Harbinger Publications, 2008), 41--46. Exercise 4c. Based on Natalie
Rogers, training in expressive arts therapy, San Francisco, CA, April
15--17, 2004. The body has its own wisdom. . . Fisher, training in
sensorimotor psychotherapy. Our resilience can be thrown. . . Fisher,
training in sensorimotor psychotherapy. Exercise 5. Based on Peter
Levine, training in somatic experiencing, University of California,
Berkeley, October 15--16, 2004.

Chapter 12 229 A master monk. . . Sylvia Boorstein, Spirit Rock
Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA, January 2006. 230 An excellent example.
. . Coan, "Our Social Baseline." 231 Phil Shaver discovered. . . Shaver,
"Secure Attachment Primes Secure Relationships." 231 Sue Carter. . .
Carter, "Oxytocin in Prairie Voles; Oxytocin in Humans." 232 Exercises
1a--c. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the Art of Self-Care" workshop.
234 the greatest predictor of success. . . Moeller, "Happier People Deal
Better with Hardships." 235 Research also shows that for purposes of
somatic resourcing. . . Moeller, "Happier People Deal Better with
Hardships." 235 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of
Resilience and Renewal" workshop. 236 A baby can. . . Baby Center,
"Milestone Charts: What You Can Expect from Birth to Age 3." 236 it can
send an inhibitory transmitter. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise
Therapist, 31. 237 My meditation teacher. . . Sylvia Boorstein, metta
retreat. 237 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience
and Renewal" workshop. 238 A sense of incompetence. . . Fisher, training
in sensorimotor psychotherapy. 239 When we're about. . . Bill Bowen,
training in somatic resourcing, John F. Kennedy University, Pleasant
Hill, CA, June 13, 2008.

239 Dopamine is the neurotransmitter. . . Jonah Lehrer, How We Decide
(New York: Mariner Books, 2010), 34--39. 240 The insula. . . Lehrer, How
We Decide, 40--42. 240 Read Montague, professor. . . Lehrer, How We
Decide, 41. 240 Bill Bowen. . . Bowen, training in somatic resourcing.
241 "Do one thing every day". . . Eleanor Roosevelt, You Learn by
Living: Eleven Keys for a More Fulfilling Life (New York: Harper
Perennial, 2011), 23--42. 241 "About to grow!". . . Jack Kornfield, "The
Wise Heart and the Mindful Brain." 241 Exercise 4. Linda Graham, "The
Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal" workshop. 242 one of the best
tools. . . Moeller, "Happier People Deal Better with Hardships." 242 Our
brain rewires. . . Lehrer, How We Decide, 42, 48. 243 Exercise 5. Linda
Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, May 14, 2010. 244 One of the major
functions. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist, 35--37.

Chapter 13 250 The desire to get rid of. . . Daniel Goleman, Destructive
Emotions: How Can We Overcome Them? (New York: Bantam Books, 2004) 49.
250 neuroscientists who study feelings. . . Lehrer, How We Decide,
xiv--xvii. 250 According to Daniel Goleman. . . Goleman, Emotional
Intelligence, 28. 251 our emotions are unparalleled mechanisms of human
connection. . . Diana Fosha, "Attachment, Emotion, Integration and
Healing in Experiential Action," paper presented at conference "The
Healing Power of Emotion: Integrating Relationships, Body and Mind,"
Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles, CA, March 9--11, 2007. 251
These sensations are filtered. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise
Therapist, 24--28. 252 A few winters ago. . . Heather Martin and Sylvia
Boorstein, metta retreat, Spirit Rock Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA,
January 6--13, 2006. 252 All emotions are. . . Goleman, Emotional
Intelligence, 5--8. 252 Once we learn. . . Fosha, The Transforming Power
of Affect, 115--17. 253 The prefrontal cortex is the manager of
emotions. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise Therapist, 30, 33--35. 255
Developing the Prefrontal Cortex. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain- Wise
Therapist, 57--75. 259 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the
Art of Self-Care" workshop. 260 repeated noticing and naming. . . Lazar
et al., "Meditation Experience Is Associated with Increased Cortical
Thickness." 260 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of
Resilience" workshop. 262 We all rely. . . Schore, "Relational Trauma."
263 people don't always know. . . Diana Rico, "Prelude to Courage," Ode,
June 2011, 17. 263 computer programs available that train the brain. . .
See, for example, Paul Ekman, "F.A.C.E.Training: Interactive Training by
Dr. Paul Ekman," http://face.paulekman.com, accessed November 21, 2012.
263 A wave of emotion. . . Daniel N. Stern, The Present Moment in
Psychotherapy and Everyday Life (New York: W. W. Norton, 2004), 31--40.
264 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, based on training in tonglen by Don
McLeod, Spirit Rock Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA, June 2000. 266
Depression, which is. . . National Institute for Mental Health,
"Depression," www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression, accessed
November 21, 2012. 266 many ways besides medication. . . Michael Yapko,
"Treating Depression: An Experiential Approach," presentation at
Psychotherapy Networker symposium "Creating a New Wisdom: The Art and
Science of Optimal Well-Being," Washington, DC, March 25, 2012. 268
Exercise 4. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course, May 14, 2010.

270 any emotion can be managed and borne. . . Diana Fosha,
"Metatherapeutic Processes and Their Transformational Affects," paper
presented at conference "The Healing Power of Emotion: Integrating
Relationships, Body and Mind," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles,
CA, March 10, 2007.

Chapter 14 273 cultivating positive emotions. . . Barbara L.
Frederickson, "The Broaden-and-Build Theory of Positive Emotions,"
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, Biological
Sciences 359 (September 29, 2004): 1367--78. 273 Positive emotions that
broaden habitual modes of thinking. . . Frederickson, "The
Broadenand-Build Theory." 274 Even more compelling data. . . Keltner,
Born to Be Good, 235--49. 274 In over one hundred studies. . . Robert
Emmons, Thanks! How Practicing Gratitude Can Make You Happier (New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 2008), 27--46. 275 Exercise 1. Based on Robert Emmons,
"The Science of a Meaningful Life: Gratitude," seminar, Greater Good
Science Center, University of California, Berkeley, October 22, 2010.
277 Neuroimaging has revealed. . . Richard J. Davidson, "Well-Being and
Affective Style: Neural Substrates and Biobehavioural Correlates,"
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, Biological
Sciences 359 (2004): 1395--1411; Antoine Lutz, Lawrence L. Greischar,
Nancy B. Rawlings, Mattieu Ricard, and Richard J. Davidson, "Long- Term
Meditators Self-Induce High Amplitude Synchrony during Mental Practice,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (2004): 16369--73.
277 Positive emotions strengthen the capacity. . . Frederickson, "The
Broaden-and-Build Theory." 278 Jack Gilbert counsels us. . . Jack
Gilbert, Collected Poems (New York: Knopf, 2012), 213. 278 Dan Siegel. .
. Siegel, "Awakening the Mind." 278 Neuropsychologists know that
resonant interactions. . . Louis Cozolino, The Healthy Aging Brain:
Sustaining Attachment, Attaining Wisdom (New York: W. W. Norton, 2008),
67--85. 279 Paul Ekman. . . Paul Ekman, "Darwin and the Dalai Lama,
United by Compassion," seminar, Greater Good Science Center, University
of California, Berkeley, June 11, 2010. 281 The poet and anthologist. .
. Roger Housden, Ten Poems to Change Your Life (New York: Harmony Books,
2001), book jacket. 281 Exercise 2. Adapted from Baraz and Alexander,
Awakening Joy, 75--76. 283 Healthy shame. . . Ken Benau,
shame-pride-psychotherapy @yahoo.groups.com, online forum post, April 6,
2012. 283 no one could survive. . . Hanson, "Taking In the Good." 284
Learning to be resilient. . . Badenoch, Being a Brain-Wise Therapist,
52--63. 284 Toxic shame takes root. . . Ken Benau,
shame-pride-psychotherapy @yahoo.groups.com, online forum post, February
19, 2012. 284 neural cells around the heart. . . Badenoch, Being a
Brain- Wise Therapist, 105--10. 284 "trance of unworthiness". . . Brach,
Radical Acceptance, 5--23. 284 Researchers have identified four
processes. . . Ken Benau, shame-pridepsychotherapy@yahoo.groups.com,
online forum post, April 15, 2012. 286 As my colleague Ken Benau says. .
.Ken Benau, shame-pride-psychotherapy @yahoo.groups.com, online forum
post, May 5, 2012. 287 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "Neuroscience and the
Art of Self-Care" workshop.

Chapter 15

293 Emotional intelligence. . . Goleman, Emotional Intelligence, ix. 294
I first heard this story. . . Jack Kornfield, Spirit Rock Meditation
Center, Woodacre, CA, June 22, 1998. 295 Exercise 1. Based on Barbara
Frederickson, Positivity: Groundbreaking Research Reveals How to Embrace
the Hidden Strength of Positive Emotions, Overcome Negativity, and
Thrive (New York: Crown Publishers, 2009), 215--22. 295 CASEL. . . See
www.casel.org. 296 Practices of self-appreciation. . . Neff,
Self-Compassion, 267--83. 297 Kristin Neff suggests. . . Neff,
Self-Compassion, 267--283. 297 Exercise 2. Based on Neff,
Self-Compassion, 16--17. 299 Neuroscientists have observed. . .Davidson,
"Well-Being and Affective Style." 300 Exercise 3. Based on Marshall
Rosenberg, Non-violent Communication: A Language of Life (Encinitas, CA:
Puddle Dancer Press, 2005), 6--7.

Chapter 16 308 people who exhibit. . . Moeller, "Happier People Deal
Better with Hardships." 308 neurobiological basis. . . Badenoch, Being a
Brain- Wise Therapist, 30. 309 We practice mindfulness. . . Siegel,
Mindsight, 79--101. 310 Sara's calm. . . Porges, "Neuroception." 310
through the connection. . . Goleman, Social Intelligence, 244. 310 By
calmly focusing. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 108--33. 311 Exercise 1.
Based on Stuart Eisendrath, meditation on mindfulness and depression,
Spirit Rock Meditation Center, Woodacre, CA, November 15, 2008. 312These
encoded beliefs. . . Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy, 133--44.
315When we become fully aware. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 164--88.
316 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal" workshop. 319 By framing every moment. . . Siegel, The Mindful
Brain, 109--10. 319 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy" course,
May 7, 2010. 320 The Buddhist teachings. . . Pema Chödrön, transcript of
conversation with Pema Chödrön and Jack Kornfield, San Francisco, CA,
May 26, 2005, available at
http://archive.thebuddhadhamma.com/web-archive/category/winter-2005,
accessed July 1, 2012.

Chapter 17 324 One of the hallmarks of resilience. . . Moeller, "Happier
People Deal Better with Hardships." 324 "monitor and modify". . . Daniel
J. Siegel, The Mindful Therapist: A Clinician's Guide to Mindsight and
Neural Integration (New York: W. W. Norton, 2010), 44--50. 325 "When the
dog bites". . . Richard Rodgers, "My Favorite Things," The Sound of
Music (1959). Lyrics available at STLyrics, www.stlyrics.com
/lyrics/thesoundofmusic/myfavoritethings. 325 the power of positive
thoughts. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 109--10. 325 Exercise 1. Linda
Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and Renewal" workshop. 326 The
longer you dwell. . . Frederickson, Positivity, 163--66. 327 taking
ourselves out of a familiar environment. . . Lehrer, Imagine, 29--32.
328 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, created for e-newsletter "Shifting
Perspectives Leads to Resilience," March 18, 2008, archived at
www.lindagraham-mft.net. 329 When we focus our awareness. . . Robert
Hirni, personal communication, June 28, 2012. 329 The shift to the
defocusing network. . . Lehrer, Imagine, 29--32.

331 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal" workshop. 333 When we deeply believe. . . Wallin, Attachment in
Psychotherapy, 133--66. 334 The psychologist and philosopher Jean
Piaget. . . Linda Graham, "Accommodating Zebras: Healing and Awakening
into Aliveness and Wholeness," e-newsletter, April 2011,
www.lindagraham-mft.net/newsletters-and-quotes/newsletters/newsletter-april-2011.
334 "Crisis, suffering, loss". . . Rachel Naomi Remen, in Schlitz,
Vieten, and Amorok, Living Deeply, 37. 335 from a helpless "poor me". .
. Wallin, Attachment in Psychotherapy, 133--66.

Chapter 18 337 Autobiography. . . Portia Nelson, There's a Hole in my
Sidewalk: The Romance of SelfDiscovery (New York: Atria Books, 2012),
xi--xii. 341 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, created for this book, 2012. 344
The prefrontal cortex makes its decisions. . . Siegel, The Mindful
Brain, 288--320.

Chapter 19 349 349 350 350 350 351 352 354 355 355 355 356

357 357 358 359 361 361 361 362 364 365

In 1971. . . Schlitz, Vieten, and Amorok, Living Deeply, 4, 45--47.
Neuroscientists are now beginning. . . Lehrer, Imagine, 13--19. That
state of reverie creates opportunities. . . Lehrer, Imagine, 29--33.
"plane of open possibilities". . . Siegel, The Mindful Therapist, 8--17.
Using the prefrontal cortex. . . Siegel, Mindsight, 71--76. Brain scans
of people who have experienced this process. . . Marc Kauffman,
"Meditation Gives Brain a Charge, Study Finds," Washington Post, January
3, 2005. Exercise 1. Linda Graham, created for this book, 2012. The
mature prefrontal cortex. . . Farb et al., "Attending to the Present."
"I seem to be a verb". . . Buckminster Fuller, Jerome Agel, and Quention
Fiore, I Seem to Be a Verb: Environment and Man's Future (New York:
Bantam Books, 1970). rather than being occupied with analysis. . .
Lehrer, Imagine, 29--33. Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "Deepening Joy"
course, November 11, 2011. even when the brain is not focusing. . .
Damien A. Fair, Alexander L. Cohen, Nico U. F. Dosenbach, Jessica A.
Church, Francis M. Miezin, Deanna M. Barch, Marcus E. Raichle, Steven E.
Petersen, and Bradley L. Schlaggar, "The Maturing Architecture of the
Brain's Default Network," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 105 (March 11, 2008): 4028--32. a small fold of brain tissue. .
. Lehrer, Imagine, 17--19. We join spokes together. . . Lao Tzu, Tao Te
Ching, trans. Stephen Mitchell (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), 11. The
defocusing network involved in this large-scale deconditioning. . . Farb
et al., "Attending to the Present." Exercise 3. Linda Graham, "Deepening
Joy" course, November 11, 2011. even in a bliss state. . . James Baraz,
personal communication, January 13, 2010. Scans of the brain waves of
meditators. . . Marina Watson Pelaez, " 'Oneness' Feeling Experienced by
Monks, Explained," Time, April 27, 2011. measurable spike. . . Lehrer,
Imagine, 17. This sense of innate goodness. . . Jack Kornfield, The Wise
Heart: A Guide to the Universal Teachings of Buddhist Psychology (New
York: Bantam Books, 2008), 11--21. Exercise 4. Linda Graham, created for
this book, 2012. My mentor Diana Fosha reminds us. . . Diana Fosha,
"Transformance, Recognition of Self by Self, and Effective Action,"
Existential-Integrative Psychotherapy: Guideposts to the

365 367 368 368

Core of Practice, ed. K. J. Schneider (New York: Routledge, 2008),
290--320. Exercise 5. Linda Graham, created for presentation "The
Personal Self and Its Relationship to True Nature," Spirit Rock
Meditation Center, September 8, 2010, available at
www.lindagraham-mft.net/resources /dharmatalks. The brain operates
differently. . . Farb et al., "Attending to the Present." Using the
defocusing network. . . Antoine Lutz et al., "Long-Term Meditators
Self-Induce High Amplitude Synchrony." This neural harmony. . . Siegel,
Mindsight, 71--76.

Chapter 20 373 Even when difficulties. . . Daniel Siegel, "Mindful
Awareness," paper presented at conference "The Wholeness of Mind, Brain,
Body and Human Relatedness," Lifespan Learning Institute, Los Angeles,
CA, March 6, 2010. 374 Jon Kabat-Zinn, developer. . . "The Art of
Conscious Living," VHL Family Forum, September 1993,
www.vhl.org/newsletter/vhl1993/93/cazinn. 374 "use it or lose it". . .
Judith Horstman, The Scientific American Brave New Brain (New York:
Jossey-Bass, 2010), 15. 374 We also have to keep challenging our brains.
. . Horstman, The Scientific American Brave New Brain, 17. 375 "We have
not solved your problems". . . Ted Swift, personal communication, June
11, 1994. 375 Learning model for resilience. . . training in
fundamentals of coaching, Coaches Training Institute, San Rafael, CA,
August 19--21, 2005. 376 Exercise 1. Linda Graham, created for this
book, 2012. 378 "As an irrigator guides water". . . Buddha, Dhammapada
6, translated by Thanissaro Bhikkhu,
www.beliefnet.com/quotes/Buddhist/General/D/Dhammapada-6-translated-byThanissaro-Bhikkhu.
378 create a coherent narrative. . . Siegel, The Mindful Brain, 307--11.
379 Exercise 2. Linda Graham, "The Neuroscience of Resilience and
Renewal" workshop. 380 Sylvia Boorstein. . . Sylvia Boorstein, personal
communication, March 29, 2011. 381 Exercise 3. Linda Graham, created for
this book, 2012. 382 Patti Quigley. . .Beyond Belief, documentary film
by Beth Murphy (2006). 383 altruism is also fueled. . . Goleman, Social
Intelligence, 50--62. 384 Exercise 4. Linda Graham, created for this
book, 2012. 385 Exercise 5. Linda Graham, created for this book, 2012.

INDEX

acceptance defined, 70 as empathy element, 81--83, 88 exercises, 83
self-acceptance, 82--83 strengthening capacities of, 83--84 toxic shame
healed through, 287--90 accommodation, 334 Activating the Release of
Oxytocin through a Head Rub (exercise), 211 Activating the Release of
Oxytocin through Hand on the Heart (exercise), 213--14 Activating the
Release of Oxytocin through Hugs (exercise), 212 Activating the Release
of Oxytocin through Massaging the Vagus Nerve (exercise), 211
adaptability, 157 addictive behavior, 239 adversity, coping with,
40--42, 79, 94 Aesop's fables, 381--82 affects, 251 Alcott, Louisa May,
xxiii altruism, 382--84 amygdala, 230, 280 calming down of, 197, 236--37
cortisol released by, 206--7 as emotional processing center, 251 as
fast-track structure, 204, 205 fear response originating in, 15--16,
200--202, 254 as focusing network structure, 25 low activity of, and
safety, 147 Angelou, Maya, 293 anger managing, 253--55, 258, 261,
263--64 positive effects of, 252, 267 prosocial behavior and, 279--80
reflection and, 314--15 resilience derailed by, 249 anterior cingulate
cortex, 254

brain functions of, 24 breath mindfulness and, 53 dopamine system and,
240 as focusing network structure, 25, 137--38, 220, 240 noticing/naming
and, 310--11 self sense created through, 177--78 anterior superior
temporal gyrus, 357 anxiety, 249, 296 appreciation, sustenance through,
294--97 Archimedes, 362 Aristotle, 258 Armstrong, Guy, 57, 74
assimilation, 334 attachment theory disorganized attachment, 32--33 fear
and, 197 insecure-anxious attachment, 31--32 insecure-avoidant
attachment, 30--31 internal secure base and, 157 relational intelligence
and, 173 secure attachment, 7--9, 33--34, 130, 135, 159, 383 attunement
to body's emotional experiences, 258--60 defined, 19, 69 as empathy
element, 72--74, 76, 88 exercises, 73 self-attunement, 53, 78
strengthening capacities of, 83--84 "Autobiography in Five Short
Chapters" (poem; Nelson), 337--38 automatic negative thoughts (ANTS),
325--26 automatic positive thoughts (APTS), 325--26 autonomic nervous
system (ANS) amygdala and, 205 brain functions of, 16 deactivation of,
208, 215, 216, 222, 238 dyadic regulation of, 199 as fast-track
structure, 204 sympathetic vs. parasympathetic branches of, 201--3, 201
t. See also parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) awareness, 61 of
awareness, 91, 351, 361, 364 of competence/incompetence, 375--76
mindful, 52--53, 62--67 shifting, 316--17 simultaneous dual, 121--22,
123 spacious, 109 steadying of, 55--59 unconditioned, 370 of whole self,
351 See also self-awareness awe, moments of, 108--9

Baldwin, James, 171 Baraz, James, 55, 214--15 Baylor University, 240
Becoming an Agent of Change (exercise), 385 Beecher, Henry Ward, 273
Befriending Yourself by Accepting the Many Parts of Yourself (exercise),
151--53 behavior changes, 178--81, 324 "belly botany" exercise, 328--29
Benau, Ken, 286 Benson, Herbert, 221 Bergson, Henri, 113 Berry, Wendell,
100 big organizing principles (BOPs), 378--85 Blake, William, 109 Blind
Side, The (film; 2010), 129--30 body -based resources (see somatic
resources) emotions experienced in, 258--60 body language, 7, 72--73
body scan, somatic memories rewired through, 219--20 bonding, early
experiences of, 130 Boorstein, Sylvia, 142, 237 boundary-setting, 172,
175--78, 251 Bowen, Bill, 240--41 Bowlby, John, 7, 8, 30, 157, 212
Brach, Tara, 214--15, 284 brain behavior habits as learned by, 10--13
CEO of resilience in (see prefrontal cortex) challenging, 374 complexity
of, 14 default operation of, 356--57 development of, 277 efficiency of,
34 emotional, 250 higher, 15, 17 t. 1, 18--24, 18 fig. 2, 26, 40, 131,
204, 216, 253, 256 integrated, 368--69 left hemisphere, 19, 21--23, 22
t. 3, 38, 137--38, 178, 253, 254--55, 258, 277--78, 280--81, 357, 374
left shift in, 277--78, 282--83, 299 lower, 15--18, 17 t. 1, 26, 39--40,
192, 204, 256 during mindfulness practice, 56--57 negativity bias of,
39--40, 161, 205, 251 oxytocin receptors in, 290 priming, 230--34
resilience capacities innate in, xxvi, 26--27 resilience development in,
4--5, 29 resonance circuit of, 87--88, 139--40, 155, 183, 282--83, 383
right hemisphere, 19--21, 22 t. 3, 23, 40, 61, 137--38, 147, 178, 253,
258, 262--63, 277, 280-- 81, 357, 359, 374 risk-taking and, 239--42

structures of, 16 fig. 1 See also amygdala; anterior cingulate cortex;
autonomic nervous system (ANS); hippocampus; insula; prefrontal cortex;
specific function; specific structure brain functions, xxvii--xxviii
brain scans, 351 brain stem, 15, 25, 201, 204, 239 Brain That Changes
Itself, The (Doidge), 14 breath/breathing calm restored through, 192,
215, 216--18 exercises for, 54--55, 217 focusing attention on, 358,
359--60 mindfulness of, 52, 53--55 Breathing to Create Resonant
Connection (exercise), 218 "Brief for the Defense, A" (poem; Gilbert),
278 Bringing Attunement to Consciousness (exercise), 73--74 Bringing
Resonance to Consciousness (exercise), 72 Buddha, 103, 378 Buddha's
Brain (Hanson), 161 Buddha's Little Instruction Book (Kornfield), 193
Buddhism, xxvii, xxix compassion practice in, 264 consciousness shifting
techniques of, 350 eightfold path, 380 equanimity in, 194, 195, 196--97
forgiveness practice, 185--87 innate goodness in, 362 life experiences
as viewed in, 320--21 loving kindness practice, 141--44, 145 "mental
contents," 56--57, 59 mindfulness in, 50, 56, 62 suffering as viewed in,
196--97 teaching stories, 166, 229 true nature in, 60, 84 wisdom and
compassion in, 87 wisdom practices in, 103 calm, xxviii brain rewiring
and, 90 conditioning and, 12, 26 during crises, 229--34 emotional
management skills for, 270 inner base of resilience and, 169 loss and
recovery of, 200--203, 204--8 mindful empathy and, 87 neural circuits
created for, 114 oxytocin and, 209--10, 230--32, 239, 245, 296, 310
refuges and, 97 relational intelligence skills and, 172 relationships
and, 145 restoration of, through calm of others, 197--200 self-directed
neuroplasticity and, 125

window of tolerance and, 191--92, 208 See also window of tolerance
Calvin and Hobbes (comic strip), 237 caregivers, compulsive, 32 Carson,
Rachel, 108--9 Carter, Sue, 231--32 causal relations, 23 cerebral
cortex, 22 t. 3 change becoming agent of, 384--85 in behavior, 178--81
negotiating, 172 Chicago Psychiatric Institute, 231--32 childhood
amnesia, 23--24 Chödrön, Pema, 320--21 Choosing a Practice (exercise),
103--4 Churchill, Winston, 245 clarity, xxviii conditioning and, 12, 26
emotional management skills for, 271 inner base of resilience and, 170
through mindful empathy, 74, 87 through mindfulness, 51--53 reflection
skills and, 318 relational intelligence skills and, 172 relationships
and, 145 self-directed neuroplasticity and, 125 Coan, James, 230--31
coherence, 157 Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning
(CASEL), 295 Coming into Presence (exercise), 89--90 compassion as
Buddhist "sublime attitude," 145 in communication, 299--303 defined, 70
emotions managed/shifted through, 264--66 as empathy element, 78--81, 88
exercises, 80--81, 264--65 power of, 79--80 relational intelligence and,
172 self-compassion, 79, 80--81, 93, 179, 297--99 strengthening
capacities of, 83--84 toxic relationships and, 131 compassionate action,
384--85 competence, xxviii conditioning and, 12, 26 emotional, 271
incompetence reframed as, 237--38 inner base of resilience and, 170
mindful empathy and, 87 phases of, 375--76

previous, confidence from, 234--37, 245 relational intelligence skills
and, 172 relationships and, 145 self-directed neuroplasticity and, 125
complexity, 58--59 compliments, 148 conditioning behavior habits created
through, 11--12, 34 defined, xxviii, 4, 11 dysfunctional, 5, 34--36
exercises, 117, 118--19 less-than-optimal, repairing, 42--45 neural
foundation for resilience through, 4--5 new, 25, 113--14, 115--17, 125,
161, 308, 324--27 secure attachment and, 33--34 stabilization from, 12
See also deconditioning; reconditioning confidence, from previous
competence, 234--37, 245 Connecting to Spiritual Resources (exercise),
109--10 connection, xxviii, 104--5, 140 conditioning and, 12, 26
defined, xxviii of emotionally healthy brains, 278--83, 290 emotional
management skills for, 270--71 inner base of resilience and, 169 mindful
empathy and, 87 relational intelligence skills and, 172 relationships
and, 145 self-directed neuroplasticity and, 125 consciousness, shifts
in, 349--51 coping, five Cs of, 12, 26, 40, 87, 104--5, 125, 130--31,
140, 145, 172, 199, 227, 270--71, 293--94, 303--4, 335 See also calm;
clarity; competence; connection; courage coping strategies with change,
12--13 default, 119 as learned patterns, xxvii--xxix memories of, 193
new, 119, 124--25 rewiring, xxix--xxx, 5, 113--15 coping strategies,
poor adversity and, 40--42 development of, 29, 257--58 implicit memory
and, 36--39 learned from others, 30--34 negativity bias and, 39--40
psychological self and, 150--51 self-reinforcement of conditioned
habits, 34--36 corpus callosum, 23, 260 cortisol, 42, 206--7, 209--10
courage, xxviii, xxviii, 12, 26, 87, 125, 145, 169, 172

Cox, Ruth, 136 Cozolino, Louis, 8 Craik, Dinah, 75--76 Creating a Better
Choice through New Conditioning (exercise), 117 Creating a Circle of
Support (exercise), 99--100 Creating a Safe Place (exercise), 101--2
Creating Material Resources (exercise), 105 Creating Options, Discerning
Choices, and Choosing Wisely (exercise), 341--43 crises, calmness in,
229--34 Cultivating Empathy and Self- Empathy (exercise), 77--78
Cultivating Equanimity (exercise), 195--96 Cultivating Self-Acceptance
(exercise), 83 Cultivating Self-Compassion (exercise), 80--81 Cummings,
E. E., 96--97 Dalai Lama, 158, 279--80 Darwin, Charles, 49 Davidson,
Richard, xxviii daydreaming, 61 decision making, 250--51, 291, 338--44
deconditioning defined, 114, 125 defocusing network and, 25 emotions
managed through, 264--66, 279, 280 exercises, 118--19, 264--65
forgiveness through, 184 as neuroplasticity process, 118--19 new
relationship experiences through, 147 poetry and, 280 response
flexibility through, 113, 308, 324, 327--29 deconsolidation, 120 Deep
Breathing to Relax the Body (exercise), 217 deep listening, 135--38, 182
Deep Listening (exercise), 136--37 default network, 356--57
defensiveness, 131--32 defocusing network, 109, 352 brain functions of,
25--26, 60--61 deconditioning in, 25, 114, 145, 184, 327--29, 358--61
defined, 25 emotions and, 266 focusing network integrated with, 23, 363
forgiveness and, 187 location of, in brain, 18 fig. 2 mindfulness
practice and shift to, 119 response flexibility and, 344 reverie and,
355--56, 357 self-awareness through working with, 369--70 self/nonself
integration and, 60--61, 350, 358--61, 367--68 wiser self and, 165--66
depression, 249, 266, 296

De Profundis (Wilde), 133 Dillard, Annie, 378 disappointment, 259
discernment, capacity for, 308--9 disconnection, 172, 284, 286
Discovering People as Resources (exercise), 107--8 disgust, 261
dissociation, 32, 33, 285 Doidge, Norman, 14 Do One Scary Thing a Day to
Train Your Brain to Risk Something New (exercise), 241--42 dopamine
system, 193, 239--41 Dreitcer, Andy, 62 Dropping into the Unconditioned:
Dissolving the Self into the Nonself (exercise), 359--60 dyadic
deconditioning, 279 dyadic regulation, 199--200 Edison, Thomas, 94--95
ego. See observing ego Eightfold Path, 380 Ekman, Eve, 279 Ekman, Paul,
279--80 Ellenberg, Daniel, 148 EMDR (trauma therapy), 124 emergencies,
preparing for, 105 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 3 emotional intelligence, xxix
benefits of, 303--4 compassionate communication, 299--303 exercises,
295--96, 297--99, 300--302 foundation for, 271 self-compassion as answer
to inner critic, 297--99 skills involved in, 293--94 sustenance through
love/ appreciation, 294--97 use of term, 293 Emotional Intelligence
(Goleman), 250--51 emotional well-being, derailing of, 249--50 emotions,
19, 23 attunement to, 72--74 cascades of, 56 cultural assumptions about,
250 decision making and, 250--51 exercises, 259, 260--62, 264--65,
268--69 expressing, 260--63 as gateways to resilient action, 251--53
managing, 252--58, 263--66 noticing/regulating, 258--60 poetic
portrayals of, 280--81 prosocial, 274, 278 reading, 260--62 recognizing,
56 rewiring, 222--24

shifting, 263--66 shutting down of, 31, 266--70 skills involved in,
270--71 toxic, 249--50 See also anger; specific emotion emotions,
positive benefits of, 273--74 connection with emotionally healthy
others, 278--83, 290 cultivation of, for wiring in new patterns,
274--78, 290 exercises, 275--76, 281--82, 287--89 eye contact and, 147
managing, 263 toxic shame healed through, 283--90 empathic regulation,
256 empathy acceptance and, 81--83 attunement and, 72--74, 76
blocked/underdeveloped, 77 as catalyst for self-directed
neuroplasticity, 50, 51, 69, 74--75, 83--84 compassion and, 78--81
defined, 19, 51, 70 development of, 262 elements of, 69--70, 83, 88
exercises, 71, 73, 77--78, 80--81, 83 healing power of, 75--76
mindfulness integrated with, 86--87 neurological basis of, 24, 73, 74
resonance and, 70--72 self-empathy, 76, 77--78, 93, 179 strengthening
capacities of, 83--84 See also mindful empathy energy, 157 Entering a
Mental Play Space through Deconditioning (exercise), 118--19
epigenetics, 6 epiphanies, 349--50, 357, 361--62 equanimity, 145,
194--97, 210 See also calm exercises, experiential, xxix--xxx, 51
awareness, 58--59 compassion, 80--81, 264--65 conditioning, 117,
118--19, 122--24 emotional intelligence, 295--96, 297--99, 300--302
emotions, 259, 260--62, 264--65, 268--69 emotions, positive, 275--76,
281--82, 287--89 empathy, 71, 73, 77--78, 80--81, 83 inner base of
resilience, 159--60, 162, 164--65, 167--68 intention, 93--94 mindfulness
of the breath, 54--55 observing ego, 65 perseverance, 95--96 presence,
89--90 reflection, 311--12, 316--17, 319--20

refuges, 99--100, 101--2, 103--4 relational intelligence, 173--74,
176--77, 179--80, 182--83, 185--87 resilience, 376--77, 379, 381, 384,
385 resonant relationships, 136--37, 138--39, 141--44, 146--47, 148--49,
151--53 resources, 105, 107--8, 109--10 response flexibility, 325--26,
328--29 self-awareness, 352--54, 355--56, 359--60, 364, 365--66 somatic
intelligence skills, 195--96, 198--99, 232--33, 235--36, 237--38,
241--42, 243--44 somatic resources, 211--12, 213--14, 217, 218, 219--20,
221--23, 225--26 window of tolerance, 233 experience, learning from, 4,
115--17, 374, 378--85 Experiencing the Whole Self (exercise), 365--66
experimenting, 374 Exploring the Contents of the Self Even as They
Evolve (exercise), 352--54 Expressing Your Own Emotions and Reading the
Meaning of Others' Emotions (exercise), 260-- 62 eye contact, 147,
262--63 face recognition, 6, 21 FACES, 157 facial expression, 7, 72--73,
262--63 failure fear of, 249--50, 376 learning from, 242--45 fear,
249--50, 252, 261, 299--300 fear-attachment-exploration motivation
system, 7 fear responses, 26, 31, 197 See also survival strategies
fight-flight-freeze response, 16--18, 192, 202--3, 208, 215 Finding
Emotionally Healthy Brains to Connect With (exercise), 281--82 Finding
Keys for Cracking the Code (exercise), 381 flexibility, 157 See also
response flexibility flow, 59--60 focused attention, 91--92 focusing
network, 22 t. 3, 23, 25--26, 60, 344, 350, 352, 363, 367--68
forgiveness, 131, 172, 184--87 Fosha, Diana, 69, 132, 365 Frankl,
Viktor, 307 Freud, Sigmund, 65 Fuller, Buckminster, 355 fusiform gyrus,
21, 147, 200, 262--63 GABA (inhibitory transmitter), 236--37 generosity,
382--84 Gilbert, Jack, 278 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 380 Goldstein,
Elisha, 289 Goleman, Daniel, 171, 213, 250--51, 293, 295 good, taking in
the, 161--63, 169 goodness, innate epiphanies and, 362

experiencing, 141--45 of others, honoring, 145--47 of ourselves, seen by
others, 148--50 repairing ruptures and, 182 Gourmet Poets' Society, 280
gratitude, 217, 274--77, 290 grief, 267--68 "Guest House, The" (poem;
Rumi), 154 guilt, 249, 283--84, 289--90 hand on heart, oxytocin released
through, 213--16 Hanson, Rick, 62, 161 Harvard Medical School, 221 head
rubs, oxytocin released through, 211 Healing Toxic Shame through Love
and Acceptance (exercise), 287--89 Hebb, Donald, 10 help, reaching out
for, 172--75 Hill, Julia Butterfly, 338 Hinduism, 62 hippocampus brain
functions of, 23--24 cortisol and brain cell loss in, 42, 207
development of, 38 explicit memories stored in, 207, 254, 344 as
focusing network structure, 25 self sense created through, 177--78
holistic thinking, 165--66, 172, 327 Honoring the Innate Goodness of
Others (exercise), 146--47 Hopper, Grace, 373 Housden, Roger, 281
Houston, Jean, 330 hugs, oxytocin released through, 212 Hurston, Zora
Neale, 283 Huther, Gerald, 125 hypothalamus, 209--10
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), 16 Identifying Your BOPs
(exercise), 379 identities, shedding, 330--34 imagination, 84--86,
98--100, 135 Imagining a Wished-For Outcome to Rewire Difficult
Experiences in Relationships (exercise), 167--68 inner child, 365, 370
inner critic, 284--86, 297--99 insula attunement and, 72, 73 brain
functions of, 24, 53--54 dopamine system and, 240 emotions processed
through, 251, 253 as focusing network structure, 25, 240 mindfulness
practice and, 53, 56 noticing/naming and, 310--11

self sense created through, 177--78 survival responses and, 200--201
Integrating the Self and Nonself (exercise), 364 intention cultivation
of, 89, 91--94, 95--96, 111 new conditioning and, 115--17
interconnectedness, 349 internal secure base, 157, 358 See also
resilience, inner base of interoception, 53--54, 240 interpersonal
resonance circuit, 25--26 interpersonal skills, 132 deep listening,
135--38 sharing, 138--40 intuition, listening to, 163--66 isolation,
172, 278 James, William, 82 Johnson, Stephen, 210 joy, 261, 290 Jung,
Carl G., 242 Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 89--90, 229, 374 Keller, Helen, 29, 384
kindness loving kindness practice, 141--44 sharing (exercise), 138--39
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 184 Kirson, Phyllis, 97 Kornfield, Jack,
134--35, 185, 193, 241, 294 language, 23 Lao Tzu, 157, 357 Learning
Resilience (exercise), 376--77 Lehrer, Jonah, 243 Levine, Peter, 225--26
limbic system, 15, 21, 23, 24, 204, 209--10 listening, deep, 135--38,
182 Listening to the Intuitive Wisdom of the Wiser Self (exercise),
164--65 logical processing, 19, 23 love inner base of resilience and,
159--61 sustenance through, 294--97 toxic shame healed through, 287--90
unconditional, 159, 169 loving connection, oxytocin released through,
212--16, 232 loving kindness practice, 141--44 Martin, Heather, 252
material resources, 105--6 McKnight-Higgins, Debra, xxv McMahon, Tim,
239

meditation, 103, 215, 216 Mehrabian, A., 72--73 memory explicit, 19, 36,
140, 207, 224--25, 254, 311 losing touch with, 76--77 See also somatic
memories; trauma memories memory, implicit, 24, 290 amygdala and, 15
body memories, 193, 218--23 conditioning and, 11 default coping
mechanisms stored in, 119 defined, 19 emotions based on, 251--52, 255,
285 poor behavior habits stored in, 36--39 prefrontal cortex and, 19
reconditioning and, 119--20 "trauma capsules" buried in, 41--42 Mendius,
Rick, xxvi "mental contents," 56--57, 59 mentalizing, 177--78
Michelangelo, 209 mind, theory of, 78, 175--78, 183 mindful awareness,
52--53, 62--67 Mindful Brain, The (Siegel), 278 mindful empathy ABCs of
mindfulness, 314 altruism and, 383 of body scans, 220 clarity through,
74 compassionate communication and, 300 connection and, 76
deconditioning and, 118 difficult relationship experiences and, 166
emotions managed through, 258, 265, 268--69, 278, 287--88 practices
working synergistically with, 89--111 prefrontal cortex strengthened
through, 51, 308, 319 reconditioning and, 120, 123 reflection and, 312,
313, 318 relational intelligence and, 172, 176, 182--83 response
flexibility through, 324, 330--33 self-awareness and, 352 somatic
intelligence and, 230 use of term, 51, 87 mindfulness awareness steadied
through, 55--59 brain activity during, 56--57 of the breath, 52, 53--55
as catalyst for self-directed neuroplasticity, 50--51, 67 clarity
through, 51--53 deconditioning and, 119 defined, 51--52

empathy integrated with, 86--87 exercises for, 54--55 intention-setting
for, 92 relational intelligence and, 179 resilience through, 62, 309
self-acceptance and, 82 self defocused through, 59--61, 67 Western
psychology and, 62--67 See also mindful empathy mindfulness practice,
52, 56--57, 62, 203 Mindful Therapist, The (Siegel), 324 Mind-Life
Institute conference (Dharamsala, India; 2000), 279--80 Mind Wide Open
(Johnson), 210 mirror neurons, 24, 73, 140 mistakes, learning from,
242--45 Mitchell, Edgar, 349, 362 Montague, Read, 240 moral compass,
finding, 380--82 movement, calm restored through, 192, 222--23 Moving
the Body to Rewire Difficult Emotions (exercise), 222--23 Mozart,
Wolfgang Amadeus, 129 naming, 309--12, 313--17 Nasruddin, Mullah, 242
Neff, Kristin, 297 negativity bias, 39--40, 161, 205, 251 Negotiating
Changes in Behaviors (exercise), 179--80 Nelson, Portia, 337--38 neural
cement, 35, 354 neural circuits, 13 creation of, 50, 53--54, 61, 91--92,
93, 94 rewiring, xxvi, xxviii, 50, 113--15 strengthening, 115, 116--17
wiring dysfunctions in, 5 neural patterns, 10--11 neural swamp, 35, 354
neurons, 10, 13 neuroplasticity behavior habits rewired through, 13
defined, xxviii, 4, 13 power of, 70 resilience restored through, 29
neuroplasticity, self-directed catalysts for, 50--51, 67, 69, 74--75,
83--84 (see also empathy; mindfulness) choice in, 132 circuits of,
25--26 practices for accelerating, 89, 110--11 (see also intention;
perseverance; presence; refuges; resources) processes of, 113--15,
124--25, 187, 324 neuropsychology, 7, 24 neuroscience, xxvi, 33, 56, 81,
97, 99

of emotional intelligence skills, 296--97, 299, 303 of emotions,
positive, 277--78, 281--82 emotions and, 250--51, 260, 266, 269--70 of
epiphanies, 349--50 of inner base of resilience, 160--61, 162--63,
165--66, 169 of reflection skills, 310--11, 319--21 of relational
intelligence skills, 174--75, 177--78, 180--81, 183--84, 187 of resonant
relationship skills, 137--38, 139--40, 144--45, 147, 150, 153--55 of
response flexibility, 326--27, 329, 333--34, 344 of self-awareness,
354--55, 356--57, 361 of somatic intelligence, 196--97, 236--37, 238,
244 of somatic resources, 215--16, 220--21, 224, 226 Newton, Isaac, 362
Nin, Anaïs, 91 Nisargadatta, Sri, 349 noesis, 349 nonself, 60--61, 86,
350--51, 352, 357--61, 363--68, 370 nonviolent communication (NVC), 300
noticing, 309--12, 313, 315 Noticing and Naming to Create Options
(exercise), 311--12 Noticing and Regulating Your Emotions (exercise),
259 observing ego, 62, 64--67, 87 Ogden, Pat, 8 organizing principles,
378--85 Orsborn, Carol, 369 Ostaseski, Frank, 71 others disconnection
from, 172 emotionally healthy, connection with, 278--83, 290 innate
goodness of, 141--47 love from, and inner security, 159--61 positive
views of self from, 148--50 reading emotions of, 260--62 as resources,
106--8, 140 sharing with, 138--40 supportive recognition from, 134--35
as support network, 98--100, 172--75 true, 132--34, 155, 158, 359 Out
with the Old, In with the New through Reconditioning (exercise), 122--24
oxytocin, 192 activating release of, 210--16 altruism and, 383 brain
priming and, 230--32 calming effects of, 209--10, 230--32, 239, 245,
296, 310 receptors for, in brain, 290 self-appreciation and, 296
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 201, 203, 208, 215, 216, 222, 238,
285 "Peace of Wild Things, The" (poem; Berry), 100 Peck, M. Scott, 323
pendulation, 226

perseverance, 233 cultivation of, 89, 94--96, 111 new conditioning and,
326--27 perspective, shifts in, 324--29, 338--39 Piaget, Jean, 334
places, as refuges, 100--102 Plato, 141 poetry, 280--81 positive
psychology movement, 273 positivity, rewiring brain for, 161--63
Practicing Altruism (exercise), 384 prayer, 103 prefrontal cortex
attunement and, 72 balance and, 201 as brain executive center, 19 as CEO
of resilience, xxix, 4 development of, 6--7, 9, 27, 33, 197, 255--58
development problems, 30--31, 32--33, 42 emotions managed in, 253,
255--58 functions/structures of, 19--26, 20--21 t. 2, 244 inner base of
resilience in, 159, 161 integrative capacities of, 365, 368--69 internal
secure base in, 157 location of, in brain, 367 mindfulness as
strengthener of, 61, 309 neural integration in, 350--51 reflection
skills and, 315--16, 317 resonance and, 70--71 self-regulating
capacities of, 205, 229--30 self sense created in, 60, 153--55, 177--78,
350--51, 352 slow-track processing by, 204--7 somatic intelligence
skills and, 237 strengthening capacities of, 26, 78, 81, 83, 86--87,
113, 124--25, 132, 244--45 stress responses and, 206--7 window of
tolerance in, 191--92 presence cultivation of, 89--91, 110 healing power
of, 135--38 repairing ruptures and, 182 present moment, awareness of,
166, 359 Prime the Brain by Beginning the Day in Ease and Well-Being
(exercise), 232 Prime the Brain by Beginning the Day in Loving
Connection (exercise), 232 Prime the Brain by Returning to Your Window
of Tolerance (exercise), 233 priming, 230--34 problem solving, 196, 374
Proust, Marcel, 327 psychology, relational, xxix, 50 psychology,
Western, 57, 62--67, 84, 87, 350 Quigley, Patti, 382--83

Ram Dass, 361 rationality, 19, 23, 250 Reaching Out for Help (exercise),
173--74 reactivity, patterns of, 197 reconditioning accommodation
through, 334 behavior changes through, 179--81 defined, 114, 125
difficult relationship experiences rewired through, 166--67 of emotions,
267--68 focusing network processes rewired through, 25 negative body
memories rewired through, 224--26 as neuroplasticity process, 119--24
response flexibility through, 113, 308, 324, 330--34 somatic
intelligence through, 241 toxic shame patterns rewired through, 287--90
reconsolidation, 120 reflection benefits of, 321 day-to-day resilience
through, 309 exercises, 311--12, 316--17, 319--20 naming thought
patterns as patterns, 313--17 noticing/naming, 309--12 option choice
and, xxix, 308--12, 338--44 response flexibility and, 307--8 shifting
old thought patterns, 318--21 skills involved in, 308, 312--13 refuges
contemplative practices as, 103--4 cultivation of, 89, 96--98, 111
defined, 97 exercises, 99--100, 101--2, 103--4 people as, 98--100 places
as, 100--102 sources of, 97--98 relational intelligence, xxix, 132, 140
behavior changes and, 178--81 benefits of, 172, 187--88
boundary-setting, 175--78 exercises, 173--74, 176--77, 179--80, 182--83,
185--87 forgiveness, 184--87 reaching out and, 172--75 repairing
ruptures, 181--87 skills involved in, 171--72 use of term, 171
relationships past, behavior habits learned in, 178 past toxic, 131--32
repairing ruptures in, 172, 181--87 rewiring difficult experiences in,
166--70 relationships, resonant

befriending oneself and, 150--55 benefits of, 129--31 deep listening
and, 135--38 exercises, 136--37, 138--39, 141--44, 146--47, 148--49,
151--53 innate goodness and, 141--47 inner base of resilience and,
158--59 loving kindness and, 141--44 safety/trust in, 134--35, 137--38
true others and, 132--34 relaxation-response exercise, 220--22 Relaxing
in a Reverie; Gaining Insights into the Self (exercise), 355--56 Remen,
Rachel Naomi, 135, 249, 334 Repairing a Rupture (exercise), 182--83
resilience attachment theory and, 7--9 big organizing principles (BOPs),
378--85 as birthright, 26--27, 158, 159, 370, 386 capacities for, xxvi,
9, 26--27, 373--75 challenges to, xxv, 150--51 defined, xxv derailing
of, 249--50, 266 development of, 4, 7--9 emotions and, 251--55, 283
exercises, 376--77, 379, 381, 384, 385 five Cs of, xxviii, 12
increasing, xxvi learning from experience and, 378--85 learning model
for, 375--78 mindfulness and, 62, 309 neurological basis of, 6--7, 343,
345, 373 personal stories of, xxiii--xxv, 3--4 recovery of, 29, 42--45,
82, 94, 375 relational, 132 response flexibility as hallmark of, 323--24
See also coping strategies resilience, inner base of awareness of, 358
exercises, 159--60, 162, 164--65, 167--68 love of others and, 159--61
neurological basis of, 157, 236--37 nourishing, 159--63
physiological/spiritual constituents of, 194 recovery of, 158--59
rewiring difficult relationship experiences for, 166--70 taking in the
good and, 161--63 wiser self and, 163--66 resilient life, 374 Resolving
the Shutdown of Emotions (exercise), 268--69 resonance brain function
and, 278 contemplative practice choice and, 104

defined, 69 as empathy element, 70--72, 88 exercises, 71, 218
interpersonal resonance circuit, 25--26 strengthening capacities of,
83--84 resonance circuit, 87--88, 139--40, 155, 183, 282--83, 383
Resonating with the Calm of Others to Calm Ourselves Down (exercise),
198--99 resources connecting to, xxviii, 104--5, 125, 172, 270--71
cultivation of, 89, 111 exercises, 105, 107--8, 109--10 material, 105--6
people as, 106--8, 140 spiritual, 108--10 See also connection response
flexibility benefits of, 307--8, 344--45 decision making and, 338--44
deconditioning for, 327--29 development of, 321 exercises, 325--26,
328--29, 341--43 new conditioning for, 324--27 perspective shifts,
324--29 reconditioning for identity shedding, 330--34 as resilience
hallmark, 323--24 skills involved in, 308 Retik, Susan, 382--83 reverie,
355--57, 358, 369 rewiring, 113 Rewiring Negative Body Memories
(exercise), 225--26 Rewiring Negative Views of Yourself through Seeing
the Goodness That Others See in You (exercise), 148--49 Rewiring Old
Somatic Memories through a Body Scan (exercise), 219--20 Rewiring Old
Somatic Memories through the Relaxation Response (exercise), 221--22
Richo, David, 363 risk taking, 172, 239--42, 245 Rogers, Carl, 65, 81,
98 Rogers, Natalie, 222--23 Rohn, Jim, 94 role models, 107--8 Roosevelt,
Eleanor, 41, 241 Rosenberg, Marshall, 300 Ross, Robert, 133 Rubin,
Theodore, 138 Rumi, 154 sadness, 252, 259, 261 Satir, Virginia, 151
Schwartz, Jeffrey, 50 Schweitzer, Albert, 275 secularization, 62

self befriending, 150--55 nonself integrated with, 357--61, 363--68, 370
personal, 350, 358, 365--66, 370 psychological, composition of, 150
redefining, 116 rewiring negative views of, 148--50 sense of, 21, 23,
59--61, 81--82, 153--55, 175--78, 284, 350--51 transformation of,
through reconditioning, 330--34 true, 60, 67, 132--34, 270, 359 whole,
awareness of, 351, 365--67, 370 See also wiser self self-acceptance,
82--83, 88 self-appreciation, 296--97 self-attunement, 53, 78
self-awareness, 53 defined, 19 defocusing network and, 369--70
exercises, 352--54, 355--56, 359--60, 364, 365--66 interoception and,
53--54 through mindfulness, 52--54 personal self, 350, 358 through
reverie, 355--57, 358 self/nonself integration, 357--61, 363--68 whole
self, 351, 365--67, 370 self-compassion, 79, 80--81, 93, 179, 297--99
self-empathy, 76, 77--78, 93, 179 self-image, negative, 148--50
self-reliance, compulsive, 30--31, 32 Setting Intention (exercise),
93--94 Setting Limits and Boundaries (exercise), 176--77 shame, 249,
252, 283--90 sharing, 138--40 Sharing Kindness (exercise), 138--39
Shaver, Phil, 231 Shifting Perspectives by Replacing ANTS with APTS
(exercise), 325--26 Siegel, Dan, 157, 193, 278, 324, 350 Silent Messages
(Mehrabian), 72--73 simply being, xxix simultaneous dual awareness,
121--22, 123 sleep, 110 social intelligence, 171 Social Intelligence
(Goleman), 213 somatic experiencing, 225--26 somatic intelligence, xxix
brain priming, 230--34 calm resulting from, 191--92 confidence from
previous competence, 234--37 exercises, 195--96, 198--99, 232--33,
235--36, 237--38, 241--42, 243--44 incompetence reframed as competence,
237--38 mistakes, 242--45

risk taking, 239--42 skills involved in, 192--93, 227 somatic memories,
218--23, 234--37 somatic resources, 191 breath/breathing, 215, 216--18
exercises, 211--12, 213--14, 217, 218, 219--20, 221--23, 225--26 loving
connection, 212--16 oxytocin, 209--16 somatic memories rewired through,
218--23 touch, 210--12 Sound of Music, The (Rogers and Hammerstein), 324
spacious awareness, 109 spindle cells, 240 Spirit Rock Meditation Center
(San Francisco), xxvii, 55, 57 spirituality as refuge, 103--4 as
resource, 108--10 stabilization, 12, 157 Strengthening Perseverance
(exercise), 95--96 submit-collapse response, 16--18, 192, 208, 238, 285
support network, 98--100, 172--75 survival strategies, 15, 16--18, 192,
200--208, 215, 238, 250, 254 sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 202
synaptic connections, 10 Taking In the Love of Others to Nourish the
Inner Base of Resilience (exercise), 159--60 theory of mind, 78,
175--78, 183 Thoreau, Henry David, 135--36 thought patterns ANTS
replaced with APTS, 325--26 automatic conditioned, 319 naming of, as
patterns, 313--17 new conditioning for shifting, 325--26 old,
opportunities to shift, 318--21 Tibetan Buddhism, 264 tonglen (Tibetan
Buddhist practice), 264 touch calm restored through, 192 oxytocin
release activated by, 210--12 trauma memories, 37, 41--42, 167--69,
218--23 trauma therapies, 124, 193--94 true nature, 60, 67, 84--86, 362,
366, 370 true others, 132--34, 155, 158, 359 true self, 60, 67, 132--34,
270, 359 unconditioned, the, 361--62, 366, 370 University of California
(Davis), 231 University of Michigan, 172--73 University of Wisconsin,
230--31 Using Belly Botany to Shift Perspectives (exercise), 328--29
Using Self-Compassion to Answer the Inner Critic (exercise), 297--99

vagus nerve, 15--16, 139, 200, 201, 211 values, 380--85 vipassana
(insight) meditation, xxvii visualization, 99, 101--2 voice, tone of, 72
Whitman, Walt, 361 Wilde, Oscar, 133 Williamson, Marianne, 66, 382
window of tolerance, 208 brain priming and, 233--34 breathing and, 215
defined, 191 equanimity and, 194--97 exercises, 233 glitches in
returning to, 203--8 returning to, and risk taking, 240--41 returning
to, through calm of others, 197--200 sympathetic activation
vs. parasympathetic deactivation and, 201--3, 201 t. 4 use of term,
193--94 Wiring for Resilience by Finding the Gift in the Mistake
(exercise), 243--44 Wiring In Current Confidence from Previous
Competence (exercise), 235--36 wiser self awareness of, 359, 366, 370
cultivating (exercise), 84--86 defined, 366 exercises involving, 108,
149, 151--53, 316, 331--33 intuitive wisdom of, 108, 163--66, 170, 344
as refuge, 99 as resource, 270 as state of being, 316 true nature and,
84--86, 88 witness awareness. See observing ego Wooden, John, 243 Woolf,
Virginia, 110 yoga, 103, 215, 216

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

LINDA GRAHAM, MFT, is a licensed psychotherapist and meditation teacher
in full-time practice in the San Francisco Bay Area. She integrates her
passion for neuroscience, mindfulness, and relational psychology through
trainings, consultations, workshops, and conferences nationally. She
publishes a monthly e-newsletter, Healing and Awakening into Aliveness
and Wholeness, and weekly e-quotes on resources for recovering
resilience, archived at www.lindagrahammft.net.

We are a socially and environmentally aware company, and we strive to
embody the ideals presented in our publications. We recognize that we
have an ethical responsibility to our customers, our staff members, and
our planet. We serve our customers by creating the finest publications
possible on personal growth, creativity, spirituality, wellness, and
other areas of emerging importance. We serve New World Library employees
with generous benefits, significant profit sharing, and constant
encouragement to pursue their most expansive dreams. As a member of the
Green Press Initiative, we print an increasing number of books with
soybased ink on 100 percent postconsumer-waste recycled paper. Also, we
power our offices with solar energy and contribute to nonprofit
organizations working to make the world a better place for us all. Our
products are available in bookstores everywhere. For our catalog, please
contact: New World Library 14 Pamaron Way Novato, California 94949
Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657 Catalog requests: Ext. 50 Orders:
Ext. 52 Fax: 415-884-2199 Email: escort@newworldlibrary.com To subscribe
to our electronic newsletter, visit www.newworldlibrary.com


