![](cover.jpeg)

[]{#titlepage.xhtml}

<div>

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="1.1" width="100%" height="100%" viewbox="0 0 933 1400" preserveaspectratio="none">
`<image width="933" height="1400" xlink:href="cover.jpeg">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>

</div>

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_000.xhtml}

::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_000.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
"All of us hurt when we are rejected. But for some, this experience is
so crushing that it is not clear how to ever bounce back. In this
well-written and carefully crafted book, Leslie Becker-Phelps invites
readers on a psychological and social journey in which rejection and
fear of rejection are allowed to shine a light on how we relate to our
own experience. All of it---including our sensations, thoughts,
emotions, actions, and the mentalization of ourselves and others. By
learning to take a self-compassionate approach to experience, the reader
is shown in a step-by-step way how to turn rejection into greater
attachment and connection---with others and with your deeper self."

---[Steven C. Hayes, PhD]{.b}, Foundation Professor in the department of
psychology at the University of Nevada, Reno; codeveloper of acceptance
and commitment therapy (ACT); and author of [A Liberated
Mind[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_000.xhtml__idTextAnchor000
.calibre2}]{.i}

"This book is very helpful for those who have recently been rejected or
who would just like to have healthier relationships with others.
Grounded in solid psychological theory and research, it unpacks why we
get stuck in old patterns and how to get unstuck. Highly recommended."

---[Kristin Neff, PhD]{.b}, associate professor in the department of
educational psychology at[ ]{.b}The University of Texas at Austin

"This book gets right to the heart of overcoming rejection
sensitivity---compassionate self-awareness. Using exercises that are
easy to apply in daily life, Becker-Phelps offers a positive pathway to
feeling more safe and secure in our relationships. She also unpacks in
accessible prose the important connections between attachment theory and
self-compassion practice. Highly recommended!"

---[Christopher Germer, PhD]{.b}, Harvard Medical School/Cambridge
Health Alliance; author of [The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion]{.i};
and coauthor of [The Mindful Self-Compassion Workbook]{.i}

"[Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i} is a wonderful primer for anyone who
is struggling with rejection and is curious about gently attending to
these sensitivities. By tapping into our basic human needs for love and
belonging, Becker-Phelps offers practical and compassionate ways to
redirect attention away from chronic self-criticism and toward
cultivating a deep sense of self-worth, security, and
self-kindness---ultimately fostering resilience for the quirky
challenges of being part of the human family."

---[Tara Cousineau, PhD]{.b}, staff psychologist at Harvard University
Counseling Center; senior faculty at the Center for Mindfulness and
Compassion, Cambridge Health Alliance, Cambridge, MA; and author of [The
Kindness Cure]{.i}

"This book first reveals the immense power that fear of rejection can
have over us. Then, clearly and compassionately, Leslie Becker-Phelps
shares the puzzle pieces---awareness, reflection, and reframing---that
can release our fear and create a newfound sense of freedom."

---[Sharon Salzberg]{.b}, cofounder of the Insight Meditation Society,
and author of [Real Happiness ]{.i}and[ Lovingkindness]{.i}

"For anyone struggling with actual or perceived rejection by others,
this book provides a lifeline. Leslie Becker-Phelps clearly understands
the issue, including its anticipation and painful aftereffects. She
offers a variety of very practical strategies for making changes based
on an integration of contemporary treatment and self-help approaches. A
book that compassionately and comprehensively attends to a topic that
gets far too little attention."

---[Christine A. Courtois, PhD, ABPP]{.b},[ ]{.b}licensed psychologist
in private practice (now retired); consultant and trainer in trauma
psychology and trauma treatment;[ ]{.b}coauthor of [Treating Complex
Trauma]{.i},[ ]{.i}with Julian Ford; and author of [Healing the Incest
Wound]{.i}

"[Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i} will help you uncover the courage,
self-worth, and resilience that are naturally at the foundation of who
you are. Take your time with it, absorb it into your life, and watch the
gifts grow."

---[Elisha Goldstein, PhD]{.b}, founder of the Mindful Living
Collective, and creator of A Course in Mindful Living

"In [Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i}, the generous and passionate
author gives us all she has, drawing on the science of attachment,
mindfulness, and compassion-focused imagery. Feelings of rejection are
at the heart of so much of our emotional suffering. What better path,
than a path to self-acceptance, inner security, and kindness?"

---[Dennis Tirch, PhD]{.b}, founder of The Center for Compassion Focused
Therapy, associate clinical professor at Mount Sinai, and author of [The
ACT Practitioner's Guide to the Science of Compassion]{.i}

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_000.xhtml__idContainer000 .calibre1}
![](OEBPS/image/BouncingBackfromRejection-TitlePage.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::
:::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_001.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_001.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
Publisher's Note

[This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
psychological, financial, legal, or other professional services. If
expert assistance or counseling is needed, the services of a competent
professional should be sought. ]{.i}

Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Books

Copyright Â© 2019 by Leslie Becker-Phelps

New Harbinger Publications, Inc.

5674 Shattuck Avenue

Oakland, CA 94609

www.newharbinger.com

Cover design by Amy Shoup

Acquired by Jennye Garibaldi

Edited by Karen Levy

All Rights Reserved

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data on file
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_002.xhtml}

:::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_002.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
::: calibre1
:::
::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_003.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_003.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_003.xhtml__idTextAnchor001
.calibre4}Foreword]{.b1}

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_003.xhtml__idTextAnchor002
.calibre2}Why do we need a book about moving from rejection to
resilience? It's because we humans didn't evolve to be happy. Instead,
our brains evolved to help us survive and reproduce. Activities that
contribute to surviving and reproducing---like eating, keeping warm, and
having sex---instinctively feel good. Experiences that threaten our
survival---such as being injured, thirsty, too cold, or too hot---feel
bad. Any of our ancestors who didn't share these reactions, who weren't
hard-wired to act in ways that supported survival and reproduction,
didn't get to pass their DNA on to us.

In prehistory, one of the greatest threats to our survival was
rejection. Imagine our ancestors, living in groups of 25 to 50, roaming
from place to place on the African savanna one hundred thousand years
ago. They needed one another to hunt for food, for protection from
hostile animals, and for mutual care when someone fell ill or was
injured. To be rejected from the tribe was a death sentence---no one
lasted long alone on the savanna.

Any of our ancestors whose brains hadn't evolved to dislike rejection
would have alienated others, been thrown out of the tribe, and died
without heirs. So we didn't inherit their DNA. Instead, we inherited the
genes of ancient hominids who survived by worrying a lot about being
accepted and included.

Even in modern times, being accepted matters a lot. We humans are born
completely dependent on adults. As infants, we can't eat, keep warm, or
protect ourselves from injury without adult care. One of our very first
survival tasks after taking our first breath is to find a way to connect
safely to adults who will care for us. To this day, having a brain that
is hungry for acceptance and fearful of rejection is essential for our
survival.

But while our instinct to avoid rejection has had enormous survival
value, it sure causes a lot of unnecessary suffering. When someone we
know passes us on the street or in a hallway and doesn't say "hello,"
what happens in our heart and mind? When a friend doesn't call or we
find out about a party to which we weren't invited, how do we feel? When
our colleague gets the promotion and we don't, what goes through our
mind?

While sometimes we're able to consider that our acquaintance was
preoccupied, that there wasn't room to invite everyone to the party, or
that our colleague deserved the advance more, most of the time we also
feel disappointment---or worse. We may go into a tailspin, wonder what
we did to alienate the other person, muse about why we're not part of
the in-crowd, or feel inadequate about our skills. We can easily suffer
a self-esteem crash that makes it hard to see our situation objectively
and may lead us into a cycle of withdrawal or avoidance that robs us of
opportunities to fully engage in our lives.

What to do? Fortunately, we humans didn't only evolve instincts to hate
rejection. We also developed ways to manage these feelings and cultivate
antidotes---ways to grow from our emotional injuries, separate our fears
from real dangers, gain perspective on our strengths and weaknesses,
soothe ourselves when injured, and safely connect to others.

In the pages ahead, you'll find a practical, step-by-step guide that
anyone can use to harness these resilient capacities and turn our
hard-wired aversion to rejection into an opportunity to grow and thrive.
Seamlessly integrating modern psychological science, ancient wisdom
traditions, and years of clinical practice, Dr. Becker-Phelps offers us
easy-to-use tools to turn the pain and fear of rejection into an
opportunity to live a richer and more rewarding life---giving us a
pathway to the happiness that our brains, narrowly focused on survival,
don't always provide. While moving from rejection to resilience can at
times be challenging, it's a journey well worth taking.

---Ronald D. Siegel, PsyD

Assistant Professor of Psychology, Harvard Medical School

Author of [The Mindfulness Solution: Everyday Practices for Everyday
Problems]{.i}
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_004.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_004.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_004.xhtml__idTextAnchor003
.calibre4}Acknowledgments]{.b1}

Writing [Bouncing Back from Rejection ]{.i}has come at an especially
challenging time for me, transforming this project into a life lesson.
It has taught me---or more accurately, reinforced and imprinted in my
heart---that my life journey is at once wholly mine and a shared
venture. I am blessed with many thoughtful and caring friends (including
family members). I thank you all for giving of yourselves when I was
most in need. This seems a fitting lesson to learn while writing a book
about the importance of finding inner strength along with trust in the
"emotional availability" of others.

Of everyone who has supported me directly and indirectly in writing this
book, I am especially appreciative of my husband, Mark Phelps. He was
always ready to encourage me as I trudged along, writing this book and
doing my best to get through the other trials of each day. I am also
grateful to him for freely offering his considerable editorial support
from the first word through to the last sentence.

Finally, I thank, and am indebted to, the editors at New Harbinger,
especially Jennye Garibaldi, Clancy Drake, Gretchen Hakanson, and Marisa
SolÃ­s, for their guidance in helping craft the book that you now read.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_005.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_005.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_005.xhtml__idTextAnchor004
.calibre4}Introduction]{.b1}

There are few things you can say with certainty about all people, but
this is one of them: every person---both alive and dead---has
experienced rejection. And [everyone ]{.i}has experienced the pain that
goes with feeling overlooked, dismissed, or abandoned. The rejection can
be from family, friends, acquaintances, and even strangers on social
media whom we will never meet. Yet some people are particularly
sensitive to it. They feel rejected when others don't intend it,
experience small slights as much deeper injuries, and have difficulty
moving on from real or perceived rejections.

If you are rejection sensitive, you may respond to feeling rebuffed or
abandoned by sinking into despondency, grasping for validation, or
lashing out in anger. Rather than viewing the situation as a painful
experience to be moved past---or better yet, an opportunity for
growth---you might assess [yourself ]{.i}to be a problem. You might
sense that there is something inherently wrong with you that invites
rejection, even if you are angry at times with others for rejecting you.
You might also believe that you lack the fortitude to overcome
rejection. Whatever your inner struggles, they can lead you to feel
disheartened, or even hopeless.

These sorts of mind-sets can often lead to a cycle of ups and downs that
seems like an unending closed loop, always with the same sinking ending.
But there are definitely ways to break the cycle and escape the
emotional roller coaster.

[Understanding the Origins of Rejection Sensitivity]{.ac}

Because you are far from alone (despite how you probably feel),
theorists and researchers have had an abundance of research subjects and
many years to consider and investigate what makes some people more
sensitive to rejection, while others are more resilient. One very
well-supported explanation is attachment theory. Chapter 1 of this book
offers a fundamental understanding of it and the part it may play in
your rejection sensitivity. Then this insight is used to inform the
guidance offered throughout the rest of the book, helping you build
resilience.

To give you a general sense of how attachment theory relates to
rejection sensitivity, consider this brief overview. The theory,
developed by the British psychiatrist, psychologist, and psychoanalyst
John Bowlby, proposes that infants are prewired to form attachments with
"older, wiser" people as a way to enable them to survive. About 60
percent of the time, these relationships nurture in them an emotionally
healthy and strong foundation. The children feel secure in themselves
and in their relationships, and so they are described as having a
[secure attachment style]{.i}.

However, other children develop an [insecure attachment style]{.i}. They
become adults who continue to have some struggles in how they relate to
themselves and others. Experiencing sensitivity to rejection is
frequently part of these struggles. This leaves them to either try
desperately to please others, turn away from emotional ties in an effort
to make rejection a nonissue, or both. All of these responses create
obstacles to effectively coping with rejection and to fully moving
forward in their lives.

Although it can seem trite to say that close relationships give life
meaning, there is a lot of truth in it. The sense of connection is
often, by itself, fulfilling. People also frequently feel better about
themselves when they enjoy the company of others who view them
positively. In addition, they usually enjoy life's happy moments---and
endure life's painful times---more when they have supportive friends.
But, as you know only too well, close relationships can also lead to
painful feelings of rejection. In learning to free yourself from
sensitivity to this, you will discover a more positive view of yourself,
along with feeling more secure in close, loving relationships.

[How Compassionate Self-Awareness Can Set You Free]{.ac}

[Bouncing Back from Rejection ]{.i}guides you toward a more positive
relationship with yourself and other people in your life, which can help
develop resilience to rejection. It does this largely by offering the
perspective and tools for you to nurture [compassionate
self-awareness]{.i}---a combination of self-awareness and
self-compassion. Self-awareness is explored in depth through five
domains of what I call STEAM: Sensations, Thoughts, Emotions, Actions,
and Mentalizing. Importantly, nurturing a compassionate response to your
own struggles requires self-awareness, as well as self-acceptance and
self-kindness. By applying this set of skills to your relationships, you
will be better able to successfully resolve rejection-related issues.

While this inner work is important, it does "take two to tango." Your
struggles involve interactions with other people and are affected by
your understanding of their responses to you. Though this is addressed
throughout the book, [Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i}'s closing
chapter offers specific guidance on improving and honing your
relationship skills to strengthen your connections. As you grow in this
area, you will begin to receive more positive responses, and you will be
better able to take them in. Together, the inner sense of having value,
and the outer validation that you [are valued]{.i}, will enable you to
feel good about yourself---even when you are sometimes misunderstood,
disrespected, dismissed, or devalued by people who may be important to
you.

As with so much else in life, this journey is inevitably filled with
setbacks, obstacles, and apparent detours. As a result, freeing yourself
from rejection can be complicated and seem like an unsolvable puzzle.
But it's not. It just takes some direction, effort, and persistence.
This book provides you with the first ingredient, though you must
provide the other two.

[Important Instructions for Reading This Book]{.ac}

To get the most you can from [Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i}, read it
slowly. Take the time to absorb information and consider how it applies
to your life. As you complete its many exercises, repeat any that show
promise of helping more with repetition. If you struggle too much with
an exercise, move on to a different one---perhaps returning to it later.

Although I have organized the chapters and sections in the order that I
think would typically be most helpful, feel free to work on the
exercises in any order you wish---unless instructed otherwise in a given
section.

You will be directed to complete certain exercises before or after
others. I also offer suggestions for what to do when you have difficulty
with an exercise. As you grow and change, you may find some exercises
that were previously helpful take on new meaning, and others that did
not seem to do much for you become more helpful.

To help you succeed in freeing yourself from sensitivity to rejection, I
recommend that you:

- Dedicate a journal to making notes and completing the exercises in the
  book. Following this suggestion can be particularly helpful. While you
  could use independent sheets of paper, this won't have the benefit of
  keeping your work together where you can easily find previous notes
  and review them at any point---even returning to them much later. You
  might want to use a tablet or laptop, though you may find that the
  physical act of handwriting helps you connect with or process your
  experiences more fully.
- Begin your personal excursion with the first two chapters, "Feeling
  Rejected Can Be Complicated" and "Commitment to Change: Concepts and
  Tools," which offer a foundation for understanding your rejection
  sensitivity and tools for empowering you to continue working on
  becoming more resilient, even when the process gets difficult.
- Each day, choose to practice---and re-practice---exercises in this
  book.
- Occasionally make note of any and all progress in your journal.
  Sometimes, in looking at the changes they still want to make, people
  lose sight of those they've already made. So, journaling about your
  progress can help you maintain perspective and motivate you to keep
  working toward your goal.
- Keep sticky notes on hand. As you are reading, you may want to skip to
  another part of the book, or you may be directed to do so. You can use
  these notes as reminders of the section that you want to return to.
- Try to accept setbacks as the inevitable events that they are, and use
  them to practice reminding yourself that you are only human, that you
  deserve empathy and compassion just like everyone else. ([Learning
  this is a process that the book, as a whole, addresses.]{.i})
- If you think you need a break from this work ([and it is work]{.i}),
  you might want to give yourself a "vacation." But first, set a date
  for when you want to consider returning to it. Then enter a reminder
  on your phone or paper calendar, or write it on your hand, if that's
  what works for you. At the appointed time, think about whether or not
  you are ready to reengage.

Your overall goal is to learn and accept in your heart that you have
value. Although rejection can hurt---and be deeply painful---it does not
mean your true value is any less. As you absorb this, you will also
learn to accept rejection as a human experience that you can survive,
and possibly even use to help you grow. If you are someone who has
suffered emotional trauma or is so deeply plagued by fears of rejection,
self-doubt, or self-loathing that it seriously affects your life, I
strongly suggest that you also seek the help of a professional therapist
to support you in working through this book.

In more than twenty years of private practice, I have treated many
people who struggle with this issue, and what I've learned while helping
them can help you. In [Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i}, I have
consolidated many of the individual dynamics I have seen into various
composite characters to illustrate different points. Though I do not
revisit most of the characters, I do follow the stories of two of
them---Janine and Chad---throughout the book. None of these characters
are actual people, but their experiences are very real, indeed, and will
probably be familiar to you.

Here's a brief introduction to our "main characters."

At twenty-seven years old, Janine has several good friends and lives in
a spacious condo adjacent to a park, where she enjoys going for walks.
Although she looks "together" on the outside, she often feels undone on
the inside. Janine frequently repeats to herself, practically as a
mantra, [I hope they aren't mad at me.]{.i} She constantly worries that
she will do the wrong thing or people will see that she is incompetent.
So, she works hard to be a nice person, going out of her way to help
friends and neighbors and trying to ensure that they will like her. But
even among her friends, she often fears that they are critical of her or
that she is letting them down.

Chad remembers that Linda literally took his breath away when they first
met.

[She is so amazing]{.i}, he kept thinking in wondrous disbelief.
Although Chad was committed to advancing at his challenging job as a
data scientist, his previous fears of disappointing his boss suddenly
didn't seem all that important. Head over heels in love, he was
euphoric. But unlike fairy tales, his "happily ever after" did not last.
In short order, his fears of rejection took hold. [Who are you meeting
up with]{.i} he would ask Linda, trying to sound nonchalant. But the
truth was that he was possessed by jealous thoughts and preoccupied with
fears of her leaving him.

Whatever difficulties you have with rejection, they are founded in
experiences we all have to some extent. We want to feel worthy and
acceptable, and we want to avoid feeling rebuffed. But none of us
escapes rejection---whether it is the devastating experience of being
dumped by a fiancÃ© on your wedding day or the relatively minor setback
of someone not laughing at your jokes. Self-awareness, self-acceptance,
and self-compassion are all key factors in helping people cope. I hope
that [Bouncing Back from Rejection ]{.i}helps you embrace these truths
and finally transition from being held captive by rejection to breaking
free and embracing life.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml}

::::::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml__idTextAnchor005
.calibre4}Chapter 1:\
]{.b1}\
Feeling Rejection Can Be Complicated

[It's just too hard]{.i}, young Chad thought, struggling with his
homework. As a third grader, he already saw himself as "stupid." It
would be another year before his parents had him tested and discovered
his language-processing disorder. Like his two older brothers, he would
continue to do well in school, but unlike them, he would have to work
extra hard. He always persisted in school assignments because he feared
losing his teachers' approval if he didn't do well. Out on the
playground, he happily played catch, which he was good at, but he kept
quiet. [Smile]{.i}, he'd remind himself when he didn't understand jokes
the other kids were telling, or why they were laughing. [Just throw the
ball]{.i}, he would tell himself to get his mind off the fear that they
would laugh at him if they knew how dumb he was.

Not all rejection is equal. It might be tough for you when your friend
balks at your suggestion to go to Poopies restaurant for dinner. (Yes,
it is a real restaurant.) Or, you may be in shock as your spouse
announces out of nowhere that your marriage is over. Or, you may be
facing anything in between. So, your reaction to rejection will
obviously depend on the situation. But if your reactions tend to cause
further problems---such as creating constant self-doubt---then you would
be wise to change them. Life will continue to deliver the challenging
situations, great and small, that have caused you to struggle with
rejection. But adjusting the way you respond to those challenges is
something you can learn.

[Dysfunctional Reactions to Rejection ]{.ac}

When you are sensitive to rejection and experience it as particularly
threatening or extremely upsetting, there are a number of ways that it
can throw you off track. See if any of these reactions to rejection,
along with the examples I provide, feel familiar to you.

Overreacting

When people chronically brace themselves against a potential threat,
they often react quickly to situations---even before they know that they
really are in danger. This general dynamic causes rejection-sensitive
people to see themselves as being rejected even when that is not the
case. For instance, Mandy would often overreact when someone was unable
to meet her for dinner. She was not able to see that it wasn't because
they didn't value her, but because of a simple conflict in their
schedule. Another way to overreact is to perceive small rejections as
Major Rejections. This would be the case if you reacted to a normally
very responsive friend not returning your call one time with a similar
intensity as you would to a friend saying she does not like you as a
person.

Being Unable to Move Forward

Some people find that they ruminate about rejection. For example, twenty
years after graduating from college, Elizabeth still stewed over the
roommate who said she no longer wanted to live with her. Meanwhile,
across town, Bonnie continues to feel like her husband does not really
love her because, before they were married, he had a brief relationship
with someone else when the two of them split up for a year.

Responding with Intense Anger

People often respond with fear and anger to being dismissed or ignored,
especially by someone they care about. As noted psychologist Paul Ekman
stated in his book [Emotions Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feelings to
Improve Communication and Emotional life]{.i} (2003, 127--128), "Anger
controls, anger punishes, and anger retaliates." When you are sensitive
to rejection, these reactions are frequently magnified. This makes the
situation even worse, as Ekman explains: "One of the most dangerous
features of anger is that anger calls forth anger, and the cycle can
rapidly escalate. It takes a near-saintly character not to respond
angrily to another person's anger, especially when that person's anger
seems unjustified and self-righteous."

Guarding Against Judgment

Rejection---or the prospect of it---might feel devastating. Many people
who are highly rejection sensitive also frequently struggle with feeling
unworthy or unlovable. Given those beliefs, it is understandable that
they would feel vulnerable and sad. It's also common for them to guard
against exposing themselves to rejection by withdrawing socially,
constantly presenting themselves in a positive light, or trying to
endear themselves to others by being extremely kind and caring. These
actions can leave you feeling very alone and as if people wouldn't like
you "if they knew the real me."

Responding with an "It Doesn't Bother Me" Attitude

Some people appear as though they don't feel distressed by rejection,
but they are actually just trying to distance themselves from their pain
by ignoring it. Andrew would[ ]{.i}buffer himself from hurt by numbing
his emotions. It's not that he didn't feel distressed by rejection, but
he would distance himself from that reaction. The problem with this is
that he really was still upset below the surface. There was one day at
work, for example, when Andrew wasn't thinking about anything in
particular, yet felt kind of restless. After he snapped at a coworker
for asking a simple question, it occurred to him that he was still upset
from the night before. Some of his friends posted online that they were
at one of their favorite bars, but they had not contacted him.

Being Independent and Self-Sufficient

Some highly self-sufficient people tend not to look to others for
comfort, support, or encouragement. Because they avoid exposing
themselves to feeling rejected by others, they may not seem to struggle
with rejection. However, this can be more complicated than it seems.
While Albert had some of these traits and truly enjoyed investing
himself in his work, he was also aware of a desire to connect with
others and a sense that something was missing from his life by being so
self-reliant. Although he did not feel lonely or exactly fearful of
rejection, he was uncomfortable when he was not busily working and would
have wanted to feel closer to someone---especially his girlfriend,
Sharon. But he wasn't sure how to do that, and he also feared that she
would be critical of him, not supportive, if he tried to rely on her.

One way to understand rejection sensitivity is to imagine that your skin
has been burned. Even a gentle touch can be extremely painful. You would
probably be very protective of your burn, not wanting anyone even near
it. If someone did touch it, you might respond with fear and anger. And
if you lived with this sensitivity for a very long time, you might
understandably feel depressed, anxious, or possibly try to emotionally
numb yourself to the ongoing pain. In your real life, it is your
"self"---you might even say your soul---that is in pain.

[Your Rejection Sensitivity Has Deep Roots]{.ac}

As noted in the introduction, these struggles with rejection can be
understood through [attachment theory]{.i},[ ]{.i}which was developed by
John Bowlby (1907--1990). After some preliminary work, he first laid out
the theory in his 1969 book, [Attachment and Loss]{.i}. It is now well
established with a proliferation of research over many decades. Here's
an overview.

Attachment theory basically says that the way people relate to
themselves and others is rooted in their biology and their early life
experiences. Infants are born into the world "wired" for connection, or
as this theory labels it, attachment. They look to caregivers for their
survival needs and for emotional connection. The adults they turn to for
security, comfort, and encouragement are called [attachment
figures]{.i}. (Importantly, people continue to have attachment figures
into adulthood, such as mentors, close friends, and spouses.)

With the understanding that a parent's influence has its limits (we'll
talk about this in a little bit), let's examine the basics of the
parent-child relationship as they relate to attachment. Children learn
that turning to their caregivers generally leads to certain responses,
such as being comforted and helped, causing anxiety or anger in their
caregivers, being ignored, or some combination of these responses.
Children's reactions to these responses are the foundation of their
[attachment style]{.i} (or way of connecting), which they generally
carry throughout their lives---though attachment styles are also
influenced by life experiences. For example, consider Janine, one of our
two recurring characters. Her mother was frequently critical, which left
its mark on Janine in the form of chronic feelings of inadequacy within
herself and a fear of rejection from others.

Researchers Bartholomew and Horowitz (1991) found support for the idea
that people's attachment styles are basically a combination of the way
they relate to themselves and to others. They explored these two
fundamental elements, which they labeled [model of self]{.i} and [model
of others. ]{.i}(These elements combine to create four basic attachment
styles, which we will discuss later in this chapter.)[ ]{.i}

Model of Self

A person's model of self is the way that they think about and relate to
themselves. Infants' sense of themselves depends upon how their
caregivers (or attachment figures) respond to them, especially in the
early years. When caregivers are attuned to the infant's distress and
able to calmly and lovingly soothe them, the infant begins developing
the sense that they are not just cared for in the moment, but worthy of
love. This can then be reinforced throughout their childhood, and, in
fact, for the rest for their lives. The positive self-perception enables
them to feel calm, as opposed to anxious.

People who hold a model of self that judges themselves harshly have a
more [anxious attachment style]{.i}. They tend to experience themselves
as inadequate, flawed, unlovable, or in some other similar negative way.
This model of self leads them to feel great anxiety in relationship to
themselves. When you relate in this way to yourself, it is easy to
understand why you would expect to be rejected and on the lookout for
it. In other words, having a negative sense of yourself naturally leads
to a sensitivity to rejection.

Model of Others

A person's model of others is the way that they perceive the emotional
availability of attachment figures, people they would turn to during
times of distress. When children experience a parent's typical reaction
to their distress as being accepted, loved, and comforted, they learn
that they can turn to significant others during difficult times.
Children who grow up getting no response, or fearing the responses of
their caregivers, tend to learn to turn away from those relationships.

They develop a model that perceives others as emotionally unavailable,
resulting in an [avoidant attachment style]{.i}. They experience others
as uncaring, as too weak or flawed to be helpful, or as hostile toward
them. Not surprisingly, any or all of these perceptions of others create
in them such sensitivity to the possibility of rejection that they avoid
emotional closeness. So, even when they have outwardly close
relationships, there are thick "walls" that prevent much vulnerability
or openness. The lack of emotional intimacy is often not a conscious
problem, but can become one. This is especially true when people face
overwhelming issues or somehow begin to be bothered by a sense of
something important missing in their life.

[Assessing Your Model of Self]{.ac}

It is important to understand that the model of self is a dimension, or
range. Everyone has good and bad days, but different people can
generally feel a greater or lesser sense of being lovable and calm, or
unlovable and anxious. If you tend to experience yourself in the latter
way, you have a more anxious attachment style.

Read over the contrasting perceptions in Figure 1.1 that people can have
of themselves. In your journal, or on a piece of paper, copy the scales
in that figure (also available online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024). Then place a checkmark on the lines
to show where in these ranges, on a day-to-day general basis, your
perceptions of yourself fall. (We're not looking for a number here.)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml__idContainer002 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch1_fig1.1.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 1.1 ]{.b}Assessing Your Model of Self

Is Your Model of Self Making You Anxious?

Consider the following ways in which a negative self-relationship is
often expressed.

[Write down each one in your journal (or just on a piece of paper) that
you believe applies to you. ]{.i}

Within Yourself

Feeling insecure, dependent, weak, inferior, flawed, or inadequate

Feeling not as good or as competent as other people in your life

Feeling alone in the world (even when others are around or supportive)

Being self-critical (which can also be self-bullying)

Feeling shame, self-loathing

Being angry with yourself for your perceived flaws

Withdrawing into yourself in response to feeling so negatively about
yourself

Fearful of being overwhelmed by your emotions (believe intense emotions
show that there is something wrong with you)

Self in Relation to Others

Being quick to see others as rejecting you

Feeling fearful of rejection or abandonment

Withdrawing from others to avoid rejection

Being angry with others for not being as available or supportive as you
feel you need, or for not somehow making you feel better

Trying desperately to prove to others that you are worthy

Being needy or clingy

[Reflect on each copied phrase.]{.i} The more you endorse these phrases,
the more anxiously attached you probably are. The phrases you relate to
indicate areas that you would benefit from improving. Journal any
thoughts you have related to these self-perceptions.

As you work to create a more positive self-relationship, you will notice
that you endorse fewer of the above statements and feel less intensely
about the ones you do endorse.

[Assessing Your Model of Others]{.ac}

Just as with the model of self, the model of others is a dimension or
range of experiences. People can feel others' emotional availability as
greater or lesser, leading them to engage more---or less---in
emotionally intimate relationships. If you generally experience others
as emotionally unavailable, you likely avoid deep emotional connections
and do not turn to them as attachment figures who could be comforting.
This indicates that you likely have an avoidant attachment style.

In your journal, or on a piece of paper, copy the scales in Figure 1.2
(also available online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024). Place a checkmark on those lines to
show where in these ranges, on a day-to-day general basis, your
perceptions of others and your reactions to them fall.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml__idContainer003 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch1_fig1.2.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 1.2 ]{.b}Assessing Your Model of Others

Is Your Model of Others Making You Avoidant?

Consider the following ways in which avoiding closeness with others is
often expressed.

[Write down each one in your journal (or just on a piece of paper) that
you believe applies to you. ]{.i}

Self in Relation to Others

Independent

Self-sufficient

Disinterested in their personal matters

Your Perception of Others

Unreliable or incompetent

Unsupportive

Uncaring

Untrustworthy

Rejecting

Critical

Not available or supportive to others in general

[Reflect on each copied phrase.]{.i} The more you endorse the statements
above, the more likely you will feel you are on your own. The more you
think of others as failing to be emotionally available [for anyone]{.i},
the more likely you tend toward being avoidantly attached. With little
to no hope of gaining their support, you are more likely to work hard at
being self-sufficient. Journal about these observations.

In reflecting on your model of others, you might realize that you think
of others as generally being emotionally available---but not to you.
This often happens when people have a model of [self ]{.i}that leaves
them feeling like they are flawed. In this case, you might feel driven
to prove your worth to earn others' caring and support. If you relate to
this, reflect on and make notes about your inner struggle.

As you learn to see others as emotionally available (to the degree that
they truly are), you will feel more connected with them. Relationships
will become a personal resource that can support your sense of
well-being.

[Understanding the Four Attachment Styles]{.ac}

While two broad styles of attachment---anxious attachment and avoidant
attachment---are described above, there are actually four basic styles:
secure, preoccupied, dismissing, and fearful avoidant. The first is
classified as [secure]{.i}, while the other three are classified as
[insecure]{.i}. These styles can be understood by considering the model
of self and the model of others together, as shown in see Figure 1.3
(also available online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024).

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_006.xhtml__idContainer004 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch1_fig1.3.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 1.3 ]{.b}Four-Group Model of Attachment Styles in
Adulthood.Based on Bartholomew and Horowitz (1991), Griffin and
Bartholomew (1994), and Mikulincer and Shaver (2007).

[Secure:]{.i} People with this style of attachment generally feel good
about themselves as people, believing that they are capable, lovable,
and worthy of self-compassion when they struggle, even as they face
their own weaknesses, mistakes, and flaws. They also see significant
others in their life as attachment figures, whom they can rely on as
sources of support and encouragement. While rejection (or the
possibility of it) is not pleasant, they are able to keep these concerns
in perspective and know that they have the resources to cope with it.

[Preoccupied (Insecure):]{.i} People with this anxious style of
attachment feel there is something unacceptable about them. They might
describe it as feeling unlovable, flawed, or inadequate, and they tend
to be self-critical. Although they see others as possible sources of
support, they sense that they aren't worthy. So, they often try (and are
[preoccupied ]{.i}with trying) to "earn" the attention or love they need
by "performing" in some way, such as taking care of other people's needs
or achieving great success in certain areas. However, they sense that it
is their performance, not really them, that is getting the attention,
support, or love. This leaves them almost constantly distressed by
feeling they are still coming up short and in danger of being dismissed,
abandoned, or rejected.

[Dismissing (Insecure): ]{.i}People with this avoidant style of
attachment manage distress by avoiding it. They perceive others as
emotionally unavailable, so they don't view them as emotionally
valuable---and might even sense that relying on others can be hurtful or
disappointing. As a result, they tend to avoid close relationships. At
the same time, they also tend to cope with their emotions (which could
be overwhelming) by avoiding them. Instead of feeling worthy as a
person, they view themselves as having value based on their achievements
and ability to manage situations. This style [dismisses]{.i} the value
of others and of their own inner experiences.

Although their avoidance of emotional closeness makes them less
sensitive to personal rejection by others, they are very sensitive to
any failure (or potential failure), which they often judge by
unrealistically high standards. After all, if they can meet that level
of accomplishment, then they must possess value. So they often struggle
greatly with self-rejection and self-criticism.

In addition, while those with a dismissing style are not particularly
sensitive to rejection by others, experiencing such rejection can
trigger an inner rejection. To outsiders, their response to their inner
rejection can sometimes look like them doubling down, driving toward
higher levels of achievement. In other cases, people with this
attachment style might share the self-criticism that drives them, or
they might focus more on their previous accomplishments.

[Fearful Avoidant (Insecure):]{.i} People with this anxious [and]{.i}
avoidant style of attachment sense that they cannot rely on others
[or]{.i} themselves to feel valued or to calm their distress. These are
people who likely experienced their parents as intensely
inconsistent---as both scary (based on angry reactions) and scared
(based on anxious reactions). So, their attempts to turn to themselves
and to others for reassurance are both ineffective. As a result, they
are easily upset and their relationships are often tumultuous. Any
rejection---real or perceived---can send them spinning into seemingly
ever-increasing distress with no clear means of feeling comforted or
regaining a sense of feeling valued.

As you think about these attachment styles and which one you best relate
to, keep in mind that the categories do not represent four distinctly
different styles. Rather, the models of self and others are based on a
range of experiences. You can sense that you are more or less lovable
and that others are more or less emotionally available. So, if you have
a preoccupied attachment style, that label just offers a general
description. Your specific style will depend on where you fall along the
models of self and others. In addition, your style can change over time
with different experiences, and it is often somewhat different in
different relationships.

You can gauge where your attachment style falls by considering how well
you relate to each of the styles. You might also want to more formally
determine your style by taking an online survey (including an
empirically validated "Experiences in Close Relationships---Revised"
questionnaire) developed by researcher Chris Fraley (Fraley et al.
2011). You can find a link on my website at
http://drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back.

Before placing too much blame on parents for their children's insecure
attachment styles, it is important to understand that there can be
profound influences beyond any parent's control. Some parents cannot be
sufficiently available to their children due to unavoidable
circumstances, such as personal struggles with anxiety or depression or
perhaps a debilitating illness. Environmental factors, such as being
raised in a violent neighborhood or being victimized by peer bullying,
can negatively affect a child in ways that are extremely difficult (if
not impossible) for a parent to mitigate. Other specific circumstances,
such as being adopted, can also affect attachment. Finally, just as no
two snowflakes are the same, no two infants are identical either. (I
know a bit about this because I have identical twin sons.) Infants are
born with different temperaments, such as their reactivity to the
environment, mood, and ability to be focused and persistent. Some
children have neurological impairments that affect their ability to
connect, such as those with autism. All of these factors can greatly
affect a child's developing attachment style.

[Special note: ]{.i}Throughout this section, I have referenced the
importance of feeling accepted and cared about for who you are because
you have inherent value. If you believe that what people do is what
gives them value, you may not really understand or believe what I am
trying to say. If that's the case, then read the "Learning the Truth:
You are Worthy and Adequate" section of chapter 8, "Building
Self-Acceptance."[ ]{.i}

[How Your Attachment Style Helps You Cope with Rejection (or Not)]{.ac}

While rejection can be painful for everyone, securely attached people do
tend to cope with it better than others. These resilient people
generally have a positive model of self, and so they feel good about
themselves. They also tend to have a model of others as being
emotionally available and supportive. So, when they do feel rejected,
they can rely on both internal and external support to help them
maintain a balanced perspective about it. For example, consider Emily's
story:

Emily always seemed to be able to roll with life's ups and downs. It
wasn't that she never got upset or exhibited distress, but when bad
things happened, she was able to recover her composure without a great
deal of difficulty. As a child, Emily was fortunate to have parents who
were not only calm and secure, but who were also able to soothe her when
she was afraid, sad, or frustrated. The comfort they supplied gave Emily
the solid base to handle life's challenges with confidence and strength.

The following three factors help securely attached people be more
resilient to rejection:

Positive Model of Self as Lovable

- By beginning with a sense of being worthwhile and worthy of being
  loved, securely attached people are able to maintain or quickly regain
  a positive view of themselves.
- Their self-acceptance supports them in being aware of, acknowledging,
  accepting, tolerating, and effectively managing their emotions.
- They are more likely to be compassionately self-aware, which can help
  heal painful emotions.

Positive Model of Others as Emotionally Available

- People who are securely attached generally feel that others are
  emotionally available to them and value them. So, when they feel
  rejected by someone or a situation, they can see and feel the true
  acceptance of others. This broader context keeps the rejection from
  being devastating, though it can still feel painful.
- With a general openness to others, they are able to consider (and have
  empathy for) other people's experiences. Reflecting on what may be
  motivating someone to end a relationship or give critical feedback
  limits its power. For instance, a securely attached person might be
  able to recognize that a friend's recent harsh comments stem from
  exhaustion and stress related to current work problems. While they
  might view the comments as unacceptable, they can also take them less
  personally and be less critical of their friend for the transgression.
  By responding relatively calmly (even if not happily), they can manage
  the situation effectively.

Positive Model of Coping with Rejection

- People who are securely attached are less likely to make mountains
  from molehills. Because they have inner and outer resources to help
  them cope with their feelings of rejection, they are less likely to
  emotionally overreact or stay in an emotionally reactive mind-set. For
  instance, rather than turning their partner's plea for them to pick up
  after themselves into an indictment about them as a whole person or as
  proof of their partner being a neat freak, they empathize with their
  partner's frustration about the situation and feel a true desire to
  lessen it.
- Because they feel positively about themselves and generally cared
  about by others, they are more likely to be able to risk rejection.
  So, if they have a problem with how someone treats them, they can feel
  freer to express their feelings.
- They can deal with a given situation, let go, and move on.

While many people---like Emily---naturally develop a secure attachment
style during childhood, not everyone has enjoyed such good fortune.
However, attachment styles can be changed. As you read this book and
work to create a model of self as more worthy and lovable and a model of
others as more emotionally available, your relationship with rejection
will begin to change. You won't feel as strong a need to avoid it.
Rather than being overly emotional in response to rejection, you will be
able to cope better with it, and maybe even see it as an opportunity to
grow.
:::::::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_007.xhtml}

::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_007.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_007.xhtml__idTextAnchor006
.calibre4}Chapter 2:\
]{.b1}\
Commitment to Change: Concepts and Tools

[Why hasn't Melissa called me back?]{.i} Janine thinks. It's been a
couple of weeks since she and her friend went to the movies, and she
can't figure out what she did wrong to make Melissa not want to talk
with her. Putting her hand to her chest, she can feel her heart racing
almost as quickly as her thoughts. [I really need to get a grip. I can't
let my anxiety overwhelm me again.]{.i} With that thought, she decides
to take a couple of deep breaths. Knowing that writing in her journal
often helps, she sits down and scribbles out her thoughts and feelings.
Reflecting on what she wrote, she thinks, [My fears about Melissa are
getting out of control. I mean, it's not like we always talk every
week.]{.i} Next, she decides to take a shower and then go run some
errands. By that afternoon, she isn't exactly cured of her fear that she
somehow offended Melissa, but she isn't overly worried about it, either.
She decides to journal more later, focusing on her thoughts, emotions,
and what she can do to deal with this situation.

With some effort, you can transform yourself into someone who is more
resilient to rejection. As with any worthy endeavor, the path will
include obstacles and setbacks. It will also involve having to face
rejection and practice responding differently to it, which can feel as
enticing as putting your head in a lion's mouth. However, learning more
about the process of change, and about how you can help yourself through
it, will make it less daunting as it equips you to do the work. So
that's what this chapter is about.

Here you'll learn how to approach change with openness and sensitivity,
nurturing a commitment to achieving your goal and becoming able to help
yourself when you feel distressed. It's a toolbox that contains ways to
keep yourself safe, stay within your [window of tolerance]{.i}, respect
your boundaries, use journaling to gain perspective on your rejection
sensitivity, self-soothe, and explore the five domains of self-awareness
that make up [STEAM]{.i}. That's the acronym I referenced in the
introduction and will describe further at the end of this chapter and in
detail throughout the book.

[Assessing How Stable You Feel]{.ac}

People need to feel some measure of stability in their lives in order to
take on the additional challenge of making personal changes, including
becoming more resilient to rejection. So, it is essential that you take
care of the fundamental activities of daily living, such as stocking
your home with healthy food and paying the bills.

Katrina is a teacher's aide at the local elementary school. She was
essentially "trained" to take care of others by growing up with
alcoholic parents, who left the care of her younger siblings to
her---something she remembers doing since she was about seven years old.
To this day, [How can I help?]{.i} immediately comes to mind any time
she has even the briefest pause of activity in her life. She feels so
driven to care for family and friends that she is always doing things
for them, to the point of regularly forgoing sleep or eating meals so
that she can bake for them, look up information about their medical
issues, or be there to talk with them when they are upset. Even the
thought of wanting to say no or not do [all]{.i} she can to help makes
her feel unworthy and leaves her with an underlying fear of them
dismissing her from their lives.

Whenever it occurs to her that she is chronically unhappy, exhausted,
and wants to take better care of herself, she immediately scolds, [Stop
being so selfish!]{.i} Though she senses that it's important to change,
she falls back to [I'm just too tired and hungry to even think about
it.]{.i} Then she does what she always does---push herself to help
others, ignoring her own needs.

All people have limited inner strength and resources. So, to have the
energy and develop the ability to overcome your sensitivity to
rejection, you must first meet your basic needs sufficiently.

Are You Taking Care of Your Basic Needs?

This exercise will help you assess whether you would benefit from giving
your basic needs more attention. To complete it, you'll need just a
pencil and your journal, or a piece of paper.

[Copy any of the sentences below that you basically agree with.]{.i}

Safe Living Situation

I feel physically or emotionally intimidated at home.

My home environment is not emotionally healthy.

My living situation is not stable.

Financial Security

I do not have sufficient income that I can depend upon.

I am not able to afford basic bills.

I do not feel capable of managing my finances.

Basic Health Needs

I do not get sufficient sleep.

I have significant concerns regarding my eating habits or diet.

I do not get sufficient exercise.

I do not go to a physician when I feel ill.

I do not get annual physical checkups.

[Consider how each of the topics you copied affects your sense of safety
and security.]{.i} Think about how they might be undermining your
ability to think clearly and to focus on and address your rejection
sensitivity.

[Make a plan to address any areas of concern.]{.i} For each one, it
might help to label a separate page with the topic and list some
concrete steps to address it. Make the steps small enough that you are
likely to do them. For instance, if you have trouble managing finances,
you might plan to take one small action each day, such as assembling
your bills in a pile, sorting them by type of bill (e.g., water,
electricity), and making a file to place the sorted bills in.

If you feel like this is more than you can do, get help. You might ask a
friend or reach out to a professional, such as an accountant or a
financial planner. By supporting your basic needs, you are giving
yourself the core strength to begin working on overcoming your
sensitivity to rejection.

[Staying in Your Window of Tolerance]{.ac}

[Stop overreacting. Linda is just enjoying time with her friends,
]{.i}Chad thought reassuringly, bringing himself back from the brink of
an emotional abyss. [Just because she's talking more with them isn't a
statement that she's done with me.]{.i} He was using this opportunity at
a party to work on trying to stay within his [window of tolerance]{.i}.
In the beginning of their relationship, his window was small---even a
hint of possible rejection might put him outside of it. But as he
repeatedly responded to this by calming and focusing himself, he found
that he increased his tolerance for addressing rejection. In other
words, by expanding this window, he was becoming less distressed by, and
better able to handle, perceived rejections.

Noted psychiatrist Dr. Dan Siegel (2010) describes the [window of
tolerance]{.i} as a range of arousal that you need to be within to
function well, such as being able to effectively receive and process
information (shown in Figure 2.1). But given your sensitivity to
rejection, remaining in that window when you feel rejected, or fear it,
can take some work. As Chad did, you can expand this window by learning
to respect your limits, soothe yourself when you become highly upset,
and yet still challenge yourself to face your emotional struggles with
rejection.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_007.xhtml__idContainer005 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch2_fig2.1.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 2.1 ]{.b}Window of Tolerance

When people feel threatened by rejection, they are cast outside their
window of tolerance. Their brains try to protect them from this pain in
one of two ways, through [hyper-arousal]{.i} (too much arousal) or
[hypo-arousal]{.i} (too little arousal). Hyper-arousal involves going
into fight-or-flight mode, and hypo-arousal is characterized by shutting
down.

As an example of hyper-arousal, consider this scenario:

When Chad first met Linda, he was immediately attracted to her, but when
she glanced down at her phone while he was talking, the sense of
rejection hit him like a body blow. He quickly became
[hyper-aroused]{.i} and flooded by an intensity he could feel in his
body. No stranger to this sense of hyper-arousal, he felt overcome by
intense fear and anxiety. As always happened when he was in this state,
he became preoccupied with the thought that he was going to be rejected.
He was outside the window of tolerance and couldn't think clearly. So,
he was unable to learn to cope differently with rejection, because
learning [in general]{.i} can't happen here.

The opposite way your brain might try to protect you is through
[hypo-arousal]{.i}, or shutting down. In this state, you would likely
feel emotionally disconnected or depressed. You might move less and feel
out of touch with your body. Your mind might also feel sluggish, making
it difficult to think. Sometimes people speak of significant events,
such as being fired from a job, with the same nonchalance that they talk
about the weather.

It's not unusual that when a therapy patient begins to talk about deep
feelings of being unworthy or not mattering to others, they aren't
consciously upset. Instead, they might suddenly get tired or have
trouble thinking clearly. These are signs of hypo-arousal, which is a
serious obstacle to change.

While working through your issues of rejection, you will undoubtedly end
up outside of your window of tolerance at different times. That's to be
expected. Many of the exercises in the chapters on developing
self-awareness in the domains of STEAM (sensations, thoughts, emotions,
actions, and mentalizing) are designed to help bring you back to a more
optimal level of arousal.

[Respecting Your Boundaries]{.ac}

You may find that even consciously thinking about the topic of rejection
sends your anxiety level through the roof, well outside your window of
tolerance. You may react to this by being critical of yourself, such as
by thinking, [You are so oversensitive! What is your problem that you
still worry so much about what other people think of you?! ]{.i}Your
desire to feel stronger and be more resilient is admirable, but
chastising yourself will make you defensive and lead you to fear the
rebuke, along with the original fear of rejection. There is a better
way.

Rather than chastising yourself, respect your feelings, which are based
on your life experiences. Approach yourself more slowly, taking the time
to understand your fears and struggles, appreciate and encourage your
efforts, and absorb the support you are giving yourself. This can more
effectively---and compassionately---help alleviate your sensitivity to
rejection.

Consider this analogy: You come across a neglected dog in an alley and
you decide to help him. As you approach him, he slowly backs away and
begins to growl. Understanding that he feels threatened, you stop
walking and just stand there. After a time, he seems to relax, but keeps
a constant eye on you. You bring water and food, but again he will not
let you approach. So, you put down the bowl and back away. He slowly
goes to the food and water. With time, the dog feels safe enough to let
you sit as he eats and drinks. He lets you pet him. Finally, you can
take him home, groom him, and enjoy your new friend!

This slow, gentle approach can be a very frustrating process. I've had
many patients become angry with themselves for being overly distressed
by rejection or fighting the process of change, even though they
consciously want to improve their lives. But when that happens, it can
help to take a step back and think. If experience has taught you that
you are in that much danger, it would be natural to resist letting down
your guard.

So, when you try to work on this issue and find that you are quick to
feel overly distressed or guarded, remember the importance of respecting
that reaction. Again, it's the result of what you've learned from
previous experiences. If you don't think you need that reaction any
longer, then an important part of changing is to gently, but firmly and
repeatedly, offer yourself the nurturance and encouragement necessary to
free yourself from your rejection sensitivity. You can do this through
the information and exercises in this book.

Note: If you have a history of childhood neglect or physical, sexual, or
emotional abuse, you may really need the help of a trained professional
to guide you through the process of accepting and having self-compassion
for these struggles.

[Journaling to Your Advantage]{.ac}

Many people find journaling a valuable tool for getting a new
perspective on their struggles with feeling rejection---or any other
life challenge, for that matter. The acts of composing your thoughts,
writing them down, and then rereading them frequently help people
organize, clarify, and gain perspective on their experiences. Also,
reading your entry later can remind you of forgotten insights.

Journaling can be completed in both structured and unstructured ways,
and each one offers different benefits. Structured journaling is writing
in response to a prompt. It may be an open-ended question, such as "Are
there common situations in your relationships that tend to trigger you
to feel rejected (e.g., you are not invited out with other friends)?" Or
the prompt may offer more detailed directions, such as "Write about your
emotional reactions to rejection. Then write about your behavioral
reactions. Finally, write about how these reactions affect other
people." Throughout this book, you will see the suggestion to reflect on
various topics. Consider each of these to be a possible journaling
prompt.

Unstructured journaling is writing out your thoughts without specific
directions or with only a basic topic in mind. It can feel very
liberating. One powerful way to do this is by writing with a
stream-of-consciousness style. You write what comes to mind without
concern for grammar, spelling, editing, or even making sense. In other
words, you just let whatever comes to mind pour out onto the paper. By
expressing your raw experience without intellectualizing or being
limited by what "makes sense," you open yourself to everything that's
happening within. This can help you experience some catharsis and gain
insights about yourself and your perceptions of the world.

There may be times when you want to add some more reflective thinking to
this journaling. Reread what you wrote---either immediately or
later---and journal about your thoughts and insights. The process of
unstructured journaling---with or without the second look---may provide
some clarity, so I strongly encourage you to do this periodically during
your journey of personal growth.

It can be particularly helpful to use one journal for all of your notes
and written responses to exercises in this book. This will give you an
opportunity to revisit and reflect on old entries. In the process, you
might remind yourself of forgotten insights, find that your thinking has
changed, or just get yourself back on track with a previous line of
thinking. Looking back over your growth from doing this work might also
encourage you---it can be easy to get stuck focusing on where you are
falling short, failing to recognize how far you have come.

I have had a number of patients hesitate to keep a journal because they
don't want anyone to see it. If this is the case for you, there are a
couple of things you can do. You can keep it in a place that is safe
from prying eyes (and maybe even lock it up). Or you can write out your
thoughts and then throw out the paper. This obviously won't allow you to
review it later, but the process of physically writing your thoughts is
worthwhile in itself. Finally, you might prefer to type your thoughts on
a computer (tablet, laptop, desktop, phone, whatever). While this can
work, consider that you may find that you connect more emotionally with
the process by writing out your thoughts by hand.

[Learning to Self-Soothe]{.ac}

It's unrealistic to expect to feel calm the whole time you are working
on freeing yourself from your sensitivity to rejection. However, when
you are so upset that you can't think straight or respond in a
constructive way, your first priority needs to be soothing yourself and
bringing your arousal level back within your window of tolerance (a
concept described earlier in this chapter).

For this reason, it is important that you know ways that you can rely on
to soothe yourself when distressed.

Create a Self-Soothing "Go-To" List

Use this exercise to create a list that you can refer to when you feel
upset. It's important to write down a list of these activities while you
are calm so that you don't have to dream them up when you need them
most---remember, the more upset you are, the harder it is to think. You
may want to complete this exercise on your phone or a loose piece of
paper, rather than in your journal, so that you can more easily take the
list with you.

[On your list, note activities you find calming.]{.i} Think about the
activities you engage in now. Also, think back on activities you used to
do and would be interested in returning to.

[Add activities from the list below. ]{.i}Check to see if this list
reminds you of activities you engage in to self-soothe. You might also
decide to try out new activities.

Listening to music

Taking a hot bath or shower

Exercising

Doing yoga

Talking with a friend

Reading

Playing games on your phone

Surfing the Internet

Watching a movie or show

Doing a craft

Playing an instrument

Eating a comfort food (best to do this slowly so you can savor it)

Getting a massage

Doing something that makes you laugh

[When you are done with your list, be sure to keep it in an easily
accessible place.]{.i} You can always add to the list or even make notes
about new activities you have yet to try in times of stress.

Review the list periodically. The more you reflect on, update, and
reference the list, the more likely you will think to use it when you
feel upset.

You may notice any activity that helps you can also be [over]{.i}done,
making it problematic. So, you need to monitor when, or for how long,
you engage in these activities. If certain ones tend to become
self-destructive---such as emotional eating or surfing the
Internet---then it may be best to steer clear of them totally, or at
certain times (e.g., not eating snacks after 8 p.m.).

Learning Relaxation Exercises

There are many exercises that are specifically meant to help people
relax. Below is a list of some that you might benefit from learning, or
from being reminded of.

[Visualization:]{.i} Close your eyes and think about a setting that you
find especially comforting, such as the woods or a beach. Using as many
of your senses as you can, imagine what it would be like to actually be
there. For instance, you might choose the beach and imagine feeling the
warmth of the sun on your face, hearing the sound of the ocean, watching
the seagulls flying overhead, and even smelling and tasting the salt in
the air.

[Deep or diaphragmatic breathing:]{.i} As you breathe in through your
nose, allow your belly to fill like a balloon. Then as you exhale, your
belly will deflate. Note that your lungs will not move much. Take five
or ten slow breaths. It can help to place one hand on your stomach and
your other one on your chest to guide your breathing. If you have
trouble doing this, lie on your back with your feet flat on the floor
(so that your knees are bent). This position makes it easier to do
diaphragmatic breathing. After you get the hang of it, you will be able
to do it while sitting up.

[Square breathing:]{.i} This is helpful for people whose thoughts are
racing, keeping them distressed. As you engage in deep breathing, count
to 4 as you inhale, pause to the count of 4, exhale to the count of 4,
and finally hold to the count of 4. If you are a visual person, imagine
drawing each side of a square as you count and breathe.

In addition to these exercises, you might find developing a mindfulness
or meditation practice can help you calm down, along with enjoying other
benefits.

The Many Ways You Can Benefit from Mindfulness

Renowned mindfulness teacher Jon Kabat-Zinn defines mindfulness in his
book, [Wherever You Go, There You Are]{.i} as "paying attention in a
particular way: on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgmentally"
(1994, 4). You can attend to any aspect of your experience, such as your
sensations, thoughts, emotions, or actions.

Much research has shown that when people learn to consciously pay
attention to their experiences without judgment, they benefit in many
ways, such as:

- Increased tolerance and modulation of emotions, including fear
- Stress reduction
- Better self-control
- Improved focus
- Less emotional reactivity
- Increased mental flexibility
- More self-insight
- Greater compassion
- Greater satisfaction in relationships

You can apply mindfulness to helping reduce your sensitivity to
rejection by bringing your awareness to it. Rather than being driven by
your emotional reactivity to rejection, with mindful awareness you will
be able to think more clearly about your rejection experiences, or fears
of them. As a result, you will be able to respond in healthier ways.
Later chapters will include mindfulness exercises to help you increase
self-awareness in the five domains of STEAM, which are described in the
next section.

[Building Self-Awareness with STEAM]{.ac}

As explained earlier in this chapter, your hypersensitivity to rejection
and abandonment (including your fear of them) reveals a problem based in
your attachment style. That is, your model of self probably involves
perceiving yourself less positively and more toward being unlovable,
unworthy, inadequate, flawed, or some similar experience. In addition,
your model of others probably involves seeing them, to some significant
degree, as not truly empathic and supportive of you.

An important step toward improving your sense of security is getting to
know yourself better through increased self-awareness. As you do this,
you can also reassess your model of others and work toward being more
open to the love and acceptance they have to offer. Each of the next
five chapters guides you through increasing self-awareness in a
different domain, collectively called STEAM, which stands for
sensations, thoughts, emotions, actions, and mentalization.

[Sensations:]{.i} As you learn to pay attention to your body, you will
find that you respond to experiences on a physical level. If you tend to
be out of touch with your emotions, tuning in to your sensations can be
a doorway into a fuller awareness of your feelings.

[Thoughts:]{.i} People often have thoughts without reflecting on them.
By learning to observe your thoughts and think about them, you will
begin to understand them in a new way. This includes gaining insight
into how they relate to your sensations, emotions, and actions.

[Emotions:]{.i} Increasing self-awareness of your emotions is like
shining a light on them, enabling you to better see the ones that were
obscured in the shadows of your awareness, as well as discovering
emotions you did not realize were even there. The more you pay attention
to all of your emotions, the more fully you can acknowledge them,
tolerate them, and even appreciate them. You will ultimately come to
value and have compassion for your "true" or "authentic" self.

[Actions:]{.i} By paying attention to your actions, you can learn a lot
about how they relate to your thoughts and emotions, and how they
frequently reinforce your negative self-perceptions and struggles with
rejection.

[Mentalization:]{.i} Psychoanalyst Peter Fonagy and his colleagues have
elaborated (though not originated) this psychological concept, which is
linked to Bowlby's theory of attachment (Allen, Bleiberg, and
Haslam-Hopwood 2003; Fonagy and Target 1997). It describes the mainly
unconscious way that people "get" where they and others are "coming
from." They do this by understanding how people's inner experiences
affect their actions. This enables them to be empathic and compassionate
toward others and themselves. So, when you develop this ability, you are
strengthening a positive sense of yourself and a sense that significant
people in your life will be accepting and supportive of you. Along with
those changes, you will also lessen your struggles with rejection.

The self-awareness of STEAM is an ability you develop with practice and
experience. This involves moving back and forth among the different
domains of awareness. So, while you work in a chapter to develop one
domain of awareness, you can expect to revisit exercises from the
chapters on other domains of awareness that you have already completed.
As you get more experienced in doing this, you will find that you can
move more easily among the different domains, which will give you a
fuller, richer sense of yourself. While no one reaches a state of full
and continuous self-awareness, you can learn skills to regularly tap
into yourself. The more you do this, the more it will characterize how
you relate to yourself.

[Caution:]{.i} You may sometimes find that increasing your awareness
intensifies your reactions to rejection. When this happens, take a break
from the exercise or exercises that seem to trigger these reactions. You
might find it helpful to spotlight areas that nurture more positive
feelings about yourself. You can do this by completing some of the
exercises in chapter 8, "Building Self-Acceptance." As you become more
open to changing, you may find it helpful to try the exercises in
chapter 9, "Nurturing Compassionate Self-Awareness."

With these tools for nurturing openness, sensitivity, and commitment to
change, you can effectively apply yourself to addressing, and moving
past, your struggles with rejection. Essential to this process is
increasing your self-awareness in the five domains of STEAM, which will
start with the next chapter, "Sensations."
:::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_008.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_008.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_008.xhtml__idTextAnchor007
.calibre4}Chapter 3:\
]{.b1}\
Sensations

Chad, now twenty-four years old, reflects on his days as a state
champion baseball pitcher in high school, and as an athlete. Back then
he learned to hone his physical conditioning: eating well; getting
sufficient sleep; and building his strength, agility, and endurance
through working out. [But that was a long time ago]{.i}, Chad thinks[.
And, even though I was in great shape, I really had no clue who I
was---or even what my body was telling me. ]{.i}

Now, years later, Chad is learning to pay attention to his body in a way
he never did before. At first, he doesn't recognize that his breathing
becomes shallow while trying to interpret a text from his girlfriend
Linda in the same way his breathing would grow short back in his
baseball days, while pitching with runners on base. Though the source of
anxiety and fear could hardly be more different, his physical reaction
is the same. But then he remembers how his pitching coach used to direct
him to be aware of changes in his breathing and take a deep breath.
[Just focus on my breathing. Take a slow, deep breath in...And
exhale.]{.i} As he lets air slowly escape his mouth, he can already feel
his anxiety ease. With a few breaths, he calms enough to be able to
reflect on what is going on. He realizes how his tense breathing was
prompted by a fear that, when Linda said she was not able to meet for
lunch, it meant she was going to leave him. [Boy, am I
overreacting]{.i}, he thinks. With another deep breath, he reminds
himself, [I know I'm worried, but she did tell me she wants to
reschedule for tomorrow. ]{.i}

Many people think of their bodies as separate from their inner selves.
Rather than attending to their sensations---the "S" in STEAM---as a
message about their personal experience, they view their bodies as they
would an external object. This is even true for those who treat their
body as a temple, attending carefully and thoughtfully to its many
needs, such as sleep, nutrition, and exercise. While they nurture their
physical selves, they do not listen to the messages their bodies send
about their inner experiences---such as Chad did when he realized that
his shallow breathing was the result of his fear of rejection. Other
people barely register their bodies and physical sensations, focusing
instead on enhancing their intellectual or spiritual selves. Even many
who understand the importance of their physical [and]{.i} inner
experiences attend to them separately---as though their bodies were not
connected to their inner selves. They don't fully acknowledge or
appreciate the connection between the mind and body.

The mind-body connection is not only real, but it is also powerful. Your
body has its own level of experience and speaks its own language,
especially through your sensations. When you are open to listening, you
can tap into yourself in a fuller and richer way. For instance, sensing
heat in your face might relate to having self-critical thoughts and
feeling embarrassed about your actions. You might also feel an
incredible churning in your stomach that tells you that your
embarrassment is intense. So, by tuning in to your body, you can get to
know [you]{.i} better.

People carry some experiences in them on a nonverbal, physical level.
So, they cannot immediately think about these experiences because there
are no words for them. As an example, children who are neglected or
whose emotions are regularly criticized by attachment figures learn that
they are inadequate or unlovable. This can even happen in everyday kinds
of ways, such as being sent to their rooms every time they cry or
express distress. For them, the message that their emotional selves
don't matter is just part of being---not something they've been
expressly told or that they have put words to. Yet, they perceive
something is wrong with them through a sense of disconnection with their
bodies, as well as with their emotions.

To whatever degree your struggles with rejection are conscious or
unconscious, paying attention to your sensations can be a helpful first
step toward addressing them. These are raw experiences you can learn to
observe, experience, and then use as a portal into your inner world. As
such, they are important in building self-awareness, along with the
other domains of STEAM.

The information and exercises in this chapter offer opportunities for
you to learn to relate to your sensations in ways that will increase
your self-awareness. There are suggestions and exercises that can help
you connect more with your current sensations, enabling you to attend to
them and to how they might be delivering messages from your inner self.
The next couple of sections---"Increasing Your Bodily Awareness" and
"Mindfulness Meditation"---are two examples of this. You are also
invited to allow your body to express nonverbal experiences through the
creative arts in the section "Tapping Your Raw Experience with Creative
Arts" and its related exercise, "Create a Personal Collage." Other
exercises use your sensations to calm you and to remain grounded in the
present, rather than being consumed by memories of past---or fears of
future---rejection. Finally, the sections that follow will enable you to
use your physical sensations as a doorway to your other domains of
STEAM.

[Increasing Your Bodily Awareness ]{.ac}

In expecting rejection from others, you may devote yourself to chasing
approval or trying to achieve a sense of worth by meeting
unrealistically high standards. These responses are similar in that they
both focus outwardly, away from your inner distress. This may leave
you---as it does for many people---so disconnected from your body that
you don't fully register your physical self.

Being out of touch with your sensations may help keep your distress at
arm's length, but it can also leave you restlessly or anxiously
unhappy---registering a vague awareness that something is not quite
right, but being unable to put your finger on it. Many people who
operate this way end up with physical problems, such as headaches, chest
pain, or upset stomach. Their stress might also lead to or exacerbate
more serious medical issues, such as high blood pressure, heart disease,
diabetes, or irritable bowel syndrome. In addition to having these
problems, they are less likely to respond to symptoms, such as not
seeking medical help when they have chest pains. In all of these
circumstances, learning to listen to your body is a first step toward
responding to your personal needs.

I have seen some patients who are so disconnected from their physical
bodies that they don't even know they are upset until I point out a tear
running down their cheek. Even then, they may not realize they are sad.
Any insights about their struggles tend to remain intellectual. While
thoughts and feelings influence each other, they operate---to a large
degree---separately in the brain. So, people cannot simply [think]{.i}
their way out of emotions. (You learn this each time you unsuccessfully
command yourself, [Stop being upset]{.i}!) But reconnecting with their
bodies provides an experiential connection to their emotions that they
can then reflect upon.

To nurture this bodily awareness, it is helpful to build practices into
your life that can connect you with your body. Some suggestions are
listed below.

[Get moving and pay attention:]{.i} This can mean strolling around your
neighborhood, going to the gym, playing a sport, hiking, or even doing
active chores around the house, such as cleaning out cabinets,
gardening, or raking leaves. Pay attention to how your body feels. You
might notice that your poor posture is causing your lower back to hurt.
Or you might notice that the aches you feel as you start your hike
disappear as your muscles warm up. Be sure to take note of any such
positive feelings that accompany your body getting exercise.

[Massage:]{.i} As you get a massage, pay attention to how it feels when
various muscle groups are being worked. You might also notice particular
emotions arising. Simply observe the different sensations and emotions.

[Dancing:]{.i} Being in touch with your body is inherent to dancing.
Given your struggles with relationships, you might gain an added benefit
by doing dances that involve a partner, such as ballroom dancing, salsa,
or square dancing. There are also many health benefits to dancing, such
as improving your aerobic fitness, coordination, and self-confidence.

[Singing:]{.i} Belting out a song requires awareness of your breath and
body. Importantly, it releases a hormone called oxytocin, which can
reduce stress and anxiety while also increasing trust and a sense of
connection. So, if you sing with a group, you can get an added feel-good
from connecting on a nonverbal level, as well as being socially
connected.

[Yoga:]{.i} Yoga involves awareness of your breath and body. It also
offers certain poses intended for helping people feel grounded, or being
present in their body.

[Tai chi:]{.i} Originally developed in China as a form of self-defense,
tai chi is "meditation in motion" and facilitates a sense of calm. It
offers gentle exercise, including stretching.

[Martial arts:]{.i} Aikido, karate, kickboxing, mixed martial arts, and
tae kwon do require bodily awareness, such as awareness of breathing,
focus, and a balance between muscular tension and relaxation. They
require a kinesthetic awareness as moves are performed. They also have
the added benefits of teaching self-defense and building confidence.

In addition to these methods of reconnecting with your bodily
sensations, you might consider meditation. This is explored in the next
sections, and exercises for different ways to practice it are also
suggested.

[Mindfulness Meditation]{.ac}

Mindfulness meditation is a practice that ultimately increases your
connection with, and acceptance of, yourself. It also fosters calmness
and a positive state of mind. You can use different techniques to
nonjudgmentally attend to your experiences, including all the domains of
STEAM (though this chapter specifically focuses on sensations). For
instance, as described fully in the next section, you might focus on the
sensation of breathing, repeatedly bringing your attention back to it
when you get distracted. Practicing this at times when you are
relatively calm can help prepare you for mindful awareness of more
distressing experiences, such as when your heart beats quickly. By
increasing your mindful awareness of sensations, you can experience them
without being overwhelmed or reactive. When your sensations relate to
rejection, you can tolerate and appreciate them, enabling you to reflect
on them and develop a healthier response.

While you can learn a lot about meditation from the Internet, make
sure---as you would be wise to do researching any subject---that the
information you are getting is valid. Some well-respected teachers of
mindfulness are Jack Kornfield, Matthieu Ricard, Joseph Goldstein,
Sharon Salzberg, Tara Brach, and His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama. You
might also want to explore the work at UCLA's Mindful Awareness Research
Center or the work of Jon Kabat-Zinn and his Mindfulness-Based Stress
Reduction (MBSR), which has been shown to be very effective. If you are
interested in the neurological basis of meditation, check out the work
of Rick Hanson and Dan Siegel. Because mindfulness and meditation have
proliferated, there are many more teachers whose work is worth
exploring.

Mindful Breathing Meditation

One common way to begin meditating is with a mindful breathing
meditation. Many people find that simply maintaining a regular
meditation practice of mindful breathing helps them effectively calm
themselves during stressful times, including when they experience
rejection. While it can be tempting to just use mindful breathing when
you are upset, this as-needed approach---while often potentially
helpful---may not be as effective in calming you as when you maintain a
regular practice. It also misses out on the benefits of increasing
mindful self-awareness even during less stressful times.

If you decide to develop a meditation practice, choose a designated time
each day. As a beginner, you might choose to sit for 2 or 3 minutes a
day. As you gain more experience, you can increase the time---but do so
slowly! It's better to meditate for only a few minutes a day as a
regular practice than to struggle with a more ambitious amount of time
that you give up after just a few days. You also want to choose an
amount of time that is comfortably available to you. (Stressing about
getting to the next thing on your to-do list is counterproductive.) As
you become more comfortable and experienced with this meditation and
feel motivated by its benefits, you can increase to a practice of 15 or
20 minutes once or twice a day.

Learn to Breathe Mindfully

It's important to spend some time preparing before you begin a mindful
breathing meditation session.

Preparation

[Timer:]{.b} For this exercise, you can use any timer, including the one
on your phone. However, some people like to use meditation apps that
offer meditation bells.

[Location:]{.b} Although breathing mindfully can help you anyplace, a
breathing meditation needs to be done in a quiet location where you will
not be interrupted.

[State of mind:]{.b} Begin by choosing to focus solely on mindful
breathing. No multitasking. Commit yourself to being "in" the experience
as opposed to thinking about it.

[Position:]{.b} You can sit comfortably on a chair or on the floor with
your legs crossed. Rest your hands on your lap and make sure you sit up
straight. If you are not comfortable with closing your eyes, you can
look downward so that you are not distracted by anything in your
environment. Another option is to lie down on the floor and close your
eyes.

Breathing Meditation

[Simply focus on breathing naturally]{.b} (not trying to slow the breath
or do anything with it). Notice your bodily sensations related to
breathing, such as the air coming in through your nostrils and the rise
and fall of your chest and belly. When you notice that your mind has
wandered, gently observe this---perhaps even saying "wandering" to
yourself---and return your attention to your breathing.

[When your timer goes off, bring your attention back to the room you are
in.]{.b} Do this slowly, giving yourself the time you need to reorient.

When you have completed this meditation, allow yourself to appreciate
that you have nurtured yourself in this way.

If you struggle with constant worries or thoughts while trying to
breathe mindfully, you might find it helpful to direct your thinking.
You can say "inhale" and "exhale" in your mind as you breathe. Or you
can count your breaths. After some practice, you may find that you no
long need to direct your thinking in this way, and you can refocus on
the sensations of breathing.

Walking Meditation

A great way to ground your body is with a walking meditation. This
common meditation practice helps focus your attention and bring an inner
calm as you increase your sense of connection and embodied awareness.

The practice involves being fully aware of your experience as you walk.
For this reason, it is best to choose a quiet place and an undisturbed
time where you can give it your whole attention. Walk for whatever
length of time feels right to you, perhaps increasing the time as you
get more comfortable with the practice. It is often helpful to begin the
practice without a destination, as you might feel pressured to get
there. Instead, choose an area where you can walk back and forth or on a
circular path. I have personally appreciated walking in a labyrinth.
Also, you might want to try this out at home or where there are no
people who might be watching.

Before you even begin, take a few slow, deep breaths. Then walk. It
often helps to walk slowly, but you can walk at any pace as long as you
maintain your mindful awareness. Observe the sensations on the bottoms
of your feet, as pressure moves from your heel to your toes. Note the
shift of weight from one leg to the other as you step forward.

When you observe your thoughts wandering off on their own path,
acknowledge it and then gently return them to your body. You can expect
this to happen many times. Noted meditation teacher Jack Kornfield
(2008) articulately offers common meditation advice when he says in [The
Wise Heart]{.i}, "Like training a puppy, you will need to come back a
thousand times."

As you get more experienced with this, you might also choose to open
your awareness to other sensations. Note the sights, sounds, and smells.
Be open to all of your experiences. But when your mind wanders to
reflecting on them or just takes a different path altogether, again,
observe this distraction and gently guide your awareness back to your
bodily sensations.

Being Mindfully Aware of Your Sensations

In addition to practicing awareness of chosen sensations---as with the
mindful breathing and mindful walking practices---you can benefit from
allowing the target of your awareness to arise from broadly attending to
your whole body. Our sensations often deliver messages that tell us
about ourselves. However, these communications can only help us if we
pick them up and read them. For this reason, it is crucial that we are
aware of, and attend to, our physical experiences---as Chad did when he
realized that his tight chest and difficulty breathing were signs of his
fear of rejection by Linda. You can learn more about tapping your
sensations to increase self-awareness by watching my brief video
[Sensations: Getting to Know Your Rejection Sensitivity]{.i} at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

As important as it is to attend to your body, it is also crucial that
you put that awareness in context, especially if you---like many
people---feel distressed by signs of anxiety or other physical
sensations. Be aware of your reactions to your sensations and consider
whether your reactions fit the situation, or whether you might be
overreacting. For instance, if you feel a wave of light-headedness while
at the gym, you might realize that it's likely related to fears of
having to give a presentation later that day, rather than assuming that
you have a serious medical condition. If you tend to react emotionally
to your awareness of certain sensations, you might want to turn to the
"Assessing Your Current Situation" section of chapter 7, "Mentalizing."
That chapter, as a whole, also addresses in depth how to guide your
responses to the different domains of awareness.

Reconnect with Your Senses

When you fear rejection or are feeling rejected, find a quiet place to
sit. Although it's up to you to decide how long to do this exercise,
make sure you will not be disturbed for at least 10 minutes.

[Choose to focus on your body.]{.i} You may find it helps to slowly scan
from the bottom of your feet to the top of your head. Stop at any point
where you are aware of sensations. Make note of each sensation before
moving on. You might notice that your stomach is unsettled, your chest
feels tight, there is a lump in your throat, or there are tears in your
eyes.

[Allow your attention to be pulled to one of your sensations.
]{.i}Attend to it without trying to change it. As you stay with the
sensation, you might notice that it changes on its own. That's okay.
Just keep paying attention. If you have difficulty identifying your
sensations because you feel numb, then pay attention to that. When you
get distracted, remind yourself to refocus on your body. Expect that you
will need to do this many times.

The whole point of this exercise is simply to practice tuning in to your
sensations. Because being mindfully aware of those sensations can be
particularly difficult to do as you challenge yourself in working
through this book, you may find it helpful to return to this exercise at
different points along your journey (and various sections in the
upcoming chapters make this suggestion).

Engaging in a daily practice connecting with your senses can be
particularly helpful in reconnecting with your physical body and
learning to "hear" what it is telling you. As your ability to do this
improves, you will probably notice certain emotions rising up. At this
point, review the "The Importance of Connecting with Your Emotions"
section of chapter 5, "Emotions." Then you might want to try the other
exercises in that section.

[Tapping Your Raw Experience with Creative Arts]{.ac}

Your sensations---whether you are aware of it or not---embody the
experiences of your inner self, including your struggles with rejection.
It is a connection that is beyond words, and so it can be difficult to
think about. However, you may find that you can tap into, and express,
your embodied inner self through the creative arts. In doing so, you
will discover valuable personal truths held deep within, much like
unlocking a treasure chest.

For instance, an artist might feel compelled to draw a picture rife with
symbolism for their inner turmoil. By itself, this can feel palpably
relieving and calming. But the sensation of releasing this creative
energy can also enable the conscious mind to make sense of an embodied
experience it had only obliquely perceived, or possibly never even knew
existed.

The creative process comes more easily for some people than others. If
you are comfortable with a particular art form or have an interest in
one, you might explore it as a way to learn more about yourself. For
instance, you might decide to explore the visual arts, such as drawing,
painting, sculpting, animation, photography, or video. Or perhaps you
are drawn to the performing arts, such as dance, music, acting, comedy,
dramatic recitation, or mime. Whatever your interest, remember that
you're pursuing it for the purpose of self-exploration. That means
rather than just mastering techniques, your focus will be more on
self-expression.

While the creative arts can help you connect with your raw experience
and true self, using the arts for deep personal expression can feel
intimidating. This is especially true when you hold an image of what
your work "should" look or sound like. So, it is important to focus more
on the process of creating art than on judging the outcome of your work.

In expressing your embodied self, you will more fully appreciate
pleasant and joyful experiences, while being more present for painful
ones. When you express that pain, you are validating its existence in a
way that may make it easier to reflect on, empathize with, and have
compassion for your pain. As someone who fears rejection, sharing your
artwork can be particularly difficult. However, if you take that risk
with supportive others, who can then empathize with your experience, you
open yourself to the possibility of feeling "held," validated, and no
longer alone in it. By definition, the relationship (or attachment) will
be more secure, leaving you less fearful of being ignored, dismissed, or
abandoned.

Create a Personal Collage

There is no one correct way to create a collage, but this exercise is
specifically designed to encourage you to listen to your inner,
nonverbal self. It encourages you to let you body "talk." As you engage
in this process, pay attention to what you are feeling and to any
particular thoughts or insights that might come to you. With this in
mind, read through these directions before starting.

[Assemble the materials you will need.]{.i} Be prepared with glue,
scissors, and magazines that you can freely cut up. Choose a piece of
paper or poster board that you will glue pictures to---the size is
completely up to you.

[Prepare your workspace.]{.i} You want a surface with sufficient space
and seating that is comfortable.

[Prepare your mind.]{.i} Before you begin, you might want to take a few
deep breaths to bring you into the moment.

[Clip images.]{.i} As you flip through the magazines, cut out any images
that attract your attention. If you find yourself lost in thought and
distracted at any point, bring your attention back to browsing the
magazines. The idea is to let your interest in an image "happen to you"
rather than looking for something in particular.

In addition to pictures, certain words, colors, or designs might jump
out at you. Whatever it is that grabs you, cut it out. None of this
needs to make sense. However, if you are aware of certain thoughts or
feelings that accompany your interest in the picture, consciously allow
for them. (You might even jot down a few notes so that you can journal
about them later.)

[Affix your images to the paper.]{.i} You might glue down the cutouts as
you go, or after you have a stack of them in front of you. Just as with
deciding what to clip from the magazines, glue them down in a way that
feels right.

[Sit back and appreciate your work.]{.i} This is a time to just absorb
the visual artwork you have created. Resist any impulse to critique it.

After you have finished, put the collage someplace where you are likely
to see it. Sometimes, rather than having some new awareness hit you
while you are working, an insight seeps its way into your consciousness
as you observe the collage later.

[How Your Self-Criticism Expresses Itself in Your Sensations]{.ac}

People who tend to expect rejection also struggle with being
self-critical. They play the roles of being both critic and victim. By
paying attention to your bodily sensations when you are engaged in
thinking from each of these perspectives, you can gain greater
self-awareness and enrich your self-understanding. Then you might
naturally respond more kindly to yourself or feel motivated to work on
doing this.

Use Your Sensations to Explore Your Self-Criticism

When you are aware of being self-critical, sit in a quiet place with
your journal or a pad of paper and pencil. Make sure you will not be
disturbed for at least 20 minutes.

[Make two columns on the paper.]{.i} Title them "Critic" and "Victim."

[Take a few slow, deep breaths to ground yourself in the moment.]{.i}
This can help bring your full attention to this exercise.

[Attend to the self-criticism, identifying with the harsh voice that is
speaking: your critical self.]{.i} As you do this, have that voice
address yourself as a separate person, using "you" instead of "I."

[Choose to shift your focus to your body, noting any sensations.]{.i}
You may find it helpful to close your eyes as you do this. After you
have a good grasp of sensations that arise or feel heightened in
response to this angry self, list them under the "Critic" column.

It's easy to get carried away by your angry thoughts, so don't be
surprised if it happens. Simply remind yourself to refocus on your
body---you may need to repeat this guidance several times.

[Return your attention to these physical sensations, attending to
whatever emotions seem connected with them.]{.i} List these emotions in
the "Critic" column, too.

[Now attend to the same self-criticism, but identify with being the
victim]{.i}. Now you are on the receiving end of the attack. What is
your victim voice saying?

[Again, shift your focus to your body, noting your sensations.]{.i}
After identifying sensations that have arisen or are heightened by
feeling attacked, list them under the "Victim" column. Again, any time
you get distracted, refocus on your body.

[Return your attention to these physical sensations, attending to
whatever emotions seem connected to them.]{.i} Note these on the chart
in the "Victim" column.

[Disconnect from the exercise.]{.i} Take several slow, deep breaths or
even walk away for a few minutes.

Review what you've written and reflect on your experience of doing this
exercise.[ ]{.i}You might find it helpful to journal about the
relationship between the critic and victim aspects of yourself and how
they affect you in general.

To help you understand how you can use your sensations to gain insight
about your self-criticism, look at Chad's responses to this exercise.

[Attend to the self-criticism, identifying with the harsh voice that is
speaking: your critical self.]{.i} Chad recognized that he was being
harsh with himself even as he thought,[ You are such an idiot for
forgetting about the meeting with your boss today. Now she is going to
hate you.]{.i}

Following the next couple of steps in the exercise, he completed the
"Critic" column of the chart with his sensations and emotions.

[Now attend to the same self-criticism, but identify with being the
victim]{.i}. Chad was conscious of a part of himself that felt attacked
by his self-criticism. It said, [You're right. I am an idiot. Now she
knows it, too, and she is going to fire me]{.i}.

At this point, he completed the directions related to the "Victim"
column.

+---------------------+--------------------------------+
| [Critic]{.b}        | [Victim]{.b}                   |
+---------------------+--------------------------------+
| Tension in my chest | Nauseated                      |
|                     |                                |
| Clenching my jaw    | Tearing up                     |
|                     |                                |
| Heat rising in me   | Afraid, ashamed, sad, defeated |
|                     |                                |
| Angry, frustrated   |                                |
+---------------------+--------------------------------+

After disconnecting from the exercise, Chad had a lot to think about. He
could see how his assumption that people were going to disapprove of him
led to viewing himself harshly, and that he just spiraled down from
there.

The immediate purpose of the last exercise is to help you use bodily
awareness to be more aware of the critic and victim voices and
experiences within you. Notice how the same self-criticism can elicit
and feed different sensations and emotions on the different lists.
Chad's thoughts that he was incompetent were associated with tension and
anger on his critic list, but associated with tears and sadness on his
victim list. The goal of expanding your awareness in this way is to help
you go beyond just living the experiences to being able to reflect upon
them.

If you can connect with your sensations but have difficulty labeling
your emotions, you might want to put this exercise on hold while you
work on developing your emotional awareness, which is addressed in
chapter 5, "Emotions." You also might want to eventually use the
"Labeling Your Emotions" section of that chapter to help you identify
your emotions in this exercise. (If you decide to return to this
exercise after exploring chapter 5, you can remind yourself to do this
by placing a sticky note in that chapter now.)

When you can reflect on your sensations---as well as all the domains of
STEAM---you will be able to question your reactions to rejection. The
increased self-awareness will offer you the space to consider
alternatives and think about what those might feel like. All of this can
lead you to develop a more positive sense of yourself, change your
expectations of how others see you, and alter the course of your life.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_009.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_009.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_009.xhtml__idTextAnchor008
.calibre4}Chapter 4:\
]{.b1}\
Thoughts

[I am such a failure!]{.i} [I am such a failure!]{.i} These words kept
reverberating in Janine's head with fierce condemnation after she got
fired from her job. "I had such a good future with that company," she
lamented to her friend Beth, "but my boss just kept harping on me. I
can't make anything work out." This opened a discussion of her mixed
thoughts and feelings about herself, which went back to long before she
even took the job.

When Beth cautiously reminded Janine about the good things her boss said
about her, Janine bit her lip, commenting, "I know he'd compliment me at
times, but that never felt as real as his criticisms." With a mix of
frustration and compassion in her voice, Beth said, "You have to
remember that he didn't just outright fire you. He said the job wasn't a
good fit and recommended you for that other position." Janine nodded
slowly as tears rolled down her cheeks. "Yeah, I know. And I know that
he really does think I'd be good in the other job. I also have to admit
that this job was never a good fit for me...I make it harder for myself
by not believing the positive stuff. I wish I could just give myself a
break."

As someone who struggles with rejection, your thoughts are very much
affected by the kind of sensitivity that Janine wrestles with. You are
more likely to read negative reactions from others into benign
situations, or to experience situation-related rejections---such as a
friend not liking your latest couch purchase---as a wholesale rejection
of you. You might also be highly critical of yourself for being so
flawed while continuing to try to please the other person, whom you see
as more worthy than yourself. Or you might be highly critical of others,
whom you are quick to see as being cruel. By focusing attention on your
thinking, you can begin to see these patterns.

Like Janine, you, too, can gain some perspective on your negative
thoughts about yourself or others by reflecting upon them. Your main
goal of increasing self-awareness of your thoughts is not to stop your
emotionally driven thinking or to start being your own cheerleader.
Rather, it is to simply open yourself up to the possibility that your
negative perceptions are not the accurate and full reflection of reality
that you believe them to be. You may still take criticisms to heart even
when you know they are inaccurate---that's okay for now. If this
happens, it can help to tell yourself, "I know this is not true, but it
[feels]{.i} true."

With practice, you will find that you can gain a fuller awareness of
what's influencing your thoughts, the degree to which you believe them,
and how they affect you. Eventually, as you increase your self-awareness
in all domains of STEAM (sensations, thoughts, emotions, actions, and
mentalizing), you will understand how they affect each other. To learn
more about reflecting on your thoughts to develop strength and
resilience, you can watch my brief video [Thoughts: Reflecting on Your
Rejection Sensitive Thinking]{.i} at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

[Understanding Emotional Thinking]{.ac}

While thoughts and emotions are clearly different, that difference can
be elusive. People often misuse the terms, such as when someone
reflects, [I feel like I answered that question wrong.]{.i} They might
mean that they think they answered incorrectly, or they feel insecure
about their answer. Such confusion can make it more difficult to explore
your thoughts or emotions more deeply.

So, to clarify, a thought is an idea or opinion, such as [I believe that
I gave the wrong answer. ]{.i}An emotion[ ]{.i}is the[ ]{.i}physical
arousal you feel, along with the meaning you make from that arousal. For
instance, when your heart is racing and your body is tense after you
answer a teacher's question, you might be experiencing fear, or
embarrassment, or both.

To complicate this situation, there is often an overlap between thoughts
and emotions. Some emotions are defined, in part, by the way the person
thinks. For instance, when Janine recognized how her negative thinking
was hurting her, she experienced regret. In this situation, the emotion
of regret includes her opinion that she was harming herself. Without
that belief, she might just feel sad.

Because thoughts and feelings are so often intertwined, this chapter
will often reference how feelings related to rejection affect your
thinking. Also, much of this chapter offers ways for you to reconsider
your emotional thinking, learning to recognize the influence of your
emotions. You will be learning more about emotions in the next chapter.

Connect with Common Struggles

Rejection-sensitive people often share common themes in how they view
themselves and others. This exercise will help you explore them. Grab
your journal (or a pad of paper) and pencil to get started.

[For the common thoughts and beliefs listed below that you most
frequently experience, write down each one on the top of a separate
page. ]{.i}Limit this to no more than three.

I worry all the time about whether people will like me.

I worry all the time about whether people will stop liking me and will
remove themselves from my life.

I believe others would not like me or want me around if they knew "the
real me."

If I say no to someone, they will reject me or not want me in their
life.

Other people don't want to be as close to me as I want to be to them.

I must meet others' expectations for them to value me.

I am not as good or worthy as other people.

I must perform perfectly (or near perfectly) to have value or see myself
as capable.

I believe that I am basically a failure, incompetent, or lack value.

Even when others recognize my accomplishments, I feel unworthy.

If I depend on others for help, it says something bad about me.

[On each page, write down examples of situations in which you had the
thought that is written at the top of the page.]{.i} You might be able
to do this in one sitting as you reflect back on situations, but you
might also find it helpful to make notes over the next few days, writing
examples as they occur.

[Reflect on and journal about what you've written.]{.i} How does your
thinking affect you? Do your self-assessments seem to be an accurate
reflection of your experiences? Or do they seem more like emotional
reactions?

If you have trouble separating your thinking from your emotions,
consciously allow for this doubt. You may want to return to this
exercise after you've explored your emotions in the next chapter. (It
can even help to place a sticky note at the end of the next chapter,
reminding you to return to this exercise.) You might also find it
helpful to read the section, "Am I Feeling 'Rejected' or 'rejected'?,"
in chapter 7, "Mentalizing." You can turn to that section now, if you
wish.

[Reconsidering What You "Know"]{.ac}

As you may have discovered in the last exercise, when you are in the
grips of an emotional reaction related to experienced or feared
rejection, it can be difficult---if not impossible---to think clearly.
For this reason, it is important to reflect on your thinking afterward,
in calmer moments. At those times, you can consider your thoughts and
beliefs related to the upsetting incident. Instead of just accepting
them because they feel true, you can reflect on them and even question
them. You might want to journal or talk about them with a trusted
person. In taking this time to reconsider your thinking, you may
discover that your thinking related to rejection is biased, that what
you "know" is not really true.

Your struggles with rejection can bias not only how you think about
yourself but also your perceptions or assumptions about the other
person. For this reason, it is important to reflect on how your
rejection sensitivity might be affecting your thinking in both
instances.

Explore Your Thinking

This exercise guides you in exploring your rejection-related thoughts
about a situation by directing you to organize them in a chart. It
focuses on your thoughts about yourself and about the person or people
who you feel rejected you (or fear will reject you). You will only need
your journal (or a piece of paper) and a pen. Copy the chart shown below
into your journal. Be sure to use a full page so that you have enough
space to fill it in. You may also use the worksheet online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| [Write a sentence about a situation that causes you to struggle   |
| with rejection.]{.b}                                              |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| [Focus]{.b}    | [Immediate     | [Reflections   | [Feelings]{.b} |
|                | Thoughts]{.b}  | on             |                |
|                |                | Thoughts]{.b}  |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| Me             | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| Others         | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+
| Situation      | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
|                | \              |                |                |
+----------------+----------------+----------------+----------------+

[Label the situation.]{.i} At the top of your paper, write a sentence to
explain the situation you will be reflecting upon.

[Complete the "Immediate Thoughts" column.]{.i} In the appropriate rows,
answer the question, "What are your immediate thoughts about yourself,
others, and the situation?"

[Complete the "Reflection on Thoughts" column.]{.i} In the appropriate
rows, answer the question, "Objectively speaking, how accurate are your
thoughts?" (Remember that even if they are not accurate, you might still
believe them. People's beliefs are often based on their emotional
experience, not their intellectual assessments.)

To help you assess the accuracy of your thoughts, you might consider
these questions:

What evidence supports these thoughts or beliefs?

Are there times when they are not true? (Even one example of it not
holding true shows that it is not absolutely true.)

With regard to any harsh judgments about yourself or others, are there
kinder ways to understand you or them that account for all of the other
person's experiences or "facts"?

Are there ways of looking at the situation that could encourage greater
empathy or compassion?

People who struggle with judging themselves harshly sometimes find it
helpful to consider how a good friend might think about them or how they
would think about someone else in their position.

[Complete the "Feelings" column.]{.i}[ ]{.b}In the[ ]{.b}appropriate
row, answer the question, "What am I feeling?" Consider how much your
thoughts might be more a statement of how you feel than how you
intellectually assess yourself, others, and your situation. If you find
this difficult, fill it out the best that you can---or even leave it
blank for now. You might want to return to this after you have reviewed
chapter 5, "Emotions."

Completing this exercise can help you gain more perspective on your
reactions. Practicing it with different situations can strengthen and
reinforce this ability. Eventually, you may find that this perspective
comes more quickly and easily, helping you remain calmer and respond in
a healthier way to feeling disrespected, dismissed, or abandoned.

To clarify how to explore your thinking, let's look at how Robin thought
about a situation she struggled with and completed this exercise.

Robin identified a situation that caused her to feel not only rejected,
but also verbally attacked. She had stopped her car at a red light and
then turned right into a gas station. As she pulled up to the pump, a
woman stormed up and yelled at her about how it is illegal to turn right
on red at that light.

After creating the chart, she followed the rest of the directions to
complete it. Below are her thoughts about each question in the exercise.
(You can see her completed chart online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

[Immediate Thoughts:]{.i} In the "Me" row, Robin wrote, "Thinking I'm a
terrible driver for making that mistake." In the "Others" row, Robin
noted that she viewed the woman as a crazy person, and even entertained
the idea that the police should take her away. She also wrote that her
boss created this problem by keeping her late and causing her to be
rushed and distracted. In the "Situation" row, she wrote, "This would
not have happened if there hadn't been so much traffic."

[Reflection on Thoughts: ]{.i}Robin filled in the "Me" row by writing
that she has never gotten into a car accident or gotten any tickets, so
she cannot be such a bad driver. In the "Others" row, she noted that her
reaction to the other woman was out of proportion and that her boss was
not really to blame for the whole situation. Although Robin did not
understand why the other woman was so upset, she could see that the
woman was truly highly distressed. Maybe she was really upset about
something totally different, but this triggered her to release that
anger. Robin could relate to feeling this way. This thinking left Robin
feeling curious about what could have caused such a tirade---though
absolutely not accepting of the woman's behavior. Finally, in the
"Situation" row, she noted that the heavy traffic was making her
stressed and more likely to make a mistake.

[Feelings:]{.i} Reflecting on her feelings about herself, Robin wrote
that she felt incompetent, inadequate, and angry with herself for this.
In the "Others" row, she noted that she was afraid of the woman's anger,
as well as afraid of and angry with the woman for treating her like an
idiot. She was also angry with her boss for delaying her. As she wrote
this, she realized that she often fears doing things wrong, leading
others to dismiss and look down on her. Then when she does fall short,
she is angry with herself. As she thought about her feelings in the
"Situation" row, she acknowledged that she was frustrated with traffic,
and this fed into her negative feelings about herself, the woman, and
her boss.

[Your Perceptions Vary by Situation]{.ac}

Along with your sensitivity to rejection, you likely hold negative
perceptions of yourself and others. If you pay close attention, you
might notice that these thoughts differ depending on the situation. For
instance, you might hold more positive self-perceptions while in the
company of your Aunt Jane, who has always thought you were a "beautiful
angel." You might also notice that when you are with your whole family,
you fear that your Aunt Jane will somehow turn judgmental (like other
members of your family), even though she has always been an effective
attachment figure, understanding and able to comfort you when you were
upset.

Reflecting on these differences can help you be more cognizant of when
you think positively about yourself and others, so that you can retain
those perceptions. It can also help you remember those positives when
you are thinking that there is nothing worthwhile about you, or assume
that others don't want you in their life.

Note What You Are Thinking, and When

To identify and highlight when you think positively about yourself and
other people, organize your thoughts in your journal.

[List the main areas of your life.]{.i}[ ]{.b}You might even want to
subdivide those areas. For instance, you might write:

Alone time:

Predawn yoga

Solo lunchtime walks in the neighborhood

Personal relationships with:

Friends: Maddy, June, Chris

Family: Mom, Dan \[[brother]{.i}\], Uncle Bob, Aunt Wendy

Husband

Children

Work:

My relationship with my boss

My role as a supervisor

My relationship with peers

My skills at the paperwork part of my job

My skills at presenting reports

Hobbies:

Painting

[For each area, make notes on how you think about yourself and
others.]{.i} Include contradictory thoughts. For instance, in thinking
about yourself, you might write, [I usually assume people don't like me,
but I also believe that my close friends like and support me. I don't
question myself when I am with them.]{.i} Or, in thinking about a
specific friend, you might write, [She has always been supportive, but
I'm always thinking she will forget about me.]{.i}

[Review everything you've written.]{.i} This can help clarify areas
where you have positive thoughts about yourself or others that you might
normally overlook. You might also notice some themes, such as thinking
positively about your competence in performing any kind of skilled
activity, but questioning yourself in relationships (or the other way
around).

Where once you might have fallen into the hopeless despair of "knowing"
that you will be rejected forever, understanding these themes can lead
you to see them with some perspective, which can be grounding.

Gaining clarity from this exercise also opens up the possibility of
learning to embrace times when you hold a positive perspective of
yourself or others and to respond more kindly in situations that tend to
trigger your rejection-related thoughts and feelings. To help nurture
the latter response, refer to the exercises in chapter 9, "Nurturing
Compassionate Self-Awareness," and chapter 10, "Recovery Through
Relationships."

[Has Your Self-Criticism Run Amok? ]{.ac}

If you have a sense of feeling flawed or inadequate, you may find that
your self-criticism has taken on a life of its own. It stokes the fear
that you deserve rejection and gives you the "foresight" to see
rejection happening at every next interaction. Its powerful voice
overtakes your reasoning and skews how you think. According to cognitive
behavioral therapy, there are many patterns of "dysfunctional" or
"faulty" thinking that create such problems for people.

Some common ones are listed below (as they relate to self-criticism and
rejection). Consider whether you engage in these patterns. If you have a
sense that you regularly use one or more, monitor yourself for about a
week. Make brief notes each day on which type of thinking you engage in
and the details of the situation. You will find that, in differing ways,
they lead you to be self-critical and label yourself negatively.

The purpose of doing this is to learn to see your dysfunctional
thinking. By itself, this can be a challenge. With practice, observing
this thinking can help you question and eventually let go of it. Also,
suggestions are offered below for what to do after being better able to
identify your dysfunctional thinking.

Some common forms of dysfunctional thinking that can be damaging to you
and your relationships are:

[Overgeneralization:]{.b} After a negative experience, you expect more
of the same in similar situations. This type of thinking is marked by
absolutes, such as "always," "never," "all," "none," "everyone," and "no
one."

[Example:]{.i} After Don overhears a colleague say that he wasn't at all
impressed by Don's presentation, he was sure that [no one]{.i} thought
it was any good.

[Mental filter:]{.b} You focus on negatives about yourself, which
supports your sense that you are inadequate, flawed, or worthless. You
also tend not to notice or acknowledge positives. When you do notice a
positive experience or feedback, you often minimize it and refocus on
the negative.

[Example:]{.i} After being promoted at work, all Susan can think of is
how she is not strong in skills needed for her new position and that she
was probably only promoted because they didn't have time to find a
stronger candidate.

[Emotional reasoning:]{.b} Your thinking is overpowered by negative
feelings about yourself. This interferes with any observation, logic, or
reasoning to support a more positive self-assessment.

[Example:]{.i} David feels so negatively about himself that he cannot
believe Jen's consistently positive comments about him and their
relationship. When she shows up late one night for dinner, he is
immediately suspicious that she's been with someone else. His concerns
are not eased even after she explains that she got held up at work on an
important project he knows she's been trying to finish.

[Personalization:]{.b} You view yourself as responsible for problems
that are not your fault.

[Example:]{.i} Whenever Jill's boyfriend gets angry and hits her, she
frantically tries to figure out what she did so wrong. Even though she
knows on another level that she doesn't deserve this reaction and that
he has a history of doing this with his ex-girlfriend, she still
struggles with thinking that it must be her fault.

[Shoulds: ]{.b}You expect yourself to live up to standards that are
impossible to meet consistently (if at all), and you berate yourself
when you fail to do so.

[Example:]{.i} Rather than just thinking that he would like to do well
in his classes, Andy tells himself that he has to (or should) get As.
When he gets any grade less than an A, he views himself as stupid.

[Catastrophizing:]{.b} You perceive problems as overwhelming and
catastrophic even when they are not objectively that big.

[Example:]{.i} During Glenn's first week as a clerk at a grocery store,
his boss praised his efforts and good work ethic. But when he was late
because of heavy traffic one day the following week, Glenn was sure that
his boss would think he was a terrible worker and would fire him. He
also imagined himself unable to find another job and that he would
eventually be homeless.

If you discover that you engage in any of these dysfunctional ways of
thinking, be on the lookout for them. Take note of how they increase
your self-criticism, struggles with rejection, and any other
consequences, such as creating a problem in a relationship. With
practice, these observations will become obvious to you. The
dysfunctional thoughts may begin to feel less true, allowing you to
consider other ways of thinking suggested by the evidence around you.

You might also loosen the hold of your negative self-image by learning
to develop empathy and compassion in relating to yourself. You will find
guidance in these areas as you read chapter 8, "Building
Self-Acceptance," and chapter 9, "Nurturing Compassionate
Self-Awareness."

[Revealing Your Inner Conflict ]{.ac}

When you have felt rejected, you may instinctively be defensive while
also struggling with your own inadequacy. The result can be a mix of
conflicted, emotionally driven thoughts. For instance, consider a
situation in which a friend became upset with you for throwing her a
surprise party. Part of you might have angry thoughts about how
unappreciative she is. However, another part of you might feel deeply
rejected by her and attack yourself for not knowing she wouldn't want
the party. When such inner conflict is strong, people often feel
overwhelmed and confused by their reactions.

I have frequently seen patients enter therapy because they are unhappy
in their relationship, but then they talk about how things are "okay,"
or "not so bad." After some back and forth, we usually find that they
"want" their relationship to be "fine" and appreciate many qualities in
their partner, but also have serious conflicting concerns about some of
the things their partner says or does. It's hard for them to address
this inner conflict because they fear identifying it will lead them to
confront their partner and then get rejected, or leave them with no
other choice but to walk away from the relationship. When I help them
understand that simply being aware does not mean they have to act in any
particular way, they begin to view themselves and others more clearly
and can decide how they want to proceed.

By being attuned to when you have inner conflicts, you can choose to
look more closely at them. You can also pay attention to any biases you
have in perceiving others, considering more consciously what might
really be going on for them. When you see these different perspectives
more clearly, you can weigh how each one affects you, ultimately gaining
a more balanced view of the whole situation. Remember, seeing things
differently does not mean you need to do anything differently. You
always get to choose how to proceed. However, once people gain greater
clarity about their situation, they often [want]{.i} to make changes.

Chart Your Thoughts, Emotions, and Reactions

It's often helpful to slow down your emotional thinking when you feel
conflicted so that you can reflect on it. This exercise helps you do
this by looking at your thoughts and emotions in a chart. Copy the chart
shown below into your journal. Be sure to use a full page so that you
have enough space to fill it in. (You may also use the worksheet online
at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

Chart Your Thoughts, Emotions, and Reactions

+------------+------------+-------------+
| Conflicted Situation:\                |
| \                                     |
+------------+------------+-------------+
| [Thoughts\ | [Emotions\ | [Reactions\ |
| \          | \          | \           |
| \          | \          | \           |
| \          | \          | \           |
| \          | \          | \           |
| \          | \          | \           |
| \          | \          | \           |
| ]{.b}      | ]{.b}      | ]{.b}       |
+------------+------------+-------------+
| Reflections:\                         |
| \                                     |
+---------------------------------------+

[Label the top of the paper with a situation about which you feel
conflicted or confused.]{.i} This might be a particular event or a
broader issue, such as having conflicting thoughts and feelings about
your partner.

[Complete the columns. ]{.i}Write each conflicting thought that you have
about the situation on its own line. As you consider each thought, write
down the emotions and reactions (in their respective columns) that seem
to relate to that thought.

[Review the completed chart.]{.i} Once you clarify the basic conflict,
you can look more closely at each of the different perspectives and
consider how you might address any problems.

While you may be able to resolve some conflicts, there are others that
will remain a problem. In those situations, you might need to brainstorm
more about alternative ways to sufficiently (if not totally) resolve the
conflict, find a way to live with it, or even leave the situation, if
you can.

If you are unsure of your emotions, feel free to leave the "Emotions"
column blank for now. These blank spaces can be wonderfully helpful in
identifying an area of difficulty. So consider each blank space to be
like a neon sign saying, "Look more closely here."

If you feel emotionally numb or are unaware of your emotions, try
returning to the exercises in chapter 3, "Sensations," to help you
connect with your emotions. However, if you feel your emotions but have
difficulty identifying or staying with them, you might want to skip this
exercise for now and return to it after reading chapter 5, "Emotions."
In both situations, you might want to use a sticky note as a reminder to
return to this exercise after you have completed the other work.

To clarify how to explore your conflict by charting it, consider Selena,
whose youngest son just left for college. She now had to face that she
felt stuck at home with her loving, yet boring, husband, Mike.

As she wrote down her thoughts in the chart, she reminded herself that
while Mike was not the most adventurous person, he was open to trying
new experiences when she made arrangements to do them. So, while she
preferred that he initiate, she decided that she was willing to plan
more activities fore them, making her marriage a happier one for her
(and hopefully for him, too). (You can also see her completed chart
online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

Chart Your Thoughts, Emotions, and Reactions: Selena's Example

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Conflict: [ I'm bored with my husband and my marriage.\            |
| ]{.lang}                                                           |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [Thoughts]{.b}       | [Emotions]{.b}       | [Reactions]{.b}      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [Husband is good man | [Happy,              | [- Want to continue  |
| & good               | loving]{.lang}       | life                 |
| husband]{.lang}      |                      | together]{.lang}     |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | [- Sometimes fear    |
|                      |                      | him leaving me,      |
|                      |                      | marriage             |
|                      |                      | ending]{.lang}       |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| [Husband is boring;  | [Bored, unhappy,     | [Want to end         |
| just sits            | frustrated]{.lang}   | marriage and move    |
| around]{.lang}       |                      | on]{.lang}           |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      |                      | [- Think of telling  |
|                      |                      | husband, but then    |
|                      |                      | fear regretting      |
|                      |                      | decision             |
|                      |                      | (remembering he's a  |
|                      |                      | good man); fear he   |
|                      |                      | would then not want  |
|                      |                      | to be with me and    |
|                      |                      | would reject         |
|                      |                      | me]{.lang}           |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Reflections: [Mike is not the most adventurous person, but he is   |
| open to trying new experiences when I plan them. I'd prefer that   |
| he initiate, but I guess I can plan more activities for us. I      |
| think we'd both be happier.]{.lang}                                |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------+

[Looking Back on Where It All Started]{.ac}

As you may remember from the explanation of attachment theory in chapter
1, early childhood experiences help shape the foundation of how you
relate to yourself and other people (especially attachment figures).
When these experiences lead you to struggle with feeling negatively
about yourself or seeing others as not supportive, you are likely to be
sensitive to rejection.

You may feel uncomfortable, or even fear, reflecting back on your
childhood, just as many people do. They are afraid that it will confirm
their worthlessness as a person or force them to remember some
life-defining horrible event they previously didn't connect with their
current state of distress---or possibly didn't even remember. But the
truth is that what they actually learn is rarely so dramatic and is
usually much more complicated.

By gaining self-awareness in all the domains of STEAM as you reflect on
the possible origins of your struggles with rejection, you might find
that you more deeply understand these issues. Rather than exposing
reasons to condemn and reject yourself, this exploration will likely
reveal a kinder, gentler, and more compassionate way of understanding
yourself. As this perspective settles in, it will likely lessen the
intensity of your struggles with rejection. You could then reflect more
clearly on the current situation, identifying when your emotional
reactions are really more about what you have learned from past
experiences than they are about what's happening in the moment. This
would free you to explore and enjoy relationships with people in your
current life who show themselves to be trustworthy.

Use the following exercise to help you gain greater self-awareness about
the possible origins of your struggles with rejection. However, if you
find this emotionally overwhelming, then stop doing it for now. You
might find it helpful to learn to tolerate and stay with your emotions
by completing some of the sections in chapter 5, "Emotions," especially
the "Sit with Your Emotions" exercise.

Think Back to Help Connect the Dots

Try to recall your earliest thoughts and emotions related to any of the
following (or something else that seems similar): alone, rejected,
invisible, not mattering, flawed, abandoned, inadequate, and like a
loser or failure. Use these memories to complete this exercise,
recording your thoughts in your journal (or elsewhere).

[Answer the following questions:]{.i}

Did these memories tend to involve particular people? Who?

If those memories occurred outside your home, do you remember having
similar feelings with your parents or other family members? If so,
reflect more on those memories and how those experiences affected you.

Were there particular people who tended to respond to you in ways that
left you feeling worse about yourself? Who?

What themes do you notice (e.g., you were alone, you were being
criticized, your sibling was being praised)?

[After answering the above questions, reflect on them as you answer the
next set of questions:]{.i}

What did these incidents teach you about your value as a person (model
of self)?

What did these incidents teach you about the possibility of others being
there emotionally for you (model of others)?

How do you think that your model of self and model of others relate to
your current sensitivity to rejection?

[With the insights you have gained from reflecting on the past, come
back to focusing on the present. ]{.i}Revisit a recent incident in which
you think you were particularly sensitive to being rejected or the
possibility of it. If your reaction was out of proportion to that event,
does your reaction fit with the childhood events that you just thought
about? (Journal about this.)

In answering these questions, you might find that your seemingly
irrational reactions make perfect sense when you consider the memories
that they trigger.

Christine's experience in therapy is a perfect example of how these
kinds of insights---and this exercise---can help. She was twenty-seven
years old and came to therapy because she struggled with low self-esteem
and had been feeling chronically unhappy. "I have friends," she
explained, "but I'm always afraid they're going to judge me. And I never
feel that they care about me as much as I care about them." Also, during
the course of therapy, she began dating a man who seemed to really like
her, but was similarly not sensitive to her needs. In all of these
relationships, she tended to be very accommodating and did not assert
her thoughts and feelings very much. Even when she did express herself,
she would quickly return to being agreeable and following their lead at
the first sign of disagreement.

When discussions in therapy sessions turned to her family interactions,
I assigned her this exercise. In reviewing her responses, she explained,
"I had always been an emotional child, something my parents couldn't
relate to because they tended to be more intellectual and not
particularly tuned in to feelings." She realized that they equated
expressing emotions as being "bad" and (ironically) "childish."

Christine talked about how, while growing up, she had always felt
undermined when she expressed herself with her parents, which---not
surprisingly---she did not do often. This exercise helped her see how
her tendency to remain quiet and feel "less than" carried over into her
adult relationships, leading her to remain in unfulfilling
relationships.

Therapy then supported her in learning more about herself, developing
compassionate self-awareness (assisted by exercises offered in this
book), and beginning to assert that self. In her last session,
reflecting back on her growth, she explained, "I lost friendships during
this process, but also found new interests and new friends."
Fortunately, Christine also eventually met and married a man who
respected and loved her very much.

Review Your Childhood: A Hidden Reservoir of Strength

Even though certain childhood relationships may have initiated a
critical view of yourself (along with fears of rejection), other
childhood relationships may have validated a positive view of yourself
(along with a feeling of worthiness). The people in these positive or
healing relationships may have functioned as attachment figures that
supported you through childhood and continue to bolster you throughout
your life. In addition, sometimes people develop relationships in their
adult lives with attachment figures who are comforting, infuse them with
a positive perception of themselves, and are healing. All such positive
relationships may have become inner reservoirs of strength that you
already tap or that you may learn to tap.

[To strengthen validating relational memories, clearly identify these
relationships. Do this by asking yourself the following questions. (You
may also want to journal about them.)]{.i}

Who did you turn to for comfort, support, or encouragement when you were
upset or struggling as a child?

Even when you were not upset, did you tend to feel good---and think
positively---about yourself when you were with certain people? Who?

Who have you been fortunate to have had in your adult life---even if
only for a brief time---because they helped you feel comforted,
supported, or encouraged?

[For relationships that you found validating, ask yourself these
questions: ]{.i}

Given their caring responses, how do you imagine that they viewed you or
still view you?

How did you think and feel about them back then? If they are still in
your life (and still supportive), how do you think and feel toward them
now?

How did you think and feel about yourself when you were with them in the
past? If they are still in your life (and still supportive), how do you
think and feel about yourself when you are with them now?

Were there certain activities you did together that still feel good when
you do them now (or might still feel good if you did them now)?

Sometimes people get so caught up in thinking about their struggles that
they lose self-awareness for the parts of their lives that make them
feel better. So, in the interest of balancing where you place your
attention, use these questions to help you focus your thinking on
positive or healing relationships that you have had. Also, if you hold a
model of others as emotionally unavailable, this exercise might help you
reconsider its accuracy in relation to past or current relationships.

To summarize, increasing self-awareness of your thoughts is not meant to
turn you into an emotionless Vulcan. Instead, the idea is to introduce
the awareness that your negative perceptions might not be the accurate
reality that they so frequently seem to be. You may still fall into the
trap of taking criticisms to heart, even when you know better. But after
some practice, you can develop a fuller grasp of what influences are
affecting your thoughts, the level to which you believe them, and the
impact they are having on your life. As you also build self-awareness in
sensations, emotions, actions, and mentalizing---the other four elements
of STEAM---you can better understand how they all interact to create a
richer appreciation of yourself.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml}

::::::::::::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idTextAnchor009
.calibre4}Chapter 5:\
]{.b1}\
Emotions

It was a month before high school graduation. Chad looked at ease as he
cruised through the party, smiling at everyone and high-fiving his
buddies. But warning sirens were blaring inside his head. [Don't make a
fool of yourself!]{.i} So, he was cautious about revealing much.
Instead, he laughed on cue and agreed with almost everything his friends
said. He repeated this agony practically every weekend through his
senior year. It didn't matter that he clearly had talent as a pitcher
for the varsity baseball team, that he did well in classes, or that
other kids seemed to like him. [At some point, they are going to realize
I'm a fake]{.i}, he often repeated to himself.

It wasn't until he was in college, listening to his friend Brett
anxiously share his own fears, that Chad had a light bulb moment. [He
feels just like I do!]{.i} In that instant, he was no longer alone. In
seeing that Brett's fears were unnecessary, he had a sudden realization
that his were, too. Afterward, he continued to worry a bit about what
the guys thought of him, but he started to doubt his fear-driven
thinking. With time, he was even able to sometimes calm his anxiety
enough to enjoy parties and feel more comfortable with friends. Still,
he was well into his twenties when he began to consciously develop his
self-awareness and finally face his fears of being judged by women and
authority figures.

Emotions are a part of our makeup as human beings. While you might enjoy
intense positive emotions, painful or distressing ones are quite another
matter. Neurologically speaking, overwhelming emotions indicate that the
part of your brain called your amygdala is very active. Without getting
too deeply into the actual structure of the brain, it's important to
understand that when your amygdala becomes more active, your prefrontal
cortex---the part of your brain responsible for thinking
clearly---becomes less active. As a result, you may be unconvinced by
rational explanations that "prove" you shouldn't be so upset by the idea
of being dismissed or overlooked, or that might help you navigate your
situation more effectively.

Because emotions are central to the richness of human experience, it is
important to be able to accept all of them---the painful along with the
pleasant. People with a secure attachment style can accept the full
range of their emotions and are more open to life's many experiences and
possibilities. They pursue love and excitedly follow their dreams. But
when things don't go well, they also accept the pain of rejection or
failure, and they let those feelings flow through them. As they do, they
are open to the potential lessons offered by those feelings and
experiences. These people tend to explore more of what the world has to
offer, and they are more resilient in response to life's small and large
misfortunes.

Still, their ability to experience and cope with their emotions in
healthy ways can vary depending on particular situations, relationships,
or periods of time in their lives.

Teresa---who was usually resilient---felt deeply hurt and angry about
being jilted by her fiancÃ©. The emotions were so strong that she was
overcome with anxiety and at times would shut down as a way to cope.
This makes it hard to find a constructive way forward from the
rejection. But after a time, she was able to use STEAM to calm her
emotional reaction, and she became more open to seeing those feelings as
an "only human" reaction that others also have. That left her more open
to feeling self-compassion---to having empathy for her pain and wanting
that pain to be gone. This freed her to grieve the loss and opened her
to starting a new relationship.

As someone who struggles with rejection, you may find that you have
trouble across situations, or your difficulties lie in one area, such as
with work, friends, or your love life. But given that you are reading
this book, it is taking a toll on you.

So, the focus of this chapter is to help you begin to develop a
healthier relationship with your emotions by increasing an accepting
awareness of them and an ability to identify them---even the painful
ones. The more you can tolerate and accept your emotions (instead of
trying to suppress or avoid them), the more you will be able to relate
to them with self-compassion and support yourself in recovering from
rejection---or at least you will be more open to nurturing
self-compassion, which is addressed in a later chapter.

For those who chronically struggle with rejection, their ability to cope
with it has broken down. No matter what feedback they get, they fear
rejection and are constantly on alert for it. They also experience many
other intense emotions. They tend to be highly self-critical, which just
adds another source of rejection to their previous experience.

As with all of the domains of awareness, you will benefit from
approaching your emotions with curiosity. The more you want to learn
about them, the more you will get to know them and the part they play in
your life. This curiosity will also help you gain more from the
exercises in this chapter, which provide guidance in acknowledging and
labeling your emotions. In addition, they offer a path to accepting and
being more open to your emotional experiences, as well as to
understanding them better. Along the way, you will find that you are
less overwhelmed by struggles related to a sense of rejection.

Still, this process can be emotionally taxing. So, some of the exercises
in this chapter are there to help you monitor and keep your distress
within a tolerable level. You may choose to take a break from focusing
on your emotions and, instead, focus on the other domains of STEAM for a
while. Moving among the domains can help you explore all of them more
deeply over time. (Simply use a sticky note to return to the exercises
or sections of this chapter that you choose to skip over for now.)

Also, remember that thoughts and emotions sometimes overlap and almost
always affect each other. To refresh your understanding of that
relationship, you might review the section "Understanding Emotional
Thinking" in the previous chapter.

The next section, "The Guest House," is designed to help you gain an
initial understanding of how to relate in a healthy way to your
emotions.

[The Guest House ]{.ac}

Below is a poem by Jalaluddin Rumi, a thirteenth-century Persian poet
(translated by Coleman Barks). Read it. Think about it. Consider what it
would be like to open yourself up to emotions in this way. (You might
even want to curl up on a quiet morning or evening as you sip some
tea---or wine---and savor it along with the poem.) Be prepared to
reflect on any resistance you feel to doing this.

[The Guest House]{.b}

This being human is a guest house.

Every morning a new arrival.

A joy, a depression, a meanness,

some momentary awareness comes

as an unexpected visitor.

Welcome and entertain them all!

Even if they're a crowd of sorrows,

who violently sweep your house

empty of its furniture, [still]{.b}

treat each guest honorably.

He may be clearing you out

for some new delight.

The dark thought, the shame, the malice,

meet them at the door laughing,

and invite them in.

Be grateful for whoever comes,

because each has been sent

as a guide from beyond.

If you instinctively want to dismiss this poem and the idea of "inviting
in" all emotions, resist the temptation. Instead, consciously choose to
seriously consider this perspective. This might be particularly
difficult for you to do with certain emotions, such as rejection,
abandonment, hurt, shame, and anger. If you are critical of yourself for
wanting to put distance between yourself and your emotions, imagine
someone else responding in this way. You would likely understand that
this other person probably wants to protect themselves against painful
emotions. You might want to offer them comfort and reassurance. Practice
offering yourself this same consideration.

Whatever your situation, accepting all of your emotions can open you to
greater self-acceptance. You will be less likely to overreact to small
rejections and more likely to tolerate any rejection. These differences
in your reactions will enable you to be more resilient overall.

[Facing the Dragon]{.ac}

Once upon a time, in a kingdom far away, there was a village that was
terrorized by a mighty dragon. It seemed undefeatable, as there were
many brave knights from kingdoms far and wide who came to slay it---only
to meet their own untimely demise. One knight charged the dragon, but
was flattened by the beast's enormous foot. Another met a fiery end just
moments after realizing that what he thought was a mountain in front of
him was actually the dragon. Years passed with many similar tales of
knights attacking with all manner of weapons---battering rams,
battle-axes, and crossbows. But all to no avail.

Then one day, when the village had all but given up hope, a stranger
came, asking about the dragon. Unlike the young, brave knights before
him, he was an older man, apparently a nomad, who had a slow gait and an
easy smile. With the same quiet confidence that he had approached the
villagers, he set out to meet the dragon. The villagers noted that he
did not take any weapons with him---not even a sword. As he walked
slowly and steadfastly up to the dragon, the great beast watched
curiously. When he was close enough to touch its snout, the dragon
opened its enormous mouth, inviting the stranger in. The stranger
accepted this invitation by stepping inside, walking right into the
belly of the dragon, and sitting down. After some angry roars and blasts
of fire (which did not touch the man sitting in the beast's belly), the
dragon disappeared in a puff of smoke...leaving the tranquil stranger in
peace.

Your emotions---especially those related to rejection---can be
frightening "beasts" that can feel powerful enough to incinerate you.
But, in fact, their great strength is magnified by your reaction to
them. When you learn to approach your emotions with calm acceptance, you
limit their power.

I imagine you might have two pressing questions in reading this: [Is it
really humanly possible to feel calm in the face of your emotions?
]{.i}And, [If it is, how does that disempower them? ]{.i}

Let's start with the second question. While your emotions are automatic
reactions to triggers, they are also the result of many factors, which
continue to influence your emotions for as long as you feel them. Your
emotional reaction may be unduly influenced by recent or long-past
experiences, or in response to faulty suppositions about yourself or
others. Also, the unknown can instill fear, which can further fuel your
emotional reactivity. So, the more you understand yourself and your
emotional reaction, the less it happens [to]{.i} you, and the more you
can influence the experience.

As for the question of whether you can learn to face your emotions with
relative calm, the answer is that you absolutely can. It will take some
learning and practice, but you can gain the skills and experience to
face your emotions with curiosity, rather than just enacting them or
trying to avoid them.

As you will learn from this chapter, there are many ways to explore your
emotions and get to know them better. From your first efforts forward,
one of the best "tools" is your curiosity. Wonder about your emotions.
With each exercise, be curious about how they can help you. This by
itself can reduce the apprehension you may feel in exploring your often
emotionally intense inner world.

Because the journey can be intense, it is important that you learn to
pace yourself, testing your limits but not pushing too hard. The next
section---"Visualizing a Safe Experience"---is aimed at helping you
learn to calm yourself when you feel hurt, ashamed, dismissed, or
generally upset. This can enable you to continue moving forward when you
might otherwise be too overwhelmed to do so. Then there are exercises
designed to help you experience and understand your emotions. As you get
more comfortable with your emotions, you'll find that you also achieve
greater self-acceptance, enabling you to have greater self-compassion.

Overall, you will gain more clarity about yourself and your situations,
moving you toward having healthier responses, including reducing your
oversensitivity to rejection and feeling better able to cope with it
when it does happen.

[Visualizing a Safe Experience]{.ac}

Recovering from rejection requires that you feel emotionally safe enough
to let go of trying to prevent rejection at all costs, or to allow for
feeling it when it happens, rather than defending against it. This can
open a door to your inner world. Then, in getting to know yourself
better and to engage more completely in your experiences, you can learn
to participate more fully in relationships despite the possibility of
further rejection.

This process isn't about someone "making" you feel safe. It's about you
finding safety within yourself, though often with the support of others.
One way that sometimes helps people feel safe is to think about a place
(real or imagined) that they find calming and comforting. You can also
find a sense of safety through the caring of people in your life. But
when you do, it is because you have let in that caring. So, you can also
access the comfort and support of relationships by thinking about them.
Together, feeling safer with yourself and with significant others, you
can enjoy more securely attached relationships that are not weighed down
by chronic feelings of rejection.

When deciding on a safe experience, there are no limitations on what
setting might be helpful. Many people choose settings in nature, such as
the woods or the beach. You might choose your home or the home of your
childhood. You can also choose outer space, deep under the sea, or what
you imagine heaven looks like. If you choose to reflect on a safe
relationship with an attachment figure you can turn to for comfort, it
can be with a loved one, a religious figure, a fictitious character, or
even your pet (yes, Fido qualifies). But whatever you pick, your goal is
for the setting and supportive figure to be comforting ones.

Plan for some undisturbed time to practice this visualization. Do your
best to engage all of your senses. Imagine the sights, sounds, and
physical sensations of being in your safe place or with your safe
figure. The imagery might even include your sense of taste. The more
real you make it, the more calming the experience.

Practice imagining this experience during calm times until you can do it
with relative ease. Then choose to go there whenever you are overwhelmed
by feelings of rejection (or any other emotions). But rather than using
it as an escape, choose to use it as a way to help you feel stronger as
you work through a difficult situation, enabling you to face feelings of
rejection as they happen. Or, if that is too difficult, you can use this
strategy to "step back" from the situation and help calm you. Then
reengage in addressing the situation at a later time.

[Labeling Your Emotions]{.ac}

Remember the neurological explanation in the beginning of this chapter
of how emotions can deactivate your clear-thinking prefrontal cortex?
Even as your brain is responding this way to your emotions, you won't
necessarily realize it. Although you might feel intensely emotional, you
might also not be aware of your emotions---or only have a vague sense
that they are there. For instance, your annoyance with a coworker who
seems to be avoiding you may be the only sign of a volcano of anger
within you (in response to the avoidance) that's simmering underneath.
This is an example of what might be an unconscious attempt to dismiss
the importance of feeling rejected by others. But it's a way of coping
with rejection that can often backfire.

Alternatively, you might be acutely aware of your reaction to feeling
rejected. Janine had been aware of struggling with this and with feeling
negatively about herself ever since she was young, when her mother was
extremely critical of her. In her current life, she easily feels
dismissed by people, which elicits intense feelings. She is sometimes so
hurt or afraid that she feels like she is emotionally imploding. Unable
to think clearly or calm herself, what could Janine do?

If only she could deactivate her amygdala---turning it off with the flip
of a switch---she would feel calmer and perhaps think clearly. Though
your brain doesn't exactly have such a switch, scientists have found
something that can sometimes work like one---or at least like a dimmer
switch. Identifying and labeling your emotions can energize your
prefrontal cortex, which is associated with decreasing activity in your
amygdala. Put more simply, when you label your emotions, you often feel
less emotionally reactive. Importantly, you can still acknowledge and
feel your emotions, but they don't overwhelm you or your thinking.

Given that identifying your emotions is a skill, you must make a
conscious effort to improve it. Find time to sit down, connect with what
you are feeling, and then label your emotions. When you find yourself
trying to understand or rationalize them away, choose to redirect
yourself to simply observing and labeling them.

You might find it helpful to begin by focusing on your emotions when
they are less intense---such as when you begin to feel concerned about
someone not returning your calls. As your skill in labeling your
emotions grows, you will find that you are better able to do it when you
are more upset. (If you have trouble recognizing your emotions before
they are intense, read the upcoming section of this chapter called
"Observing the Intensity of Your Emotions," along with the associated
exercise, "Rate the Intensity of Your Emotions.")

It's not uncommon for people to have difficulty labeling their emotions,
especially when those emotions are strong. One way to help yourself with
this is to refer to the List of Emotions on page 193; it is also online
at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024. Some people find it helpful to keep
the list handy so that they can check it when they are confused or
emotionally overwhelmed. (You can download it and carry it with you.)

If you cannot label your emotions because you have trouble physically
connecting with them, try doing the "Reconnect with Your Senses"
exercise in the chapter 3, "Sensations."

If you can physically connect with your emotions and label them, the
next step is to allow yourself to spend time with them. To learn more
about this, see the next section, along with the associated exercise. [
]{.i}

[The Importance of Connecting with Your Emotions]{.ac}

Too often, when Janine's rejection sensitivity was triggered, she
avoided her emotions by putting extra effort into taking care of other
people, eliciting positive feedback from them, and easing her fears of
rejection. But after she practiced sitting with her emotions, she was
able to stay with them more, which gave her the opportunity to process
those emotions (reducing their intensity), let go, and move on.

Opening yourself to your emotions begins with choosing to give them your
attention. If you have no idea what you are feeling or even whether you
are feeling anything, you might find it helpful to begin connecting with
your emotions through your body. To do this, complete or revisit the
exercise in the "Reconnect with Your Senses" exercise in chapter 3,
"Sensations," and then return to this exercise.

Sit with Your Emotions

Once you are able to connect with your emotions, this exercise directs
you in how to spend some quiet time with them. Although there is no
standard amount of time for this exercise, make sure you will not be
disturbed for at least 10 minutes. (You can increase your time with
practice.)

[Allow yourself to be aware of your emotions.]{.i} They might be mild,
barely worth your attention---but attend to them anyway. Or they might
feel powerful. Take the time to identify each emotion and let yourself
really feel it. This part of the exercise can, by itself, be difficult.

[When you feel a number of emotions, single out one that is particularly
intense or important.]{.i} For instance, if a disagreement with a friend
recently turned nasty, you might be powerfully afraid of her never
talking to you again. But you can choose to focus on your sense of
annoyance, which is comparatively weak. Though you may be unsure why you
made the choice, you might still have a sense that it was important.

[Whatever emotion you pick, attend to it without trying to change
it.]{.i} As you stay with it, you might notice that it changes on its
own. That's okay. Perhaps that mild annoyance with your friend grows to
being "peeved" and then angry. Next, you might feel afraid of your
anger---more specifically, you might feel the fear of rejection that has
seemed to haunt you forever. In this way, the unfolding of your emotions
increases your self-awareness and can even offer great insight. So, just
keep paying attention until you feel that your work is done for the time
being.

[When you find that you get distracted while sitting with your emotions,
remind yourself to refocus on them.]{.i} You might need to do this
several times. Many people also find it helpful to bring their attention
back to their bodies and then notice that particular emotions arise from
their bodily sensations.

Identifying and feeling your emotions is a process and an end in itself.
So, don't try to rush through it. Be patient. You may find that you
remain somewhat confused even when you finish. That's okay. This is an
exercise to be repeated, and your emotions will reveal themselves in
time.

[Observing the Intensity of Your Emotions ]{.ac}

As you pay closer attention to your emotional experiences, you can learn
to distinguish how each emotion changes as it increases or decreases in
intensity. This increased awareness is an important part of getting to
know yourself better and can transform your emotions or enable you to
manage them better. For example, consider this story:

Soon after Chad and Linda began dating, Chad's thoughts kept returning
to the fear, [Is she going to leave me?]{.i} While he was passionately
in love with her, the slightest action on her part---such as getting
momentarily distracted when they spoke---could send him deep into an
emotional abyss of feeling rejected. From out of nowhere, his positive
and negative emotions seemed to overwhelm and control him. But that
changed when he learned to pay closer attention to the weak signals of
his emotions and to increases in their intensity. He learned to rate the
intensity of his emotions "Happy" and "Afraid" along scales, as shown in
Figure 5.1.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer006 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch5_fig5.1.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 5.1 ]{.b}Chad's Scales of Emotional Intensity: Happy and Afraid

Not surprisingly, he liked practicing attending to the "Happy" scale and
rating the intensity of that feeling. He was aware that he would
sometimes feel calmed from being with Linda (rated 1 on the "Happy"
scale). With more attention, it would sometimes morph into him smiling
with happiness (rated 6), whistling joyfully (rated 8), or even what he
called beaming with delight (rated 10). He noticed that doing this
helped him more fully appreciate, and sometimes even extend, those
feelings. However, he also noticed that the feelings would often drop as
his levels on the "Afraid" scale increased.

As Chad practiced attending to his fear, he learned to rate the
intensity of it, noting that he was first aware of feeling
uncomfortable, which was a 1 on the "Afraid" scale. It would then
increase to being fidgety and anxious (rated 5). As it increased, he
felt a bit shaky and afraid (rated 6), and then he began sweating and
could feel his heart pounding as he was overwhelmed with a dread of her
leaving him (rated 8 or 9).

Along with rating his emotions, he learned to respond differently to
them. Rather than just passively feeling the tightening grip of his
increasing fear, he practiced becoming curious about whatever intensity
of emotion he was experiencing. At first, he would just bring his
awareness to the feeling and stay with that. Often, this alone eased the
intensity. When it didn't---or didn't ease it enough---he wondered about
the feeling. [What was making him feel this way? Was it really in
response to what Linda was doing, or more about what he thought she
might do? Did he really have reason to expect she was going to leave
him?]{.i} (He learned to steer away from focusing on the future, which
tended to increase his fear and distress.)

In addition, attending to the intensity of his fear of rejection taught
him that no matter how intense his fear became, it always faded with
time. From this, he realized that his feelings of rejection have a "life
cycle." So, when his fear of rejection became overwhelmingly strong, he
could remind himself of the common phrase, "This too shall pass."

You can learn more about connecting with your emotions by watching my
brief video [Emotions: Opening to Your Rejection Sensitivity]{.i} at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

Rate the Intensity of Your Emotions

To help increase your awareness of the intensity of your emotions, this
exercise will guide you in creating and using a scale of an emotion. You
might pick fear, anger, or another emotion. Similarly to Chad, you can
choose to create more than one scale, though you might want to start
with just one.

[Copy the scale below.]{.i} Assign a word to describe how you feel at
different levels of intensity. While you do not need to label all ten
levels, be sure to label several of them.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer007 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/emotionalIntensityScale.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Use the scale to identify when the intensity of your emotion impairs
your thinking.]{.i} When you reflect on increasing levels of the
emotion, you will notice that there comes a point when you begin having
difficulty thinking clearly. (This can happen even with pleasant
feelings, such as when people who are in love ignore signs of their
partner cheating.) Circle the number that best represents that level of
intensity.

While creating your scale(s) can increase your awareness of your
emotions, you can also use the scale(s) to practice being conscious of
the increasing intensity of your emotions in your daily life.

Regularly practice being conscious of the levels of intensity leading up
to the number at which you have trouble thinking clearly. As your
emotion approaches and exceeds the number you circled, you will find it
increasingly difficult to tolerate or manage that emotion or to think
clearly. The more you practice rating your emotions, the better you will
be at tolerating and regulating them. That will make them less likely to
spiral out of control.

Even as you become more adept at rating your emotions, you may still
struggle with being overcome by them. As you approach your circled
number, you might try using the "Sit with Your Emotions" exercise
earlier in this chapter. If your emotion is too intense for you to "sit"
with, you might want to use some of the suggestions offered in the
"Learning to Self-Soothe" section in chapter 2. Also, some of the
sections in chapter 3 might help, such as the "Mindful Breathing
Meditation" and "Walking Meditation" sections. Once you feel less
overwhelmed by your emotion, you can return to attending to it and its
many levels. [ ]{.i}

[Mapping Your Journey of Emotions ]{.ac}

Certain situations can cause you to immediately feel intense rejection
and anxiety, just as facing a tiger might trigger panic in you. However,
learning that the tiger is actually behind thick glass will likely have
a calming effect on you. Similarly, gaining greater self-awareness about
your emotions can help you reflect upon them and develop a greater sense
of calm. You will still feel emotions in reaction to events in your
life, but you may suffer less---and you may become more open to
enjoyable feelings.

Dr. Paul Ekman, a pioneer in the research of emotions, joined with the
14th Dalai Lama (spiritual leader of Tibet) to create a map (or an
atlas) of emotions, which you can see at www.atlasofemotions.org. The
website helps people understand how they experience and process what he
defines as the five universal emotions: anger, fear, sadness, disgust,
and enjoyment.

To help you understand this model of emotions better, consider the
diagrams that are presented in Figure 5.2 of each of the five universal
emotions as they might be experienced by rejection-sensitive people.
(These diagrams of emotions can also be found at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.) Based on a modification of Ekman's
timeline of emotions, they show how sensations, emotional thoughts, and
emotions influence behavioral reactions. I specify thoughts as
"emotional thoughts" because they are a way of thinking that is strongly
influenced by emotions.

Using this model, you can gain a better understanding of how your
struggles with rejection play out. Based on life experiences and your
sensitivity to rejection, you may feel fear of rejection even when a
friend or partner is simply offering a suggestion, such as for improving
communication between you by asking you to lower your voice. As you can
see in the "Fear" diagram in Figure 5.2, your fear might be accompanied
by sensations of rapid heartbeat, sweating, and nausea. It might also be
accompanied by emotional thoughts of assuming the other person will be
critical of you, seeing you as somehow unworthy or unlovable, and
possibly abandoning you (physically or emotionally). Your behavioral
reaction might be to become extremely agreeable in the moment and
perhaps follow up by frequently texting or calling.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer008 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch5_fig5.2a.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[ Figure 5.2 ]{.b}Diagrams of Ekman's Five Universal Emotions, as
rejection-sensitive people might experience them (based on Paul Ekman's
timeline of emotions, found on www.atlasofemotions.org)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer009 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch5_fig5.2b.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[Figure 5.2 ]{.b}(cont.)\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\

[\
\
\
\
\
Figure 5.2 ]{.b}(cont.)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer010 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch5_fig5.2c.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

Increasing self-awareness of emotions can help you [consciously
respond]{.i} rather than just [automatically react]{.i} to
circumstances. Although this chapter is focused on your emotions, you
can learn to help yourself by intervening at any of the domains of
STEAM.

Follow Your Emotional Process

After reviewing the diagrams in Figure 5.2, think about a situation in
which you struggled with rejection. Then grab your journal (or a piece
of paper) and a pen to complete this exercise. Copy the chart shown in
Figure 5.3 on a page of your journal. You may also use the worksheet
online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

[Complete the "Emotion" box with a specific emotion.]{.i} You may feel
many emotions in response to struggling with rejection, but choose just
one for the purpose of this exercise.

[Complete the "Sensations" box.]{.i} Take a deep breath and pay
attention to your body. You may find it helpful to close your eyes. Some
people also find it helpful to slowly scan their body from their feet up
to the top of their head. Doing whatever works for you, observe any
notable sensations, and then write them in the appropriate box.

[Complete the "Emotional Thoughts" box.]{.i} Reflect on the chosen
situation and pay attention to your thinking. Write down your thoughts
related to rejection in the appropriate box.

[Complete the "Behavioral Reaction" box. ]{.i}Thinking back on the
situation, observe how you acted in response to it and write this in the
"Behavioral Reaction" box.

After completing the whole diagram, review it. Allow yourself to become
more conscious of all the factors at play in this emotional situation.
This awareness may, by itself, help you respond differently in future
emotional situations. Also, you might find it helpful to repeat this
process for other emotions in the situation you just reflected on or for
other situations.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_010.xhtml__idContainer011 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch5_fig5.3.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[ Figure 5.3 ]{.b}Follow Your Emotional Process

If you think that your sensations, thoughts, or (re)actions are causing
you greater difficulty with your emotions, you might want to turn to
those particular chapters to learn how to address those domains.

[Lightening Your Load One Emotion at a Time]{.ac}

Being rejected can feel like an explosion that sets off an emotional
landslide. In the end, you might feel like a boulder has landed on your
chest, making it hard to get up and move on with your life. But if you
pay closer attention, you'll probably find that there's not a single
boulder there. Instead, it's a pile of rocks. This is an extremely
important difference. Although you probably would not be able to move a
huge boulder off your chest, you would be able to lift one rock at a
time and move it aside---eventually allowing you to get free. And that's
kind of how it works with emotions.

An undifferentiated combination of many intense emotions might be
overwhelming and confusing, and feel like an all-encompassing mass of
anxiety. It is too much to take on at once. However, an awareness of the
many emotions in that massive experience, such as fear, hurt, and
sadness, might be more manageable. For this reason, it's important to
identify the different emotions that make up your "boulder" and then
address them one at a time.

Accomplishing this task is a bit complicated, but you can do it by
focusing on one step at a time. You will be returning to some of the
exercises presented earlier in the book. Read through this section to
learn which exercises are needed to help in this task. If you have not
already worked through any of the exercises, go back and complete them
one at a time (rather than trying to learn them and put them together in
one sitting).

Begin the Offloading Process

Once you have worked through the earlier exercises and are ready to use
them here, set aside some uninterrupted quiet time in a comforting
place. You will need enough time to settle down in a comfortable chair,
separate out your emotions, and regroup before moving on with your day.
I suggest beginning with at least 20 minutes.

[Attend to your emotions.]{.i} If you have difficulty focusing
immediately on your emotions, you might begin with the "Reconnect with
Your Senses" exercise in chapter 3, "Sensations."

[Identify the emotions. ]{.i}Label the emotions you are feeling. (If you
need help with this, review the "Labeling Your Emotions" section earlier
in this chapter.)

[Focus on one emotion.]{.i} As you become aware of the emotions stirring
within you, choose to focus on one. Do not try to do anything with the
emotion other than keep your awareness on it.

[Complete the "Sit with Your Emotions" exercise. ]{.i}If you do not
remember this exercise from earlier in this chapter, review it before
just trying to stay with your emotion.

After completing this exercise, you will probably still feel quite
emotional. However, you will be better able to process your emotions and
consciously take steps toward recovering from rejection.

You may want to repeat these steps for other emotions, though I don't
suggest you do this all in one session. It takes time and can be
emotionally draining. You will most likely need to go through this
exercise many times to identify and experience each significant emotion
that is part of the "massive boulder" pinning you down. But each time
you do, you will likely find that your experience becomes clearer and
less overwhelming.

[Identifying Levels of Emotion ]{.ac}

Understanding your inner emotional landscape is particularly complicated
because you not only have emotional reactions directly to situations,
but you also have emotional reactions to your emotions and thoughts.
Emotion-focused therapy identifies these two levels of emotions as
primary and secondary emotions (Greenberg, 2010).

[Primary emotions]{.i} are your initial reactions to a situation. You
might feel happy, sad, hurt, afraid, ashamed, or lonely. They are an
expression of your authentic or "true" self.

[Secondary emotions]{.i} are your reactions to your initial thoughts and
emotions---not to the situation. For instance, you might feel frustrated
or angry with yourself for feeling hurt (and in your assessment, weak).
You might also be angry with yourself for feeling hopeful that things
can get better because you believe that it only sets you up for more
rejection.

Secondary emotions "protect" you from connecting with your primary
emotions, which can seem too threatening or painful, but they do this at
a price. For example, you feel frustrated or angry with yourself
(secondary emotions) for feeling hurt (primary emotion) by the
dismissive comment of a friend. Then your angry, self-critical thoughts
may grow. As long as you are engaged with them, you will not be
consciously feeling the pain of rejection or may have hope to avoid
feeling that way again---but you will also be perpetuating a negative
view of yourself.

To further elaborate on primary emotions, some people get stuck in
maladaptive ones, such as being prone to responding to even the
slightest rejection, or the possibility of rejection, with intense fear,
anger, or sadness. When you recognize this maladaptive pattern, [do
not]{.i} try to force yourself to feel differently or even berate
yourself for feeling as you do. Instead, with the emotional distance you
might feel in watching a character in a movie, simply notice how your
response is disproportional.

To free yourself from the emotional mire caused by rejection, it is
essential that you bring your awareness to these primary and secondary
emotions. Get to know them. After some self-exploration, you might
observe that becoming more aware of your hurt (primary emotion) causes
you to reflexively revert back to your anger (secondary emotion). This
observation is key in helping to change, because it offers a pathway
back to your primary emotions. Continue to observe this.

There is no doubt that our emotions are deeply rooted, inextricably
intertwined with the other domains of STEAM, and complicated to
understand. However, they add richness to what would otherwise be drab
and unfulfilling lives. So, as you learn to open to your
emotions---especially those tied to your feelings and fears of
rejection---without being a prisoner of them, you will feel set free.
You will learn to enjoy a life where you embrace your inner self and can
take the risk of sharing that self with significant others.
:::::::::::::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml}

::::::::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idTextAnchor010
.calibre4}Chapter 6:\
]{.b1}\
Actions

"Fine!" Janine yelled into the phone as she stabbed at the red "end"
button. [If she's really my friend, Gina will apologize]{.i}, Janine
muttered to herself. She tried to get back to writing her daily to-do
list, but she kept glancing at her phone, unable to concentrate. Then it
occurred to her; she was the one rejecting Gina, not the other way
around. Gina wasn't urging Janine to stand up for herself as a way to
put her down or be mean. It was because Gina cared about her. Although
Gina [had]{.i} hurt her feelings, she had also apologized for that. If
only Janine had really been listening to Gina, she would have heard the
concern in Gina's voice. Then she would have felt cared about instead of
attacked. After chewing on this---and the end of her pen---for a while,
she took a deep breath and picked up her phone. "I'm sorry..."

Your actions express your sensitivity to rejection and perpetuate it in
ways that you may not even be conscious of. Developing a fuller
awareness of your actions opens you to an opportunity for greater
self-understanding through them and the other dimensions of STEAM. You
can then acknowledge and "own" your experiences and behaviors.

This is what happened for Janine, who realized, after some reflection,
that she had hung up on Gina based on emotionally influenced thinking,
not the reality of the situation. With her change in perspective, she
felt differently about the interaction, prompting her to reach back out
to Gina. Similarly, you will find that greater awareness of your actions
will lead to a change in your relationships with yourself and others.

This chapter explores gaining greater awareness of your actions from
observing verbal and nonverbal communication in any given conversation,
as well as in patterns you repeat over time. For example, your sense of
feeling unworthy may express itself in your slumped posture, as well as
in the way you repeatedly put yourself down. Sometimes such patterns of
behavior elicit criticism from friends or family---which only serves to
reinforce your negativity toward yourself. When you can consciously see
these dynamics, you have the chance to pause and think about them,
enabling you to better understand yourself and others. As a result, you
are more likely to feel greater empathy for yourself, opening you to
feeling greater compassion. From this new perspective of compassionate
self-awareness, you can choose to act differently.

This chapter also encourages you to be more aware of how activities
affect you. Your insights can help you choose to engage in ones that
facilitate growing and healing. It addresses how mindful actions can
help you stay in the moment rather than getting swept away by your fears
and feelings of rejection. And it addresses how, when you are
discouraged, you can work to appreciate a comforting touch from people
who care about you. Learning to take this in can help you turn to them
(as an attachment figure) for reassurance when you feel upset. In
addition, you can supplement the skills offered in this chapter with
those in the "Learning to Self-Soothe" section of chapter 2, such as by
practicing yoga or doing a craft. By adopting these many ways of
actively coping when you feel rejected, you can ease your distress,
think more clearly about the situation, and respond to rejection with
greater resilience---all of which will help you become more securely
attached and less sensitive to rejection.

In addition to the information presented in this chapter, you can learn
more about the importance of attending to your actions in my brief video
[Attending to How Rejection Affects Your Actions ]{.i}at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

[Understanding Nonverbal Communication ]{.ac}

Messages communicated with the wholeness of someone's being have more
weight than those communicated with dry words. These messages are
delivered with many actions, such as facial expressions, gestures, and
behaviors. Nonverbal communications (and their meanings) often happen
outside of people's conscious awareness, which can make them even more
impactful. With your sensitivity to rejection, you are likely to
erroneously experience other people's nonverbal cues as powerfully
rejecting and to unconsciously express your struggles in a way that
perpetuates them. But when you begin to consciously pay attention to
these communications, you can learn to recognize them, clarify their
messages, and reconsider your response to them.

With this in mind, review the following kinds of nonverbal
communications. Then, when you observe examples of them in your daily
life, consider what they might be saying---and what you might be
misinterpreting.

[Prosody:]{.i} This is the pattern and rhythm of speech, such as the
volume, pitch, and tempo. It also includes the emotional tone, such as
being gentle, happy, excited, strident, condescending, sarcastic, or
threatening. These cues suggest the emotional state of the speaker and
indicate their thinking and the next actions they might take. Depending
upon your perception of prosody, the same words, such as, "Yeah, I love
you" can be a source of comfort or a trigger for being consumed by a
sense of rejection.

[Posture:]{.i} When people stand in an upright posture with shoulders
back, they are physically grounded and stable in their bodies. It tends
to communicate self-assurance. However, when the body is held rigidly
and movements are not smooth, a person can appear highly anxious. You
might notice that your torso tends to slouch when you feel dismissed or
defeated. Sometimes when people notice someone else has good posture,
they become more self-conscious and feel more inadequate, perhaps even
imagining that they are being judged.

[Body placement: ]{.i}If you are dating someone who stands and sits
close to you, they are likely showing romantic interest. On the other
hand, if they give you plenty of personal space,[ ]{.i}that distance may
indicate that they do not currently want greater closeness. However, to
guard against misinterpretation, it is essential that you stay as close
to the facts as you can while interpreting the meaning of a person's
body placement.

When Linda remained a bit physically distant from Chad on their first
date, he fell headlong into rejection and despair. However, this
reaction was premature. As he later found out, she liked him, but needed
some time to get comfortable.

[Physical reactions:]{.i} Many involuntary physical reactions can be
observed. People's faces often turn red when they are embarrassed or
angry. Their bodies sometimes shake when they are afraid. And their
breathing is often constrained when they are anxious and fearful of
rejection.

[Gestures:]{.i} People often communicate with gestures rather than
words, such as when someone waves you to come closer. However, as with
verbal communication, you must understand gestures in their context.

[Eye contact:]{.i} Maintaining eye contact is often used to intensify an
experience. When people feel loving, holding eye contact expresses
greater emotional closeness. However, when linked with being angry or
judgmental, it can be threatening. By contrast, avoiding eye contact
generally increases distance or lessens emotional intensity. People may
avoid eye contact when they are lying or when they are uncomfortable
with closeness for other reasons, such as fear of being judged.

As you attend to nonverbal communication, you may gain insights about
yourself and other people. But beware of your bias to see rejection
where it does not exist, or to perceive it as bigger than it is. Be sure
to double-check your interpretation of nonverbal messages with other
information, such as the context of the situation and the nature of the
person you are interacting with.

[Burning Yourself Out]{.ac}

Sometimes it may seem like you are a perpetual motion machine in taking
care of life's to-do list, but you also feel like you are just doing
what's necessary. Anything less and other people will have no use for
you. Still, you have to admit that it takes a lot of effort. You might
even feel like there is something wrong with you for having to work so
hard.

Some downsides to your massive efforts---to your almost constant
busyness and actions---are that you seem to always feel deeply
unfulfilled, at the end of your rope, or like you have no gas in your
tank. But slowing down might not feel like an option. You may fear that
this would only reveal your flawed self to everyone...and that would
lead to the unacceptable fate of them dismissing, abandoning, or
rejecting you. Yet, continuing at your current pace feels impossibly
draining.

[If you are nodding as you read this, then it is extremely important
that you understand:]{.i} Life does not need to be this way. There are
people who do their best, take care of themselves, and have a positive
self-image, despite not being the best at something or not meeting their
own or others' expectations. Not only are these people often outwardly
successful, but they also feel good as a person even when other people
don't like them, are critical of them, or outright reject them.

With this in mind, reflect on your efforts to perform well and their
effects on you.

Are You Doing Too Much?

To determine whether you are working too hard, choose a situation in
which you think you are acting in an extreme way, such as regularly
working 70 hours a week or never saying no to a friend's requests. Then,
do the following:

[Make a pros and cons list.]{.i} The pros side of your list might
include that you feel like a good friend or you are excited about
advancing at work. On the cons side, you might note that you have no
time for friends or activities that you enjoy. For people who stay
motivated through self-criticism, the cons list will also include things
like continual self-doubt and general unhappiness despite any successes.

[Reflect on your list.]{.i} Ask yourself, "Does this ultimately make me
happy or feel fulfilled?" If you accept that you are making sacrifices
now for the future, consider whether there will really be a time when
your actions will lead to a sense of success and fulfillment. If you
realize that you are not happy and expect that you will forever be
chasing approval, be clear with yourself that your excessive efforts are
not working well, even if you are outwardly succeeding in the moment.

[Consider an alternative approach in which you accept your needs and
your limits.]{.i} Imagine choosing a more balanced life. Fears of
failure and rejection will undoubtedly arise. As they do, challenge the
criticism that probably accompanies them. For example, question whether
you would really think less of a colleague or friend who led a more
balanced life.

(If you see yourself as not just busy, but as a perfectionist, this will
be addressed in detail in the chapter 7 section "When Perfectionism
Falls Short" and the related exercises.)

If you can see how your fears of rejection lead to your excessive
busyness, but can't seem to change it yet, that's okay. Remember, this
is just one step toward your goal of overcoming your sensitivity to
rejection.

You may want to pay daily attention to how your excessive efforts are
related to your self-criticism, fear of rejection, and unhappiness.
Consider what your reaction might be to others whom you respect, but are
not so perfect. You might also find it helpful to keep a diary of these
observations and thoughts.

[Protesting Rejection]{.ac}

Janine is constantly fearful of not being good enough, and therefore
being rejected by friends. She [protests]{.i} this by frequently texting
or calling them. She also fills her days with helping them with anything
and everything. While she enjoys being helpful, she is also
unconsciously driven to make herself indispensable.

Many people sense that they cannot expect to be loved for who they are,
but rather need to earn the acceptance and caring of others. So, when
they feel that they have been dismissed or abandoned---especially by
attachment figures---they often respond with protests like Janine's,
pushing back against the rejection or trying to earn (or earn back)
approval.

Some of the many actions people take to protest rejection and try to
gain other people's approval are:

- Requesting practical help and emotional support
- Caretaking
- Remaining almost constantly connected with people in person, on the
  phone, or through social media
- Being highly physically affectionate, such as with hugging, kissing,
  and being physically intimate
- Using deceit and manipulation to keep people personally engaged

At other times, they engage the anger they feel by:

- Expressing hostility (This can be both an honest expression of anger
  and an "opportunity" for others to show caring by trying to appease
  them.)
- Being passive-aggressive (For instance, while Janine feared that
  expressing her anger toward friends for perceived rejections would
  lead to even more rejection, she would often not return their texts or
  calls.)

Paying attention to your protests against rejection will likely make you
more conscious of your feelings of rejection, in addition to the other
domains of STEAM. As you become more self-aware, you can practice
reflecting on how you want to respond to these experiences rather than
reflexively reacting. For instance, aware of your inclination toward
caretaking, you might be conscious of how you immediately insist that
your friend choose the restaurant when the two of you plan to go out to
dinner. You might also notice that you are suddenly disconnected from
any sensations of hunger---an experience that you know is related to
sublimating your own needs.

In addition to becoming more aware of your actions and related
experiences, you might reconsider your perceptions of the other person.
Let's say that you tell your friend who prefers barbecue that you want
to eat Chinese food. Now you fear your friend is frustrated. Even if
that is true, contrary to how it feels, maybe they still like and accept
you as a whole person. Or perhaps they are not upset with you at all.
Instead, they might be distracted or upset with something having nothing
to do with you.

With a greater appreciation of the needs underlying your protests, you
will be more inclined to respect them. You will have a conscious choice
for new ways of acting that you never had before: attend to the other
person's needs, advocate for yourself, or find a way to balance both.

[Learning to Respond Constructively ]{.ac}

By reflecting more on your actions and reactions, as well as your
[possible]{.i} actions and reactions, you can begin to consider the
consequences of them. Then, when faced with a situation, you will be
more likely to respond thoughtfully rather than just reflexively
reacting.

As mentioned in chapter 5, Dr. Paul Ekman is a pioneer in the research
of emotions. He created a map (or an atlas) of emotions, which you can
see on www.atlasofemotions.org. On this website, he illustrates that
people can have three categories of reactions to their emotions:
constructive, destructive, and ambiguous.

To understand these reactions, note how Janine moved between all three
of them in this situation:

When Janine walked into the yoga studio, she immediately approached
Beth, who was talking with a new woman. "Hi, Janine. This is Pat," Beth
said, offering a broad smile, but then immediately turning back to Pat.
Janine's heart beat quickly as she irrationally imagined Beth turning
her back on Janine and befriending this new woman. She felt like she
didn't matter and was almost immediately overwhelmed by feelings of
rejection. At first, Janine pretended to be lost in thought, not being
bothered (an ambiguous reaction). Later, she "joked" about Pat's
matronly appearance (destructive reaction). This annoyed Beth, creating
the very distance that Janine feared. However, when Beth was late to the
next class, Janine talked with Pat alone. As it turned out, despite her
reservations, she realized that she liked Pat and chose to engage fully
in the conversation (constructive reaction), which eventually grew into
a close friendship.

To clarify these three categories of reactions, review Figure 6.1.
(These diagrams of emotions can also be found at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.) You may recognize that the diagrams
in this figure are very similar to those in the "Mapping Your Journey of
Emotions" section of chapter 5, "Emotions." However, in this section,
the diagrams are expanded to illustrate the three options for reacting
to the five universal emotions that Ekman has identified---fear, anger,
sadness, disgust, and enjoyment.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idContainer012 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch6_fig6.1a.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[ Figure 6.1 ]{.b}Diagrams of Emotions with Constructive, Destructive,
and Ambiguous Responses (based on Paul Ekman's timeline of emotions,
found on www.atlasofemotions.org)

[\
\
\
Figure 6.1 ]{.b}(cont.)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idContainer013 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch6_fig6.1b.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

[\
\
Figure 6.1 ]{.b}(cont.)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idContainer014 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch6_fig6.1c.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

Observe Your Responses and Consider Your Options

This exercise is designed to help you recognize your own automatic
reaction to rejection and to consider various possible responses.
However, because it builds on the "Follow Your Emotional Process"
exercise in chapter 5, complete that exercise before doing this one. You
will need your journal (or a piece of paper) and a pencil to complete
this exercise.

[Think about a situation in which you struggled with rejection.]{.i}

[Identify the emotions you felt.]{.i} They may or may not include
Ekman's universal emotions.

[For each emotion, copy and complete the chart shown in Figure 6.2 on a
page of your journal.]{.i} You may also use the worksheet online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024. Be sure to place your reaction next
to the appropriate label of constructive, destructive, or ambiguous.
Circle this reaction. Next, fill in possible actions for the other two
labels.

You might notice that your reaction in a given situation is
constructive. Still, fill in the destructive and ambiguous reactions.
You might recognize these as reactions you have had in other
circumstances. By completing all of the reactions in the diagrams, you
are enriching your understanding of the various ways you can respond to
your emotions, along with clarifying which ones are the most
constructive.

[\
\
\
\
\
Figure 6.2 ]{.b}Observe Your Responses and Consider Your Options (based
on Paul Ekman's timeline of emotions, found on www.atlasofemotions.org)

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_011.xhtml__idContainer015 .figure}
![](OEBPS/image/ch6_fig6.2.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

If you want, you can extend this exercise by completing another diagram
for your emotional responses to your reactions. For instance, if your
emotion was sadness and your reaction was emotional withdrawal, you
might notice that this reaction caused despair. You might also note that
a constructive response would be to call a friend, who could help you
feel comforted. Next, you could extend the exercise by completing
diagrams for the emotions of despair and feeling comforted. This process
of following your emotions, the different aspects of them, and your
reactions to them can enable you to have greater personal insights that
lead you to choose healthier reactions.

[Keeping Busy: Distraction versus Fulfillment ]{.ac}

Chad couldn't take it anymore. Why hadn't Linda called him this morning
like she usually did? [I must have done something to turn her off...but
what? ]{.i}He didn't dare call her, or she would surely tell him their
relationship was over. Of course, he knew this was crazy. [We had a
great time last night at the movies and dinner. And I'm sure nothing
could have changed since then]{.i}, he puzzled. But all the logic in the
world didn't change the sickening feeling he had inside. So, he needed
to get busy doing something, anything, to distract himself.

My patients often tell me how their emotional pain can overtake them,
and that they cope by doing things to keep their minds off of their
thoughts and feelings of rejection. But when we look more closely at the
things they do, it becomes apparent that not all activities are the
same. While some behaviors are purely distractions, others offer more
personal fulfillment.

Purely distracting activities take your mind away from your struggles
with rejection, though they do not inherently nurture your inner self.
You might play games on your phone or get lost in mind-numbing Internet
surfing. Whether the distractions are fun or neutral, their main
importance is that they allow you time to calm down. But for them to be
helpful in the long run---as opposed to just a momentary escape---you
must reflect on your struggles once you feel calmer. It is most
effective to return to the topic when you still feel somewhat emotional
about it---albeit not when you are overwhelmed. While it can help to
reflect much later when the feelings are "cold," that's not as effective
in helping you manage your emotions.

Though pure distractions have their place, engaging in personally
fulfilling activities can nurture a sense of self-worth while also
distracting you from distressing situations. Of course, just as with
purely distracting activities, it is important to reflect back on your
struggles with rejection after you feel a bit calmer.

Chad had noticed that when he became a paramedic, he felt better about
himself, because he was part of a team that was serving the community.
On the morning when Linda didn't call him, someone called to ask if he
would take their shift. While he continued to worry about his
relationship, the work definitely redirected his attention [and]{.i}
gave him a sense of value and fulfillment. Then when he returned home
later, he had the emotional strength to text Linda. By then, he could
see that he had overreacted. That's when he learned that she had slept
all day because she was feeling sick.

You can build meaningful or fulfilling activities into various aspects
of your life, such as:

[Work:]{.i} learning new skills

[Hobbies: ]{.i}completing a family genealogy, designing homemade
birthday cards

[Religion:]{.i} praying, being part of a social-action committee

[Volunteer:]{.i} fostering animals

[Family:]{.i} spending the day with a sibling and their family

[Social life:]{.i} going to a concert or having a barbecue with friends

The more you can connect with inherently having value and feeling
fulfilled, the stronger you will feel in facing your fears of rejection.
Rather than feeling like you are being rejected as a whole person, you
might realize that someone is taking issue with some aspect of you, such
as your sense of humor or your politics. You might also recognize that
you are simultaneously being accepted and valued in another situation or
another relationship (as Chad did with his paramedic work). Although
these differing experiences can be confusing at first, the practice of
observing these different aspects of your experiences will help you gain
a sense that rejection is not all-encompassing.

By using your "go-to" fulfilling and distracting activities when you are
upset, you can help yourself calm down, think more clearly, gain a
greater sense of having value, and even feel less overwhelmed with
rejection.

(For more on developing a positive sense of yourself, turn to chapter 8,
"Building Self-Acceptance," and chapter 9, "Nurturing Compassionate
Self-Awareness.")

[Acting Mindfully ]{.ac}

Your feelings of rejection can prompt you to think and feel particular
ways that then lead to other painful thoughts and feelings, and this
chain reaction can continue on. Very soon, you are likely no longer
acting in response to the reality of a situation, but are instead going
in circles or spinning off into the netherworld of internally created
struggles. For instance, you may be snapping at a friend who stood you
up, before you even register that she is telling you she got in a car
accident. And it began with wandering off in your own head, rather than
remaining connected to the moment.

To help keep you closer to the current circumstance and to the actual
actions of others (rather than your fear of what they are doing or might
do), it is helpful to have reminders to stay present---or be
mindful---built into your day. Some people do this with rituals, such as
saying grace before they eat or, for Jews, touching a mezuzah before
entering a home or room. A less inherently meaningful, yet potentially
powerful, way to develop the ability of being mindfully present is to
choose an action you perform regularly.

When I am in my office, I have practiced being more fully aware of the
moment as I touch my doorknob to open the door for my next patient. You
might choose each time you pick up your phone or stand from your chair.
You might also choose more extended actions, such as walking more slowly
and mindfully from your car to your office each day, or taking a shower
with more mindful awareness. The options are limitless.

Aware that his mind often wandered off, Chad decided to practice a
mindfulness exercise. He chose to attend to the experience of chopping a
carrot while he cooked dinner. As he picked up the carrot and placed it
on the cutting board, he noted its temperature and texture. He was even
aware of its smell. Then, as he picked up the knife, he brought his
attention to its weight and the texture of the handle. He slowly chopped
the carrot, being aware of the changing sensations in his hand and arm
as he did so. He also noticed and appreciated his wonderfully designed
and functional hand as he chopped vegetables for his meals.

Whenever you perform a mindful action, do so slowly and with more
focused attention. It's okay when ([not if]{.i}) you find yourself doing
these actions mindlessly. The idea is not to perfect being focused, but
rather to help yourself live more mindfully even as you continue to get
pulled back into old habits, daydreaming, and mindless action. That's
why practitioners of mindfulness call it a practice.

[Comforting Touch in Your Relationships ]{.ac}

Whenever Janine's "touchy" friend Beth hugs and kisses her on the cheek,
she can feel her body stiffen. As she became conscious of this, she
began to wonder about her reaction. Although she was hungry for
approval, she was uncomfortable with physical affection. [Beth has
always been a caring and dependable friend]{.i}, she thought. Then she
reassured herself, [Hugging and kissing are Beth's way of showing she
cares about me]{.i}. Janine decided to work on being more open to Beth's
physical affection. When Beth hugged her, she took a slow, deep breath,
and consciously relaxed her muscles. She paid attention to the warmth
she felt in her body and noted, [I can feel her caring]{.i}. It took a
number of times doing this before Janine was able to feel positively
about it---even if she was still a bit uncomfortable.

Comforting touch (such as a hug or feeling a hand on your shoulder) can
trigger the production of oxytocin, a hormone that can bring down stress
hormones and, in turn, bring on a sense of trust, safety, and
connection. Oxytocin can have such a powerful effect that it has been
dubbed the "cuddle hormone." Once released, it can help you feel
emotionally safer, allowing you to be more aware of your emotions, able
to tolerate them better, and even share them with others when you might
otherwise suppress them. When---through repeated interactions---you
associate someone with this sense of comfort, you are likely to see them
as a possible source of soothing when you are upset (making them an
attachment figure).

Along with these benefits, the act of someone touching you can also
increase your sense of vulnerability, and so you might reflexively steel
against the comforting effects of touch. If you struggle with this,
respect your innate need to protect yourself. Rather than trying to
force yourself to accept physical comfort, be curious about your
defensive wall and consider what it might be like to let it down a bit.

If you can relate to Janine's discomfort and are open to trying to
change this, consider your relationships carefully. Is there someone
whom you believe that you can trust and feel safe with? If so, you might
want to practice being more physically expressive, such as by hugging to
say hello or goodbye. If you think it would help, ask for their support
in this. Another option is to get professional massages. Or you can get
creative, such as joining a ballroom dance class. (Note: People with a
history of abuse often find physical closeness very challenging and
should not force themselves to engage physically with other people.
Instead, it is important for them to nurture self-compassion---as
addressed later in this book---and perhaps work with a therapist on
their struggles.)

Keep in mind that when you touch others, their oxytocin levels will
probably increase, so they'll be more likely to return the favor. For
instance, as Janine became more open to Beth's hugs and kisses, she even
initiated a hug one day when Beth was upset, which made Beth visibly
happier. Of course, you must gauge how open the other person is to being
touched by you, and specifically to the way in which you touch them.

Increasing touch can reduce the intensity of your distress enough that
you can tolerate it better. In doing so, you might find that you can
think more clearly about your struggles and even be more understanding
and responsive to others---such as when Janine was able to be aware of
Beth's need for comfort and to offer it.

Open Yourself to Hugs and Emotional Closeness

One way to become more aware of how open or closed you are to being
comforted is to pay attention to your experience when hugging, or
accepting a hug from, someone you love. This could be a partner, friend,
or family member. To help you with this, complete the following very
brief questionnaire in your journal (or on a piece of paper) and
consider what your responses mean.

[Think about your general experience when you and someone you love are
hugging. ]{.i}Write down your rating for each statement on a scale of 1
to 5, with 1 being not at all and 5 being very much. Then add up your
ratings for a total.

- I sense caring [from]{.i} the other person.
- I feel caring [for]{.i} the other person.
- I feel emotionally comforted by the hug.
- The hug helps physically calm my body.

[Consider what your total rating means, and journal about it.]{.i}
Understanding that the lowest total score you can get is 4; the lower
your score is, the less open you are to absorbing the love offered. If
certain scores are higher or lower than the rest, think about what that
is saying about you and your openness to physical affection and
emotional acceptance. For instance, you might rate the statements about
being comforted or calmed by a hug lower than the other statements,
reflecting a difficulty in emotionally taking in a hug despite
registering it as a message of caring.

[Consider, and make notes about, whether you would respond differently
to different people.]{.i} If you would, look for themes. For instance,
some people are very open to receiving physical comfort from women but
not men, or from children but not adults.

[Open your mind to, and write about, the implications of this
exercise.]{.i} Think about how your openness to physical affection
influences your sense of feeling cared about or feeling alone in the
world. Reflect on the different themes that you notice. Consider your
thoughts related to the physical experience of hugging.

These observations and insights can enrich your understanding of
yourself. That is important, even if nothing changes immediately,
because it can eventually lead to being more open to letting down that
defense.

After completing this exercise, when someone hugs you, consciously
choose to be open to the caring they are offering, as well as the
physical warmth. If you try to take in a hug but don't feel comforted,
it's okay. That's your starting point. You can just continue to be aware
of your experiences when you hug. Feeling the warmth may come with time
and with the other inner work that you are doing.

By becoming more aware of your actions, the messages that they
communicate, and how they relate to the other domains of STEAM, you will
understand yourself better. You can then choose how you want to act,
rather than reacting reflexively. This might mean learning new coping
behaviors so that you can feel emotionally stronger and be more
resilient to rejection. It might mean choosing an "appropriate" response
when you recognize your emotional reactions as being out of proportion
to the situation. Or it might mean using your developing self-awareness
to increase empathy with your struggles with rejection. As you continue
reading this book, you will learn to use that empathy to develop greater
self-compassion, which will then enable you to be more resilient to
rejection.
:::::::::::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_012.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_012.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_012.xhtml__idTextAnchor011
.calibre4}Chapter 7:\
]{.b1}\
Mentalizing

"I'm going to need to stay longer than I thought," Linda said solemnly,
as she explained that her mother was having more problems from her
stroke than they originally thought. Chad's heart immediately began
pounding hard, the way he imagined it would if it received an electric
jolt by one of those defibrillator paddles.

As Linda explained more, he realized that he wasn't following a word of
what she was saying. Aware that he was not there for her as she had been
there for him these last two years, he forced himself to focus. He
consciously attended to the [sensation]{.i} of muscle tension in his
chest, [thoughts]{.i} that she was abandoning him, [emotions]{.i} of
feeling rejected, and [action]{.i} of not saying a word. That's when he
realized that his old abandonment fears had overtaken him. Fortunately,
he was then able to refocus and be supportive of Linda rather than
spiraling into his own personal crisis.

When Chad used his deepening self-awareness through STEAM to understand
his own and Linda's responses, he was [mentalizing]{.i}. This means he
could "get" where she was coming from when she decided to stay longer
with her mother. It also means that he could "get" [himself]{.i}, and
that his initial reaction was motived by old abandonment fears. Experts
sometimes refer to mentalizing as "holding the heart and mind in heart
and mind." That is, you recognize someone's thoughts and feelings (their
"heart and mind") with both an intellectual understanding and an
emotional connection to their experience (your "heart and mind"). You
can do this when relating to other people, as well as to yourself.

While it might sound confusing, mentalizing is something you do every
day without even thinking, such as when you hold the door for someone
entering a store behind you. But when you become emotional or feel
strain in a relationship, it helps to be more conscious of your
mentalizing (technically called "controlled mentalizing"). When Chad
consciously mentalized by making himself aware that Linda was really
acting out of concern for her mother (not a desire to distance herself
from him), he was able to respond with caring rather than react with
anger or hurt. Chad's experience shows how consciously mentalizing is
very helpful in clarifying misunderstandings.

Importantly, mentalization is not solely an intellectual process, such
as when a movie critic coldly picks apart why characters behave a
certain way. This would be called "pseudo-mentalizing" because it is
done while being emotionally disengaged. Instead, your heart and mind
both need to be engaged to fully appreciate someone's experiences in
this way.

The better you are at mentalizing, the more you can understand yourself
and others. In addition, it can help you tolerate, and feel less
distressed by, your emotions. This allows for greater empathy,
compassion, and ability to truly forgive. For example, if a coworker
expressed their frustration with you for interrupting their work, a weak
mentalizing ability would leave you feeling like their response was an
indictment of you as a whole person. On the other hand, a strong
mentalizing ability would allow you to understand that they were
expressing a momentary feeling. You could empathize with what it feels
like to be interrupted when you are highly stressed and focused on a
task. By improving your mentalizing ability, you will also think more
clearly and flexibly---which would include being more resilient in the
face of small and large rejections. You can learn more about using
mentalizing to address your struggles by watching my brief video
[Mentalizing: A Way of Overcoming Rejection Sensitivity]{.i} at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.

To complete the exercises in this chapter, it is important that you have
worked on developing all of the other domains of self-awareness. By
having an awareness of your sensations, thoughts, emotions, and actions,
you can consciously challenge your tendency to automatically become
overwhelmed by rejection or any experience even slightly resembling
rejection.

[Using Engaged Curiosity with Yourself]{.ac}

Remember [Curious George]{.i}? That little monkey was lovable because of
his playful nature. His natural sense of wonder led him to explore the
world with an openness to learning. This same curiosity and openness to
learning can help you increase your self-awareness.

But the quality of that curiosity is extremely important. You can have
nonjudgmental curiosity---which I call [engaged curiosity]{.i}---or
judgmental curiosity, which I call [critical curiosity]{.i}. When
applied inwardly, [engaged curiosity]{.i} opens you to new experiences
and can help you understand yourself better. For instance, in thinking
about wanting to make your living as an artist, you might muse, "I
wonder what it would be like to be a professional painter?" By contrast,
you might be [critically curious]{.i} and, in the tone of an
inquisition, ask, "What do you want to do [that]{.i} for?" In response,
you would likely feel criticized, and so you might shut down your
self-awareness. When this happens, you become more of a stranger to
yourself, and your ability to mentalize inwardly becomes impaired. By
contrast, practicing engaged curiosity encourages you to be more open
with yourself. You feel accepted and have a sense of safety that allows
you to lower your defenses, be more self-aware, and mentalize yourself
better.

Learn to Develop Engaged Curiosity

You can further develop engaged curiosity by completing this thought
experiment:

[Reflect on a time when you felt rejected.]{.i} Replay it in your mind
well enough to connect with your thoughts and feelings at that time.

[Be curious about your reaction.]{.i} Ask yourself, "What was going on
for me?" Access the other domains of self-awareness in STEAM. If you are
unable to connect with experiences in a particular domain, use some of
the exercises in the chapter for that domain. This will help you gain a
full understanding of your experiences and elicit empathy for them.

[Consider other reactions that people might have to this
circumstance.]{.i} It might help to think of how particular people you
know might react differently. Maybe they would feel rebuffed, but not
deeply hurt. Or maybe they would not feel rejected at all. They might
also feel disrespected or angry.

[Reflect on what might be causing your reaction.]{.i} Rather than
letting yourself just slip into familiar old reactions, use your
awareness of other possible reactions to try to understand what is
causing you to respond in this way. You might consider how the current
circumstance would make most people feel at least somewhat rejected. You
might also note how certain aspects of the situation remind you of
other, deeply upsetting situations. Or the fear of not being good enough
might be related to a deeper fear that has been with you since
childhood---an issue that might need to be explored further to more
fully understand.

[Affirm your understanding.]{.i} Once you "get" why you responded as you
did, it is important to realize that your reaction is a human one. Given
your particular circumstance, you would likely feel empathy for someone
else having the same reaction. Allow yourself to have empathy for
it...and for yourself.

Think about doing this exercise as a way to practice engaged curiosity,
as you would do for any new skill. If you realize that you have returned
to old patterns, simply acknowledge it, along with how difficult it is
to develop this skill. You might take a breath and try again, or give
yourself a break and return to practice this exercise at a later time.

As you strengthen your ability to use engaged curiosity, it can help you
cope better in the moment when you are feeling dismissed or rejected, or
to recover more quickly afterward. To be curious in this openly engaged
way, you must think about yourself from a caring---or at least
nonjudgmental---perspective. If you are unable to do this even when you
are in a positive frame of mind, turn to chapter 8, "Building
Self-Acceptance." Take some time to work on feeling more positively
toward yourself. When you are better able to think of yourself in an
open and positive way, return to this exercise. (You might want to place
a sticky note in chapter 8 to remind you to return to here when you feel
ready.)

[Using Engaged Curiosity with Others]{.ac}

It is just as important to approach others with engaged curiosity as it
is to approach yourself with it. When you do, you will feel more open to
what the other person is expressing, enabling you to have empathy,
understand them better, and nurture the relationship. And when you feel
increased trust, you are more likely to feel safe turning to them for
comfort at times when you are upset and vulnerable (seeing them as an
attachment figure), and not be as likely to fear or feel rejection. As
the relationship strengthens to become more securely attached, it may
support you in feeling better about yourself.

One way to nurture engaged curiosity with others is by picking a friend
or family member with whom you feel relatively safe. As you talk with
them at a time when you don't feel tension between you, listen for a
topic where they struggle emotionally. Ask questions that help you
connect and have empathy for their experience. Even if you feel a strong
desire to help them, choose to stay focused on really "getting" what
they are going through (you can problem solve later). If they feel
understood and cared about, they will probably share more and eventually
feel the intensity of their emotions lessen. Once you have developed
this skill when you feel safe, strengthen your ability by practicing it
when you disagree or feel upset with the person.

Another way to nurture engaged curiosity is to pay attention when you
assume someone's ambiguous behavior is expressing a critical view of
you. Just as many people find that increased self-awareness opens them
to engaged curiosity, Janine also discovered this for herself:

[Oh, no. Here we go again]{.i}, Janine thought. She was sure that Gina
was distracted because Janine bored her. But then she had a flash of
awareness for how she often overreacts. So, instead of letting that
sick, nauseated swirl of rejection pull her under, she chose to pause
and think. [OK, maybe she is tired of me, but maybe there's a different
problem. Maybe work has finally gotten to her. Or maybe she's gotten
more bad news about her mother's health.]{.i}

As Janine reflected on the possibilities, it occurred to her that she
really did not know what was going on---and that it made no sense to
assume Gina was done with her. Still unsure, she was at least able to
keep a more open mind. [I really wish I knew what was going on]{.i}, she
thought. And then, almost without realizing it, she asked, "You seem
distracted or upset. Do you want to talk about what's going on?" That
simple question opened the floodgates, with Gina pouring out many
struggles she had kept inside.

By thinking about another person's inner experiences, you are practicing
mentalizing that person. Although you can only ever guess at someone
else's inner experience, mentalizing them can help you better understand
their actions and be more open to cues that belie that experience. As a
result, you can connect better and have healthier, happier relationships
with less fear of rejection.

[Assessing Your Current Situation ]{.ac}

When you are having an emotional reaction out of proportion to a
situation, it is natural to wonder what is going on. Rather than
starting with deep psychological issues, begin more simply. Consider
current unrelated factors that might be affecting you.

For instance, if you feel terribly hurt in response to a generally
supportive friend gently teasing you about getting lost driving to meet
her, understanding your struggles with rejection can make sense of your
reaction. However, another helpful insight might be that you ate two
doughnuts for breakfast and are likely experiencing a plummet in your
blood sugar levels.

So, before you explore the depths of your psyche for why you are
overreacting, ask yourself these questions:

[Is there something going on with me physically?]{.i} Some examples are:

- Hunger
- Tiredness
- Pain
- Illness
- Drunkeness

[Am I upset with or about someone else?]{.i} Some examples are:

- Parent
- Friend
- Child
- Partner
- Coworker

[Did one or more situations happen recently that have affected my
mood?]{.i} Some examples are:

- Recent problems at work
- Financial difficulties
- Car accident

If you do identify external stressors, then it is important to consider
how strong an effect they are having. This will open many choices of how
to respond. You might want to turn your attention from your current
reaction---such as feeling hurt about being teased---and focus on one or
more of these problems. You might tell the person you are upset about
these other factors, or you might remove yourself from the situation and
handle the other issues separately.

Be sure to consider whether the problem is a chronic one that requires
attention. For instance, if you regularly eat doughnuts for breakfast,
switching to a healthier alternative could work wonders. A few common
examples are in the following chart. If you struggle with other
problems, add them to the list, along with their solutions. Then make a
plan to take action on the proposed solutions for your problems,
creating healthier habits.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [Problem]{.b}                    | [Solution]{.b}                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Tired                            | Get rest.                        |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Take action to    |
|                                  | increase your regular sleep or   |
|                                  | address insomnia.                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Hungry                           | Eat a balanced meal or snack.    |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Develop a plan    |
|                                  | for healthy eating, including a  |
|                                  | balanced diet with appropriate   |
|                                  | portion sizes and eating at      |
|                                  | regular intervals.               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Illness                          | Get rest and take medicine as    |
|                                  | needed.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Consult with a    |
|                                  | doctor and follow through with   |
|                                  | recommendations.                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Angry with a particular friend   | Address the issue with your      |
|                                  | friend.                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Reassess that     |
|                                  | relationship and how you want to |
|                                  | deal with ongoing issues.        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Financial difficulties           | Develop a plan for addressing    |
|                                  | the problem.                     |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Reassess your way |
|                                  | of managing finances.            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Feeling burned out from life     | Do activities that nurture       |
| stressors                        | yourself, such as taking a hot   |
|                                  | bath or giving yourself          |
|                                  | permission to have a fun,        |
|                                  | stress-free day.                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Chronic:]{.i} Build activities  |
|                                  | into your regular routine that   |
|                                  | can help give you the strength   |
|                                  | to continue on. Reconsider your  |
|                                  | priorities.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Finally, if a current stressor or difficulty seems to be causing ongoing
strain and you have been unable to adequately address it, seek
professional help.

[Am I Overly Sensitive to rejection?]{.ac}

After their most recent argument, Chad feared Linda would leave, which
shook him to his core. It was like an inner earthquake that set off a
tsunami of emotions. He was repeatedly slammed by powerful waves of
self-loathing and anger with Linda. [She can be such a bitch]{.i}, he
growled to himself as he got more caught up in how she didn't care and
how she had ruthlessly hurt him. Any sense of emotional stability he
felt was undermined by a growing conviction that all people are cold and
heartless, even though many pretend to be nice.

These thoughts felt real to Chad despite evidence to the contrary. When
someone responds in an overly sensitive way to rejection, they are
reacting---overreacting, really--with a sense of being Rejected (with a
capital [R]{.i}). By contrast, when they react to rejection in a way
that is more in proportion to a situation, they are responding to it
with a sense of being rejected (with a lowercase [r]{.i}). This is the
difference between Chad feeling Linda simply wasn't being fair versus
feeling cruelly rejected by her.

So, while Chad had friends and family who often called him out of
concern, he still experienced himself as all alone in the world. He was
unable to hold his negative thoughts and painful feelings back---much as
no one can hold back tidal waves. Though he felt like this crisis would
never end, his intense emotions eventually calmed on their own. His
emotionally driven thoughts continued to exist, but he held them less
intensely, and they were not as central in his conscious thoughts.

As Chad discovered, when you recognize you are experiencing Rejection,
the ability to calm your emotions enough to think more clearly is
essential. People can often help calm themselves in various ways, such
as the activities described in the "Learning to Self-Soothe" section of
chapter 2. That section includes many suggestions for self-soothing and
describes some techniques for relaxing. If you do not have activities
that you can rely on to help you feel better and you are frequently
overcome with anxiety or distress, you might review that section now.

As you feel less overwhelmed, you will likely gain some perspective. You
might recognize that it looks from the outside like you are "making a
mountain out of a molehill." But this probably won't feel true. In fact,
you might be deeply, painfully hurt when a coworker doesn't think to
invite you to lunch, or when your spouse says that she would like to
spend some time alone on the weekend. Despite your objective thoughts,
your sense of rejection feels more real.

The truth of the matter may be that your reaction is out of proportion
to the [current]{.i} situation. However, the very real pain is telling
you that there is more to the story. As I explained in chapter 1, it can
help to think of your emotional sensitivity to rejection as similar to
the sensitivity that a burn might cause to your skin. In both cases,
even a gentle touch to that sensitive area (skin or sense of rejection)
can feel unbearable because of previous experiences.

Once you can recognize that you are having a sense of being Rejected
(with a capital [R]{.i}) rather than rejected (with a lowercase
[r]{.i}), you can begin to question it. It's important not to question
the validity of your feelings, because they are neither right nor
wrong---they just exist. Rather, your feelings can be in keeping with a
situation or misaligned with it. So, you might say to yourself something
like, "I'm feeling Rejected with a capital [R]{.i}." That statement can
be a signal for you to think more about what might be triggering the
feeling. If it does not seem to fit the current situation, it comes from
past experiences. This awareness can help move you toward being less
sensitive to real or potential rejection, dropping unnecessary defenses,
and ultimately opening up to feeling closer with others.

Consider whether you become so overwhelmed by "Rejection" that it is
difficult for you to reflect on the feeling. If it is, then you may find
it helpful to complete the "Sit with Your Emotions" exercise in chapter
5. When you are able to "sit with" your emotions, then you might explore
the origin of your feelings by completing the "Think Back to Help
Connect the Dots" exercise in chapter 4.

[When Perfectionism Falls Short ]{.ac}

One way people try to avoid rejection is by being "perfect." After all,
if you get everything right, you have shown that you have value to
yourself and others. But perfection---or excelling beyond reasonable
expectations---cannot be maintained, and there is always the threat of
falling short. So, moments of feeling "good enough" tend not to last
long. Even at the height of your success, you may continue to feel below
the surface that you are only successful because you have tried so hard,
or were lucky. You believe that you don't really deserve---and won't be
able to continue---being successful and valued. These thoughts, not
surprisingly, can leave you feeling depressed and anxious.

You may intellectually know upon reflection that you are not a loser or
failure. You may know that there are people in your life who truly care
about you. Unfortunately, "knowing" the truth won't automatically help
when the negative and self-critical thoughts "feel true." But with this
intellectual awareness, you can question your "felt truth." Rather than
attacking yourself for your perceived failures and "deserved" rejection,
you can choose to be deeply curious about what is going on within you.

A good way to start is to clarify whether (and to what extent) you
engage in two kinds of perfectionism: self-evaluative perfectionism and
socially prescribed perfectionism (Reis and Grenyer 2002).

James is near the top of his class in medical school. Unrelentingly
self-critical, he gripes to himself, [I might as well be at the bottom
of my class.]{.i} True to his nature, instead of feeling proud of his
accomplishments, he remains steadfastly focused on being at the top of
his class. He is driven by a sense he'd always had that he needed to be
ahead of the pack in order to be okay or have any value.

Similar to James, you might not consciously worry much about what others
think of you. Instead, you might use self-evaluative perfectionism to
focus on personally defined high standards---maybe even unrealistically
high ones. By meeting those standards, or at least surpassing other
people's accomplishments, you sense that you can prove to yourself (and
others) that you have value.

Rate Your Self-Evaluative Perfectionism

The following sentences are thoughts that reflect self-evaluative
perfectionism. In your journal (or on a separate piece of paper), rate
how much you relate with each statement on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1
being not at all and 5 being very much. Then add up your ratings to find
your total score.

It's very important to me to strive to be as perfect as possible in
completing tasks.

- I feel driven to keep working on a task until it is perfect.
- I set very high expectations for myself.
- I am rarely, if ever, proud of my accomplishments.
- When I have attained a goal, I immediately focus on the next goal
  without much appreciation for what I have achieved.
- Even when there are objective signs of success (e.g., recognized by a
  boss, earned an award, hired for a job), I continue to be
  self-critical or focus on what I have not achieved.

Understanding that the highest score you can get is a 30, the higher
your score, the more that you value yourself based on meeting
unrealistically high standards.

[Consider and journal about the meaning of your score]{.i}. As your
score approaches 30, consider how your perfectionistic tendencies might
be backfiring. Rather than helping you feel accomplished and secure in
your value, they might ultimately be reinforcing your sense of not being
good enough. Even when you are successful, it may never feel good
enough, prompting you to forever be pursuing the next goal so that you
can feel okay about yourself.

[Reflect more deeply on your self-evaluative perfectionism]{.i}. Though
it takes courage, choose to focus on all the domains of awareness in
STEAM as they relate to your perfectionism. When you need help with a
particular domain, use the exercises in the chapter on that domain to
help you. For example, use the "Reconnect with Your Senses" exercise in
chapter 3 to tap into your physical sensations as you have these
perfectionistic thoughts. Engage in the "Sit with Your Emotions"
exercise in chapter 5 to allow yourself to become more aware of the
emotions related to your perfectionism. And use the "Are You Doing Too
Much?" exercise in chapter 6 to see how your efforts to be perfect
affect you. While exploring and reflecting on your perfectionism in the
domains of STEAM, journal about your thoughts and insights.

As you develop a fuller sense and appreciation of your self-evaluative
perfectionism, you will find that you begin to question it, and perhaps
consider healthier ways of relating to yourself.

As you get to understand yourself better, you may look upon yourself
with greater acceptance and compassion. You will not be as
self-rejecting, or expect others to be as rejecting, if you fail to live
up to your high standards. To whatever degree you see this progress---or
even if you don't see it much at all yet---that's okay. These patterns
are often very entrenched. Keep your struggles with self-evaluative
perfectionism in mind as you read chapter 8, "Building Self-Acceptance,"
and chapter 9, "Nurturing Compassionate Self-Awareness."

Not thinking about what she needed to do to take care of her own three
children, Nancy thought, [Rhonda's job is crazy busy this week, so she
could really use a hand]{.i}. She immediately found a way to cook
dinners for Rhonda's family, chauffeur her kids, and be there to listen
to Rhonda's frustrated rants about her supervisor. There's nothing
wrong---and a lot that is right---with all of that...except that Nancy
was muttering angrily to herself for having less to give to her own
family and work. In other words, it was so important for her to be a
good friend to Rhonda that she didn't take into account her own needs.

Similarly to Nancy, you might engage in socially prescribed
perfectionism, focused wholeheartedly on perfectly meeting or exceeding
your perception of other people's standards. If you excel in what others
are looking for, then they won't reject you---or, at least, that's how
this thinking goes. If you are the nicest person possible, or the best
worker your boss has ever seen, you will likely get positive feedback
that can help counter your sense of lacking value. The problem is that
the sense of being essentially flawed will still be there, needing to
constantly be proven wrong. This can produce chronic and even disabling
anxiety.

Because Nancy had been increasing her self-awareness of STEAM, she
realized something was not right about her response. Then she thought
about how she was always totally there for her friends---much more than
they were there for her, and more than she would expect anyone to be
there for her. She also realized that while she liked being helpful, she
feared that others would not want to be her friend unless she made
herself irreplaceable.

Rate Your Socially Prescribed Perfectionism

The following sentences are thoughts that reflect socially prescribed
perfectionism. In your journal (or on a separate piece of paper), rate
how much you relate with each statement on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1
being not at all and 5 being very much. Then add up your ratings to find
your total score.

- It is extremely important to me not to let others down.
- I often feel anxious at the thought of disappointing people.
- Most people I know are disappointed in me when I make mistakes or fail
  at a task.
- I try to avoid making mistakes so that other people don't get upset
  with me.
- When I make mistakes or fail at a task, I feel like this shows I am
  not as good as other people.
- I often fall short of meeting other people's expectations of me.

Understanding that the highest score you can get is a 30, the higher
your score, the more that you look to others to assure you that you have
value.

[Consider and journal about the meaning of your score]{.i}. As your
score approaches 30, it reveals a great tendency toward unhealthy
attempts to perfectly meet or exceed what you think others would want
from you. Think about how this tendency is affecting how you feel about
yourself. Does it leave you feeling constantly insecure and fearing that
others will reject or abandon you? Or that they will do that if you ease
up on trying to meet or exceed their standards?

[Reflect more deeply on your socially prescribed perfectionism]{.i}. Use
your self-awareness in the domains of STEAM to help you understand your
perfectionism more clearly. As described in the "Self-Evaluative
Perfectionism" section above, for any domain in which you have
difficulty, use the exercises in the chapter for that domain to help
you. Journal about this, as well as your answers to these questions:

- [How much do you consider your own wants and needs when they don't
  align with what others might want? ]{.i}
- [If expressing yourself is difficult, specifically what do you fear
  will happen by voicing your thoughts, feelings, desires, and beliefs?
  ]{.i}
- [When you have expressed yourself with people who are supportive, what
  has happened? ]{.i}
- [When you haven't expressed yourself, how has it affected your
  relationship and your sense of yourself---in good and bad ways? (This
  might be different in different relationships.)]{.i}

In developing a fuller appreciation of your socially prescribed
perfectionism and its consequences, you will discover that you become
more conscious of the negative effects on you.

If you engage in socially prescribed perfectionism, learning more about
it will help you have greater appreciation of the struggle, enabling you
to respond with empathy and compassion. As a result, your drive to be
perfect for others will lessen and you will see yourself as worthy of
love and acceptance. This might motivate you to consider your needs more
seriously.

[The Downside of High Expectations ]{.ac}

Mia had studied hard in high school, working to cover up her perception
that she wasn't smart by demanding no less than an A for herself on all
exams. So when she received one B and one C in her freshman year of
college, she was horrified. [I'm so stupid. I don't belong here]{.i},
she repeated to herself. Believing these thoughts, she figured it was
practically useless to study or ask for help. So, she didn't. Not
surprisingly, her grades plummeted...which, of course, supported her
original assumption that she was "stupid" and shouldn't bother wasting
her time studying. In addition, her fear of being rejected by peers and
fantasies of failing out of school increased.

Serena, who graduated in the top 10 percent of her high school class,
also struggled with the transition to college. She feared she was
incompetent, but she studied extra hard to overcome her perceived
inadequacies. When, to her surprise, she did well in classes, she
thought, [It's a good thing I studied so much. Now people won't think
I'm dumb.]{.i} Though grateful for this, she was continually afraid that
her secret would be discovered and everyone would look down on her.

Mia and Serena were unable to see the abilities they possessed, the ways
that their fears of incompetence did not match the facts, and how
unlikely it was that falling short of their high expectations would
result in the dismal failure and rejection that they imagined. If you
relate to either of these examples, think about how your
self-perceptions and personal standards affect you.

Assess the Effects of Your High Expectations

Use these questions to help you explore how your personal standards and
expectations affect you. You may want to write your answers in your
journal. (If you have not reviewed the "Using Engaged Curiosity with
Yourself" section of this chapter, do that now. By approaching these
questions with engaged curiosity rather than with a critical eye, you
will be more likely to gain greater insights by answering them.)

- How realistic do you think your standards for yourself are? How often
  do you meet them, and how does this affect you? Consider how this
  might differ in different areas of your life.
- Do you expect others to meet the same level of expectations you have
  for yourself? If not, what is your reasoning? Might this same
  reasoning apply to you?
- Consider a time when you fell short of your own standards. What did
  you think of yourself? What do you imagine others who care about you
  thought of you? What would you think about someone else if they made
  similar efforts and got the same results?
- When you do achieve success in meeting your standards, how do you feel
  about yourself? If you feel positively, how strongly and for how long?
  If you have a negative---or less than positive---reaction, what are
  your thoughts and feelings?
- If you go to extraordinary lengths to meet your goals and
  expectations---such as by working long hours or devoting all waking
  hours to them---how does this affect your sense of well-being, both
  emotionally and physically? Weigh the costs and benefits.
- How would your life be different if you gave significant effort toward
  your goals, but also allotted more time toward other personal
  interests and valued activities?

These questions can open up many avenues of self-exploration. So, you
may want to work on them over several days, or even work on them a bit
now and finish them at a later date.

[Making Progress and Clarifying Your Goals]{.ac}

For many reasons, your sensitivity to rejection can be overwhelming and
disorienting. Because of this, you can easily lose your way in trying to
escape from your struggles with rejection. Part of the problem is that
this goal defines what you want to get away from, [not]{.i} what you
want to move toward. So, to grow in ways that will feel constructive,
fulfilling, and healthy, it is essential to define what you want to move
toward.

Clarify Your Goals

Imagine your future self as enjoying a sense of well-being, free of
rejection sensitivity. Then create a chart in your journal or on a loose
piece of paper to clarify the goals and objectives that can help you
create that reality and become more securely attached. You may also use
the worksheet online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024. Follow along with what Chad did to
clarify his goals as an example for how you might do the same. (A chart
showing Chad's work in this area is also online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

[First, identify your goal:]{.i} Chad wrote: Feel positively enough
about myself that I don't assume Linda will leave me, can tolerate Linda
being upset with me, and believe that I would survive my relationship
with Linda ending (even if I'd be miserable for a while).

[Then develop objectives for yourself based on STEAM.]{.i}

- [Sensations:]{.b} Chad wrote: Feel physically less tense or more
  relaxed when talking with Linda and things objectively seem to be okay
- [Thoughts:]{.b} Chad wrote: Think more positively about myself in
  general; think positively about myself when I express a different
  opinion from Linda and other people
- [Emotions:]{.b} Chad wrote: Feel happier and at peace with myself in
  general; tolerate my fears of rejection enough to be able to get past
  them (rather than being totally sucked into them)
- [Actions:]{.b} Chad wrote: Tell Linda what I think when I disagree
  with her; do the same thing with other people
- [Mentalizing:]{.b} Chad wrote: Recognize what's going on for Linda
  rather than always assuming she's looking for a way to ditch me

[Finally, ask yourself what is needed to happen for you to make
progress.]{.i} Chad realized that he needed to see how he was
unnecessarily hard on himself and how he was too ready to believe others
would reject him before he could begin to let go of his fears of
rejection.

What Chad accomplished in clarifying his goals and objectives took time.
It is easy to have a sense of what you want, but being specific in your
plan requires focus and persistence. When what you desire most is to
free yourself from being rejection sensitive, that effort is an
important step toward lessening your reactivity to real or feared
rejection, and increasing your resilience when you are hit hard by
feelings of being dismissed or abandoned.

[The Wise Choice: Balancing "Shoulds" and "Wants"]{.ac}

Janine thinks about her friend Lucy, who can be a lot of fun. [But I'm
done with lending her money that she never pays back]{.i}, Janine
thinks. Now Lucy is asking to borrow money to pay a parking ticket---and
Janine feels stuck. [Even though I should help her out because she's my
friend, I don't want to. I feel like such a selfish person.]{.i}

Particularly because of your fear of rejection, you may find that you
get easily frustrated or angry with yourself for not doing what you
think you [should]{.i} be doing but don't really [want ]{.i}to do. Then
there is what you [want]{.i} to do but for some reason may not be a good
idea to do. Finally, there is---if you take the time to think about
it---what you believe is a [wise]{.i} choice, the best overall decision
for yourself. This is the path that would ultimately be best to take.

You can help yourself make a wise decision by following these steps:

[1. Listen to the negative, critical "should" voice as though it were
external, coming from another person.]{.i} Make note of the reasons this
voice gives for insisting that you take action. Importantly, note how
that voice discounts or minimizes [your]{.i} feelings and desires.

Janine reflected:[ I'm conscious of part of me saying, "You should give
Lucy the money. I can't believe you are so selfish that you would say no
and then go out to dinner with other friends." ]{.i}Considering that
critical voice within herself, she thought, [This line of thinking
considers Lucy, but doesn't care about me or what's right for me. ]{.i}

[2. Attend to what you feel or want. ]{.i}Allow yourself to be open to
the emotions and desires you experience deep within. Rather than
focusing on your response to the critical voice, such as feeling guilty,
attend to emotions that are direct from your inner true self.

Janine was aware that she did not want to give Linda money. [I feel
taken advantage of, and I don't want to be Lucy's personal bank]{.i}.

This awareness did not come easily, though. At first, Janine was
confused about her feelings. She originally thought, [I should not have
to be someone's personal bank.]{.i} By using the word "should," she was
focusing more on the way she expected the world to work, instead of
embracing how she felt and what she wanted. But then she refocused on
her feelings and replaced the word "should" with the word "want," which
made all the difference. She clearly felt better about herself when she
acknowledged, [I want to feel more assertive and empowered. And I don't
want to be Lucy's personal bank]{.i}.

[3. Take the time to make a wise decision.]{.i} Weigh your differing
thoughts and feelings, the various potential actions you could take, and
the potential outcomes for each act. This process can help you make the
best decision given all that you know at the current time.

Janine reasoned:[ It is important to be there for friends, but my sense
that I "should" give Lucy the money is misplaced. She has been using me,
not being a good friend to me. So, I really think it's okay that I'd
rather spend it enjoying myself with other friends. If she chooses not
to talk with me, I can survive that, even though I'll feel awful. It's
time that I finally say no and take the risk of losing her friendship.
]{.i}

[4. Take action.]{.i} Once you know your chosen direction, it is
important to take action, even if that means just developing a plan to
help you move forward.

Janine sensed that she needed to help herself follow through.[ I think
I'll talk with Beth before I say no to Lucy. I know she'll support me.
It might even help if we make plans to get together later, after I've
talked with Lucy. ]{.i}

In any given situation, making a wise choice is a decision that you may
need to make again and again. Encourage yourself to consider both your
thoughts and your feelings in deciding what is ultimately best for you.

This type of dilemma comes up often in romantic relationships, too. For
instance, Belinda---a twenty-six-year-old advertising copywriter, who
felt deeply in love---had to talk herself through a breakup with her
abusive boyfriend.

Belinda thought: [My friends all tell me I should leave Paul because of
the way he treats me, but I love him and feel like I'll forever have a
broken heart if I leave. I'm such a weak person and a fool for staying
with him!]{.i}

[Still, when I pay attention to how I feel, I see that he is mean to me
and hurts me a lot. I'm forever afraid of making him angry. I have even
begun to believe that I deserve how he treats me. I want to stay because
I love him, but I also know I should leave. And I logically know that my
friends would support my decision to leave. I'm so afraid of walking
away, but I would eventually be happier without him. So I really have to
go.]{.i}

Belinda also talked with friends to rally support for leaving Paul. She
planned out when and how she would tell him, as well as how she would
fill her time after leaving.

[Exploring Consequences ]{.ac}

Mentalizing involves reflecting on how the first four domains of
awareness (sensations, thoughts, emotions, and actions) affect each
other and are related to your rejection sensitivity. It will enable you
to gain greater insight into yourself.

The following exercise, broken into three parts, is designed to help you
with this very process. Because there is a lot to it, read through it
all and look at Janine's sample chart (in the example after the
directions for this exercise) before getting started.

Understand Yourself Through STEAM

In this exercise, you will be reflecting on your thoughts in a chart as
you attend to your sensations, emotions, and actions. (A template for
this exercise is also available online at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

1.  [Write the word "Sensations" at the top of a page in your journal
    (or on a piece of paper).]{.i}

    On the next line, write, "When I struggle with rejection or the fear
    of it, I often sense in my body..."

    Below this, draw a line down the middle of the paper and write
    "Positive Sensations" on one side and "Negative Sensations" on the
    other side.

    Now complete the chart with as many responses as come to mind. To
    help you connect with your sensations, you might find it helpful to
    bring to mind the struggles you identified in the exercise "Connect
    with Common Struggles" in chapter 4.

    Finally, think about how the sensory consequences of your struggles
    with rejection affect your life. Jot down some notes about this at
    the bottom of the page.

2.  [Repeat the same steps for your emotions. ]{.i}Instead of
    "Sensations," write the word "Emotions" at the top of a page.[
    ]{.i}Replace "I often sense in my body" with "I often feel."

3.  [Label a third page with the word "Actions." ]{.i}Replace "I often
    sense in my body" with "I often act by." Again, repeat the same
    steps as before.

4.  [For all three pages, reflect on and explore any outcomes that you
    note along the bottom of the pages.]{.i} Ask yourself whether and
    how they ultimately reinforce your struggles with rejection. For
    instance, on the emotions page, you might note that feeling angry
    with yourself is associated with being self-critical, which
    motivates you to be an especially good friend or to try hard to be
    the person you think your partner wants you to be.

While you can complete the whole exercise in one long session, you might
prefer to spend a few days to complete each of the three sections.
However you choose to complete the exercise, you may find that you
continue to process it for days, if not longer.

To give you an idea of what your chart might look like, take a look at
what Janine wrote when she was working on increasing her self-awareness
through mentalizing. (A chart showing Janine's work in this area is also
online at www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.)

Understand Yourself Through STEAM: Janine's Example

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [Sensations]{.b}                                                    |
|                                                                     |
| When I struggle with rejection or the fear of it, I often sense in  |
| my body...                                                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [List "positive" sensations      | [List "negative" sensations      |
| ]{.b}                            | ]{.b}                            |
|                                  |                                  |
| [+]{.b}                          | [-]{.b}                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [Energized (to prove             | [Headache]{.lang}                |
| myself)]{.lang}                  |                                  |
|                                  | [Tension in my chest]{.lang}     |
| [Alert]{.lang}                   |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| [My thinking about rejection often makes me feel tense and          |
| physically not well. That makes it hard to concentrate at work or   |
| enjoy myself with friends. Though it can make me feel alert, that's |
| a heightened sense of looking to protect myself---I think this is   |
| my way of trying to protect myself from getting hurt.]{.lang}       |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

While insights from mentalizing are earned through hard work, newly
attained ones can sometimes also be easy to lose. So, to help you
remember and reinforce your insights, you might want to journal about
them or talk about them with a friend or therapist. When others are
supportive of such inner exploration, you will find the experience
validating.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_013.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_013.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_013.xhtml__idTextAnchor012
.calibre4}Chapter 8:\
]{.b1}\
Building Self-Acceptance

Janine is all too aware of her belief that she doesn't have much to
offer others. [At least I'm a good friend]{.i}, she often repeats to
herself as she tries to fend off the feeling that current friends will
soon leave her behind. But recently, as she has been paying increasing
attention to the different levels of self-awareness in STEAM, she has
been having doubts about her belief that she's essentially worthless.
She has also begun having the fleeting thought, [Maybe feeling worthless
is just a feeling.]{.i} From there, the doubt has grown stronger as she
has found herself repeating the statement, [Just because I feel
worthless, it doesn't mean I am worthless.]{.i} At first this was almost
unbearably uncomfortable. It felt wrong. Yet, she could not deny that
she was a caring person and a good friend, and that she had friends who
really cared about her. She also could not deny that she had good skills
as a painter, though she would visibly wince when she remembered one
teacher calling her "gifted." With her efforts to connect to, and
accept, these positive experiences of herself, she began to feel the
stirrings of self-acceptance.

For many of us, our rejection of ourselves is central to our struggles
with rejection from others. You may find yourself doing this by blocking
out or disconnecting from your basic experiences, a problem that can be
overcome by reconnecting with the guidance of the STEAM chapters in this
book. More broadly speaking, you may reject your general sense of your
"true" self. This chapter offers ways for you to connect with, and be
more accepting of, the person you experience yourself to be.

To be successful with this, it's essential that you accept two basic
premises. First, human beings are, by nature, imperfect. We all have
weaknesses and flaws and make mistakes. We all experience an array of
emotions, including different kinds of emotional pain, such as hurt or
grief. Researcher Kristin Neff (2011) describes this as a [common
humanity]{.i}, and she explains that it is a necessary part of
experiencing self-compassion (which will be explored in the next
chapter).

The second premise may seem absurd to even have to state outright,
but---you are a human being, with all the qualities that this implies.
Most notably, being human means that you have weaknesses and flaws, make
mistakes, and experience emotional pain. As basic as this may seem, this
premise is likely to be more difficult for you to embrace. To fully
accept it means that you struggle, suffer, and are sometimes rejected,
not because there is something inherently wrong with you, but because
these experiences are inherent in being human.

The exercises in this chapter encourage you to accept your full
humanity, including all of your qualities. They will help you connect
with and appreciate aspects of yourself that feel good. They also
encourage you to accept your struggles as part of being human. The more
you can build self-acceptance, the more positively you will feel about
yourself, even with your weaknesses, flaws, and the mistakes you make.
Importantly, you will also be less preoccupied with others rejecting
you.

[Using Self-Affirmations to Stay Positive]{.ac}

You can ease your struggles with rejection by using
[self-affirmations]{.i}. Developed by psychologist Claude Steele (1988),
this concept suggests that thinking about important values can help you
maintain a positive sense of yourself when you feel threatened. The
"values" he refers to can be anything about yourself that makes you feel
good or proud, such as a trait, an ability, or a basic belief about what
is important in life. [It's not that self-affirmations increase your
self-esteem, but rather that they help you keep a positive feeling you
already have about yourself by bringing your focus there.]{.i}

Janine acknowledges that she is a capable painter and a caring
person---though she is uncomfortable doing so. When she directs her
attention to these positive traits, she notices that she feels more
positively about herself. Though she continues to fear that she will be
rejected by friends and eschewed by coworkers, the intensity of these
fears lessens. She is also more likely to feel warmed by positive
feedback, like when her gym buddy Gina one morning let out an impressed,
"You are so toned. You look great!"

Research has shown that by engaging in self-affirmations, people are
less defensive and more accepting of emotionally challenging feedback
(McQueen and Klein, 2006). While self-affirmations are unlikely to cure
you of your sensitivity to rejection, they can lessen it. You might find
that by feeling positively about yourself, you are less likely to so
quickly assume others will see you in a negative light. And when someone
does clearly take issue with something you have done or is critical of
you, self-affirmations might help you to hold on to positives about
yourself, enabling you to be resilient.

List Your Strengths

To develop and use self-affirmations, first identify your traits,
talents, and values by creating three lists. Following the prompts
below, write these in your journal (or on other paper).

As you brainstorm about these three aspects of yourself, you might be
inclined to leave "unimportant" things off the list---DON'T. Include
everything. Perhaps you are a good friend, a talented cook, or have
great hair. You may minimize these qualities, but they are there.
(Before you write off something like having great hair as being "too
superficial" to feel good about, think about how critical you are for
other "superficial" shortcomings, like a shrill karaoke voice.)
[All]{.i} of your positives are affirmations of you as a whole person.

[List traits about yourself that you value.]{.b} For instance, you might
think that you are funny, persistent, curious, caring, social, creative,
or logical.

[List your talents.]{.b} For instance, you might include being a good
carpenter, negotiator, or comforter to those in distress.

[List the basic values that you live by.]{.b} Examples of these are
honesty, integrity, compassion, or generosity.

By completing your lists, you created a pool of inner resources that you
can use for self-affirmations.

Affirming Your Positives

With your three lists, you can now start practicing self-affirmations.
Try any or all of the ways below.

[Reflect on your positives.]{.b} Choose just a few (no more than six) of
the positive aspects of yourself that are [most important to you]{.i}.
They can include aspects from all or even just one of the categories.

Set aside some quiet time---even just 5 minutes---to think about these
traits, talents, or values. Reflect on specific experiences that
highlight them. If you become distracted by other thoughts, memories, or
fears of failure or rejection, choose to redirect your thoughts to these
self-affirmations. The purpose of this self-affirmation practice is to
connect with aspects of yourself that you are proud of or that make you
feel good about yourself.

[Create a mantra.]{.b} Many people find it helpful to develop a mantra
that they repeat daily, based on something they value about themselves.
For instance, Janine found it helpful to repeat, "I am a caring,
empathic person." Your mantra might be: "I am an insightful, thoughtful
person," or "I am creative."

[Write about the aspect of yourself that you value most.]{.b}[ ]{.i}It
should be particularly meaningful to you and make you feel proud or good
about yourself. Be sure to answer these questions fully:

- What is this value or aspect of yourself?
- Why is this value important?
- Describe times when you lived this value, including how it made you
  feel or what made it meaningful.

After completing this description for one value, you might want to do
this self-affirmation practice again, focusing on another value.

Throw Out the Negatives

Looking specifically at people's body images, researchers BriÃ±ol and his
colleagues (2013) conducted a study in which they focused on whether
they could influence these perceptions. They directed subjects to write
down what they liked about their bodies on one list and what they did
not like about their bodies on a separate list. Then they were directed
to throw out one of the lists. When they threw out a list (either one),
they were less influenced by it. However, when they put a list in their
pocket, they were more influenced by that one.

Although this study specifically focused on physical attributes, you may
find a similar result with listing other qualities. Strengthening your
positive sense of yourself may help you overcome your struggles with
rejection.

A Pocketful of Positives

Refer to what you wrote down in the exercise "List Your Strengths." Then
grab two loose pieces of paper. You can also complete this exercise
using your smartphone, though many people find that the act of
physically writing their thoughts can be therapeutic in itself.

[Write a list of positive qualities about yourself on one of the pieces
of paper.]{.i} You can include anything, such as physical
characteristics, personality traits, or skills you have acquired.

[Write a list of qualities about yourself that you do not like on the
other piece of paper.]{.i} Write this quickly, being careful not to
spend too much time elaborating on your negatives.

[Throw out (or delete) the second list (of negatives). ]{.i}

[Place the first list (of positives) in your pocket.]{.i} Or save it on
your phone. Either way, carry it with you for at least one full day,
though you might want to carry it with you even longer than that.

To make this exercise more effective, consciously engage with it each
day. At the end of the first day that you complete it, take the paper
out of your pocket and review the list. The next morning, read it slowly
before placing it back in your pocket for that day. Continue doing this
daily until you feel that it is ingrained in your sense of self.

Give Yourself Permission to Feel Good and Get Going

Although Chad continued to enjoy playing baseball recreationally long
after his high school championship days, he no longer does. His head has
become too filled with thoughts like, [What if I lose my mechanics and
just can't execute my curveball? If I let the guys down, they'll never
forgive me.]{.i}

If, like Chad, you have trouble accepting positive aspects of yourself
because you are so dominated by negative self-perceptions, you can
increase your self-acceptance by engaging in activities that you enjoy.
While they might be passions that you pour yourself into, this is far
from necessary. The small pleasures or comforts in life are also
important. But it's not enough to just perform these activities; you
must also allow yourself to [feel]{.i} good. When you are enjoying the
thought of doing an activity, actually engaging in it, or even
reminiscing about it, you are much less likely to get caught up in
negative perceptions of yourself or feelings of rejection.

There are four basic elements to enjoying activities. To help infuse
your life with them, try the following:

[1. Identify your comforts, joys, and passions: ]{.i}There are an
infinite number of activities that might bring positive feelings. For
example, you might want to play games on your phone, go for a car ride,
take a stroll through a park, or plan a romantic date. (A longer, more
complete list of enjoyable activities can be found at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024.) List those that you find pleasurable
in your journal, on a separate sheet of paper, or on your phone. Then,
write down any activities you enjoy that are not on the list.

[List of Enjoyable Activities ]{.b}

Listen to music

Daydream

Plan a vacation

Watch a funny movie

Go out to dinner

Play miniature golf

Do a puzzle

Volunteer

Go for a drive

Help others

Get a massage

Drink coffee, or tea

Dance

Do landscaping

Browse a bookstore

Bicycle

Fix something

Cook

Learn a new skill

Do crafts

Play cards

[2. Get moving: ]{.i}The next step is to get started on whichever ones
you want to do, or feel most manageable to start with.

If you are in a negative or depressed state of mind, you might think
that doing enjoyable activities is beyond what you are capable of. You
don't have the energy or motivation. Fortunately, people are wired in a
way that engaging in activities often gives them energy and can prompt
positive feelings. So, choose an activity that is not too challenging
and give it a try. Feel free to start by doing it a little at a time.

There are also some other ways you can help yourself get started.
Planning an activity with a friend can help you feel more positively
about it and discourage you from backing out. Another option is to give
yourself permission to bail from the activity after you've given it a
try.

Chad had been feeling really down when March rolled around, so he was
thinking he might just pass on signing up for baseball this year. He
knew that being on the mound again in the spring would probably help him
feel better, but he wasn't up to it. Finally, he decided to give it a
try, promising himself that he would drop out if it didn't go well.
Though he tended to be self-critical, he recognized there were times
when he enjoyed just being out on the field with the team, smelling the
freshly mown grass. Also, it wouldn't hurt to see that all the other
guys were not as good as they had been in their younger days, either.

[3. Enjoy the moment: ]{.i}As you do the things you like, you will
hopefully feel naturally energized and engaged. However, many people
struggle with the "what ifs," just as Chad did. [What if I've gotten too
old to pitch? What if I let the guys down?]{.i} Once you recognize that
you are doing this, choose to refocus on the moment. Attend to what you
are doing [now]{.i}. Let the future take care of itself---even when that
future is in just a few moments, as it was for Chad when he was worrying
about facing the other team's best hitter in the next inning. If you
realize you enjoyed the moment, even just a little bit, pause and allow
yourself to absorb that positive.

Observe how your fears or feelings of rejection have a less powerful
hold on you---and might have even disappeared for a time. Maybe you feel
a little lighter, even if you do not exactly feel happy. Also, consider
whether you were, for at least part of the time, engaged in what you
were doing and not focused on your negative self-perceptions or fears of
rejection.

[4. Think about pleasurable experiences: ]{.i}As you look at the
activities you listed, remember occasions when you enjoyed them. Really
take the time to allow your memories to be detailed and to [feel]{.i}
the experience again. Also, think about how you would like to do it
again. Similarly, as you consider trying another activity, allow
yourself to anticipate the experience.

By using some or all of these strategies, you are helping yourself
initiate and have good experiences. Your interests, choices to act on
those interests, and the enjoyment you get from them are all part of
you. The more you can "own" them as part of you, the more you will feel
good about yourself, and the more you will feel good about sharing those
parts of yourself with others.

[View Yourself as You Would a Friend ]{.ac}

When Maya's five-year-old daughter asked for the tenth time where they
were going, Maya snapped, "How many times do I need to tell you?!" And
on she went about how her daughter never listens. After a few minutes,
she came to her senses. [Damn! I did it again. I feel like such an awful
mother,]{.i} Maya lamented. But then, remembering the inner work she had
been doing, she imagined her friend Elise under similar pressures she
had been having, including not sleeping well. Maya realized that rather
than being critical of Elise, she could really "get" how her friend
would have lost it in that moment.

While Maya could relate to another mother's humanity by understanding
her struggle, she viewed herself as essentially flawed---and a cause for
criticism. By learning to see herself as a human being---no more, no
less---she made strides in becoming more accepting of herself. As a
result, she then had greater self-empathy and self-compassion.

The following exercise can help you to approach yourself as you would a
friend.

Be Your Own Best Friend

You can learn to approach yourself with greater self-acceptance by doing
the following:

[Think of a friend who is in a situation that is similar to one you
struggle with, and for which you are self-critical.]{.i} If you can't
think of a similar situation, then simply use your imagination.

[Pay attention to your reaction.]{.i} Notice how you are more
understanding of how your friend's reaction is "only human," and so you
have empathy and compassion for their struggle. If you are judgmental
rather than empathic, spend more time trying to understand how your
friend's experiences led to their reaction.

[Try seeing yourself through that same lens.]{.i} Pay attention to any
shift toward feeling more empathy or compassion for yourself---even if
the feelings only last a moment.

Approaching yourself with greater self-acceptance takes practice. You
will find that you can do it better sometimes than other times. But with
perseverance, you can build your ability to tolerate your feelings,
understand your own behaviors and struggles, and respond more
constructively to feelings of rejection.

If your efforts fail to elicit empathy for yourself, you may need to
return to trying this approach after working more on developing your
basic self-awareness in the different domains of STEAM.

[Look at Yourself from the Outside In]{.ac}

When you become easily overwhelmed by a particular memory of rejection,
viewing yourself from the outside (as you did in the last section) can
help you develop greater resilience. It can help decrease the intensity
of your emotions, as well as increase your tolerance of them.

The difficulties caused by your emotions being out of a tolerable range
cannot be underestimated. If you have not read (or do not remember) the
"Staying in Your Window of Tolerance" section of chapter 2, do that now.
It explains the different ways your body reacts to being overcome with
feelings of rejection.

The following exercise offers you a way to view particularly painful
memories of rejection from the outside, thus helping you better tolerate
your emotions and expand your window of tolerance. Given that this is a
more advanced exercise, make sure that you first do some work on
increasing your awareness in the domains of sensations, thoughts,
emotions, and actions. Also, given that the exercise can be emotionally
triggering, you may find it helpful to at least briefly review chapter 2
sections "Learning to Self-Soothe" and "The Many Ways You Can Benefit
from Mindfulness" because they offer ways to remain in (or return to)
your window of tolerance.

Play a Movie in Your Mind

You will be going to the movies in your mind---or having a "movie-like"
experience of a memory in which you struggled with feeling rejected.
Just as you do in a real movie theater, you can watch the movie and get
caught up in it---but with the comforting awareness that you are not
truly in the action.

[Decide on the event that you will want to watch]{.i}. It can be a
situation that has occurred or one that you fear will happen, such as
your boss giving you a poor performance review. It's important to
challenge yourself but not push yourself out of your window of
tolerance. This exercise offers ways for you to make the experience more
tolerable.

[When you are ready to start, sit in a quiet spot where you will not be
disturbed]{.i}. Get comfortable and settle in. Close your eyes. Take a
few deep breaths, inhaling through your nose and letting the air escape
from your mouth, making the exhale longer than your inhale.

[Imagine you are in a theater]{.i}. You will be in charge of playing the
movie, which will enable you to help yourself stay within your window of
tolerance. You can make the experience less intense by pausing the
movie, muting the sound, or even watching it in black and white. But
fundamental to all of this is that you remember that you are just
watching a movie in your mind's eye. Your goal is to be engaged enough
that your arousal increases, but not so much that you end up outside
your window of tolerance.

Practice this repeatedly, replaying the same situation until you can
watch it through with increased---or even full---intensity and remain
inside your window of tolerance.

To help you develop greater resilience to rejection in general, you can
continue doing this with other incidents of rejection. If your memories
are intrusive in your life and too intense to modify---or trying to do
this exercise makes you very distressed---stop the projector. Depending
on how intrusive and distressing these memories are in your life, you
may want to find a therapist who can help you cope better with them.

[Learning the Truth: You Are Worthy and Adequate]{.ac}

You may struggle a lot with feeling like something is essentially wrong
with you. Maybe you focus on shortcomings in your appearance or your
intellect or some hard-to-identify problem. Whatever the issue is, the
sense that your flaw keeps you from being equal to others feels so
strong that you [know]{.i} it's true. And this is what makes you so sure
that you will be rejected.

But what if you are wrong? What if you are basically no different from
other people? This is not to say that you are without flaws or
weaknesses. But what if everyone else has flaws? Maybe, just maybe,
there is value in simply being the person you are. Not convinced?
Imagine this:

You are sitting under a tree at a local park. You see several elementary
school-age children having fun together on a playground. Watching them
run around, play on the swings, and slip happily down the slide brings a
smile to your face. Then you notice a boy sitting on a bench off to the
side. You become aware that he is watching the other kids intently,
longingly, and uncomfortably. You imagine that he wants to join the fun
but is afraid of being laughed at or ignored. In that moment, how do you
feel toward him?

Do you make judgments about how he lacks any value and is worthless? Do
you think about what a loser he is? [Or]{.i} do you feel sorrow for his
inner struggles, hoping that he can overcome his fears and join the
others?

If your reaction is the latter one, wishing that he would join the
others, then you inherently value him---even though he is not fulfilling
his "responsibility" of playing and being social. You see him as
worthwhile despite not having any knowledge of him [earning]{.i} that
worth. All people have this same [inherent]{.i} worth---even you.

In thinking about this, you may find that you understand, even agree,
but feel unable to apply it to yourself. That's okay. If this analogy
does nothing more than open you to the possibility that you have worth,
then that is a lot. Return to the image of that little boy from time to
time, considering its implications for your worth.

Similarly, notice when you instinctively show caring toward others for
their pain or struggles. You might observe this reaction in people you
directly interact with, such as a colleague who is upset about a
critical comment from a supervisor. Or you may challenge yourself to
think about people you have a more distant relationship with, such as
refugees in the news or sick people in a hospital you happen to be
driving past. Consider how your sense of caring is based on your
connection with them as fellow human beings, not based on specific
contributions they've made to the world.

[Kintsugi: Find Beauty in Your Brokenness]{.ac}

The idea that you have value just for existing can be a difficult one to
grasp, especially when you feel broken inside. Similarly, it can be
difficult to fully grasp that your worth is not based on what you
accomplish, especially when you perceive that you have not accomplished
enough. To illustrate these elusive ideas, consider the art form of
[kintsugi]{.i}.

[Kintsugi]{.i} is the Japanese art of rejoining the broken fragments of
a piece of pottery with gold or other precious metals. While the
repaired item may be aesthetically appealing, the real beauty is in how
people relate to it. The beauty is in valuing the life of the ceramic,
which includes the damage that happens over time.

Similarly, to truly value yourself, it is essential to value your life's
journey. Mothers do this when they smile while looking at a stretch mark
that they earned during the pregnancy of their child. Those who have
endured childhood abuse do it when they appreciate that their
sensitivity to others' pain comes from the pain they have endured. Each
year, many Americans value their country's hard-won freedom when they
honor veterans by visiting Arlington National Cemetery in Washington,
D.C., or other landmarks that celebrate painful times in their history.
It's important to note that appreciating brokenness or imperfection as
part of your life story does not mean you "should" be happy about the
pain that you have endured. But you can appreciate your strength in
overcoming your struggles, find value in the lessons you have learned
from them, and be grateful for the resilience you have built.

See Your Beauty

You can practice transforming your sense of brokenness into a beautiful
new you by learning to relate differently to your struggles. To do this,
follow these three steps:

[Challenge what you find acceptable.]{.i} Reconsider your belief that
you need to be some particular way to have value. Reconsider the "given"
that, to be worthy of acceptance or love by others, you must earn a
certain amount of money, be charming or outgoing, have a particular body
shape, excel at sports, or be a recognized talent.

[Practice consciously accepting your limitations, weaknesses, or
failures.]{.i} Once you can accept that it's your belief in needing to
be a particular way that's "flawed," then there is the possibility that
your perceived imperfection may not be a valid reason for others to
reject you.

[Accept and appreciate yourself for who you are.]{.i} Consider what it
would mean to accept your perceived imperfection. Might you still have
value as a person? Might others accept you anyway, or even value you in
part [because]{.i} of your "imperfection"?

By practicing self-acceptance for all aspects of yourself, you create an
opportunity to heal.

As you enjoy a more positive self-image, you will make steps toward
overcoming your self-rejection and your sensitivity to rejection by
others. Let's consider how Andrew, a systems analyst, learned to find
beauty in his brokenness.

[Challenge what you find acceptable.]{.i} Andrew began to question how
he derived so much of his worth from seeing himself as intelligent,
logical, and able to solve any problem he faced. He could see how
whenever he failed to fix a problematic relationship or practical issue,
his self-esteem would spiral downward and he would often end up
depressed. He would isolate himself from others because he feared that
they would see he was unworthy of their friendship.

[Practice consciously accepting your limitations, weaknesses, or
failures. ]{.i}As Andrew focused on his need to fix every situation or
problem, he realized that this required the impossible from him---to be
all-knowing or all-powerful. With this realization, he became more aware
of feelings of sadness and powerlessness about the things he could not
change. He also began to question his reflexively negative thoughts
about himself in response to when he felt powerless.

[Accept and appreciate yourself for who you are. ]{.i}Andrew could
appreciate his clear thinking, problem-solving abilities, and compassion
for others. He also liked being able to make friends laugh. He realized
that he did not have to "have it all figured out" to feel good about
himself or for others to like him.

[Be Strong: Ask for Help]{.ac}

For Janine, being inferior was a statement of fact, like saying that
overcast days are gray. She tended not to talk with anyone about it, but
when she lost a big client at work, it all came pouring out to her
friend Beth. She related, "I just feel like I'm no good. I obviously
wasn't any good at work. And I know this sounds pathetic, but I feel
like I'm lucky that anyone even wants to hang out with me because I'm
such a loser. I just feel so alone." She partly expected that Beth would
never talk with her again, but then something surprising happened. "You
are [not]{.i} a loser, but I do know how you feel. I'm always thinking
about how my life is going nowhere. I feel scared and alone a lot," Beth
shared. When they finished talking, both women felt less alone and a
little less hopeless.

Many people fear that appearing weak and asking for help will drive
others away. But everyone needs help sometimes. It's part of being human
in the same way that having weaknesses and making mistakes are part of
being human. Just as admitting to your struggles takes strength, it also
takes strength to acknowledge when you are trying to lift a weight that
is too heavy to carry alone.

Once you decide that you need help, be wise in choosing whom you will
ask. You want to reach out to someone who is supportive, caring, and
trustworthy. People who can remain calm while discussing emotional
issues are likely to be better at helping you calm down. Also, look for
signs that they want to be helping, such as calling you to check on how
you are doing. Consider these tips for [how]{.i} to ask for help:

[Choose an appropriate time.]{.i} For instance, you may not want to ask
your friend when they are preoccupied with their own immediate concerns.
If you believe that it's a good time to talk, you might still ask before
launching in.

[Ask for what you need.]{.i} People can help best when they know what's
needed from them. So, be as clear as you can about whether you are
looking for emotional support, advice, practical help, or something
else.

[Do your part in the conversation.]{.i} If you are too overcome with
emotion to think clearly, then just pour it out. But also be open to the
support offered by your friend. If you are looking for advice, then
truly listen to their proposed ideas and possibly brainstorm with them.
The more open you are to the help you are requesting, the more likely
your friend will want to keep helping, and the better the experience
will be for both of you.

[Finally, remember to be there for your friends.]{.i} Though their
problems may be different from yours, they will undoubtedly have
struggles. Listen and be a support. In addition to feeling good, this
can help you fully realize that you are not alone in sometimes needing
help. When you nurture relationships in which you can look to each other
in times of distress, those secure relationships can help you develop a
general view (or model) of others as emotionally available. This change
is a step toward being more securely attached and less driven by
feelings and fears of rejection.

When struggles with self-worth and self-criticism overtake your mind and
heart, you can do yourself a great service by consciously engaging inner
resources or turning to outside help. Use the awareness you gain through
STEAM to empathize and accept yourself. Also, choose to take in positive
feedback from others. While increasing your self-acceptance will
probably lead to greater self-compassion, at the least, it will open you
to developing that resource, as discussed in the next chapter.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_014.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_014.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_014.xhtml__idTextAnchor013
.calibre4}Chapter 9:\
]{.b1}\
Nurturing Compassionate Self-Awareness

"I love you," Chad said softly as he hung up the phone from Linda. While
she was helping her mother recover from a stroke, he consciously kept
his fears of rejection at bay by reminding himself, [She loves me]{.i}.
He strained to stay present with his hard-won self-awareness: [My heart
is beating fast because I'm scared of losing Linda...I wonder if she's
interested in that old friend, Rob, who she keeps talking about...Stop
it. I know that my fears of rejection from the past are leading me to
think that she wants to leave me. But I also know from our conversations
that this isn't true]{.i}. Then he reassured himself again, [She shows
me all the time that she loves me]{.i}. With all of this awareness and
self-talk, he calmed himself. But then the fears hit again. And the
cycle just kept repeating itself. [Damn it! What is my problem?! I am
such an ass for making a crisis out of a whole lot of nothing. If I keep
this up, I deserve to lose her!]{.i}

While Chad has made progress in having a greater understanding of his
struggles, he eventually makes his distress worse by chastising himself.
It's interesting that he could maintain a more compassionate response to
Linda. His heart ached for her sadness about her mother, and he wished
he could do something---anything---to help ease her distress. If he had
a similar feeling of compassion for himself, he would have recognized
his own distress at not having been able to shed his fears of rejection
despite sincere efforts. He would have gently assured himself, [Of
course I'm afraid of losing Linda. She has been gone for a while and
will now be gone longer. Though I've come a long way in not overreacting
to my fears, it makes sense that this would push my buttons. If someone
else were in my position, I'd understand them having a hard time with
it. I deserve the same consideration. I just need to keep taking the
time to think this through and to remind myself that we have a strong
relationship. ]{.i}

You nurture compassionate self-awareness when you learn to understand
and approach yourself from a compassionate perspective---with empathy
for your experience and a mind-set of wanting to alleviate your pain.
This skill will enable you to help yourself remain on the path toward
overcoming your struggle with rejection---even at times when you are
inclined to be self-critical or get lost in your emotional pain.

To gain compassionate self-awareness, you must first develop increased
self-awareness in the domains of STEAM. Hopefully this will help you
have greater empathy for yourself and so gain self-acceptance, another
essential element of self-compassion. However, even if you struggle with
this, you can work to bolster your self-acceptance, as described in
chapter 8. Finally, you must treat yourself with kindness and caring.
That is, you must respond to your pain from an emotional place of caring
that you are in pain and wanting it to stop.

You might wonder what the difference is between self-compassion and
compassionate self-awareness. This is a good question because they are
very similar concepts, though they differ in emphasis. Self-compassion
emphasizes [treating yourself with kindness]{.i} when you are faced with
pain and suffering. It also requires that you be aware of your
experiences and can relate to them empathically. Compassionate
self-awareness is more centered on awareness, with the word
"compassionate" describing the quality of that awareness. It emphasizes
[being empathically self-aware]{.i} when you are faced with pain and
suffering. This can then motivate you to treat yourself with kindness
and compassion.

People can often effectively practice self-compassion by choosing to be
kind to themselves when they are distressed. However, many people are
not fully in touch with their negative self-perceptions, which
undermines their attempts to engage in self-compassion. They cannot
empathize with their own experience (causing them to lack
self-acceptance), and so they are not sufficiently motivated to treat
themselves with caring or kindness. In these situations, it is essential
that they focus on being more self-aware to help them transition to
self-compassion. For instance, consider the personal growth that Chad
made over the course of his relationship with Linda.

If Linda had to take care of her mother during the early days of their
relationship, Chad would have been quickly overcome with feelings of
rejection. Unable to gain perspective on his feelings, no amount of
prompting to have self-compassion would have helped him respond
differently. However, later in their relationship, after he learned to
have greater self-awareness, he understood his reaction better, could
see it in a way that loosened its grip on him, and had more empathy for
that reaction. This opened him to having more self-compassion, or at
least to being able to get there with some prompting.

This chapter focuses on adding self-kindness to the self-awareness and
self-acceptance that has been developed in the other chapters. The first
section explores the benefits of self-compassion while the next one
addresses common struggles that people have in responding to themselves
with compassion. Then the rest of the chapter guides you in how to
consciously be kinder and more compassionate to yourself.

[Exploring Compassion]{.ac}

Understanding more about compassion lets you better appreciate how it
can help you overcome your sensitivity to rejection. Though compassion
has a long history of being viewed in Buddhist thinking as essential in
attaining enlightenment, Western therapies have tended to only assume or
imply its importance in growth and healing. However, recent attention
and research in the West have explored and developed this concept more.

As you may know or have discovered in reading this book, your personal
history can have a huge impact on how you connect with yourself and with
other people. British clinical psychologist Paul Gilbert (2009) has
further found in his research that people's early experiences and their
attachment styles can lead to shame and self-criticism, along with a
weakness in their ability to comfort and soothe themselves. Fortunately,
they can develop a sense of safety and inner warmth by learning the
skills and attributes of compassion. Although Gilbert's work focuses
broadly on compassion, it also delineates the importance of
self-compassion in addressing self-criticism.

Interestingly, psychologist and self-compassion researcher Kristin Neff
(2011) has found support for three main elements of self-compassion,
which align well with Gilbert's attributes of compassion. These elements
are similar to those found in compassionate self-awareness. They are
mindfulness (similar to self-awareness), common humanity (relates to
self-acceptance and mentalization), and self-kindness. So, although
self-compassion is different than compassionate self-awareness, Neff's
work has influenced, and overlaps with, the concept of compassionate
self-awareness.

In looking at self-compassion and attachment styles, it is clear that
they affect each other. By increasing your self-compassion, you can help
yourself become more securely attached and less overly sensitive to
rejection. Increasing self-compassion and secure attachment can also
help you in many other ways (Neff and McGehee 2010, Wei et al. 2011,
Barnard and Curry 2011, Hazan and Shaver 1987, Mikulincer and Shaver
2007). For instance, it can help increase:

- Positive feelings
- Self-acceptance
- Life satisfaction
- Conscientiousness
- Social connectedness
- Satisfaction and health of romantic relationships
- Effective stress management skills
- Sense of well-being

Increasing your self-compassion builds these strengths by enabling you
to soothe yourself when you are upset, take in comfort when other people
offer it, and develop resilience to stressful events, such as being
overlooked, dismissed, or rejected.

[Self-Compassion Is Not for Me]{.ac}

When you hear the word "self-compassion," do you internally pull back or
put up a wall? If so, you are in good company. Many people respond this
way for several different reasons---but all based on misconceptions of
self-compassion (Neff and Germer 2017, Barnard and Curry 2011). Read
each of the reasons below and follow the prompts to reflect on them.

[Showing myself compassion would mean I'm self-centered. ]{.i}Many
people worry that by taking care of themselves, they would be viewing
themselves as the center of the universe. But the truth is that to
sustain caring for others, you must take care of yourself.

Think about the safety instructions flight attendants give passengers in
case of an emergency in which oxygen masks drop down: "If you are
traveling with a child or someone who requires assistance, secure your
mask first, and then assist the other person." Of course, the reason
they say this is that you can't help anyone else if you pass out from
lack of oxygen. So, remind yourself that you want to take care of
yourself along with ([not instead of]{.i}) caring for others.

Some people neglect basic self-care, such as eating healthy, exercising,
or getting enough sleep. Some forgo all things they enjoy in order to
take care of others. Such selflessness can leave them low on energy,
limited in their ability to care for themselves or others. It can also
lead them to feeling negatively toward themselves or resentful toward
others.

[Take time to reflect:]{.i} If you are concerned that treating yourself
with compassion would make you self-centered, take a moment to consider
how ignoring or trying to reject your own experience has affected you,
including your ability to care for others. Next, think about how
attending better to yourself might affect your ability to be there for
others.

[Self-compassion is the same as self-pity. ]{.i}These concepts are very
different. Even though they are both focused on the self, the difference
is that only self-compassion includes self-acceptance and what Kristin
Neff (2011) describes as a sense of common humanity---that all people
are, by nature, imperfect and have painful emotional experiences.

Self-pity says, "Rejected again. I feel worthless and like a pathetic
human being. There is something wrong with me." Self-compassion says,
"Rejected again. As much as this hurts, I know other people get
rejected, too. It's just part of being human."

While self-pity makes you feel alone and lesser as a person,
self-compassion accepts your experience as a human one, meaning you are
not alone in how you feel, and how you feel doesn't mean anything
negative about you as a person.

[Take time to reflect: ]{.i}If you continue to be wary of
self-compassion for fear of it leading to self-pity, try recognizing the
common humanity in your struggles. Make note that others also struggle
with rejection.

[If I have self-compassion, I will become lazy. ]{.i}My patients will
often say that they think being self-compassionate would "let myself off
the hook." They fear that if they give up their tougher, more
self-critical stance, they will just be lazy failures and no one would
want to be around them.

While self-criticism sometimes can push people to work hard, it also
makes them feel badly about themselves. When it comes to accomplishing
tasks, they don't enjoy successes and often simply give up trying. On
the other hand, when they are gently supportive of themselves, they feel
good about themselves even as they are upset about a situation. Then
they have more inner strength to keep trying to fix relationship
problems or attend to tasks that are important to them.

[Take time to reflect:]{.i} This way of thinking may be firmly
entrenched, taking some time and persistence to shift. Continue to work
on developing your ability to mentalize and increase your
self-acceptance. You may find it particularly helpful to review the
section "When Perfectionism Falls Short" in chapter 7, "Mentalizing."

[I don't deserve compassion.]{.i} Some people reject self-compassion
because they feel worthless and inadequate. They are sometimes angry
with others for treating them like they don't matter, but they also feel
like they don't matter. In their minds, they don't deserve to be treated
with kindness and understanding. Instead, as much as it hurts, they feel
like they deserve rejection by others.

[Take time to reflect:]{.i} If you relate to this struggle, return to
the earlier chapters. It is important to work on increasing your
self-awareness through STEAM and also on challenging yourself to be more
self-accepting. You might find it particularly helpful to review the
section "Learning the Truth: You Are Worthy and Adequate" in chapter 8,
"Building Self-Awareness." Remind yourself to be patient, because it
generally takes time and persistence to work through this issue. If you
continue to strongly resist the idea that you have value even after
working through many of the exercises in this book, consider seeking
professional help, perhaps using this book as a template for approaching
your therapy.

As you continue on your inner journey, you may repeatedly and
instinctively balk at the ideas of getting to understand yourself better
and approaching yourself with compassion. When you realize that you are
being resistant, choose to think more about that resistance. By
questioning your emotional reactions in the ways suggested here, you can
keep yourself on the path toward developing compassionate self-awareness
and becoming more resilient in the face of rejection.

[Living a Healthy Lifestyle]{.ac}

Just like many people who fear rejection, Janine was so focused on
others that she didn't take good care of herself. There were times when
she tried to develop a healthier lifestyle, such as eating healthier or
exercising regularly, but it always ended up a miserable failure. She
was only able to make and sustain some changes when she began thinking
about her obstacles to change.

As you think about ways to strengthen the physical and psychological
aspects of yourself, consider these fundamental elements of a healthy
lifestyle:

- Sufficient sleep
- Healthy eating
- Regular exercise
- Strong social connections
- Connection to something larger than you (e.g., religion, spirituality,
  giving back to a community larger than yourself)
- Personally meaningful activities

Attending to these means attending to yourself, something that can be
painfully difficult for people who are single-mindedly focused on
preventing rejection or proving their worth. If you have trouble
maintaining a healthy lifestyle, set aside some undisturbed time to
complete the following exercise.

Create a Healthy Lifestyle

Think about the following questions and write down your responses in
your journal (or on a piece of paper).

[Why do I want to change? ]{.i}Reviewing this question can increase your
motivation by focusing on what you want. So, give it some serious
thought.

[What needs to happen for me to lead my life in this way?]{.i} You must
change how you conduct your life in order to make room for any new
healthy habit. Consider what changes you need to make to your life.

[What feelings---and related thoughts---arise when I think about making
these changes?]{.i} You will have many different feelings. Take special
note of the ones that you sense tap something deeper---especially issues
of rejection, abandonment, or being inadequate.

[What do I think about my feelings?]{.i} Acknowledge your feelings,
allowing yourself to understand them, and then consider what you
objectively think.

[How can I overcome the stumbling blocks to creating a healthy
lifestyle? ]{.i}Reaffirm the changes you want to make. Also, keep in
mind that this question is not just about what you need to do
practically, but also how to manage your feelings.

[How important is changing to me, and what makes it that important?]{.i}
Answering these questions can be motivating.

[What is my plan going forward?]{.i} Write down a specific plan,
including details about each step and also addressing emotional issues.

Reviewing this plan regularly, such as once a week, can help you stay on
track with it. You might also find it motivating to come up with a way
to reward yourself for sticking with it.

Keep in mind that most people struggle in some way with leading a
healthy lifestyle. However, with some introspection and planning, your
efforts to change are much more likely to be successful. By
understanding and accepting your needs, you will be more likely to be
kind to yourself in attending to those needs. And when you do attend to
those needs, you will feel better about you, even as you face concerns
about rejection.

Let's consider how Janine established a healthier lifestyle for herself
by looking at her journal entries in response to each question.

[Why do I want to change? ]{.i}Despite struggling with her weight for
years, Janine had been unsuccessful in maintaining healthy eating or
regular exercise. Referring to the need to exercise, she wrote, "To help
me lose weight---be stronger---feel healthier---be happier with myself."

[What needs to happen for me to lead my life in this way?]{.i} "To fit
in exercise, I need to go to the gym before work, which means getting up
at 5 a.m. The only way to really do this is to go to sleep earlier,
maybe 9:30 p.m. But I have to be there for Gina on our nightly talks. I
don't know if I'm really up for doing this."

[What feelings---and related thoughts---arise when I think about making
these changes?]{.i} "I feel anxious at the thought of telling Gina I
can't talk because I have to sleep. How lame is that?! I can't be that
selfish. Gina will feel like I've let her down and would probably not
want to talk with me anymore..."

[What do I think about my feelings?]{.i} "I can feel myself almost
panicking as I think about losing Gina as a friend. I need to get a
grip. My fear doesn't even make sense. I know in my head that Gina would
not abandon me for this."

[How can I overcome the stumbling blocks to creating a healthy
lifestyle? ]{.i}"Two big obstacles are going to sleep earlier and not
talking with Gina. First, the truth is that I could get to sleep earlier
if I set my mind to it---even if that means spending less time on
Facebook." Janine continued, "As for Gina, I'm sure she would work with
me. Maybe I can even talk her into going to the gym with me! I'd really
like that. Still, I feel anxious about talking with her. But I can do
this. I'll talk with her later."

[How important is changing to me, and what makes it that important?]{.i}
"I really want to feel and be healthier. And it would feel great to walk
up steps easily---no huffing and puffing---and to be a size 8 again!
When I think about it, I definitely feel motivated to exercise."

[What is my plan going forward?]{.i} Because Janine was so worried, she
talked with Gina before sitting down to write out her plan. She was
surprised to find that Gina agreed to go to the gym with her. She then
wrote out her plan for getting to bed early and going to the gym four
days a week. She finished up her journal entry with, "I'm excited to
make this happen. I'm also excited about our plan to have lunch together
every Friday to celebrate another week of keeping our commitment!"

[Compassionate Self-Awareness in a Single Phrase]{.ac}

Self-awareness enables you to understand and connect with your inner
experiences. When it opens you sufficiently to those experiences, you
will feel empathy with them. And as a result, when your experiences are
painful, you will often feel self-compassion---which will challenge your
self-rejection.

Compassionate self-awareness is the process of opening up to this caring
connection within yourself. It is the realization of a beauty that is
already inside you, much as a flower is the realization of the beauty
held within a bud. You know that you are experiencing compassionate
self-awareness when you find it natural to say, "Of course I ..."

"Would it be okay if we met a little later, at 8 o'clock, because I
think Donna and I will need a bit more time to catch up." Rather than
asking a question, Linda seemed to be simply checking off items on her
to-do list. But Chad's heart was suddenly pounding hard and he felt like
inhaling required the same effort and concentration as lifting weights.
Just as he was about to explode into a full panic, he had a flash of
insight (based on all the self-awareness work he had been doing). He saw
what was happening and reassured himself: [She is not trying to get rid
of me. She just wants enough time for them to catch up; and then she
wants to spend time with me...I can't believe how much I'm
overreacting!...I'm always so worried about not being good enough. This
goes all the way back to when I was a kid and I felt like I could never
be as smart as my brothers---and like my parents were disappointed in
me. And to make things worse, I was also so painfully shy with other
kids---feeling on the outside all the time. Given all this, of course I
am starting to panic---anyone in my position would. It's a painful way
to be wired, but I will survive it. Also, Linda doesn't need me to be
outgoing or a genius, or anything else. She shows me all the time that
she loves me. ]{.i}

As you consider an example of your own sensitivity to rejection, the
next exercise will help you make sense of your reaction. For instance,
you might realize that you were affected by dynamics in your family when
you were growing up. Or you might think about how you have been affected
by friendships, or by previous intimate relationships. You are not
looking to say whether your reactions---past or present---are good or
bad. You are just trying to understand and empathize with them enough
for it to be natural for you to say, "Of course I..."

Practice Responding to Yourself with an Empathic "Of course I..."

Think of a specific incident when you struggled with rejection. As you
do, consciously empathize and offer compassion to yourself by doing the
following:

[Attend to the first four domains of STEAM.]{.i} Rather than just
quickly touching on each domain, allow yourself time to really connect
with each experience---enriching your self-awareness as a whole.

[Mentalize to understand and empathize better with yourself.]{.i} After
the initial step of increasing your self-awareness, reflect deeply on
your reaction so that you can experience compassion for your struggles
with rejection. For example, consider how previous life experiences play
a part in your current reaction. If you are caught up in self-criticism,
you might think about how a supportive friend would respond to your
feeling of rejection if they fully understood what you were feeling and
what influenced you to feel this way.

[Respond with "Of course I..."]{.i} When you are able to empathize with
your struggle with rejection, complete this phrase by explaining to
yourself how your reaction is a human one. It is a reaction that others
in your situation would also have. Allow for the natural compassionate
feelings of wanting your struggle to diminish or go away.

When you feel compassionately toward yourself, you will be in a position
to make better decisions about how to proceed. Rather than being
critical of your sensitivity to rejection, you will be more
understanding of it, which will free you to focus on how best to move
forward.

When you gain compassionate self-awareness, you may also become more
open to compassion from others. As a result, you may move toward a more
secure attachment style, which would be less fraught with struggles
related to rejection.

[Using Your Present Self to Help Your Future Self]{.ac}

As with so much in life, there is a rhythm to our emotions. Every day,
there are the small undulations of uplifted and downhearted moments. In
a single interaction, you can even be carried from loneliness to
connection, or from restless unease to exhilarating love. But, of
course, it's the downside of emotions that are more often upsetting.
When the weight of rejection pins you down, it can feel like there is no
way---and will never be a way---to escape it. You can so lose touch with
the positive moments that they feel unreal and unachievable.
Fortunately, even in those desperately low moments, your positive
experiences are still in you---you just need to reach them.

The next exercise offers you a way to help your future dejected self by
guiding you through writing a letter to that self. When Linda was
spending time away from Chad while caring for her mother, Chad was glad
that he had previously taken the time to write this letter. He realized
that he was able to turn inward for comfort in times of distress
(essentially serving as his own attachment figure). You might be able to
see from the letter pictured below how reading it over was able to help
when he was struggling.

[Hey, Buddy. The fact that you are reading this means you are in a dark
place right now. You are probably feeling worthless---like dirt---and
that no one really cares about you. And I'm really sorry about
that---it's a tough place to be. But the truth is that when you get in
this place, ]{.lang}[everything]{.b}[ looks worse than it is. Even
though you aren't feeling good now, there have been times when you have
felt good---and there will be times when you will feel that way again.
Think about what you know to be true about the people in your life---you
have friends who have always been there for you. Linda has shown you,
over and over again, that she cares. So, even though you feel worthless
right now, remember that is just a feeling that will pass. Sometimes it
has helped to call Linda, a friend (maybe Scott?), or to go to the
batting cages. Do those things or focus on something else that helps you
feel good. I promise you that you will feel better and stronger again.
]{.lang}

[Me. ]{.lang}

Write a Letter to Your Future Self

This exercise offers a way for you, while in your best state of mind, to
help yourself when you feel overwhelmed by rejection. To complete the
exercise, choose a time when you are feeling positively about yourself.
Then follow these steps:

[Before writing to your future self, reflect on a time when you felt
overwhelmed by rejection.]{.i} As an outside observer, note how the
rejection took over your emotions and your thinking. Not only did it
prevent this past self from feeling anything positive, but it also
distorted almost everything about you and your experiences to make it
all seem to be awful.

[Note your thoughts about, and feelings toward, that past self.]{.i} It
is important to do this as an outside observer, one who is currently
feeling good about yourself. When you focus on your past self, think
about how your struggles were human ones. Then you will notice that you
are better able to have empathy and compassion for that past self.

[Consider what advice you would want to offer that past self.]{.i} Think
in terms of what that self could do to try to get through this difficult
time. For example, you might suggest calling a friend or going for a
walk.

[Now write the letter to your future distressed self. ]{.i}Put all of
your answers to the above questions together in a letter offering your
future upset self some compassion, encouragement, and even a bit of
advice while going through a similarly difficult time.

[Put the letter in an accessible place.]{.i} When the day comes that you
are again struggling deeply with rejection, open the letter. You will
find that it helps. After all, who knows and understands you better than
you!

Part of what makes this letter helpful is that you know deep in your
heart that the person who wrote the letter understands you, honestly
cares, and is being truthful in saying that the negative feelings won't
last forever (despite how it feels).

[Developing Self-Compassion Takes Time]{.ac}

Compassionate self-awareness requires caring enough about yourself that
you want to get to know you. While you may want to shed your fears of
rejection and enjoy a happier life, you may not quite be at the point
where you feel compassionately toward yourself. Or maybe you have
moments of having self-compassion, but your frustrations and
self-criticisms often override them. Still, you can imagine that there
could be a time when you do have more self-compassion. This imagining
can be a source of strength as you confront your struggles with
rejection.

Imagine a Compassionate You

By drawing upon the skills you have learned throughout this book, this
exercise focuses your imagination on what it would be like to have
self-compassion, thus actually increasing that very ability.

[Think of your increasing self-awareness]{.i}. Reflect on how increasing
your self-awareness in the domains of STEAM has helped you have more
empathy with your struggles with rejection. Note the self-acceptance
that has been emerging as you have felt empathic toward yourself. Also
pay attention to any glimpses of self-compassion you have had along with
your growing empathy and self-acceptance.

[Think about all the elements of a compassionate person.]{.i} It may
help to recall people you have known or heard about who are
compassionate. For example, you might bring to mind a parent, an aunt, a
mentor, or a friend. You might also think about a religious figure (such
as Jesus or Buddha), a political figure (such as Nelson Mandela), or
even a character from a novel or a film. List the qualities that you
notice, such as warmth, caring, acceptance, and understanding.

[Imagine your future self as compassionately self-aware.]{.i} Imagine
what your older self might look like from the outside, including your
countenance and what you would be wearing. See that future self as being
understanding and at peace. This self knows everything you have ever
thought, felt, and done. With a deep understanding of you, this self
feels positively toward you.

[Settle into a memory of rejection.]{.i} Sit comfortably, close your
eyes, and turn your attention inward. Attend to the position of your
body and your breath. Think of the word "rejection" and allow memories
of feeling rejected to come to you. Settle on one memory. Stay with it
until you feel it strongly, in body and emotions.

[Imagine your future compassionate self coming to you.]{.i} This future
you clearly feels warmth toward you and shares an understanding of you
from a compassionate perspective. The message may be offered in words, a
look, or some gesture. But however it is shared, you can feel the
acceptance and compassion deeply. Take a moment to consciously absorb
this experience.

[Thank your compassionately aware future self.]{.i} As the interaction
draws to a close, thank your compassionate future self. As you say
goodbye, take note of the positive feeling you have within you.

After doing this exercise, reflect on it. Note how the compassionately
self-aware future self is evolving in you at this moment. As you
continue to work on enhancing your compassionate self-awareness, you are
actually nurturing that self now.

(If you find it too difficult to imagine yourself being compassionate,
you may find it helpful to first try this exercise with one of the
figures you thought of when you reflected on the elements of compassion.
After successfully doing the exercise with that person, you might try
again with your future self.)

[Be on the Lookout]{.ac}

Your struggles with rejection run deep because connection is at the core
of our experiences as people. For this reason, stories that explore the
depths of people's intimate lives---within themselves or with
others---speak directly to our psyches. They can tap our deepest pains
and our most treasured aspirations.

You can use this natural portal into the raw emotional experiences of
others as a way to help you connect with, and relate to, your own
struggles. So, be on the lookout for stories---such as in the form of
books or movies---that you can relate to. You might find this experience
in timeless romantic classics, such as Shakespeare's [Romeo and
Juliet]{.i}, or movies about self-discovery, such as [Bridget Jones's
Diary]{.i} or [Thelma & Louise]{.i}. You might also find it in personal
stories reported in the news. Use the stories that move you as a way to
deepen your connection with your inner experiences, enabling you to
better understand your struggles and have compassion for them.

Developing compassionate self-awareness is a process. It involves an
evolution from self-awareness to self-empathy and self-acceptance, and
ultimately to self-compassion. Being compassionately self-aware is a
skill that you develop and then must choose to use again and again to
free yourself from your struggles with rejection and other challenges.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_015.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_015.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_015.xhtml__idTextAnchor014
.calibre4}Chapter 10:\
]{.b1}\
Recovery Through Relationships

Janine looked mindlessly at the menu, waiting as patiently as she could
for Beth, who was late, yet again. When Beth finally came in and settled
into her chair, Janine quickly got over her friend's tardiness and
poured out, in animated excitement, her plan for a new business. "You
know the empty store on Pine Street? Well, I know I'm being ridiculous
and will probably be in way over my head, but I want to turn it into a
cafÃ© art gallery. I want to hang the paintings of local
artists---[including mine]{.i}---and have a wall with books. The store
has a small courtyard in the back that I could arrange for outdoor
seating and even have some local musicians play. So, what do you think?"
As she expected, Beth was enthusiastically supportive, and they
immediately began brainstorming about how to make it happen.

When there was a lull in the conversation, Janine sat back and mused
about her efforts at personal growth in the last couple of years. Her
mouth unconsciously curled into a knowing smile as she realized just how
much more open, happy, and adventurous she had become, and how much her
friends had been a part of that growth.

After giving so much attention in this book to self-awareness in the
domains of STEAM, it is important to consider the part your
relationships can play in overcoming your sensitivity to rejection. As
was addressed in chapter 1, attachment theory emphasizes the importance
of developing a positive relationship with yourself and with [attachment
figures]{.i} in your life. As a reminder, attachment figures are
significant people in your life whom you turn to during times of
distress.

Throughout this book, you have been guided in reflecting upon your
relationships with yourself and with other people. You may remember that
attachment theory explains that people develop a [model of self]{.i} in
which they tend to see themselves as somewhere on a range from worthy
and lovable to unworthy and unlovable. They also develop a [model of
others]{.i} (based on experiences with past and present attachment
figures) in which they tend to see others somewhere on a range from
emotionally available to emotionally unavailable. The combination of
these two models you hold within you has significant implications for
how you cope with your emotions and respond to difficulties, and for the
quality of the relationships in your life.

People with a secure style of attachment enjoy close, healthy
relationships without worrying too much about rejection. They feel
worthy and see others as emotionally available. When they are rejected
or at least perceive that they are, they can feel deeply distressed, but
not generally to the point of feeling it is intolerable. They are also
resilient, able to bounce back and move on with their lives.

You can enjoy the benefits of being more securely attached by learning
to see significant people in your life as attachment figures who can
consistently offer a sense of safety and support. Attachment theory
suggests that when you do this, these attachment figures serve three
essential functions, each of which is explained in detail later in this
chapter:

1.  [Proximity]{.i} refers to the physical and psychological closeness
    of an attachment figure.
2.  [Safe haven]{.i} refers to the sense that an attachment figure
    provides protection and comfort when someone feels threatened or
    distressed.
3.  [Secure base]{.i} refers to when an attachment figure offers support
    for exploring experiences (e.g., feelings, interests) and the world.

Keep in mind that strong, healthy, adult relationships are a two-way
street. Just as you must experience others as nearby, a safe haven, and
a secure base, it is important that they feel the same way about you. By
reading this chapter and developing insights and skills related to
relationships, your model of others will become more reliably available.
Also, you will notice how this model of others and the model of self
that you have been working on throughout this book feed each other. They
will make you feel emotionally stronger and able to manage stress
better. In the end, you will enjoy secure relationships without the high
levels of sensitivity to rejection that have overwhelmed you in the
past.

[Proximity: Keeping Loved Ones Close]{.ac}

It is obvious that during early childhood, caregivers need to be near
their children to keep them physically safe and to comfort them when
they are distressed. What is less obvious is how essential this
nearness---or what attachment theory calls [proximity]{.i}---is to
helping people learn to cope with their emotions at that time and for
the rest of their lives.

When caregivers (most often moms) are responsive to their children's
needs, their children are not just [kept]{.i} safe, but they also
[feel]{.i} safe, and eventually develop a secure attachment. They learn
that they can turn to their caregivers to be comforted, and they
eventually learn to comfort themselves. They also receive the message
that they are lovable---whether smiling or wailing. Over time, they
develop an inner [working model]{.i} that significant people in their
lives will be caring, comforting, and accepting of them. With this
working model as a part of how they experience themselves and the world,
they have less of a need for their caregiver to be physically close to
them because they have "internalized" this person. As a result, they are
better at calming themselves when their attachment figures are not
nearby.

Not only do these securely attached people have a [model of others]{.i}
that is emotionally available, but they also have a [model of self]{.i}
that is lovable and worthy. When they face difficult circumstances,
their distress tends not to overtake them. Instead, they tend to respond
with thoughts and behaviors that help them cope effectively with the
situation. However, when the stresses and strain of life feel like too
much, they are able---and do---turn to trusted others for support and
reassurance.

As someone who is sensitive to rejection, you may have an anxious style
of attachment. This would include holding a model of others that is
often not emotionally available because of your model of self that is
unlovable, unworthy, or inadequate. These inner models are apparent in
Chad's constant scanning for signs of rejection from Linda, his chronic
sense that he was falling short, and his fervent efforts to make Linda
respond positively to him. Similarly, instead of feeling unconditionally
accepted and comforted, you may feel driven to earn support and
acceptance, making you sensitive to rejection.

However, you may have a more dismissing style, trying to prevent
rejection by avoiding emotionally close relationships and by being
extremely self-reliant. Many people with this style of attachment aren't
fully aware of feeling particularly lonely, though this might underlie a
sense of restlessness or boredom. Though you may generally do well in
life, it can also leave you at a loss when facing overwhelmingly
emotional issues and with a niggling sense of inner discomfort,
especially in quiet moments.

So, to develop resilience to rejection, it is essential that you nurture
a model of others that is emotionally available, along with a sense of
yourself that is worthy and lovable. To do this, you must experience
emotionally supportive people as close to your heart. Even more
important than having them in physical proximity is carrying with you a
working model of others that views them as emotionally available to
comfort and support you.

Both ways of experiencing others as available provide a foundation for
being able to look to others as a safe haven and also as a secure base.
When you experience them as both, you will cope better with all kinds of
social difficulties, from minor rebuffs to major rejections. So, the
following sections on developing a safe haven and a secure base will
also guide you in experiencing others as being close.

[Finding a Safe Haven in Your Relationships ]{.ac}

"Thank you," Chad whispered to Linda, who replied with a gentle kiss to
his forehead as she got up to refill their wineglasses. After talking
intensely for the last hour about some problems at work, he finally felt
better. He was still going to have to return tomorrow to the high-wire
act that was his job (complete with a snarling boss below), but Linda's
caring attention and ability to really appreciate his dilemma comforted
him. Finally, after years of feeling alone, his relationship with Linda
offered a safety zone where he could feel understood, soothed,
reassured, and supported.

Attachment theory explains that people are wired from birth to look to
others for their emotional safety needs. When people are upset or feel
vulnerable, their attachment system is usually activated, prompting them
to look for a significant person to help them feel safe. That attachment
figure becomes a [safe haven]{.i} for them, and the comfort offered
infuses them with the inner strength needed to navigate difficult
circumstances.

To experience someone as a safe haven, they must be [emotionally
attuned]{.i} to you. Not only would you feel they were empathic, but
they would also be responsive to your emotional needs. Both empathy and
responsiveness are conveyed verbally, but more importantly, they are
also expressed in a variety of nonverbal ways. For instance, when Linda
listened to Chad's struggles, her attentive gaze and the soft tone of
her voice showed that she empathized. Her calmness, even when Chad
became highly distressed, showed that she did not just join him
emotionally, but that she was responsive to his need for a supportive,
comforting presence.

Like many anxiously attached people, Chad often felt extremely alone and
chronically flawed or inadequate, leaving him with a sense that he must
repeatedly earn acceptance and work to prevent an inevitable rejection.
Even though he desperately looked to others for acceptance and
reassurance, he did not fully believe it when it was offered. By
contrast, those with a more avoidant style of attachment don't even
register the possibility of others being there for them. As a result,
they tend to be excessively self-reliant. So, with both insecure
attachment styles, there is a sense of being alone and a resistance to
using others as a safe haven.

You can reduce your fear or expectation of rejection---and thus open
yourself to others as a safe haven---by learning to recognize when you
can trust someone to be accepting and supportive. An important sign is
that you feel understood and comforted when you are with them. This does
not mean that you feel privileged that they would deign to be kind to
you (because, in your mind, you don't really deserve it), but that they
seem to actually empathize with you and help you feel better about the
situation [and]{.i} about yourself.

Identify Safe Havens in Your Life

For a relationship to be a safe haven, you must recognize the other
person as someone you could turn to for comfort when you are upset. Get
out your journal (or a sheet of paper) to help you do this exercise.

[Make a written list of significant people currently in your life. ]{.i}

[Circle the name of each person who fits with this list of traits.]{.i}
These characteristics describe people who can function well as a safe
haven:

- Is a good listener, so you feel understood
- Expresses a desire to be there for you when you struggle
- Responds to your distress with caring, reassurance, and support
- Effectively communicates their support and caring
- Just being in their presence feels comforting

The people whose names you have circled are likely to be people you can
rely on to comfort you and help relieve your distress at difficult
times. Consider using the information in this chapter to help you work
on turning to them (or turning to them more) when you are upset and
fully taking in the comfort that they offer.

Reflecting on Comforting Relationships

Even when you know that someone in your life has been reliably there for
you, you may still brace yourself for rejection. One way to build your
sense of being able to rely on that person when you are going through a
difficult time is to reflect on situations when they have been accepting
and comforting.

Open Yourself to Feeling Comforted

Think back on a situation when you were upset and someone close to you
responded with caring. Then do the following:

[Note any warmth and positive feelings you had.]{.i} Open yourself to
really experiencing the relief you felt.

If you feel unable to access or hold the positive feelings, you may find
it helpful to return to the chapter 5 section "Identifying Levels of
Emotion." It offers insight into people's emotional reactions to their
emotions---such as recognizing how you might respond to a primary
emotion of feeling comforted with a defensive response of anxiety or
emotionally distancing yourself. After processing this information,
return to trying the current exercise again.

[Note any anxiety about possible rejection.]{.i} Your fear of rejection
may be elicited when you lower your defenses in reaction to the caring
response.

[Allow yourself to hold the warm and anxious feelings at the same
time.]{.i} You might find it helpful to hold out your hands, palms up.
Look at one hand as you connect with the warmth. Then look at your other
hand as you connect with the fear of rejection. Then choose to refocus
on the hand "holding" the sense of warm connection.

[Reflect on the conflicting feelings.]{.i} Note that your anxiety has
more to do with your chronic fear of rejection than with any sign that
this person will reject you.

[Return your attention to the feeling of being comforted.]{.i} Look at
the palm that is "holding" the sense of feeling soothed. Allow yourself
to feel cared about and relieved. Choose to put aside any anxiety about
rejection, labeling it as a feeling that does not belong in this
situation.

This exercise can help you connect more strongly with feeling cared
about and experiencing a sense of relief from that. With repetition,
perhaps choosing different situations with the same person, you may find
it increasingly easy to trust in that person as a safe haven.

After reflecting on situations when a person has already comforted you
in times of distress, consider using the strategy below to help you
approach that person (or someone else) with something that is currently
upsetting you.

Encourage Your Feeling of Safety in Relationships

This exercise involves increasing your feeling of being comforted while
talking with someone about a topic that bothers you.

[Choose a person who has already shown that they can be supportive and
caring.]{.i} If you struggle with fearing rejection, remind yourself
that this person has shown themselves to be sensitive to your feelings.

[Share a distressing topic with the person you have chosen.]{.i} Pick a
topic that bothers you, but does not make you too vulnerable. (If you
have previously completed this exercise and feel reassured about the
person's responsiveness, you may want to choose to a more sensitive
topic.)

[Pay attention to their response. ]{.i}As best as you can, objectively
observe how they respond to your distress. When you see them show
caring, consciously note that it is safe to let down your defenses
enough to take in their support.

[Linger on any sense of feeling comforted.]{.i} Many people who struggle
with rejection only briefly note that they feel comforted, and then
immediately dive back into their sense of feeling unsafe. Instead,
choose to spend more time focusing on the support and warmth you feel
from the other person. Note any easing of your distress. If you still
feel somewhat anxious, you might mentally respond with, [Yes, I feel
anxious, but I'm safe with this person, and I'm going to pay attention
to feeling comforted.]{.i}

[Ask for a hug, if appropriate.]{.i} As you may instinctively know,
physical affection can be very soothing. For this reason, a simple hug
(or holding hands) can help tremendously when you are upset. If you find
physical affection uncomfortable, skip this step for now.

The more you practice opening yourself emotionally to others who show
that they care about you, the more that these interactions will "warm
your heart" and soothe your distressed feelings.

In completing this exercise, you might have trouble staying with a sense
of feeling cared about. With this difficulty in mind, try returning to
the exercise "Sit with Your Emotions" in chapter 5, "Emotions."
Afterward, you might want to come back to this exercise.

If you struggled with the hugging part of the exercise, you might want
to review the "Comforting Touch in Your Relationships" section of
chapter 6, "Actions." This might help you develop your ability to
appreciate touch as a way to feel soothed.

If you found any comfort in the interaction in this exercise, you can
enhance the benefits of a comforting interaction by reminiscing about
it. Each time you revisit the interaction, you will reinforce your
experience of being comforted by this person---making them more likely
to be someone you can turn to as a safe haven.

Think of it as entering the person's warm home. Every time you repeat
the experience, you become more assured that it will feel warm and
soothing. You will begin to take off whatever layers of clothing and
protection you have wrapped yourself in. But your anxieties and fears
will, at times, likely make you wary of relaxing, reminding you to
prepare for "when" the person will toss you out into the cold,
threatening world. As you continue to challenge this fearful reaction,
it will become less real and less powerful. Eventually, you will trust
in the person's warm home as a safe haven.

Working Collaboratively to Create a Safe Haven

One frequently important element in establishing a safe haven in
relationships is [collaborative communication]{.i}, which involves each
person responding to the other. Consider this scenario:

With a plaintive voice, Janine complained to Lucy, "I told my mother on
the phone yesterday that I was planning to get a pet ferret, and she
said, 'Why would you want to do that?' You know, in the way that she
does." Looking at Lucy's blank expression, she exclaimed, "Oh, you don't
understand. And you agree with her!" To ease Janine's distress, Lucy
clarified that while she didn't have anything against ferrets, she also
didn't get the attraction. "I have heard that they really smell. Have
you thought about that?" she asked. Again, Janine felt hurt. But as the
conversation progressed, Lucy assured Janine that she was good with
Janine getting a ferret if it would make her happy. She added, "If your
mother really is against the ferret, that's her problem." While it was
clear to Janine that Lucy still didn't appreciate why she would want a
ferret, she felt reassured, supported, and comforted.

In this situation, Janine and Lucy worked together, through
collaborative communication, to understand each other, clarifying their
thoughts and feelings along the way. This led to Janine feeling that
Lucy was not judging her and that Lucy was someone she could turn to for
comfort when she was upset. (Incidentally, this is very difficult to do
"remotely" via social media, one of the big problems with using that
form of communication.)

When you are struggling emotionally, you can benefit a lot from being
able to turn to someone you trust to help ease your pain. Often, just
their general caring is enough to comfort you. However, at other times,
you will need reassurance that they truly understand and can empathize.
Although they might immediately get it, you cannot always rely on this.
Collaborative communication facilitates greater understanding, enabling
them to really get what's going on for you. Then you are more likely to
accept and feel comforted by their expressions of compassion, making
them a safe haven during difficult times.

Active Listening

An effective method for engaging in collaborative communication is
[active listening]{.i}. As you might intuitively expect, it means
listening consciously and actively.

Practice active listening by choosing to talk with someone who is
generally supportive and a good communicator. Pick an interesting topic
to talk about, but not something that is likely to make you feel too
vulnerable. You can always increase the difficulty as you practice it
more and gain more skill. You might want to tell the person you are
practicing active listening and even invite them to practice the steps
with you---but neither is necessary. Finally, pick a time when you are
unlikely to be distracted. Then use these steps to guide your
conversation.

[Pay attention.]{.i} It's easy to get distracted while talking with
people, so do your best to pay attention. When you catch yourself being
distracted, redirect your focus back to what is being said.

[Really listen.]{.i} As you attend to the other person, focus on wanting
to truly understand. Try to see the world through the other person's
eyes, including having empathy with how they feel---even if you don't
agree or think they are overreacting.

[Show you are listening.]{.i} It is extremely helpful for people to see
that you are listening as they speak. This usually involves
communicating through actions, as discussed in the "Understanding
Nonverbal Communication" section of chapter 6. You might nod or offer
vocal sounds of acknowledgment (e.g., "uh-huh"). Your body
position---such as leaning forward or turning your head away---can say a
lot, as well as your facial expressions.

When someone is discussing a difficult experience, you want to let them
know you empathize, but are not lost in it with them. For instance, your
eyes might tear up, but you would not be sobbing. By having your own
empathic but less overwhelmed reaction, you can be a safe haven as you
comfort them.

[Reflect your understanding.]{.i} Either confirm that you understand, or
offer an opportunity for the other person to correct your
misunderstanding. On its simplest level, this means telling the other
person what you heard. However, a rote repetition of what someone says
has the emotional depth and understanding of a robot. So, nonverbal
communication is essential in expressing that you really "get" what they
are saying.

If the other person indicates that you misunderstood, ask them to
explain themselves again. Listen carefully and then try again to reflect
what you are hearing. Do this as many times as necessary until the other
person feels understood.

[Offer your response.]{.i} Depending on the conversation, you might
offer validation, problem solve, or share your own experience or
perspective. However, be sure to respond in these ways only after the
other person feels listened to and understood.

With active listening, you will likely feel accepted, supported, and
open to being vulnerable with that person. It's this way of relating
that opens the possibility of you turning to the person for comfort when
you need it---though not everyone can be good at comforting you, no
matter how good the communication is.

[Encouraging Personal Growth with a Secure Base ]{.ac}

In addition to relationships offering a safe haven when you feel upset,
they can serve the important function of being a [secure base]{.i}.
Attachment theory explains that healthy, significant relationships
support people in exploring their interests and the world. They
encourage you to grow and develop as a person, which enables you to feel
good about yourself and to have a sense of well-being. In the terms of
attachment theory, you are supported in having a model of self as being
worthy and a model of others as being emotionally supportive.

When someone is a secure base for you, they express caring and support
for the "real" you. You do not need to earn their acceptance by behaving
in specific ways, holding certain opinions, or achieving particular
goals. Instead, they encourage you to explore what matters to you. This
includes standing by you when you make false starts or stumble.

Importantly, they continue to support you even when your interests or
opinions conflict with theirs. Without wavering in their support of you
as a person, they might express concern about your decisions when they
believe those decisions are not in your best interests. However, if they
believe you are engaging in self-destructive behavior (such as drug
abuse), they might remove support for that behavior. Through it all,
they unconditionally care about you.

When partners (romantic or platonic) have a healthy relationship, they
each serve as a secure base for the other. This means that they not only
offer support, but they also look to each other for support when
distressed. Partners can be supportive of each other even when tension
exists between them. In these situations, they both feel the other has
their best interests at heart, even as they work through their
differences.

Identify Secure Bases in Your life

For a relationship to be a secure base, you must recognize the other
person as someone you could turn to for support in your life journey.
Get out your journal (or a sheet of paper) to help you do this exercise.

[Copy down the list of people you have identified as a safe haven.
]{.i}You created this list in the exercise earlier in this chapter
called "Identify Safe Havens in Your Life." If you did not complete this
exercise before, do it now.

[Circle the name of each person who fits with this list of traits.]{.i}
These characteristics describe people who can function well as a secure
base.

Shows an interest in what's important to you

- Wants you to be the best version of yourself
- Encourages you to explore your interests
- Is consistent in their support and encouragement
- Is supportive even when you differ in opinion or interests

[Consider whether you look for support from each person whose name is
circled.]{.i} For those whom you reach out to for encouragement in
exploring your interests and values, place a star next to their names.
They function as a secure base in your life. The other names that are
circled represent potential secure bases.

Once you identify actual or secure bases in your life, you can begin
strengthening them.

In completing this exercise, you might intellectually recognize that
someone could be a secure base, but you still have trouble trusting in
them. That's a common struggle that is similar to the struggle you may
have in turning to others as a safe haven. You might find it helpful to
return to the exercise earlier in this chapter entitled "Encourage Your
Feeling of Safety in Relationships." By developing your ability to feel
comforted by people as a safe haven, you will likely also be better able
to turn to others as a secure base.

Growing with the Support of Friends

Fearing rejection often makes people conservative in how they lead their
lives. For instance, Janine was only too aware of this when she was
hesitant to tell her mother that she was getting a ferret, and then to
share that conversation with Lucy. Although the voice in her head kept
telling her to get a cat or a dog (which she was sure people would
approve of), she decided on the ferret. She knew they were playfully
curious, which she loved! This was a conscious act of bravery---risking
disapproval in an effort to do something that made her happy. Even
though her mother's reaction and Lucy's initial reaction at first made
her second-guess herself, she felt better when she talked it through
with Lucy and ultimately felt Lucy's support.

As you connect with your "true" self through increased self-awareness,
you will become increasingly aware of your interests, values, and
feelings. You may discover interests that friends don't have, realize
beliefs that friends don't hold, or make decisions that they would not
make. So, even then---especially then---it is important that you have
people in your life whom you can rely on to be supportive of you
exploring the world on your own terms. To do this, you must:

[Identify people who are secure bases in your life.]{.i} Use the above
exercise, "Identify Secure Bases in Your Life," to identify people who
could be (or already are) supportive of your personal growth.

[Open up to supportive people. ]{.i}When you decide someone is safe to
trust, your fear might still be strong. You can begin to test out their
trustworthiness and challenge your fear by taking small chances. Divulge
an interest or opinion that you wouldn't ordinarily express, but that is
not too personal. Repeatedly do this, increasing your openness as you
feel ready to take more risks.

[Identify areas of personal growth.]{.i} Consider your interests,
values, feelings, and desires. Make a decision to explore these areas
and to be more open to your emotions related to them.

[Use supportive people as secure bases while investing yourself in
personal growth.]{.i} Reach out to people you have identified as secure
bases, or potential ones. Allow them to be supportive of your pursuits,
share in your excitement and concerns, and help you follow through with
your goals.

You can, of course, explore your values and new interests without the
support of anyone. But stretching yourself in these ways requires inner
strength that can be enhanced by others acting as secure bases. Also,
this kind of connection to others offers a sense of meaning and
fulfillment that is missing from a life that is lived emotionally---if
not physically---alone.

Challenging Self-Criticism with a Secure Base

Despite Janine's initial excitement about opening a cafÃ© art gallery,
she struggled with feeling like she was too dumb to do it or to even
take a class about starting her own business. It was only after a
motivating conversation with Beth that she felt like she might have what
it took to learn enough from the class to move toward her goal.

You may seriously question that others will support and encourage your
personal growth not just because of your fear that they'll reject you,
but also because of your negative self-perceptions. It's almost
impossible to believe their encouragement when you constantly question
and undermine it with your harsh judgments of yourself and your
abilities. However, when you have people in your life who are fully
there for you emotionally (as Beth was for Janine), you will benefit
from learning to take in their support and encouragement.

As you look to achieve personal goals, it is important to encourage
yourself, as well as to feel encouraged by others, who can function as a
secure base. Their support can help you challenge your self-criticism,
see yourself in a more positive light, and pursue your dreams.

Use a Secure Base to Help You Persist Toward Your Goal

If judging yourself harshly gets in the way of you pursuing a goal,
follow these steps to challenge self-criticism with a secure base
relationship:

[Choose a trusted person to speak with about your goal.]{.i} This person
must be someone who has shown themselves to be encouraging and is
someone you named by completing this chapter's exercise, "Identify
Secure Bases in Your Life."

[Acknowledge negativity toward yourself.]{.i} By seeing when you are
being self-critical, you are also recognizing that there might be a more
positive way to view yourself. (If you have trouble being aware of
self-critical thoughts, you can work on this by reviewing chapter 4,
"Thoughts.")

[Talk about your struggle with your chosen confidante.]{.i} This person
will hopefully help you feel comforted by truly listening,
understanding, and empathizing with you. Let the person know what your
goal is and how you feel about it and yourself.

[Listen carefully to their response.]{.i} As they respond, allow
yourself to feel their support (assuming they are encouraging). Try
seeing yourself through their eyes.

[Repeat back what you are hearing. ]{.i}If they are encouraging and you
can really see yourself as they do, talking about yourself from their
perspective can help reinforce positive perceptions of yourself.

With the support and encouragement of someone who is truly a secure
base, you will hopefully take this conversation to heart and feel more
positively about yourself and your ability to pursue your goal. However,
self-doubts may arise at any point. If they do, return to the person who
is your confidante and secure base (or to memories of your
conversations) as many times as necessary for encouragement as you
continue to struggle and grow.

It's important to understand that you can feel discouraged or rejected
even by conversations in secure base relationships. If this happens,
remind yourself that this person is usually supportive and not someone
who wants to hurt you. Then take the brave step of talking with them
about what you heard them say and how you feel about that---perhaps
using the "Active Listening" exercise earlier in this chapter. Maybe you
misunderstood. Or maybe they were more focused on saving you from
possible distress than on empathizing with your thoughts, feelings, and
desires. Or maybe there was some other misunderstanding. But hopefully
this conversation will help provide greater clarity, leaving you to
again feel like they are in your corner. Still, if you question their
perspective or feel judged and rejected, you might choose to speak with
someone else.

Aspirations to grow always hold with them the possibility of failure.
Through encouragement within yourself and from secure base
relationships, you can find the strength to persevere. Whether you meet
with success or failure, you will feel positively about yourself and
less concerned with being judged or rejected.

Carrying Your Secure Base Within

When you have repeated interactions with people (past and present) who
function as safe havens and secure bases, you carry an abstract sense of
them within you as [mental representations]{.i}. In other words, you
keep them in close proximity to you, even when they are physically far
away. Having attachment figures close by in this way forms the basis of
a working model of others as emotionally available. (As you may
remember, proximity is discussed in more detail in the beginning of this
chapter.) Research has supported the idea that you can "prime" or
strengthen this working model of others by consciously and repeatedly
accessing the comfort and encouragement of these mental representations
(Mikulincer, Shaver, and Pereg 2003).

Prime Your Secure Base

While there are many ways to prime your working model of others, this
exercise offers a way to do it by using your phone.

[Choose someone who is a secure base.]{.i} Pick someone you have
identified in the exercise "Identify Secure Bases in Your Life" (earlier
in this chapter).

[Find a picture of this person on your phone.]{.i} While it can be any
picture, it might be more helpful to choose a picture depicting a
positive experience you had together.

[Save this picture in an easily accessible place on your phone.]{.i} You
might make it your wallpaper or save it in a favorites album. The idea
is that it should be easy to find.

[Set an alarm on your phone to look at this picture every day.]{.i}
While this exercise is based on research showing that secure base
priming is helpful, there is no evidence of the best way to do it or the
best frequency. I suggest that you look at this picture at least once or
twice a day.

[Every time the alarm goes off, "prime" your connection as a secure
base.]{.i} Look at the picture and do the following:

Pause long enough to revisit a memory of them being caring, supportive,
and encouraging.

Repeat the following sentences (aloud, if possible), which reflect the
three basic elements of secure attachment: proximity, safe haven, and
secure base. Repeat them slowly and with a connection to what you are
saying (or thinking):

![](OEBPS/image/1.png){.calibre3} genuinely cares about me and just
being near them is comforting.

If I am upset, I can ask for help and they will probably be there for
me. This would help me feel relieved and better able to cope.

I can rely on ![](OEBPS/image/1.png){.calibre3} to support and encourage
me in activities that I want to pursue.

You might print out or save the sentences on your phone so that you
always have them with you. If you really connect with them, they can
help you feel closer to your chosen secure base. The more you repeat
them, the more deeply they can sink into your being.

Applying all you have learned in this chapter about nurturing
relationships will combine with your efforts to increase self-awareness
in the domains of STEAM, build self-acceptance, and nurture
self-compassion. Together, they will give you greater inner strength,
making you feel even better about yourself and less worried about
rejection. Although you will be able to comfort yourself more, you (like
all people) will still find it helps to think of, and spend time with,
significant others---or attachment figures---in your life.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_016.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_016.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_016.xhtml__idTextAnchor015
.calibre4}Postscript ]{.b1}

[Breathe. Just breathe]{.i}, Chad advised himself while he waited for
Linda's response. She swallowed slowly as she gazed at the ring. Then
she looked deep into his eyes, as a smile curled the corner of her
mouth. "I thought you'd never ask. Of course, I will." With a huge
smile, he exhaled---or more accurately, he spontaneously deflated, as if
her answer punctured his body, releasing the four years worth of tension
he had held inside while trying to get up the nerve to ask her the big
question.

Not that long ago, Janine never could have imagined that this would be
her life. It was the opening night for her cafÃ© art gallery. As she
looked around, she was amazed. [My friends are all here! With all my
fears and tears...and falling apart. I can't believe they have stuck
with me.]{.i} For the first time in her life, she felt confident in
herself, secure in her friendships, and truly looking forward to waking
up tomorrow.

Sensitivity to rejection is like living in a house of mirrors when your
own reflection makes you anxious. Looking at other people, you see
rejection staring back---or perhaps you see a look of criticism
forecasting imminent rejection. And so you focus intently on
accomplishing something (anything), or on proving yourself. You think
that if you can be productive or needed, then you will feel valued and
safe...but that feeling never lasts.

By reading [Bouncing Back from Rejection]{.i}, you have bravely taken on
the challenge of overcoming your sensitivity to rejection. It's okay if
you still feel anxious and afraid, because that's what happens when
people face their inner demons. Choosing to continue in your efforts is
what ultimately matters.

Even as you have worked your way through this book, you may have felt a
natural pull to constantly scan the responses of other people, on alert
to discover rejection. All too frequently, you may immediately feel
rejected and dive headlong into painful emotions. Hopefully, you have
followed this book's suggestions to redirect your efforts to increasing
your compassionate self-awareness. Even with the progress you have made,
there is probably still more work to do. That's to be expected. This is
a process that takes time.

Recommit yourself to putting in the effort to further develop
compassionate self-awareness: getting to know, accept, and have
compassion for yourself. Improving this skill will help you get better
at tolerating, managing, and responding to painful emotions in a
healthier way. You can then feel more positively about yourself, even
when you are faced with the possibility---or reality---of rejection.

With this growing inner strength, you will no longer feel like you are
living in a scary house of mirrors. You will not fear rejection at every
turn. Of course, the responses of other people still matter a lot. No
one likes rejection. But if it happens, you know that you will survive
and move on. The sense of yourself as worthy and lovable will open you
to experiencing relationships in which you feel accepted for you,
comforted when upset, and encouraged to explore yourself and the world.

Rather than thinking about your journey from rejection sensitivity to
resilience as a trip with a defined end, it may be more helpful to think
of it as an adventure. You have actively deepened your self-awareness
with STEAM, practiced self-compassion, and explored ways of experiencing
your relationships with other people as sources of strength. Your
connections with yourself and with others are entwined, feeding each
other, making both stronger. As you have become less encumbered by fears
of rejection, your adventure has become more motivated by your growing
strength, resilience, and sense of well-being. You are venturing forward
in [living]{.i} life, freer to simply enjoy being you.
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_017.xhtml}

::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_017.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_017.xhtml__idTextAnchor016
.calibre4}List of Emotions]{.b1}

(Becker-Phelps 2014)

This list can also be found at
www.drbecker-phelps.com/home/bouncing-back/ or
http://www.newharbinger.com/44024. Some people find it helpful to keep
the list handy so that they can check it when they are confused or
emotionally overwhelmed. You can download it and carry it with you.

+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [HAPPY]{.b}                                     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| At ease        | Energetic     | Optimistic     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Ecstatic       | Inspired      | Satisfied      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Hopeful        | Relaxed       | Wonderful      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Pleased        | Vital         | Content        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Thankful       | Cheerful      | Glad           |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Blissful       | Excited       | Peaceful       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Elated         | Lighthearted  | Serene         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Humorous       | Relieved      | Delighted      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Proud          | Well-Being    | Grateful       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Tranquil       | Comfortable   | Playful        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Calm           | Exhilarated   | Spirited       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [COMPETENT]{.b}                                 |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Adept          | Strong        | Secure         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Capable        | Arrogant      | Together       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Independent    | Confident     | Cocky          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Powerful       | Inspired      | Important      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Self-Reliant   | Savvy         | Invulnerable   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Adequate       | Thoughtful    | Self-Assured   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Composed       | Brave         | Worthy         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Indestructible | Courageous    |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Privileged     | Invincible    |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [VALUED]{.b}                                    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Accepted       | Cherished     | Favored        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Belonging      | Loved         | Understood     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Included       | Revered       | Appreciated    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Respected      | Wanted        | Desired        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Worshiped      | Adored        | Idolized       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Admired        | Desirable     | Validated      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [LOVING]{.b}                                    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Affectionate   | Adoring       | Enchanted      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Attracted      | Desirous      | Infatuated     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Fond           | Horny         | Passionate     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Longing        | Lustful       |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Yearning       | Aroused       |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [CARING]{.b}                                    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Compassionate  | Tender        | Liking         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Connected      | Concerned     | Warm           |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Forgiving      | Empathic      |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [INTERESTED]{.b}                                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Absorbed       | Eager         | Resolute       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Challenged     | Fervent       | Ardent         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Determined     | Motivated     | Dedicated      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Fascinated     | Anticipating  | Enthusiastic   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Intrigued      | Curious       | Intent         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Addicted       | Engrossed     |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Committed      | Focused       |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [VINDICATED]{.b}                                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Absolved       | Forgiven      | Redeemed       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Appeased       |               |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [UNHAPPY]{.b}                                   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Agonized       | Disillusioned | Melancholy     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Discontented   | Jealous       | Sad            |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Hurt           | Pessimistic   | Despondent     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Negative       | Suspicious    | Grief-stricken |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Stressed       | Crushed       | Miserable      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Alone          | Dissatisfied  | Shameful       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Discouraged    | Lonely        | Detached       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Inadequate     | Regretful     | Guilty         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Pained         | Tortured      | Moody          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Stubborn       | Dark          | Somber         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Anguished      | Envious       | Disappointed   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Disheartened   | Low           | Heartbroken    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Inferior       | Remorseful    | Needy          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Pathetic       | Withdrawn     | Startled       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Sullen         | Depressed     |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Blue           | Gloomy        |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [INSECURE]{.b}                                  |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Awkward        | Lost          | Unsure         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Confused       | Torn          | Common         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Indecisive     | Unfocused     | Foolish        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Surprised      | Bewildered    | Silly          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Uncomfortable  | Embarrassed   | Uneasy         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Baffled        | Puzzled       | Worthless      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Disoriented    | Uncertain     |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [OVERWHELMED]{.b}                               |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Burdened       | Thwarted      | Obliterated    |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Despairing     | Worn out      | Useless        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Hopeless       | Confused      | Defeated       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Pressured      | Disorganized  | Helpless       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Worn down      | Obligated     | Powerless      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Compelled      | Trapped       | Weak           |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Devastated     | Consumed      |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Impotent       | Exhausted     |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [UNLOVED]{.b}                                   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Abandoned      | Deserted      | Judged         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Criticized     | Ignored       | Rejected       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Hated          | Oppressed     | Victimized     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Lonely         | Unsupported   | Betrayed       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Singled out    | Alone         | Disparaged     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Aching         | Discarded     | Labeled        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Cut off        | Insignificant | Repulsive      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Humiliated     | Overlooked    | Chastised      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Misunderstood  | Used          | Excluded       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Unlovable      | Belittled     | Left out       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Alienated      | Disgraced     | Shamed         |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [FEARFUL]{.b}                                   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Afraid         | Anxious       | Cautious       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Cowardly       | Distrustful   | Dreading       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Frightened     | Horrified     | Nervous        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Paranoid       | Scared        | Suspicious     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Terrified      | Vulnerable    | Concerned      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Alarmed        | Apprehensive  | Exposed        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Defenseless    | Doubtful      | Panicked       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Hesitant       | Hysterical    | Tense          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Petrified      | Shaky         |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Timid          | Worried       |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [ANGRY]{.b}                                     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Aggressive     | Outraged      | Livid          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Defiant        | Appalled      | Resentful      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Fuming         | Disgusted     | Contemptuous   |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Infuriated     | Hostile       | Frustrated     |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Offended       | Irritated     | Indignant      |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Annoyed        | Repulsed      | Mad            |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Disdainful     | Bitter        | Scornful       |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Furious        | Enraged       |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Irate          | Incensed      |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [INDIFFERENT ]{.b}                              |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Ambivalent     | Apathetic     | Bored          |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Complacent     | Flat          | Lackadaisical  |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Lazy           | Lethargic     | Numb           |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Passive        | Unmotivated   |                |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| [SURPRISED]{.b}                                 |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
| Amazed         | Astonished    | Shocked        |
+----------------+---------------+----------------+
:::

[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml}

::::::::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml__idContainer021 .calibre1}
[[]{#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml__idTextAnchor017
.calibre4}Bibliography]{.b1}

Allen, J., E. Bleiberg, and T. Haslam-Hopwood. 2003. "Mentalizing as a
Compass for Treatment." [Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic]{.i} 67:
1--11.

Barnard, L., and J. Curry. 2011. "Self-Compassion: Conceptualizations,
Correlates, and Interventions." [Review of General Psychology ]{.i}15:
289--303.

Bartholomew, K., and L. Horowitz. 1991. "Attachment Styles Among Young
Adults: A Test of a Four-Category Model." [Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology ]{.i}61: 226--244.

Bowlby, J. 1969. [Attachment and Loss]{.i}. New York: Basic Books.

BriÃ±ol, P., M. GascÃ³, R. Petty, and J. Horcajo. 2013. "Treating Thoughts
as Material Objects Can Increase or Decrease Their Impact on
Evaluation." [Psychological Science ]{.i}24: 41--47.

Ekman, P. 2003. [Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Improve Communication
and Emotional Life]{.i}. New York: Henry Holt.

Ekman, P. Atlas of Emotions. http://atlasofemotions.org.

Fonagy, P., and M. Target. 1997. "Attachment and Reflective Function:
Their Role in Self-Organization." [Development and Psychopathology]{.i}
9: 679--700.

Fraley, C., A. Vicary, C. Brumbaugh, and G. Roisman. 2011. "Patterns of
Stability in Adult Attachment: An Empirical Test of Two Models of
Continuity and Change." [Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
]{.i}101: 974--992.

Gilbert, P. 2009. "Introducing Compassion-Focused Therapy." [Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment]{.i} 15: 199--208.

Greenberg, L. 2010. "Emotion-Focused Therapy: A Clinical Synthesis."
[FOCUS: The Journal of Lifelong Learning in Psychiatry]{.i} 8: 32--42.

Griffin, D., and K. Bartholomew. 1994. "The Metaphysics of Measurement:
The Case of Adult Attachment." [Advances in Personal Relationships
]{.i}5: 17--52.

Hazan, C., and P. Shaver. 1987. "Romantic Love Conceptualized as an
Attachment Process." [Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
]{.i}52: 511--524.

Kabat-Zinn, J. 1994. [Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness
Meditation in Everyday Life]{.i}. New York: Hyperion.

Kornfield, J. 2008. [The Wise Heart: A Guide to the Universal Teachings
of Buddhist Psychology]{.i}. Read by Jack Kornfield. Newark, NJ:
Audible.

McQueen, A., and W. M. Klein. 2006. "Experimental Manipulations of
Self-Affirmation: A Systematic Review." [Self and Identity]{.i} 5:
289--354.

Mikulincer, M., and P. Shaver. 2007. [Attachment in Adulthood:
Structure, Dynamics, and Change. ]{.i}New York: Guilford Press.

Mikulincer, M., P. Shaver, and D. Pereg. 2003. "Attachment Theory and
Affect Regulation: The Dynamics, Development, and Cognitive Consequences
of Attachment-Related Strategies." [Motivation and Emotion ]{.i}27:
77--102.

Neff, K. 2011. [Self-Compassion: The Proven Power of Being Kind to
Yourself]{.i}. New York: William Morrow.

Neff, K. D., and C. Germer. 2017. "Self-Compassion and Psychological
Wellbeing." In [Oxford Handbook of Compassion Science]{.i}, edited by E.
M. SeppÃ¤lÃ¤, E. Simon-Thomas, S. L. Brown, M. C. Worline, C. D. Cameron,
and J. R. Doty. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Neff, K. D., and P. McGehee. 2010. "Self-Compassion and Psychological
Resilience Among Adolescents and Young Adults." [Self and Identity
]{.i}9:[ ]{.i}225--240.

Reis, S., and B. F. S. Grenyer. 2002. "Pathways to Anaclitic and
Introjective Depression." [Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research and Practice ]{.i}75: 445--459.

Rumi, J. 1997. [The Illuminated Rumi]{.i}. Translated by C. Barks. New
York: Broadway Books.

Siegel, D. 2010. [Mindsight: The New Science of Personal
Transformation.]{.i} New York: Bantam Books.

Sonkin, D. J. n.d. "Can Secure Base Priming Enhance the Effects of
Psychotherapy?" Accessed December 17, 2018. Retrieved from
http://www.danielsonkin.com/articles/sbp_psychotherapy.html.

Steele, C. M. 1988. "The Psychology of Self-Affirmation: Sustaining the
Integrity of the Self." [Advances in Experimental Social Psychology]{.i}
21: 261--302.

Waters, H., and E. Waters. 2006. "The Attachment Working Models Concept:
Among Other Things, We Build Script-like Representations of Secure Base
Experiences." [Attachment & Human Development]{.i} 8: 185--197.

Wei, M., K. Y. H. Liao, T. Y. Ku, and P. A. Shaffer. 2011. "Attachment,
Self-Compassion, Empathy, and Subjective Well-Being Among College
Students and Community Adults." [Journal of Personality ]{.i}79:
191--221.

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml__idContainer018 .calibre1}
![](OEBPS/image/NHP_About_Us_page.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml__idContainer019 .calibre1}
![](OEBPS/image/BouncingBackfromRejectionBOB.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::

:::: calibre1
::: {#bouncingBackFromRejection_EPUB_split_018.xhtml__idContainer020 .calibre1}
![](OEBPS/image/onlineMaterialBOB.png){.calibre3}
:::
::::
:::::::::
