Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul Daily Inspirations Jack Canfield,
Mark Victor Hansen, Peter Vegso, Gary Seidler, Theresa Peluso, Tian
Dayton, Rokelle Lerner, and Robert Ackerman

Backlist, LLC, a unit of Chicken Soup for the Soul Publishing, LLC Cos
Cob, CT

www.chickensoup.com

When you come to the edge of all the light you have and must take a step
into the darkness of the unknown, believe that one of two things will
happen to you: Either there will be something solid for you to stand on,
or, you will be taught how to fly. Patrick Overton

JANUARY IV

Footnotes for Life

Contents JANUARY 1 JANUARY 2 JANUARY 3 JANUARY 4 JANUARY 5 JANUARY 6
JANUARY 7 JANUARY 8 JANUARY 9 JANUARY 10 JANUARY 11 JANUARY 12 JANUARY
13 JANUARY 14 JANUARY 15 JANUARY 16 JANUARY 17 JANUARY 18 JANUARY 19
JANUARY 20 JANUARY 21 JANUARY 22 JANUARY 23 JANUARY 24 JANUARY 25
JANUARY 26 JANUARY 27 JANUARY 28 JANUARY 29 JANUARY 30 JANUARY 31
FEBRUARY 1 FEBRUARY 2

FEBRUARY 3 FEBRUARY 4 FEBRUARY 5 FEBRUARY 6 FEBRUARY 7 FEBRUARY 8
FEBRUARY 9 FEBRUARY 10 FEBRUARY 11 FEBRUARY 12 FEBRUARY 13 FEBRUARY 14
FEBRUARY 15 FEBRUARY 16 FEBRUARY 17 FEBRUARY 18 FEBRUARY 19 FEBRUARY 20
FEBRUARY 21 FEBRUARY 22 FEBRUARY 23 FEBRUARY 24 FEBRUARY 25 FEBRUARY 26
FEBRUARY 27 FEBRUARY 28 MARCH 1 MARCH 2 MARCH 3 MARCH 4 MARCH 5 MARCH 6
MARCH 7 MARCH 8 MARCH 9 MARCH 10 MARCH 11

MARCH 12 MARCH 13 MARCH 14 MARCH 15 MARCH 16 MARCH 17 MARCH 18 MARCH 19
MARCH 20 MARCH 21 MARCH 22 MARCH 23 MARCH 24 MARCH 25 MARCH 26 MARCH 27
MARCH 28 MARCH 29 MARCH 30 MARCH 31 APRIL 1 APRIL 2 APRIL 3 APRIL 4
APRIL 5 APRIL 6 APRIL 7 APRIL 8 APRIL 9 APRIL 10 APRIL 11 APRIL 12 APRIL
13 APRIL 14 APRIL 15 APRIL 16 APRIL 17

APRIL 18 APRIL 19 APRIL 20 APRIL 21 APRIL 22 APRIL 23 APRIL 24 APRIL 25
APRIL 26 APRIL 27 APRIL 28 APRIL 29 APRIL 30 MAY 1 MAY 2 MAY 3 MAY 4 MAY
5 MAY 6 MAY 7 MAY 8 MAY 9 MAY 10 MAY 11 MAY 12 MAY 13 MAY 14 MAY 15 MAY
16 MAY 17 MAY 18 MAY 19 MAY 20 MAY 21 MAY 22 MAY 23 MAY 24

MAY 25 MAY 26 MAY 27 MAY 28 MAY 29 MAY 30 MAY 31 JUNE 1 JUNE 2 JUNE 3
JUNE 4 JUNE 5 JUNE 6 JUNE 7 JUNE 8 JUNE 9 JUNE 10 JUNE 11 JUNE 12 JUNE
13 JUNE 14 JUNE 15 JUNE 16 JUNE 17 JUNE 18 JUNE 19 JUNE 20 JUNE 21 JUNE
22 JUNE 23 JUNE 24 JUNE 25 JUNE 26 JUNE 27 JUNE 28 JUNE 29 JUNE 30

JULY 1 JULY 2 JULY 3 JULY 4 JULY 5 JULY 6 JULY 7 JULY 8 JULY 9 JULY 10
JULY 11 JULY 12 JULY 13 JULY 14 JULY 15 JULY 16 JULY 17 JULY 18 JULY 19
JULY 20 JULY 21 JULY 22 JULY 23 JULY 24 JULY 25 JULY 26 JULY 27 JULY 28
JULY 29 JULY 30 JULY 31 AUGUST 1 AUGUST 2 AUGUST 3 AUGUST 4 AUGUST 5
AUGUST 6

AUGUST 7 AUGUST 8 AUGUST 9 AUGUST 10 AUGUST 11 AUGUST 12 AUGUST 13
AUGUST 14 AUGUST 15 AUGUST 16 AUGUST 17 AUGUST 18 AUGUST 19 AUGUST 20
AUGUST 21 AUGUST 22 AUGUST 23 AUGUST 24 AUGUST 25 AUGUST 26 AUGUST 27
AUGUST 28 AUGUST 29 AUGUST 30 AUGUST 31 SEPTEMBER 1 SEPTEMBER 2
SEPTEMBER 3 SEPTEMBER 4 SEPTEMBER 5 SEPTEMBER 6 SEPTEMBER 7 SEPTEMBER 8
SEPTEMBER 9 SEPTEMBER 10 SEPTEMBER 11 SEPTEMBER 12

SEPTEMBER 13 SEPTEMBER 14 SEPTEMBER 15 SEPTEMBER 16 SEPTEMBER 17
SEPTEMBER 18 SEPTEMBER 19 SEPTEMBER 20 SEPTEMBER 21 SEPTEMBER 22
SEPTEMBER 23 SEPTEMBER 24 SEPTEMBER 25 SEPTEMBER 26 SEPTEMBER 27
SEPTEMBER 28 SEPTEMBER 29 SEPTEMBER 30 OCTOBER 1 OCTOBER 2 OCTOBER 3
OCTOBER 4 OCTOBER 5 OCTOBER 6 OCTOBER 7 OCTOBER 8 OCTOBER 9 OCTOBER 10
OCTOBER 11 OCTOBER 12 OCTOBER 13 OCTOBER 14 OCTOBER 15 OCTOBER 16
OCTOBER 17 OCTOBER 18 OCTOBER 19

OCTOBER 20 OCTOBER 21 OCTOBER 22 OCTOBER 23 OCTOBER 24 OCTOBER 25
OCTOBER 26 OCTOBER 27 OCTOBER 28 OCTOBER 29 OCTOBER 30 OCTOBER 31
NOVEMBER 1 NOVEMBER 2 NOVEMBER 3 NOVEMBER 4 NOVEMBER 5 NOVEMBER 6
NOVEMBER 7 NOVEMBER 8 NOVEMBER 9 NOVEMBER 10 NOVEMBER 11 NOVEMBER 12
NOVEMBER 13 NOVEMBER 14 NOVEMBER 15 NOVEMBER 16 NOVEMBER 17 NOVEMBER 18
NOVEMBER 19 NOVEMBER 20 NOVEMBER 21 NOVEMBER 22 NOVEMBER 23 NOVEMBER 24
NOVEMBER 25

NOVEMBER 26 NOVEMBER 27 NOVEMBER 28 NOVEMBER 29 NOVEMBER 30 DECEMBER 1
DECEMBER 2 DECEMBER 3 DECEMBER 4 DECEMBER 5 DECEMBER 6 DECEMBER 7
DECEMBER 8 DECEMBER 9 DECEMBER 10 DECEMBER 11 DECEMBER 12 DECEMBER 13
DECEMBER 14 DECEMBER 15 DECEMBER 16 DECEMBER 17 DECEMBER 18 DECEMBER 19
DECEMBER 20 DECEMBER 21 DECEMBER 22 DECEMBER 23 DECEMBER 24 DECEMBER 25
DECEMBER 26 DECEMBER 27 DECEMBER 28 DECEMBER 29 DECEMBER 30 DECEMBER 31
REPRINTS

JANUARY 1

Today I have a fresh start. I choose to begin letting go of unhealthy
thoughts, feelings and attitudes that have stifled my growth. Today I
choose to think new thoughts, to look at new values and to find new ways
of expressing my God-given gifts. I now choose to deepen my
understanding of others and myself. I will look at my relationships with
family and my friends in a new light. I choose to have vital, healthy
interactions with others. I truly welcome this new day, this new year
and this new me. I welcome the wonderful possibilities open to me.
Rokelle Lerner Be like a sponge when it comes to each new experience. If
you want to be able to express it well, you must first be able to absorb
it well. Jim Rohn

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 2

When I grew up, I learned not to rock the boat; asserting my own
opinions and desires could get me in trouble. Sometimes I carry this
over in my parenting; I don't take a stand or set limits. When my
children push or threaten to get angry, the fear I felt as a child comes
up and my reaction is to placate them and keep the peace. This is not
healthy. I need to feel those fears I felt as a child along with the
sense of helplessness that overwhelmed me. I need to separatemyself as a
child from myself as an adult. I also need to separate my inner child
from the child I am raising. Tian Dayton Loving a child doesn't mean
giving in to all his whims; to love him is to bring out the best in him,
to teach him to love what is difficult. Nadia Boulanger

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 3

When I was a teen, my grandmother taught me how to cross-stitch. I was
apprehensive at first, sure that my disability would interfere. It
always did. My grandmother reassured me that I could do simple patterns
at my own pace. There were curses; there were smiles. There were times I
quit and times I began again. But when I completed my first pattern I
realized the mistakes and curses were twined with perfect stitches and
smiles to create something brand new. Just like life. It's a lesson I
re-learn every time I thread a needle. Christyna Hunter Great is the art
of beginning, but greater is the art of ending. Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 4

Spend a few minutes, a few hours, or an entire day unconcerned about
what others will think, or what's in it for you, or whether something
offends you or not. Feel the freedom, delight in the ability to
accomplish, and explore possibilities that you may never before have
even known about. Once you decide to let go of your ego, it's a very
simple thing to do. And it will truly change your world for the better.
Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University Detachment is being close to
what you most want to be free from and using it to make you grow. Brahma
Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 5

Just for today, I will not hate. Just for today, I will forgive the one
who hurt me. I will remember that I am a child of God, and I will take
the child out to play. Just for today I will ask God to forgive me, and
just for today, I will let Him. Jaye Lewis Forgiveness is a gift you
give yourself. Suzanne Somers

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 6

Within every human being there is an inherent sense of dignity and
selfrespect. Circumstances in life might cause it to be buried under
layers of grime but sooner or later, this sense of dignity pushes its
way up for recognition and one day breaks through the surface. That's
the day a person becomes aware that "I am too good for this." At that
moment, the miracle of recovery can begin. Abraham J. Twerski The best
solution for little problems is to help people with big problems. Rabbi
Kalman Packouz

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 7

Embrace life and all it has to offer, then you can live with an
appreciation for all it's worth. When you embrace life there is a sense
of satisfaction and contentment that comes over you, helping you to live
each moment with acceptance and gratitude. Not always longing to be
someplace else or wishing for something different. Instead you are
taking what comes your way and turning it into the best it can be. You
can live with a purpose, enjoying every moment, and with a thankfulness
that stirs in you a deeper commitment to embrace life even more. Peggy
Reeves There's only us, there's only this, forget regret, or life is
yours to miss. No other road, no other way, no day but today. Jonathan
Larson

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 8

When I was alone and hope seemed so far away, I met a soul who changed
my life-myself. I began to learn, to love, to be responsible for my
future and to accept that the past cannot be changed. Rather than walk
without direction, lost inside my tormented mind, I learn and accept
that if I feel pain, I can feel joy as well. I can enjoy the present and
cherish a sunset, a lake, a tear, a smile, a friend. Isa Traverso-Burger
I can't change the direction of the wind, but I can adjust my sails to
always reach my destination. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 9

The more I recognize abundance as being meant for me, the more it will
be true. An unconscious attitude of limitation and scarcity will find
its way into my life if I allow it to. When I can see the prosperity in
this world as a boundless supply, one in which I partake along with
others, I open the channels for it to enter into my life. I will think
positively about other people's prosperity, knowing that what I believe
to be true for someone else, I also believe to be true for me. I accept
the abundance in my life. Tian Dayton The moon belongs to everyone; the
best things in life are free. B.G. DeSylva

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 10

Dreams are surprisingly durable. Though forgotten, they will lie like
dry seeds buried in desert sands, waiting. A dream may appear fragile
and lifeless, but inside the parched husk waits lush creative potential.
We sometimes forget these old dreams of ours, but they do not forget us.
Spring rains arrive at last, following the hard years of drought, and
our "dead" dreams sprout most unexpectedly. We are filled with delight
to see their long-forgotten shape, to breathe their fragrance again, and
we wonder at our carelessness in forgetting. Today, I will visit my
garden of forgotten dreams . . and bring a watering can. Rhonda Brunea
All our dreams can come true . . . if we have the courage to pursue
them. Walt Disney

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 11

The harsh winter winds call attention to themselves, and I am mindful of
all the unpleasant aspects of the unfriendliest of seasons. Some
memories of my unhappy childhood still linger within me, blowing icy
blasts through my soul. I am aware of these, just as I am aware of the
chill in the world around me. There is no need to struggle against these
elements. I am as unique and important to life's scheme as each
snowflake. I have a new and abiding warmth in my soul as I patiently
await the coming of spring with its warmth, sunshine and fresh breezes
to rejuvenateme. Rokelle Lerner What life means to us is determined not
so much by what happens to us as by our reaction to what happens. Lewis
L. Dunnington

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 12

Some think he's a little strange. A week before my son was born; I
rested against his fence and admired his flowers. He was quiet for a
while and said, "I used to watch those through my window when I was in
prison." I protectively placed my hand over my unborn child. "I was a
prisoner of war," he continued. "Just a kid really. Both my parents and
my sister were murdered and I didn't want to live. Then, I saw those
cosmos through my cell window and I made up my mind that if I was ever
free, I'd go and touch them and keep some of the seeds." Things are not
always what they seem. Mary Lee Moynan Infinite riches are all around
you if you will open your mental eyes and behold the treasure house of
infinity within you. Joseph Murphy

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 13

We make extensive lists. We make lists of all that is broken about
ourselves; we also have long lists of what we should be doing, and
aren't doing yet; we have lists of regrets, lists of complaints, and
lists of "it will never happen." But today, let us start a new list
entitled All That Is Possible with Me. It starts like this: I can hold
someone's hand; I can feed the ducks; I can read a book; I can write a
book; I can become president; I can feel the cold and the warm; I can
color any page blue if I want; I can breathe; I can smile. Barbara A.
Croce I know of no better life purpose than to perish in attempting the
great and the impossible. Friedrich Nietzsche

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 14

We are survivors. We are resilient. Within us is great strength, an
ability to overcome and to endure. From pain we never deserved, we build
walls to hold in our secrets. Secrets that seem too difficult to face
head-on. Secrets we fear, if shared, will only bring more pain. You have
a choice and you have a voice. Keep your secret locked up within your
walls forever, or use your strength and courage to break the silence and
allow the truth to set you free. Nicole Braddock Truth is the secret of
eloquence and of virtue, the basis of moral authority; it is the highest
summit of art and of life. Henri Frederic Amiel

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 15

The day after my daughter confessed to me that my husband of ten years
was molesting her, I found myself without a home, no job and with three
frightened, displaced children in a women's shelter. I had spent ten
years dodging shouts and blows, trying to make a nice life out of what
had become a nightmare. I had obviously failed. I was as low and lost as
I'd ever been. When the counselor asked what choices I had made in my
life that had brought me to this moment, it was a turning point.
Everything from that day forward would be the result of that long, hard
look at myself. It was the first small step for me. Jaye Lewis In the
depth of winter I finally learned there was, in me, invincible summer.
Albert Camus

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 16

My recovery lifts my spirit and gives my life a deeper purpose. Even my
compulsive behavior was an attempt to grow, to find inner peace, however
misguided. But today I recognize that the peace I sought can only truly
be found by uniting my will with God's. When I willfully try to push my
life in place, I am limited in my vision. Today I invite spirit to
involve itself intimately in all the petty arrangements of my life.
Nothing is too small for spirit to be a part of. I am one with spirit;
separateness is but an illusion, for the very second I invite spirit to
be with me, it is there. Tian Dayton Love is faith, and one faith leads
to another. Henri-Frédéric Amie

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 17

We as a group are privy to knowledge that is rapidly coming to the rest
of the world. There is a Spiritual solution to every single problem,
question and situation in our lives, because that is what we indeed are,
creatures of a Spiritual nature, a Spiritual origin. This is the most
important thing that we have learned as a result of working the Twelve
Steps. Jeffrey R. Anderson Resolve to perform what you ought; perform
without fail what you resolve. Stonewall Jackson

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 18

Sobriety is not attained just by putting the cork in the bottle. It is
suggested that our emotional growth stopped the day we started drinking
and as we acquire more and more sobriety we "catch up." I know that I am
addicted to alcohol and am just one drink away from a drunk. For me,
staying sober is paramount in my life. Without my sobriety and
spirituality I am nothing. Rev. Bob Lew Love truth, but pardon error.
Voltaire

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 19

Will you please accept the help we're offering? This was the question
asked by each of Ruth's family members assembled for the intervention.
Ruth's family not only loved her, they revered her. She had a great
capacity to give and a way ofmaking people forget their troubles. She
was everyone's ray of sunshine. She drank infrequently, but after her
husband's heart attack, the binges became more frequent and more
dangerous. Ruth looked around the room at her family and through tears,
with a small smile the seventy-three-year-old grandmother said, "Yes,
I'll accept your help today." Debra Jay In spite of warnings, nothing
much happens until the status quo becomes more painful than change.
Laurence J. Peter

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 20

The problem with using a crutch--alcohol, drugs, food, gambling--to numb
our emotional pain is that in the end we come to rely on it instead of
on our own inner strength. We learn to lie quite persuasively: "I don't
need to drink. I just like the taste." "These pills have caffeine in
them. It's like drinking coffee"; "I work hard for my money. I deserve
to gamble if it relaxes me." It becomes easier and easier to convince
ourselves that our problems are under control. Eventually, when there
are serious consequences and the crutch is no longer available, the only
way to regain our health and to remain well is to acknowledge the truth.
Kay Conner Pliszka This above all: to thine own self be true. William
Shakespeare

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 21

Sometimes I find myself living life like a prison sentence--just doing
time, trying to stay out of trouble, filling my days with activities and
thoughts just for something to do. On those days I have forgotten how it
feels to wonder about life; to wonder why we are here, to wonder where
we might be going, to wonder how I might contribute. Today I will be
curious. I will carry questions in my pockets: What matters most? What
can I do to express my gratitude? What can I do for someone I love--or
maybe a complete stranger? I want more than a good day in prison. I want
a wonder-full life. Thom Rutledge Who we are, the kind of people we will
be, individually and collectively, is ultimately determined by one
thing: how we relate to fear. Thom Rutledge

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 22

Worry is rehearsing calamity, meditating on the worst thing that can
happen. Worry is a joy stealer and a time robber. Worry sets a tone of
unrest to those around you, causing misery to everyone. What is the
antidote to worry? Count your blessings. Live one day at a time. Break
the habit of negative self-talk. Take the energy you use in worrying and
replace it with overwhelming positive thoughts. See yourself worry free
with God's help and then be successful, prosperous and victorious. Joan
Clayton Being happy today takes care of tomorrow. Joan Clayton

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 23

Change is generally regarded as positive, but it can be destructive as
well. When running toward change, ask yourself, "From what am I
running?" Are you leaving behind a family, a job, a reputation or
troubles that are overwhelming? Change may bring relief and a fresh
start but finding happiness and success right where you are may be more
challenging and enduring. Elaine Young McGuire Change is an easy
panacea. It takes character to stay in one place and be happy there.
Elizabeth Clarke Dunn

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 24

At times in the past, my love had been hidden, blocked off by
impenetrable clouds. No light or love came through. These clouds
prevented me from seeing the love within me and the love within someone
else. In my family the love we felt for each other often got cloudy with
broken promises, fear, anger and confusion. But today, the confusion,
anger and fear are gone. I no longer dwell on past broken promises,
instead I let my love shine forth and share my gifts with others.
Rokelle Lerner Take the power to love what you want in life and love it
honestly. Susan Polis Schutz

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 25

Alicia was referred to me hoping I might solve the mystery. She was
writing poetry with hints of suicide and showing signs of extreme
anxiety.Her parents insisted nothing was wrong and refused professional
counseling forher. Fortunately, the door tomyhighschool student
assistance office was always open. After many weeks Alicia slowly began
confiding a lifetime of sexual abuse--from her grandfather and father.
Those revelations began a difficult process for Alicia but with her
secrets and pain no longer hidden, she faced the truth. It is never too
late to begin healing and as Alicia discovered, help can be just down
the hall. Kay Conner Pliszka Not everything that is faced can be
changed, but nothing can be changed until it is faced. James Baldwin

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 26

Regardless of the things that I thought I had gotten away with, I have
learned that there are no free rides. Being responsible for my recovery
also means being responsible for my actions, as well as the effects that
my actions may have on others. When I made my direct amends to my
children, they immediately forgave me--no questions asked. I was
grateful for their unconditional forgiveness and in accepting it, know
that I must unconditionally forgive those in my life who had wronged me
in the past. Sala Dayo I have not failed. I have merely found 10,000
ways that won't work. Thomas Edison

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 27

When confronted with impossible and confusing situations, remember three
profound thoughts given in four words at many railroad crossings: Stop,
Look and Listen. If we really consider each of those words when dealing
with difficulty, even when we're not necessarily negotiating an
automobile across a set of railroad tracks, we'd be well on the path of
resolution. Stop and take a deep breath. Look and concentrate on the
situation. Listen within yourself or turn to others for guidance. Bruce
Squiers Everyone should carefully observe which way his heart draws him,
and then choose that way with all his strength. Hasidic Saying

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 28

My name is Debbie and I am an alcoholic. I had reachedout toA.A.
andwantedtomake anhonest effort toworktheStepsbut Iwas a
confirmedatheist. Onedaymy sponsor askedme tolist allof the
characteristics I wanted my Higher Power to have. For several days I
consideredmy list and settled on supportive, caring, forgiving,
understanding, patient and noncontrolling.One evening as I
wasdrivingtoameeting,mentallyreviewingmylist,Isuddenly heard a voice
say, "You already havemewith you." I immediately felt as though a heavy
weight had been lifted off my shoulders. I could stand straight and hold
my head up proudly. My name is Debbie and I am in recovery. Debbie
Heaton I am not a phoenix yet, but here among the ashes, it may be that
the pain is chiefly that of new wings trying to push through. May Sarton

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 29

After work I often found myself at the drive-thru window, ordering lots
of food and consuming it in my car before going home. When I complained
about the grips of my addictive behavior to a wise friend she simply
said, "Do something different and you'll get different results." That
night I told myself that I wanted to cook a healthy meal. I stopped at
the grocery store, got the ingredients and did just that. Occasionally,
I still find myself at the drive-thru but I don't beat myself up. I
acknowledge how poorly I feel after bingeing and contrast that with the
calm I feel after I cook for myself. The pattern is broken. Lisa Jo Barr
Why not go out on a limb? That's where the fruit is. Will Rogers

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 30

Powerful emotions stir as I recall the places from which I have come.
Worlds of seemingly unrecoverable loss and immense pain until his words
brought peace and a hand of beauty, love and grace reached into the vile
darkness to rescue me. Tears, no longer of rage and anger, roll down my
face in thankfulness for the life I have now found. Sobriety; a life no
longer dominated by drugs, alcohol, rage and pain. Each day brings with
it the promise of something better, this can only be so as the words he
spoke echo somewhere deeply in my soul. Godwin H. Barton We are not
human beings having a spiritual experience. We are spiritual beings
having a human experience. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin

Footnotes for Life

JANUARY 31

When I am in a bad mood and feel like blaming someone else for it, I
will try something new--I won't. Blaming doesn't work. It makes the
other person defensive and deaf to what I say, and it postpones my
seeing and understanding what the feeling beneath the blame is. Today I
will recognize that beneath my urge to blame is probably either
self-condemnation or a fear of being blamed myself. I will stay with
those feelings and see what they are about for me before I act on them
by blaming someone else. Tian Dayton I will connect with my Higher Power
today and see where the connection leads me. Tian Dayton

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 1

Early in my recovery A.A. members told me, "Let us love you 'til you can
love yourself." I surrendered. As my sobriety grew, they offered, "Don't
get too hungry, angry, lonely, tired." I accepted. When they advised,
"It's the first drink that gets you drunk, just stay away from that
first drink." I understood. When they suggested, "Don't think about not
drinking for the rest of your life, only today." I knew. When someone
told me, "Don't quit before the miracle." I believed. And when I heard,
"Remember alcohol gave you wings to fly but then it took away the sky,"
I was free. What wise words! Dorri Olds Live not one's life as though
one had a thousand years, but live each day as the last. Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 2

Iwas astounded to find myself powerless over my feelings. When I first
got sober and started feeling feelings that had been numbed for years, I
thought there must be a way to control these feelings away. My sponsor
explained that, along with being powerless over alcohol, people, places
and things, I was powerless over my emotions. My life would be
unmanageable if I thought I was in charge. After attempts to stuff my
feelings using food or avoid them by shopping, I began to be conscious
of my powerlessness. Surrendering to powerlessness became my best
choice. This let me feel my feelings, process them and live life more
fully. Pamela Knigh Life is a great big canvas, and you should throw all
the paint on it you can. Danny Kaye

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 3

Iwalk softly with my spirit today. I am uplifted by the thought that I
am not alone, nor ever was. I am waiting in pleasant anticipation for
spirit to work its quiet magic inmy day. There is nothing that I can
think, feel or do, that cannot be made lighter and truer by inviting
spirit into it. I rest in the joyous awareness that spirit is with me;
has never left me. If I feel an absence of spirit I will remember that
it is not spirit that moves away from me, but me that moves away from
spirit. Tian Dayton If you can't have faith in what is held up to you
for faith, you must find things to believe in yourself, for a life
without faith in something is too narrow a space to live. Alec Bourne

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 4

My mom often summarized her philosophy in succinct phrases. One of her
favorites was: The most precious gifts should not be kept or hidden.
They should be given freely with no strings; a smile, a kiss and love.
Amelia Rose Bederka as told to Steve Bederka-Toth Go out into the world
today and love the people you meet. Let your presence light new light in
the hearts of people. Mother Teresa

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 5

The road to recovery should be renamed the joy of discovery. Each day I
uncover a part of me that was lost and hidden from view. I love the
transformation as I look forward to my future and the person that I am
becoming. Let me accept today's challenges with gratitude knowing that I
will be given the inner strength needed to go on with my life. Not
everyone is so fortunate to be given a second chance to start over. Let
me see the opportunity in my hardships rather than despair, as the
guiding force for goodness leads me there. Theresa Meehan Tell me and
I'll forget; show me and I may remember; involve me and I'll understand.
Chinese Proverb

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 6

Recovering from my mother's death wasn't easy for me. Because she was
elderly, it was generally accepted that her death should be expected but
I still missed her. One day while going through her things I found a
small journal; inside she had written, "Such a pretty book for pretty
thoughts." Apparently she died shortly after, because the following
pages were blank. I began on the next page and wrotemy memories of her:
funny things she said and did and about the life of love she lived. She
continues to live through my words not only for myself but also for
those that read about her in years to come. Carol Van Dyke Brown The
written word may be our greatest invention. It allows us to converse
with the dead, the absent, and the unborn. Abraham Lincoln

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 7

Ihad never felt better in my life when during my annual health check-up
my doctor delivered stunning news. I had last stage liver disease. In
one brief moment everything had changed. In talking with my wife later,
I heard myself saying, "Remember that exercise, the one that asked you
to consider what regrets you might have if you had only twenty-four
hours to live? Well, I can't think of any. All of the people I love know
I love them and I know they love and honor me. There's no unfinished
business. I feel grateful." Tears of joy began to run down my cheeks.
Who would have thought that my journey in recovery would pay off with
such dividends? Ted Klontz Don't compromise yourself. You're all you've
got. Betty Ford

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 8

Iworked on a horse ranch for Anna and Pete every summer until I left
home at eighteen. My memories are full of afternoons flying through tall
grass holding onto the reins while Fleet Foot, the horse I cared for,
did his job cutting cattle. I never told Anna or Pete about the horrors
that were going on in my childhood home, but I shared my deepest secrets
with Fleet Foot. Those days at the "Flying W" were few but the work I
did there was more than cutting cattle and mending fences; the lasting
work was the mending of my spirit and the knowledge that we all deserve
to be treated with kindness and compassion. Jane Middelton-Moz If one is
without kindness, how can one be called a human being? Sarada Devi

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 9

Through self-expression we find insight and we begin to understand.
Through community with others we find understanding and we begin to
heal. Through releasing of the past we find courage to face the future
and we begin to forgive. Alexandra P. Courage is the price that life
exacts for granting peace. The soul that knows it not, knows no release
from little things. Amelia Earhart Putnam

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 10

When we were using, we had no problem manipulating our schedules to fit
in quality time for our addictions. Filling the bottomless pit of them
constituted a full-time job. Our new way of life can be free of insanity
and frenzy; we can be content to slow down and just be. Candy Killion It
is time to make the time. Henry Dumas

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 11

Pat had a rough start in the program, relapsing often until he finally
"figured it out," as he says. He was a "wrecker" when he drank. He'd
tear things apart, knock down walls, leave a mess everywhere he went.
Most of his sober time was spent paying for all the damage he caused
while on his drinking sprees. One night during a blacked-out relapse, a
tornado came through a town where he was holed up. Cars were turned
over, roofs torn off houses, trees uprooted. In themorningwhen he
staggered to the door of the motel and saw the damage, he looked up to
the heavens and wailed, "Holy God! How am I going to pay for all this?"
As told to Earnie Larsen Made direct amends to such people wherever
possible, except when to do so would injure them or others. Step 9, The
Twelve Steps of A.A.

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 12

It's amazing we ever get so lost and even more amazing we come back from
the realms of addictions, but we do. It is no wonder that, with the
insanity of this world, we trust so little and fear so much. That's who
I was, one who really trusted very little and feared most of all. During
my time in treatment I realized that maybe I wasn't what I did. That who
I had been wasn't who I had to be. I could choose again. My program
teaches me that knowing what I am doing is nowhere nearly as important
as just showing up and letting life show me. Lee R.McCormick Answer that
you are here--that life exists and identity. That the powerful play goes
on, and you may contribute a verse. Walt Whitman

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 13

So often I have wanted to run away but an invisible hand held me in
place. I remained, worked through the issue I wanted to escape and I
overcame. In the midst of the struggle, I discovered a wonderful truth:
I can't lose if I don't give up. Failure is not an option if I don't
quit. I intend to win in life. I have made it this far, and I am going
to make it all the way. I believe in me. Barbara A. Croce That which we
persist in doing becomes easier--not that the nature of the task has
changed, but our ability to do has increased. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 14

When it is hard to breathe, slow down. Think of one breath at a time.
Relax and drift inward. Focus on happier times with people you love.
Think of how important your life is to others. Think of your dreams.
Think of tomorrow, next week, next year. Inhale slowly. Exhale slowly.
Taste the air as it miraculously fills you. One breath at a time. Felice
Prager Imagine that you are a Masterpiece unfolding, every second of
every day, a work of art taking form with every breath. Thomas Crum

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 15

Talking is a powerful way to share experiences, to create intimacy and
build a connection between people. Many of us find it difficult to talk
about our feelings, often because we feel so much shame about what we've
been through. We are afraid to tell other people what we feel, or what
we struggle with. We expect to be rejected or condemned or humiliated.
Share your story with someone today. It takes courage, but we are all
human beings who desire acceptance and understanding. All you have to
lose is shame and fear. Lisa Jo Barr Silent gratitude isn't much use to
anyone. Gladys Berthe Stern

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 16

The close of the front door ended the abuse. I watched my husband, once
my best friend, and the father of my three children, walk out of our
lives. Tears of relief and a trickle of regret emptied down my cheeks.
Money was scarce and it was difficult keeping the kids safe and well
cared for, but all of those challenges paled in comparison with the
peace of mind and the emotional security we felt as soon as the abuse
stopped. I drew strength and confidence with each smile on my children's
faces and every hug told me any sacrifice was worth giving our family of
four another chance. Cynthia Borris You grow up the day you have your
first real laugh--at yourself. Ethel Barrymore

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 17

When my three-year-old son was diagnosed with autism I made a promise
never again to let a day go by that I didn't hug him and tell him I
loved him. It no longer mattered if he returned my love or if he
continued to push me away. He would never leave this Earth without
knowing how much I loved him. I kept my promise and he has done very
well. Today he is a very happy, loving little boy and I am a believer in
the power of unconditional love. Linda C. Bird Being deeply loved by
someone gives you strength; loving someone deeply gives you courage.
Lao-tzu

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 18

"God, do you know how hard it is for me to love you? Do you know how
hurt I am? Do you know that even though I don't understand why; why I am
an alcoholic--why I had to lose my child. I don't need to know the
answers to those questions anymore. In spite of every burden that I
carry, either by my own free will or by your command, even though my
soul cries for release, even though I will always feel this way--I still
love you, God. Though I wanted to blame you and hate you, I love you
anyway." With that prayer, faith, courage, honesty, acceptance and
surrender became the foundation of my recovery. Julie Orlando I want to
know God's thoughts. The rest are details. Albert Einstein

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 19

Believe in your body, it will lead you toward recovery. Your legs will
carry you to the meetings when you don't want to go. Your hands will
write in the journal every day even if you think you don't have anything
to say. Your heart will beat stronger than it ever has because now it
beats in a drug-free body. Your soul is your strength to continue to
guide you through one day at a time. Your mind will remind you of your
past so you don't repeat it. Your eyes will see the future of living a
drug-free life. Have faith in yourself and keep moving forward.
Christine Learmonth They lied to you, sold you ideas of good and evil,
gave you distrust of your body and shame for your prophethood of chaos.
Charles Donaldson

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 20

Paul had been sober for fifteen years and I was acting as if he was
still drinking. His kindness was greeted with my recriminations. His
gentleness fueled my defensiveness. My anger flared like a fire suddenly
out of control provoked by something he did to show he cared. He was
trying so hard to make up for lost years and I was thwarting him at
every turn. Late one night, I lay awake thinking. As tears rolled onto
the pillow, I realized I could never release my anger until I forgave
Paul. The more I thought about this, the more free I felt. I was not the
judge and jury. I could not continue to judge my husband, only to love
and forgive him. Sallie A.Rodman Your pain is the breaking of the shell
that encloses your understanding. Kahlil Gibran

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 21

Sound judgment about what is right and what you need to do is based on
your system of values. It is only when you are standing on the
foundation of your values that you are able to maintain your truth, no
matter what the circumstances. The ability to live according to your
values, in an unwavering way, depends on how well you have realized your
true spiritual identity, and have begun to cultivate that
innerstateofdignity.TheawarenessofbeingGod'schildallowsyouto
claimyourdivinity.Theawarenessofbeingastudent,learningnotjust
fromGodbutalsofromthosearoundyou,ofbeinganexample,of becoming a model of
whatever you want otherstolearn,allowsyoutounderstandyour
highesttruthandbegintoliveit. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University
In your golden heart there is no limit to forgiveness, and no space for
disheartenment. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 22

Since I had cancer twelve years ago, I have created my own recovery.
Every day, I must tend to my body and to my mind. I cannot forget that I
am always in recovery. I cannot say to myself, "I do not matter," for I
must believe I do. I matter to my family and friends who reach out to me
and I to them. I matter to my pets who think there is no person more
important in the world. I matter to myself because that is essential to
my recovery. To matter. To someone. Somewhere. Every day. Harriet May
Savitz I long to alleviate the evil, but I cannot. And I too suffer.
This has been my life; I found it worth living. Bertrand Russell

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 23

In the stillness of the morning before I get out of bed, I listen for
the voice of God and this is what he says, "I give you love, peace and
happiness to set you on your way. I am always watching out for you each
and every day. Do not fear for tomorrow, for today has just begun.
Instead, look for the treasures that come from up above." Theresa Meehan
I will greet this day with love in my heart. I will love the sun for it
warms my bones; yet I will love the rain for it cleanses my spirit. Og
Mandino

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 24

My great grandmother had eleven children, washed clothes on a washboard,
cooked on a wood-burning stove and lived in a modest shanty with no
plumbing or electricity. Although poor by the world's standards, she had
riches untold. Her wealth consisted of hope, peace and joy. In my
research I dis-coveredGranny Lowe's secrets of success: Live one day at
a time, be content with what you have andmake someone else happy. These
three secrets can change a life fromdespair into hope, envy to
contentment, and sorrowinto joy. Joan Clayton I want to leave treasures
that money can't buy. Joan Clayton

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 25

Somewhere along your path to recovery, God has given you at least one
encourager-- someone who listens, who is farther along the path than you
are, who gives you hope. Is the time right for you to find someone
farther back, who needs your encouragement, guidance, a light to see the
path? Giving support will energize their recovery . . . and your own.
Joy Neal Kidney Having chosen our course, without guile and with pure
purpose, let us renew our trust in God, and go forward without fear.
Abraham Lincoln

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 26

Close your eyes and savor the quiet. Hear the birds chirping, the
airplane soaring overhead, the neighborhood moving through its daily
rhythm. Listen until the lullaby soothes your spirit and a sense of
peace surrounds you. Feel the quiet calmand open the locked window in
your heart. You wait, unsure, then your mind quickens when deep, buried
hurts stumble out. You're facing the horror again, not wanting to look
away anymore. Somehow you survived the abuse all those years ago. The
scars are real and will always remain, but today, you realize they don't
define you. You're still shaky, but now you feel something like hope.
You finally understand it wasn't your fault. Joanna Booher Stress leaves
an indelible scar, and the organism pays for its survival after a
stressful situation by becoming a little older. Hans Selye

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 27

In the midst of a terrible winter storm Tom lay blacked-out on his back
in an alley, unaware that drugs and alcohol were about to claim him.
Slowly a strange sensation pulled him back. Short, abrasive strokes
across his face. His eyes snapped open to find himself nose-to-nose with
a pitiful but very large cat. Life soon bottomed-out for Tom but concern
for his furry angel gave him the will to hold on. Years later, cradling
the old cat, he spoke softly, "You don't have to stay on my account, I'm
gonna be okay," and the golden eyes closed for the last time.
Companionship and support comes in all shapes and sizes. John Crusey No
matter how dark things seem to be or actually are, raise your sights and
see possibilities--always see them, for they're always there. Dr. Norman
Vincent Peale

Footnotes for Life

FEBRUARY 28

What a powerful thing choice is. We can choose to lead and set examples
of strength and perseverance, courage and love, or we can give in to our
addiction, accept defeat and wallow in a self-pity that will never let
go. We can choose to support those who are strong and in turn lean on
them so we no longer have to walk alone. Reflect on your journey and
where your path leads. The most difficult choices often lead to the
greatest rewards. Raquel Strand Destiny is not a matter of chance; it is
a matter of choice. It is not a thing to be waited for; it is a thing to
be achieved. William Jennings Bryan

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 1

Iwill not hold onto the memories or the hurtful past, though they are a
part of me. I choose to allow them to strengthen me as I move forward. I
chose this destiny. I chose this journey. I will begin with my first
step, putting one foot steadily in front of the other. Then another.
Then another. Alexandra P. Let's take the mistakes of the past, and the
road-blocking challenges of the present, and build them into stairs that
support our climb into the future. Mattie J. T. Stepanek

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 2

Today signals a change in my life. Today, the tide turns me on a new
course, a new way of living. Today, I am released of the burdens and
pain and suffering that have kept me contained, living small. Today, I
am like the vast open ocean, free to flow expansively, surging with
powerful energy. As I ebb with my natural life current, an endless
horizon of possibilities comes into view. I float through the cool clear
waters, refreshed and renewed with hope. The calm waves soothe my spirit
and cleanse the sorrow of the past. Today, I glide with the surf,
carried gently to a life far bigger than I ever dreamed. Shary Hauer
Most people live in a very restricted circle of their potential being.
We all have reservoirs of energy and genius to draw upon of which we do
not dream. William James

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 3

My three-year-old daughter pulled the blankets up under her chin as I
tucked her in for the night. "Mommy, does God have arms?" "No, God is
spirit," I replied. "He doesn't have a body like ours." "Then how does
he give hugs?" she asked. Reaching down to wrap my arms around her in a
tight squeeze, I explained, "Whenever God needs arms, he borrows ours."
Emily Chase What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters
compared to what lies within us. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 4

Ihave a busy "committee meeting" in my brain on most days. It's always
been there and I have come to accept that it may always be there.
However, when I hear too much conversation in my head centered on the
idea of "enough-ness," I know it's time to get conscious about those
messages. My disease is about "not being enough." It tells me I'm not
smart enough, rich enough, pretty enough; the list goes on and on. Once
I recognize that line of thinking, I change to a more truthful
affirmation--I am enough. I am intelligent enough, I am thin enough, I
am simply enough, just the way I am. Anne Conner Argue for your
limitations and sure enough they're yours. Richard Bach

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 5

At thirty-one I had a doctorate in psychology and had been drinking
heavily on and off for fourteen years. My head was so filled with
theories and concepts that I thought myself into one blind alley after
another. Finally unable to struggle any longer, I shook with fear as I
called a friend in recovery. "Charlie, I think I'm an alcoholic. Will
you take me to a meeting?" I could feel a comforting, accepting smile
beaming out of the telephone. Through the fog of my terror and shame I
heard him say, with nearly infinite warmth, "John, I've been waiting a
year and a half for you. Of course, I'll take you. It would be an
honor." John C.Friel Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if
you were to live forever. Mahatma Gandhi

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 6

When you find yourself trapped, there is only one way out. That way is
your trust in a Higher Power. You do not have to wear yourself out until
you are near death. Look around. He may reveal himself to you, just as
he revealed himself to me, when I became willing to be carried in loving
hands. David Mead Only that day dawns to which we are awake. Henry David
Thoreau

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 7

Victories often arrive after you have exhausted every ounce of effort
and the sweat pours down your face. Sometimes victory is achieved as you
stand resolute with feet firmly planted, confronting your enemy face to
face. But there are times when victory is not in the battle at all, but
in the understanding that discretion is, indeed, the better part of
valor.Whatever shape they come in, celebrate your victories. Ava
Pennington Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the soul
needs matchless and pure strength of faith. Mahatma Gandhi

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 8

Ihonor my own experience and personal truth. I know that no one from my
past needs to see things the way I do for me to get better or move on.
Trying to convince family members of what I have learned through my own
journey can be an exercise in futility and delay my progress. Each of us
has our own truth that is unique unto itself. We are all at different
levels of understanding and acceptance of who and where we are in life.
Each member of my family experienced our childhoods in our own way and
have a right to our own perceptions. I do not have to get anyone to see
it my way in order for me to feel comfortable. My truth is my truth,
theirs is theirs. Tian Dayton If you add to the truth, you subtract from
it. The Talmud

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 9

Failure. It's one of the most beautiful things in the world. Failure is
exciting because it means I'm reaching past what I've always done. It
means I'm willing to try new things. It keeps my mind young and
energized because the focus isn't on the failure but on the one step
closer to a goal to be reached. Goals are reached one failed step at a
time. Glenda Schoonmaker If you always do what you've always done, then
you will always get what you've always gotten. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 10

These days my attention is not on fixing others, but on creating a sense
of well-being within myself. As I discover new ways of improving the
quality of my life I can be sure that I reflect well-being to others. If
I am critical of myself, I am quick to condemn and judge others. If my
life is full of contradictions, resentments and insecurities, I might be
sabotaging the growth of those who come to me seeking help. I must
remember that as a helper, I can only be a catalyst for change. In the
end, each individual must decide whether or not to embark on a different
journey. Rokelle Lerner Discovery consists of seeing what everybody has
seen and thinking what nobody has thought. Albert von Szent-Györgyi

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 11

Ienjoyed fulfilling work as a sign language interpreter until a brain
injury left me struggling to re-learn simple tasks. One Sunday, the
chair where the interpreter sat for our church service was empty. My
heart argued with my bruised brain as I saw the deaf people's
disappointment. I knew I had to try. I tookmy place, looked out into the
large congregation and began to panic. But as I looked into the eyes of
the deaf congregants my hands took flight. Expressed with the voice in
my hands, the words landed lovingly in the hearts and minds of my deaf
friends through expectant eyes. In the service of others, I had found
and reclaimed my self. Jenna Cassell The highest of distinctions is
service to others. King George VI

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 12

Pain of human experiences is universal and a safe setting and a language
through which to talk about one's experiences allow people to begin to
speak their truth, to own their reality. Ultimately they can put the
past behind them, let go of painful familiar scripts and be accountable
for their own choices. No one deserves to live a life of fear, pain and
shame. Claudia Black It is easier to build strong children than to
repair broken men. Frederick Douglas

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 13

Just for today, I release all worries. Just for today, I release all
anger. Just for today, I shall earn my living with integrity. Just for
today, I will be kind to every living thing. Just for today, I give
thanks for all my many blessings. Reiki Principle Gratitude makes sense
of our past, brings peace for today, and creates a vision for tomorrow.
Melody Beattie

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 14

The gems of real value in our lives are the people who at one time or
another have loved us unconditionally. These spiritual guides change
from time to time, but what they have in common is their acceptance of
us just the way we are. We can keep that love with us today in accepting
ourselves as treasured gems. We need to accept ourselves as part of the
wealth of the Universe, for without us it would be devoid of the beauty
of the human spirit. That beauty is the kind of wealth that provides
true happiness. Love is a richness that cannot be devalued. Yvonne Kaye
If your riches are gems, why don't you take them with you to the other
world? Benjamin Franklin

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 15

It is important that we laugh, sing, dance and love. Never stand on the
sidelines and be left wondering "what if." Step forward and give life
all you have to give. Open doors for others as doors have opened for
you. Face the challenges with hope. Meet obstacles with a smile. You
never know who may be watching, so be a good example and mentor. Cherish
the moments and look to God for answers. Diane Thompson God bears with
imperfect beings even when they resist His goodness. Francois de Fenelon

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 16

It is one of themost difficult things you can do. And yet, it is very
simple, easy and effortless. It is one of the most powerful things you
can do. And yet, when you do it you give up the need and the desire for
power. What is it? It is letting go of your own ego. When you can bring
yourself to get beyond your own ego, you raise yourself to a whole new
level of awareness, experience and effectiveness. When you can think,
live and act unconstrained by the limitations of your ego, the
possibilities are truly endless. Your worries, your fears, your doubts,
anxieties, disappointments and hesitation to move forward are all
sustained by your ego. Imagine the power of leaving all those
limitations behind. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University
Flexibility means being able to make problems into teachers. Brahma
Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 17

My past is no longer here. My present is today. My future is waiting and
I will start planning now. I will treat myself with love, make each day
a positive one and not allow self-pity to control me. It is survival of
the fittest and I challenge myself to focus not on what others do for me
but what I can do with my disorder to help other people. Stacey Chillemi
Determine that the thing can and shall be done, and then we shall find
the way. Abraham Lincoln

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 18

Vague feelings of discontent or twinges of restlessness are discomforts
we have difficulty identifying and they can be disconcerting. Often we
are able to handle the obvious problem areas in our recovery but
struggle with the subtle pitfalls. Without realizing it, we can choose
the wrong things to fill the empty void created by our boredom. It might
be as simple as choosing a handful of cookies when a walk would be a
better choice. Part of recovery is making wise choices. Joyce McDonald
Hoskins Expectations are the thief of God's blessings. Constance K.
Hardy

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 19

You are enough, you have enough. Everything you need is within you.
Maybe for others I believed that, but not myself. I've always felt
lacking and wanting. I needed more, something was missing. Should I
change jobs? Go back to school? Move? Move on? That "not enough" feeling
was always there. Suddenly, today I understood that "not enough" meant
love. That "more" meant love. That thing "missing" was love. Self-love.
As I embrace that idea, I recognize and appreciate that I do have enough
and I am enough. What a gift to give oneself! Deb Sellars Karpek If
something is wrong, fix it if you can. But train yourself not to worry.
Worry never fixes anything. Mrs. Ernest Hemingway

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 20

As a teenager I chased after better living through chemicals believing
that if you had my troubles, you too would drink and drug. Now that I've
learned that most of my troubles came from the drinking and drugging,
when I come to a fork in the road I know how to make a sober choice and
reap the significant rewards. I remember many nights sitting on a bar
stool yakking away about being an artist. Now that I'm in recovery I
know how to show up for life and work hard. I am successful. I run my
own business. I set goals. I achieve them. I'm not all talk. That's what
self-esteem is made of! Dorri Olds Nothing is so soothing to our
self-esteem as to find our bad traits in our forebears. It seems to
absolve us. Van Wyck Brooks

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 21

Ispent many years unsuccessfully struggling to change the size and shape
of my body. Therein lay the spark for change, the point of departure.
The new idea, the only fad I hadn't tried, was to love and accept my
body unconditionally at the size and shape I was. This newfound
acceptance was the revolutionary act that led me to unprecedented
freedom from obsession and dangerous behaviors. My bottom line is I no
longer harm myself with food or exercise and I no longer use food or
exercise to try to change the size or shape of my body. I've finally
come to know beyond a shadow of a doubt that there is nothing wrong with
me. Nothing needs to be changed. Rachel Caplin It is the mind that makes
the body. Sojourner Truth

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 22

There have been times in my recovery when my life feels dull. That sense
of exhilaration and newness isn't present anymore. As a recovering
"excitement junkie," I need to practice being comfortable with the
stability of a more even existence. Consistency can actually be a
comfortable state of being once I get past the old messages about
"doing" rather than "being." I can also remember that new and exciting
experiences will come my way when it's time. While I'm calmly waiting, I
can ask my Higher Power for inspiration and direction on the next
chapter of my life. Anne Conner Life is a glass given to us to fill; a
busy life is filling it with as much as it can hold; a hurried life has
had more poured into it than it can contain. William Adams Brown

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 23

Ourdaughter is anathletewhohas runtheChicagoand NewYorkmarathons. Facing
an eight hour surgery for malignantmelanoma she relatedthe experience
toher hike across themoors inScotland. "Whenwalking inthe driving
rainthroughthebarrenland, I'dlookaheadat thepuddles forming.
TheylookedsobigandIdidn'tthinkIcouldgetacross...butI
did.EverytimeIgotuptotheplacewhereIneededtocross,
IdiscoveredsmallpebbleshadformedapathformeandeachtimeI've
facedatrial,IknowGodwillputthepebbles inplacewhenIneedtocross." Elaine
Ingalls Hogg Courage is the first of human qualities, because it is the
quality which guarantees all others. Winston Churchill

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 24

Ithink that human beings are very imitative creatures; we imitate
clothes, hair styles, mannerisms and lifestyles. A man's mind will be
influenced by what he listens to and what he reads. And what we think is
very important to sobriety. Today I make an effort to examine my
thinking and check it out with a sponsor or in a support group. I know
that my dignity in sobriety is connected not only with what I do but
also with my attitudes and thoughts. When my thinking begins to go
crazy, I know I am in a dangerous place and I need to talk. God created
me with the ability to think, therefore, I need to safeguard the
information I put in my mind. Reverend Leo Booth Thought makes the whole
dignity of man; therefore endeavor to think well, that is the only
morality. Blaise Pascal

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 25

"Did you notice the beautiful sunrise this morning?" Steven asked. I
shookmy head no. "Well, I justwatched it frommy cell and realized how
grateful I amthat I can see the sunrise through the bars of my window.
And, I just had breakfast. My oatmeal wasn't as cold as it often is,
which makes it a good day." The sincerity in his voice stopped me in my
tracks. Just the day before, Steven learned he would be serving the full
termof his DUI sentence, another five years, behind bars. I've never
forgotten what I learned from him that beautiful morning. When I start
throwing a pity party for myself I remember that I, too, can choose what
to focus on in my life. Lisa Kugler People become what you encourage
them to be, not what you nag them to be. Scudder N. Parker

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 26

Recovery is a journey from brokenness to wholeness during which we often
shut ourselves off from those around us. What we don't readily see is
that intentionally alienating ourselves from others is a kind of
self-inflicted brokenness. There is no shame in needing others; none of
us is complete without human relationships, but if we choose to face
life in isolation we will always be deficient in some way. At the same
time, we must realize that in every relationship we also bring something
of value to others that they need in order to be whole. In community, we
give and receive strength for the journey. Lynne Lepley I would rather
define self as the interiorization of community. James Hillman

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 27

When going through tragedy to emerge on the other side without having
taken on the ugly traits of bitterness, anger and self-pity is no easy
task.Hopefully, we come to understand that deep in our souls we are all
beautiful. It is this beauty that continues to live on. It's an
incredible gift if we can connect with it, not only within ourselves,
but also with our loved ones. But just as the ugly duckling was blind to
his true being until he saw his reflection, we can't know this truth
unless we are willing to look for it. The journey takes courage. Joyce
Harvey I asked God to give me happiness. God said, "No. I give you
blessings. Happiness is up to you." Unknown

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 28

Today I greet the world, not only with resolutions of what to achieve,
but also with a willingness to embrace life as it is. If I miss all that
is contained in this moment, then I miss it all. The beauty, purpose and
mystery that are always available to me are my real treasures in this
world. This year I learn about life and love and simplicity. I want what
I pass on to my children to go into their hearts where no one can take
it away. I want to know them and I want them to know me. Tian Dayton
Life was meant to be lived, and curiosity must be kept alive. One must
never, for whatever reason, turn his back on life. Eleanor Roosevelt

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 29

Every imaginable form of loss, disappointment or temptation has been
experienced countless times and will be repeated as long as man
continues to walk the Earth. Pain isn't a new concept but it is
experienced fresh in each shattered heart seeking a purpose for life's
unpredictable course. Despite our own heartbreaking experiences, we
cannot fully comprehend the depth of despair that touches each
individual soul. What we can do, is draw from our own experiences a
passion to wrap them in tender arms of compassion, cover them with
prayer and become, through our own response, a model of God's
unconditional love. Valerie Frost The finest qualities of our nature can
be preserved only by the most delicate handling. Henry David Thoreau

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 30

Days come and go and the beauty of life is lost when I wander through
moments unconsciously. To fully experience life I remind myself of what
gave me pleasure as a small child. Sniffing oranges as I peeled the
skin. Rolling a caramel around in my mouth. Feeling the swooping thrill
as I swished down a slide. Playing with bubbles in a soapy bath. The
curiosity and creativity I possessed as a child is still inside of me.
All I need to do is remember that my ability to recapture it is there
for the taking. I can dance, write, play or listen and in doing so I
awaken my senses to celebrate the creative wonderful parts that I
possess. Rokelle Lerner Some pursue happiness, others create it. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

MARCH 31

It's very early spring; it's still damp and cold. Though the snow has
melted off the garden beds, the debris of winter is all that's evident.
I stoop down and pull off a bit of matted leaves here and there, pull
back the few branches of evergreen left over from the holidays, and I'm
amazed to see the little shoots of bulbs and perennials clearly showing
above the soil. I am always reminded that, each spring the new shoots in
the garden return and soon blossom into flowers. I also remember that I
too experience new growth all the time, especially after I clear the
debris of what's no longer needed in my life. Anne Conner Criticism,
like rain, should be gentle enough to nourish a man's growth without
destroying his roots. Frank A. Clark

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 1

Ijust celebrated my first Dry Decade. At my first A.A. meeting, I cried.
I couldn't speak and I went home and finished off my bottle of vodka.
But I went back the next day. So how were the first ten years? It was
heavy on the major life stuff; I got married, quit my job, had two
babies. How I did it all without my Stoli, I don't know. But I couldn't
have done it with my Stoli, either. Ten years is a long time, but then
not. To see where I've been and where I am now is both confusing and
clear. It's ten years that I may not have lived to see, had I continued
sailing into darkness. Julia Jergensen Edelman When walking through the
"valley of shadows," remember, a shadow is cast by a light. H.K. Barclay

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 2

Early on you may find obstacles in your path and have the constant
feeling of being unfit. Sometimes you blame yourself for the nagging
weakness that causes you to regress. Re-adjust your thinking; take the
pressure off and stop beating yourself up. Shame and guilt may flood you
no matter how great your willpower is. Write down your trigger points.
Replace these negative thoughts with positive ones. Conquer this
internal battle by summoning your inner strength and purpose. Suzanne
Baginskie He can inspire a group only if he himself is filled with
confidence and hope of success. Floyd V. Filson

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 3

Serenity is an expression of my spiritual nature and--much as I might
try--I cannot experience it through hard work and determination.
Instead, I must learn to let go of my anger, resentments, demands and
the need to be "right." Then and only then will I be at peace with
myself and the world around me. Jeff McFarland Nothing can bring you
peace but yourself. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 4

Timing is everything. When is it time for me to make decisions about my
recovery? When will I no longer wait to do something about my family
situation, my pain or my destructive relationships? I know that
postponing help will only allow my problems to continue. I have been
waiting for the "right time" to start acting for my benefit when in
fact, there is no better time than now. Today I will take care of
myself. I will wait no longer for the help I need. The "right time" has
come. Rokelle Lerner Let your life lightly dance on the edges of Time
like dew on the tip of a leaf. Tagore

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 5

Were we given the choice, not many of us would choose to learn the hard
lessons. They overtake us nevertheless. And yet they are not without
value, these painful experiences. Whether visited upon us unfairly at
the hand of another or brought on by our own bad choices, we have the
ability to select our attitude from this point forward. We can glean
every possible goodness from present circumstances and resolve to learn
all that may be learned, not only for our own benefit but to help ease
the way of fellow learners. Rhonda Brunea Experience: that most brutal
of teachers. But you learn, my God do you learn. C.S. Lewis

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 6

Marathons are won one inch at a time, and twenty pounds are lost one
ounce at a time. We must simply repeat the same action over and over and
over again, until we win. We only get what we are working for by a
series of little actions, one boring move at a time. Success in life has
to do with a simple faithfulness to do what we know how to do, one task
at a time, one moment at a time. Success has everything to do with
simply waking up one more day and moving forward. Barbara A. Croce Big
shots are only little shots who keep shooting. Christopher Morley

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 7

Sometimes I'm more generous and forgiving towards others than of myself.
It's easy to be at war within--harsh, judgmental, focusing on faults.
Today will be the beginning of fairness. I'll be a friend to myself;
generous and forgiving. I will talk gently, and appreciate my strengths.
I acknowledge there are areas of needed improvement that I must work on,
but I will practice being as supportive with my inner person as I am to
others. This is especially critical for my recovery. I can be my own
best friend in word, thought and deed. Brenda Nixon Things which matter
most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least. Goethe

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 8

If we all approached each of our days as if they were the last, perhaps
we would finally understand that a life well lived is our greatest
responsibility and our ultimate glory. The prospect of death wouldn't be
so frightening. Of course we are a relentlessly hopeful group--that's
what makes us human-- and who are we not to believe we can live forever?
In many ways we do. Take the time to savor, like never before, every
rise and set of the sun, every phase of everymoon, each rain shower and
cloudless sky, all the rich and myriad sights and sounds and smells that
are ordinary and extraordinary. Nancy Burke And if the earthly no longer
knows your name, whisper to the silent earth: I'm flowing. To the
flashing water say: I am. Rainer Maria Rilke

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 9

What do you say to someone who has manipulated, abused and controlled
you for years? What do you say to someone who has lied to you for your
entire life? What do you say to someone who ultimately wants to destroy
you? I sat in silence for what seemed like an eternity. Finally I asked,
"Why do you try to control my every move? Why won't you just leave me
alone?" In the few seconds that it took me to ask those two questions, I
felt just a little bit of separation from ED--an acronym for my eating
disorder. And it felt so good. Jenni Schaefer No one can make you feel
inferior without your consent. Eleanor Roosevelt

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 10

Ioften feel so impatient when things don't change more quickly than I
want them to. My old way of thinking left me desperate for immediate
gratification. If something didn't happen right away, I changed course
and tried another approach with the same high standards of immediacy.
That included everything from what I cooked for dinner, to the
newposition forwhich I applied, to demanding that a relationship develop
the way Iwanted it to, rather thanwaiting to see how it would develop
naturally. Today, I have learned to be conscious of slowing down,
lowering my expectations and understanding the different stages in any
process. I am happier all around, and I cook better meals! Anne Conner
Growth in wisdom may be exactly measured by decrease in bitterness.
Friedrich Nietzsche

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 11

How do I put the pieces of my life back together? What do I do with
those misshapen parts of myself, the parts that are old, frayed and
tattered? Let me take a lesson from the quilt maker. I will examine all
parts of myself before I make decisions to "keep" or "throw out." Who I
am is all I have to work with. There is no need to rip myself apart and
start over. Recovery is the art of making order out of chaos. With love
and patience, I am learning how to make order out of my personal chaos.
A work of art is in the making. Rokelle Lerner You must understand the
whole of life, not just one little part of it. J. Krishnamurti

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 12

Thanking God for a specific attribute brings him into your everyday life
and reminds you he has an answer for your every need. On a day you feel
disorganized, or frustrated with someone else's disorganization, thank
him for being organized. When you feel misunderstood, thank him for
being understanding. When you experience his perfect timing that turned
out to be different from yours, thank him for being timely. Thank him
for being generous on a day you are experiencing his unmerited
abundance. Thank him for being a forgiver, on a day you need
forgiveness, or need him to help you forgive. When you feel less
important than others, thank him for being interested in all of us. Lana
Fletcher The strength of a man's virtue must not be measured by his
efforts, but by his ordinary life. Blaise Pascal

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 13

There is something unique about each one of us. We all have different
ways of expressing ourselves, of handling adversity or conflict.
Misunderstandings are the basis for most quarrels and it requires
patience to listen to what is said between the lines. To recover from
hurts and injustices I must first look at myself. If something I did or
said added to the conflict, then I must take responsibility for my
actions and apologize. If the other person cannot accept it and the
relationship suffers, it is their problem. I have done my best. Joan
Clayton Forgiveness is the bridge for restoring relationships. Joan
Clayton

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 14

It is a sign of wisdom to be able to set goals and then, having done so,
to let them go. All that is required for success is a vision of the
destination. The journey itself will reveal the means that will take you
there. Mistakes will not throw you off course unless you let them stop
you. A good navigator keeps a sure eye on the final destination, but
steers there through a series of approximations. Brahma KumarisWorld
Spiritual University Your determination pulls success toward you, and
your focus pushes obstacles away. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 15

We can be so quick to judge, to label actions, people, circumstance as
good or bad, right or wrong. By doing so we essentially limit our
experience of life. Even the painful path of an alcoholic need not be
labeled or judged as bad, for this path provides perspective,
consciousness, gifts unattainable in any other way. Today, I let go of
my need to label or judge, remembering that often gifts are well
disguised, and that God has a much bigger perspective than I. Jeffrey
R.Anderson Don't judge each day by the harvest you reap, but by the
seeds you plant. Robert Louis Stevenson

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 16

Ilove to awaken to the birdsong outside my bedroom window as I wonder
what the new day will bring. As I look outside, it looks cold and damp
as if it has been raining. Yet, regardless of the weather, the little
robin perched on her branch will continue singing. The robin knows that
all her needs will be provided for daily. There is no need to worry. I
also have needs, but unlike the little robin, I do worry. But, just for
this morning, I will surrender my cares to the one God who provides for
all creation. Theresa Meehan Life is really simple, but men insist on
making it complicated. Confucius

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 17

For me, the greatest part of recovery is the feeling that I am never
alone. I have a whole sober community that I share my life with. One day
someone is holding me up; another day that same person is shaky and I
get to be their strong support. In recovery I have been given so much
love and so much hope. A passage in "Promises" from The Big Book of
Alcoholics Anonymous says it best, "We are going to know a new freedom
and a new happiness. No matter how far down the scale we have gone, we
will see how our experience can benefit others." Dorri Olds I once was
lost but now I'm found. John Newton

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 18

Choosing an attitude of joy regardless of circumstances is a courageous
act of faith, but it is also a matter of will. Such an attitude enables
us to set a strong hand to whatever good we can do, lighting brave
little candles against the darkness. It is a conscious decision to make
my world better rather than worse. I choose this day to notice and savor
every good thing. I will walk in joy that cannot be disturbed by the
actions of others, but can be passed on to those who desire it. Rhonda
Brunea We cannot cure the world of sorrows, but we can choose to live in
joy. Joseph Campbell

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 19

Paint it all. Not just the sunshine and the rainbows, but also the
floods and the storms. Write it all. Not just about laughter and cheers,
celebrations and victories, but also write about pains and tears,
failures and fears. Because as the years go by and you go over your
life, you will not want to miss out on anything. For even the faintest
smile, even the smallest teardrop has made your life as it is. Maria
Isabel A.Arellano Imagination disposes of everything; it creates beauty,
justice, happiness, which is everything in the world. Blaise Pascal

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 20

Iaccept that each time I grow or change, somewhere pain will be present.
Issues that I may have accumulated over a period of decades I am dealing
with in a much shorter time frame. The pain of confronting myself in
these ways will be present alongside the joy that I feel. The easiest
way to have the joy rests in not denying the pain, which is also a
natural part of the process. All change requires a giving up, and this
in itself is cause for mourning. It is this giving up, however, that
clears the path for change. I know today that I am going through a
purification process and though it is not easy, it is deeply worthwhile.
Tian Dayton In order to unify ourselves we must change, renounce, give
ourselves; and this violence to ourselves partakes of pain. Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 21

When our last child left home I had "empty nest" syndrome big time.
"Let's get in the pickup and go for a drive," my husband said, brushing
away my tears. After a few miles I saw it. A large piece of gnarled
white driftwood had been discarded by a country road. The white wood
glistened in the sunlight. We put this treasure in our front yard. After
many years it still stands, sharing its beauty while reminding me the
best things in life are free. Letting go of my children was hard, but
like my driftwood, they glisten with beauty in their freedom too. Joan
Clayton It takes a lot of courage to release the familiar and seemingly
secure, to embrace the new. Alan Cohen

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 22

How many times did our mother talk to us about keys? The key to
happiness was trust. The key to a decent meal was practice. Being
prepared was the key to end all keys. Save three months' pay (in case
you lose your job). Keep a canned hamin the pantry (for unexpected
company). Have clean underwear (in case you have to go to the hospital).
But I wasn't prepared for her to die. I wasn't prepared for a tomorrow
without her. Not until our four-year-old granddaughter Amy leaned over
Mom's coffin and shook her sleeve and whispered, "When you get to
Heaven, say hello to my other grandma, okay?" A child passed us the key.
Mary Lee Moynan To live fully is to let go and die with each passing
moment, and to be reborn in each new one. Jack Kornfield

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 23

Life is fair because everything balances out; tears are eventually
replaced with laughter, loneliness with companionship, fear with
bravery, and pain with strength. Today I embrace this adventure called
life---taking it all in. I am able to accept what comes my way even if
it's a deep valley because I know there's a mountaintop to come. Brenda
Nixon Life is not so much a matter of position as of disposition. Ralph
Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 24

Glimpses of divine guidance do not usually appear to me as flashes of
inspiration or overwhelming feelings of spiritual bliss. Often they
arrive more subtly, as in a magazine article someone sends to me, or a
book I happen to pick up without knowing why. I find my answers in the
everyday moments as often as I do in the breathtaking cathedrals or
quiet times of prayer. When I am too busy looking for the grand gesture,
I often miss the soft whisper. Today I will keep my mind open to the
tiny messages that appear to me throughout the day. I have faith that
they are there; it is up to me to be open to receiving them. Amy Ellis
Start by doing what is necessary then do what is possible. And suddenly,
you are doing the impossible. St. Francis of Assisi

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 25

We often grasp the stem of a rose precariously, fearing the pain of
getting pricked. Just as sometimes, in a difficult situation, we tend to
dance around the real problem in hopes of not getting hurt. We make
excuses for unseemly actions committed by a loved one or ourselves. We
refuse to discuss an issue that may force us to change our familiar
lifestyle. We convince ourselves that a difficult task is probably not
necessary after all. In avoiding the problem we lose the opportunity to
correct it. We remain fearful and out of control. The fact is that by
grasping the stem of a rose firmly one does not feel the prick of the
thorns. Kay Conner Pliszka Only by facing fears can we defuse them and
put ourselves back in control. Hugh Delehanty

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 26

Before recovery, we had many questions, the most frequent being
"Whyme?"Our answers to that were often too painful to face, so we
drowned ourselves in alcohol, substances, food or sex. The morning
after, there still were no answers. Just for today, we'll ask: "Why not
me?" Candy Killion What is the answer? In that case, what is the
question? Gertrude Stein

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 27

Everything you need has already been given to you. You have legs so you
can turn and face your fears. You have arms to reach out to others. You
have shoulders to brace yourself when bad times come. You have ears so
you can hear the advice of others. You have eyes to see what needs to be
done. And you have a smile so you can always show the face in the mirror
that you're going to be okay. ShelleyWake Be gentle with yourself, learn
to love yourself, to forgive yourself, for only as we have the right
attitude toward ourselves can we have the right attitude toward others.
Wilfred Peterson

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 28

As I become healthier, my desire to live joyfully grows. Healing means
that I no longer want to live in fear, indecision or despair. If this
means that I must leave a painful or destructive situation, I am free to
do so. No longer do I believe that I am supposed to suffer, nor do I
believe that God is ready to punish me at any moment. These beliefs are
part of the addicted family sickness. Getting well means acknowledging
God's love and knowing that my healing is an expression of my Higher
Power. I am making daily choices to avoid beliefs or feelings that throw
me back into self-defeating cycles. I am living my life based upon the
firm belief that I deserve to find joy and happiness. Rokelle Lerner
Believe that life is worth living and your belief will help create the
fact. William James

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 29

Believe in yourself, it is your most valuable commodity. This inner
spiritual inspiration will help you find the strength to commit yourself
for the long-term healing process. Your acceptance will cultivate
character and patience. Denial will soon pass. As you reach for your
goal the reality will overcome your old desires. A wealth of happiness
erases your stress of yesterday while creating a strong accountable bond
for today. Your protective covering will yield to the richness that
life's new pathway will bring; the need for a sense of personal
fulfillment and satisfaction. Suzanne Baginskie While it takes courage
to achieve greatness, it takes more courage to find fulfillment in being
ordinary. Marilyn Thomsen

Footnotes for Life

APRIL 30

Darkness is relentless in conquering everything in its path with
negativity and hopelessness. "All is lost," cries out its hapless
victim. Then the dawn quietly breaks through, gently overpowering its
opponent. The exhausted soul is re-energized and consumed with thoughts
of endless possibilities, hopes and dreams. A new life is born and the
dawn is victorious. Darkness retreats with wounded spirit, mourning its
loss and wondering how the gentleness of dawn can be so effective. Irma
Newland Expect the dawn of a new beginning in the dark nights of life.
Lloyd John Ogilvie

Footnotes for Life

MAY 1

Iwork with children who have been ravaged by tragedy and abuse. Most
days I am simply amazed and proud that these kids, especially with their
acting out and "behavior problems," have survived. One little girl in
particular had been victimized at every turn in her young life. During
our initial session I was given all the proof I needed of a child's
resilience as she serenaded me with the best rendition of "Itsy Bitsy
Spider" I've ever heard. Her ability to do that reminded me that despite
the awful things I see every day, mine is a great reward to meet just
one of these kids, who no matter what happens in their life, can still
sing. Jennifer M.Reinsch Those who wish to sing, always find a song.
Swedish Proverb

Footnotes for Life

MAY 2

Spring arrives. The start of the new season inspires you to begin anew.
You climb another step in your healing progress, an acceptance of a
stronger you. The snow melts away like the anxious feelings you've
finally shed. The ice turns into cool water and with it your worries
trickle away. Your head and heart yield to the warm gentle breeze. The
challenges that threatened you are easier to overcome. Life becomes
simpler and each day brighter as hope and faith prevail. Suzanne
Baginskie If the simple things of nature have a message that you
understand, rejoice, for your soul is alive. Eleonora Duse

Footnotes for Life

MAY 3

Ihave something now that I did not have as a child in an alcoholic home.
I have choices. It wasn't always like that. For example, we had the same
thing for dinner every night--365 days a year! What we had for dinner
was tension because no one wanted to be there. I am an adult and a
father now. If I don't learn new ways, if I don't learn healthy
behaviors and if I am not recovering, not only would it affect our
children, but someday I could sit at a dinner table with grandchildren
who learned to hate dinner. Family rituals are passed from generation to
generation. Recovering shows us how to change them. Robert J. Ackerman I
will be an adult child of an alcoholic until the day I die, but I am not
going to die one more day because I am an adult child of an alcoholic.
Robert J. Ackerman

Footnotes for Life

MAY 4

We may have become so accustomed to hardship and pain that we have lost
our ability to recognize a good thing when it arrives. We have become
preoccupied looking out for the next disaster that will somehow need to
be handled. When better times arrive, many of us feel like imposters,
undeserving of such favor. We must remember that simply because life has
been a certain way in the past does not require it always to be so. We
can train our hearts to recognize and accept the good.We do ourselves a
great kindness in learning to gratefully accept positive, life-giving
occurrences as easily as we once accepted gloom. Rhonda Brunea Nothing
is too wonderful to be true. Michael Faraday

Footnotes for Life

MAY 5

If you want to change your behavior, focus on the thinking which causes
it. Thoughts are like seeds. From them grow your attitudes and, in turn,
your actions. When you build a house, every brick counts. When you build
character, every thought counts. So think constructively. Brahma Kumaris
World Spiritual University It is because you are determined, not
flawless, that you attain perfection. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

MAY 6

Another rainy day--and I was so hoping for some bright sunshine. At
first I feel disappointed, but then I begin to realize how comfy and
cozy I feel inside my home curled up in a throw with a good book. I
listen to the soft patter of drops outside my window, and I think I can
feel the Earth soaking up and drinking in the nourishing rain. I imagine
seeing the roots of my perennials and vegetables; fat and juicy from the
moisture they are taking in. I think about how relaxed and refreshed I
now feel, having been gifted with a day of repose. What joy--another
rainy day. Anne Conner You have to accept whatever comes, and the only
important thing is that you meet it with courage and with the best that
you have to give. Eleanor Roosevelt

Footnotes for Life

MAY 7

My mother had a stroke that left her struggling to talk, walk and
swallow. She had no trouble hearing. We spoke of love. We told her our
secrets. Then, one night, we put Mom in a wheelchair and took her to
church for a service for the sick. The place was packed. "Raise your
hand," said the priest, "if you think your illness is a punishment from
God." I watched in disbelief as my good mother slowly lifted her hand
just inches off her lap. That's when I learned that healing begins in
the heart. In time, Mom walked and talked again. Trust God with your
secrets. Mary Lee Moynan True friendship is like sound health; the value
of it is seldom known until it is lost. Charles Caleb Colton

Footnotes for Life

MAY 8

Iwas a freshman in college, three hours from home and not one face at
the meeting looked familiar. During a lecture the mention of "Al-Anon"
had caught my attention. That was a new one on me. No harm in checking
it out--for clinical research reasons, of course. I looked for a seat
way in the back and began having second thoughts when someone touched my
arm. "Please, join us." I didn't know what to do, or if I belonged
there. I felt eyes searching, looking for clues, trying to uncover my
secrets, my memory. In a moment of true clarity, as I tried desperately
to come up with an excuse for leaving, the woman simply said, "It's
okay--we know." Patricia Holdsworth Love wholeheartedly, be surprised,
give thanks and praise-- then you will discover the fullness of your
life. Brother David Steindl-Rast

Footnotes for Life

MAY 9

There is a great deal of power in humility. Sometimes that power is
useful for your own protection. Sometimes it is useful in the protection
of others. The power of humility allows you to see the benefit in
everything, even the criticisms of others. It enables you to say, "Maybe
there's something for me to learn here. Someone is saying this to me,
there must be something to it." Your own self-respect works to keep you
steady, no matter what comes your way. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual
University Dive deeply into life's mysteries, and fly high above life's
challenges, all the while keeping your feet firmly on the ground. Brahma
Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

MAY 10

This morning I wake up looking forward to what I can accomplish. I have
chosen my path and I will concentrate on positive goals; the power of
ambition and embracing change. I will embody positive transformation and
revel in every step I take in the process of becoming who I want to be,
moving forward with determination toward my future. Stacey Chillemi
Intelligence without ambition is a bird without wings. C. Archie
Danielson

Footnotes for Life

MAY 11

It may be impossible to capture life in all of its beauty, splendor and
glory. Yet, by catching even bits and pieces of those significant
moments, we are endowed with the wonderful opportunity to relive them,
to savor them once more. And then we realize life is truly beautiful.
Maria Isabel A.Arellano Some people have a wonderful capacity to
appreciate again and again, freshly and naively, the basic goods of
life, with awe, pleasure, wonder, and even ecstasy. A.H. Maslow

Footnotes for Life

MAY 12

Iwas used to living with insanity. Living with an alcoholic parent
prepared me for survival. I learned to enter into destructive
relationships and then to wait for the craziness to end. I learned to
see a person not for who they are, but for whom they might become . . .
if only. I now know I must protect myself emotionally. It's not safe to
place my psyche in the hands of an insane person. I was not put on this
Earth to be abused emotionally or physically. I cannot wait for
permission to get help or leave an abusive relationship. I cannot wait
for overwhelming approval from others for my choices. My life is my own
and I must make decisions in my own best interest. Rokelle Lerner I
cannot think of any need in childhood as strong as the need for a
father's protection. Sigmund Freud

Footnotes for Life

MAY 13

Leave the whispers of the tempter. Today, the strength to walk away is
within reach. The taste still charms, but the enemy lives there. An
image of new life clings to the mirror. The sweetness of sin turns to
bitter memory. Once held captive by cravings, release comes through
prayer. Life's path was steep, but now grows level. Peace replaces the
agony of physical yearnings. A fortress shields me from the tempter.
Tomorrow, fill my heart with more prayers to protect me. Ann Coogler
Trials, temptations, disappointments--all these are helps instead of
hindrances, if one uses them rightly. James Buckham

Footnotes for Life

MAY 14

Ican think of no burden that can be heavier upon the shoulders and
conscience of someone than the wreckage of one's past, left untended.
The Steps give us the tools to relieve ourselves of that burden, clean
up the wreckage and live happy, joyous and free with the freedom,
excitement and wonder of a child once again. Jeffrey R.Anderson Pain
nourishes courage. You can't be brave if you've only had wonderful
things happen to you. Mary Tyler Moore

Footnotes for Life

MAY 15

Astudy of people living over one-hundred years included their secret of
happy living. They awakened each day being grateful for another day of
life, stating life was too short to hold grudges or spend time
complaining. Every day presents an opportunity to be happy. Joy is
obtained by making others happy. All it takes is a little act of
kindness . . . a note, a smile, an encouraging word, a pat on the back
and a loving heart. We can learn a lot from these centenarians. The gift
of life is priceless. Joan Clayton Being happy today takes care of
tomorrow! Joan Clayton

Footnotes for Life

MAY 16

Hardships sensitize us to the everyday parts of life. When we have been
stripped bare by the happenings of a dark season, the simple fragrance
of lilac on a spring evening, the smile of a stranger, or even the
pleasure of crunching a carrot can wrap themselves around us like a hug.
These ordinary events are like a cool drink of water in a parched land;
we can take them in and allow them to flood the dry places in us.
Barbara A. Croce Take the most difficult challenge you are now facing
and turn it into the greatest opportunity to grow simply by changing how
you see it. Dead ends then become turning points. Bob Perks

Footnotes for Life

MAY 17

When I get a very strong intuitive message, I will listen to it. I may
not be right but I will not discount the feeling or the impulse, knowing
that intuition plays an important part in my life. My intuition is real.
It is a combination of feelings and instincts that help me to navigate
this world. I will not silence that quiet inner voice with "shoulds"
today. Living true to my insides is more comfortable for me than working
around them. Intuition is real. It is there to guide me. Tian Dayton
Lead me from the unreal to the real. Lead me from darkness to light.
Lead me from death to immortality. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad

Footnotes for Life

MAY 18

Life is full of choices that we make with great and little thought.
Whatever the case, you should look back on the moment without regret.
Regret is empty and futile and brings with it stagnation. Instead look
forward with wishes. Wishes of another opportunity to make another
choice with the memory of the lesson learned from that outcome. Michelle
Gipson I have no regrets, only many, many wishes! Michelle Gipson

Footnotes for Life

MAY 19

Irun the risk of getting burned out when I give wholly to others that
which I need myself. When I see to it that my own needs are met, I am
not tempted to fill my unmet needs in ways that harm others and myself.
I seek nurturing support from my friends and my Higher Power and take
time to relax and unwind. I understand that if I fail to support myself
I become exhausted, lethargic and angry, helping no one at all.
Attending to my own needs before I help someone else is an act of love.
Rokelle Lerner Hope is faith in the me yet to be. Treatment Counselor

Footnotes for Life

MAY 20

We never knew each other, let alone had a relationship as sisters. She
was the first daughter of my dad, but we had different mothers. Our
father had fallen in love with one of his students, a girl fifteen years
his junior. He left his wife and young daughter and married the student,
who became my mother. We had lived separate lives, become women, wives
and mothers, coming together as our father lay dying. I was impressed
with her courage and her talents and I admired her forgiving spirit
toward a father who had abandoned her. We heal because of the pain we
share and in doing so, refuse to repeat the mistakes of our parents.
Miriam Hill You can't shake hands with a clenched fist. Indira Gandhi

Footnotes for Life

MAY 21

Life is like soup. The same ingredients will taste differently tomorrow
than today and the process is quite different experienced alone, or with
another. Two people can use the same recipe; yet end up with a different
flavor and every person will have a unique experience of the same
ingredients. You don't have to know what is in it to like it and of
course, there is no one right way to do it. Creating it with love makes
all the difference. Jeffrey R.Anderson All life is an experiment. The
more experiments you make the better. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

MAY 22

Someone once asked me how to pray. I think prayer is a bit like sex.
It's what happens between consenting people. So here's how it works for
me. I talk. God listens. So you might ask "How do you know God listens?"
That's the tricky part. One time, I turned a picture on its side and
decided that if God's answer to my plea was "yes" then in the morning,
the picture would be straight. Well that didn't work. But strangely
enough, God's answer was yes. Twenty-four hours later, I met the man I
would marry. At our wedding,my best friend gave us a plaque "God gives
the best to those who leave the choice to him." Mary Lee Moynan When you
have laboriously accomplished your daily task, go to sleep in peace. God
is awake. Victor Hugo

Footnotes for Life

MAY 23

My friend was showing me his early spring vegetable garden and he said,
"And here is where the kale is coming up." I looked down and all I saw
was dry dirt. "You mean, where the kale will soon come up?" "No, look,"
he said, "It's up already." I squatted down to look more closely and
still only saw small stones and dusty soil. "Look," he said, "Right
here." And there they were, as clear as bright green seedlings against
dark, sandy soil. Suddenly, I could see fifty of them all in a row where
I had seen nothing moments before. Sometimes, we need another pair of
eyes to help us see what's right in front of us. Anne Conner Gratitude
unlocks the fullness of life. It turns denial into acceptance, chaos to
order, confusion to clarity. Melody Beattie

Footnotes for Life

MAY 24

His brief but tormented young life was punctuated by recurring visits to
the ER for treatment of unexplained, questionable injuries too numerous
to count. The responsible adults who were supposed to be providing love
couldn't control their own anger, impulses and frustrations. He
shouldn't have been allowed to slip through the cracks, but in this
imperfect world, he did. The battered, wounded youngster experienced
moments of comfort and safety as he passed into the next life surrounded
by the love that he so desperately needed and deserved in this life. Be
a source of love and comfort to someone every day. Laura Hayes Lagana
The hunger for love is much more difficult to remove than the hunger for
bread. Mother Teresa

Footnotes for Life

MAY 25

Iwas the daughter with "so much potential" as my mother used to say. I
used the potential to hide my drug habit, living a lie, dreading the day
anyone discovered my awful secret. That was over seven years ago. My
family's love and encouragement never wavered and today I am fully
enmeshed in my family. I belong. I have a wonderful job, and I'm active
in my church and community. My relationship with my fourteen-year-old
son is incredible. I am there to guide him, love him and to be a light
in his world. So, once again my mom was right . . . I do have potential.
And every day in my recovery, I live it. TraceyW. Lee If you can't be a
good example, then you'll just have to be a horrible warning. Catherine
Aird

Footnotes for Life

MAY 26

The words "Here I go again" indicate tears are on the way when I talk
about something near and dear to my heart; like helping a youth from a
broken home. For years I didn't express deep-seated emotional thoughts
to avoid the pain and embarrassment of losing control, of crying.
Finally I realized the benefit of expressing my true feelings. I
changed. Now I cry from strength and courage, not from weakness and
fright. Now I express my deep thoughts. If I cry, others hopefully will
see the value in my tears. Just maybe they will see the value in their
tears also. George H.Moffett The more often a man feels without acting,
the less he'll be able to act. And in the long run, the less he'll be
able to feel. C.S. Lewis

Footnotes for Life

MAY 27

When Faith announced, "I have chosen the song for the father and
daughter dance at my wedding," Mina was shocked. Faith's father was
disabled and dependent on his scooter, but Faith was insistent they
would have this dance. The night of the wedding the band began to play
Faith's song as Mina prayed for a miracle. Faith hugged her dad and
grasped the handles of his scooter. They slowly circled the floor;
mindless of the tearyeyed crowd. A determined Faith fulfilled her dream
and Mina learned a valuable lesson. Nothing is impossible if one is
committed to her dream. Myrna Beth Lambert Any man can be a father but
it takes someone special to be a dad. Anne Geddes

Footnotes for Life

MAY 28

My life is a symphony that I create. I can make it beautiful and
soothing to the ear or strident and cacophonous. Focusing on losses and
disappointments brings discordant notes into play. My soul cramps and I
can no longer find the air to breathe a clear note through my
instrument. When I instead turn to regard the good with a thankful
heart, tragedy transforms into glory, disappointment becomes
opportunity, and discord melts into harmony. The music of my life
encourages listening hearts to rest and heal, even while bringing
restoration to me. Rhonda Brunea You know, sometimes it is the artist's
task to find out how much music you can still make with what you have
left. Itzhak Perlman

Footnotes for Life

MAY 29

Today is today. Today is not yesterday, crushing you with the mistakes
you have made. Today is not tomorrow, which is always out of your grasp.
But you can take hold of today. You can face it. You can deal with it.
You can rejoice in the gift that it is. Unwrap this present with the awe
of a five-year-old on Christmas morning. Pull off the bow, rip the
wrapping paper and give thanks to him who provided you this gift today.
Sharon Siepel Do not pray for easy lives. Pray to be stronger. Do not
pray for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers equal to your
tasks. Phillips Brooks

Footnotes for Life

MAY 30

If someone had told me ten years ago that I would be living my dream,
writing and painting every day, happily married and fulfilled, I would
have thought they were crazy, but here I am. Sometimes life gets very
hard and somewhere along the line you hit rock bottom. All you can do is
stand there and look up to where the light is, wishing there were some
way out. I'm living proof that life gets better and there were many
times when I thought it never, never would, but tiny successes turn into
larger ones. Anne Tiller Slates You see things; and you say "Why?" But I
dream things that never were; and I say "Why not?" George Bernard Shaw

Footnotes for Life

MAY 31

The world seems impatient with time. Children can't wait to grow up.
Grownups wish time had not passed so quickly. Older ones wish for "the
good old days." In all of this process, no one seems to enjoy the
present stage of life. Instead of living one day at a time many live in
guilt from yesterday or dread of tomorrow. Today is the time to love,
laugh, encourage, smile and to cheer the fainthearted. It's the time to
leave a good memory, to say, "I love you," and to forgive a wrong. This
very day is the day to give appreciation to someone you have long
admired. Today is the time of your life! Joan Clayton Be patient toward
all that is unsolved in your heart and try to love the questions
themselves. Rainer Maria Rilke

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 1

Wrestling with your mind weakens you. When negative thoughts grab hold
of you, observe them without judgment and they will loosen their grip.
To remain cheerful, learn how to cordon off areas of weakness. Once you
refuse them entry into the rest of your mind, they can no longer
influence you. Then you can work on them safely. Brahma Kumaris World
Spiritual University The secret of success lies in the balance of
remaining firm in the goals you set, but flexible in the process of
realizing them. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 2

Laughter reveals a childlike trust that all will eventually be well. All
may not seem well at the present moment. Things may not line up in as
orderly a fashion as I would prefer, but believing that my Higher Power
is at the helm, I can ease my heart with the healing nourishment of
laughter as I set my hand to doing whatever can be done. Rhonda Brunea
With the fearful strain that is on me day and night, if I did not laugh
I should die. Abraham Lincoln

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 3

On this new morning shed your anxiety and fears; treat this day as a new
adventure. Streamline your daily routine and leave more time for you.
Pace your wants and needs and let yourself be less than perfect. The
major roadblock in your life has been cleared and you need to establish
those new boundaries. Remember to look within yourself and revitalize
your thinking. Take a moment for quiet reflection. Once you're confident
and motivated you'll empower your survivor qualities. They were always
there, but now they need to be recharged. Congratulate yourself and
breathe in your tranquil state of mind. Suzanne Baginskie Most true
happiness comes from one's inner life. It takes reflection and
contemplation and self-discipline. William L Shirer

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 4

Ichoose not to let myself become a victim of circumstance. I refuse to
let fear stop me from taking a chance. I understand time and persistence
is the pathway to my goal and although I will encounter obstacles, I'll
not let go of my dream. I know that faith in God will give me strength
from within and I accept that I may sometimes need help from others. If
there is a day I fall short of the finish line I'll remind myself that I
have tomorrow to make it in record time. I know that in every field, the
expert was once a beginner and I recognize within myself and others the
potential of being a winner! Teri Mitchell Have confidence that if you
have done a little thing well, you can do a bigger thing well, too.
Joseph Storey

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 5

One cold icy night my life changed forever. I was sitting in the car
with the motor running waiting for my son to finish a court-ordered A.A.
meeting when a young woman knocked on my window. "Why don't you come in
and share a cup of coffee with us?" I climbed out and we hurried inside.
The topic was detachment. I didn't have a clue what that meant, but as I
listened an overwhelming sense of belonging washed over me. I was not
alone. I was not crazy. My son's grown now and sober but I still attend
AlAnon. It's not about him, it's about me and sometimes I get the two
mixed up and I need the wisdom to know the difference. Carol Davis
Gustke Convincing yourself does not win the argument. Robert Half

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 6

The gift of friendship can be hard to accept. I wonder, "Is there a
string attached? What is that person's motive?" I need to learn to be a
gracious acceptor of what is offered to me. I can analyze the person,
the friendship and the words. Accepting the friendship slowly and
cautiously can help me begin to trust others. There are those who might
attempt to take advantage of me, but I still need to take the time to
examine the offer. Caution and time can be my friends. Linda
Myers-Sowell It is more shameful to distrust our friends than to be
deceived by them. La Rochefoucauld

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 7

Ihave grown beyond the need to prove to anyone that I am a good girl. I
am not waiting to be rescued or saved. I do not require anyone's
permission to be who I am. I am learning not to experience myself as a
child. The source of my approval resides within me and not at the mercy
of others. I have the ability to see the normal frictions of everyday
life in a realistic perspective and not translate them into evidence of
rejection or of my not really being loved. Along with my autonomy, I am
respecting other people's needs to follow their own destinies, to be
alone sometimes, to be preoccupied with issues not involved with me. I
have matured and embrace my independence. Rokelle Lerner There is no
failure except in no longer trying. Elbert Hubbard

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 8

Often the appearance of something is not really that thing at all,but
rather the lackof something else. For
whatisdarknessbuttheabsenceoflight? Sorrowbut the absence of joy?Hate
but the absence of love? Lack but the absence of abundance? There is no
lack in God. Embrace abundance. Today I release old thoughts, patterns
or habits that impede my life experience. I open, totally and
completely, to a divine abundance of good in all areas of my life.
Jeffrey R.Anderson If we share with caring and love, we will create
abundance and joy for each other. Deepak Chopra, M.D.

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 9

Cars rust. Rusting must start inside somewhere. Then it just pops out in
spots through the paint. Once it starts, it goes fast, from a speck to
many specks to a whole part. It's the same with addicts. Rusty cars are
hard to remember new. Their vexations blot out the memory of their
charm, their accessories and even particular model year. It takes
concentration to call up the original image. It's the same with
alcoholics. Old cars begin to look alike, inside and out, but they get
the job done again and again. They gain respect, a place in the family,
and even acceptance and understanding of frequent breakdowns. It's the
same with addicts and alcoholics. Joseph R. Cruse Courage is a quality
so necessary for maintaining virtue that it is always respected. Samuel
Johnson

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 10

Despite the miracle in my life, recovery remains a day-to-day process.
It began with the supernatural power to forgive and it continues with a
grateful and ever repentant heart. Miracles do happen. Seekers do get
healed. Lives can be forever changed. Recovery is not just a road, it is
also a reason. Rev.Ed Donnally It is faith in something and enthusiasm
for something that makes life worth looking at. Oliver Wendell Holmes

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 11

Each day produces a fresh opportunity to make new choices. Sometimes my
past throws a shadow over the present. A fresh outlook, a new attitude
and the determination to cast off the old weights will brighten my path
through recovery. I learn to dodge, scale and push through the barriers
that block the road to success. Continually looking over my shoulder
makes it difficult to avoid the stumbling blocks in my path or to
recognize and embrace the new plans for my future. I look forward to
tomorrow. The best part of life might be just on the horizon. Valerie
Frost Goals give you more than a reason to get up in the morning; they
are an incentive to keep you going all day. Harvey Mackay

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 12

Natural anger is meant to protect me from harm and help me to know how I
feel. In the past, I learned to stuff my own anger and I lost track of
my own responses to situations because I denied my feelings before I
knew I had them. Today I let myself have my angry feelings without
letting them have me. I needn't let the feeling flood me or make me feel
I need to react. I let my anger inform me that something is not okay so
that I can be honest with myself and with others. Tian Dayton He who has
been angry becomes cool again. Greek Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 13

Ibelieve the day I stopped trying to get over the loss of my mother was
the day I truly began to heal. Sometimes we can't recover the person we
used to be. By accepting our new persona we acquire the ability to get
on with our lives--to live with new hopes and new skills. Elva Stoelers
God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change; the
courage to change the things I can; and the wisdom to know the
difference. Reinhold Niebuhr

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 14

Don't deny sorrow and pretend that it doesn't exist. Just know that with
sorrow comes hope to nurture our inner strength. Hope is healing, hope
is Overcoming our problems and pain. Hope rests in the Perseverance that
we portray in the face of adversity and quite simply hope is Everywhere.
We hope to recover and we recover through hope . . . for sometimes hope
is all we have. Elizabeth Batt Things never go so well that one should
have no fear, and never so ill that one should have no hope. Turkish
Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 15

Our little girl lost her valiant five-month battle with a brain stem
tumor only weeks before her birthday, a day which dawned fittingly with
a steadily falling rain. I secluded myself. The tears and questions
flowed. The answers didn't. Suddenly the sun peeked out, brilliant rays
streamed through the window. I noticed a dark-eyed junco's nest in the
porch rafters and the bird flying in "protect mode." As the mother bird
made its third descent, thinking to comfort it, I said aloud, "Don't
worry Mama Bird, your babies are safe." Those words echoed in my heart
as if God had spoken them. I cried.Only this time, the tears were tears
of joy. Loretta McCann Bjorvik I believe that laughter is the only cure
for grief, and that love is stronger than death. Robert Fulghum

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 16

Throughout my childhood, I dreamt of a peaceful yellow room where I
would sit and wait. For twenty years I thought that little yellow room
was a dream, some abstract defense mechanism to protect my psyche from
the horrors of childhood sexual abuse. Abuse that destroyed trust, even
in God. My guarded relationship with God changed through my Twelve-Step
work. I hid in that little yellow room and I now know God built it
lovingly, for me. He is a carpenter after all. He took hammer and nails,
some sheetrock and a bucket of yellow paint that looked and felt like
cool sunshine on a summer morning and created a safe place for me to
wait. Shannon As long as a man stands in his own way everything seems to
be in his way. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 17

At ten I was amember of a street gang, rising to the rank of leader. A
series of drug and gang-related crimes led me to prison where I
confronted my addictions and took an honest look at the choices I had
made in my life. Functionally illiterate I reentered society through a
prison-based, long-term residential drug treatment program. I have been
sober for twenty years and a few years ago I received an award for
"Counselor of the Year" out of eight thousand counselors in my state. My
work is rewarding and I feel as if I make a difference in the lives of
people I touch. No one knows the potential that lies dormant in those
who cross our paths. Benneth Lee as told to Mark Sanders A dewy spider
web, spun in silence proclaims, "I'm here by design!" Rachel Blevins

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 18

Do not allow your ego to manipulate you into believing that your
material or physical life is what matters. Always allow your spirit to
decide what is important in your life. To follow the ego's path is to be
empty, although if you follow the path of the spirit you will be
eternally fulfilled. Today, try to seek what your spirit desires rather
than what your ego demands. This choice between the ego and the spirit
is the gift of recovery. Rick Singer An egotist is a person who plays
too big a part in his own life. Dan Bennett

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 19

Shedding the shame of the judgments of others is like losing weight--it
doesn't all come off at once. You may put some back on before you get to
where you want to be. Just like that tempting chocolate cake in the back
of the fridge, some people are waiting to fill you with regret and shame
all over again. When you are strong and resist accepting the judgments
of others, you feel lighter, brighter, able to do so many things you
weren't doing before you lost it. It takes some work not to absorb those
judgments; some exercise. And sometimes you've just got to clean out the
fridge. Carla Edmisten It's not that some people have willpower and some
don't. It's that some people are ready to change and others are not.
James Gordon, M.D.

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 20

When things were going too well, it was time to self-destruct again.
Finally close friends and my wife urged me to complete a checklist that
I often used with clients during their assessment for treatment. I did
it to prove everyone wrong, but even with my background as a
professional I was unprepared for my memories of sexual molestation. As
my past began to unravel, there were times I wanted to deny it, but
everywhere I turned my memories were being confirmed for me. I am not
alone as a male survivor, but if it were not for my faith in God and my
wife's faith in me, I would have given up. My life has started to make
sense. Stuart Brantley He that will not apply new remedies must expect
new evils, for time is the greatest innovator. Francis Bacon

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 21

While in the process of "coming to believe," I realized that I had the
wrong perspective about money. My money, as all things, belongs to my
Higher Power. I am merely the agent responsible enough to see that it
reaches its proper destination. Sala Dayo If money is all that a man
makes, then he will be poor--poor in happiness, poor in all that makes
life worth living. Herbert N. Casson

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 22

There is no need to prove the truth. Trying to do so shows only your own
stubbornness. Truth will always reveal itself at the right moment and
the right place. You need be concerned only with living true to your own
self. Judge whether your thoughts, words or actions are beneficial to
the scene in which you find yourself. Focusing on your own part is more
useful than passing judgment on others. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual
University By constantly remaining obedient to your sense of integrity,
certain success obeys your every move. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 23

Set your roots down deep and drink from refreshing streams as you dine
on the sustenance provided by the One who gives you life. Nourish
yourself with words, values and relationships that will uphold you
during the storms of life. Make right choices to move forward, leaving
behind the floods and droughts of the past. Enjoy the refreshing rain of
forgiveness as it washes away the dirt from each day. Sway with gentle
breezes, bend with fierce winds, and reach to the highest heights as you
bask in the warmth of the sun. Ava Pennington Life is simplified when
there is one center, one reason, one motivation, one direction and
purpose. Jean Fleming

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 24

To "live in the moment" means to breathe the fragrance of Heaven, to
stop and listen to the cry of need, to step out in faith and love
bringing God's provision, to not miss it all because I'm too busy
running to the next moment. Karen Hall We have stopped for a moment to
encounter each other. To meet, to love, to share. It is a precious
moment, but it is transient. It is a little parentheses in eternity.
Deepak Chopra, M.D.

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 25

Loved ones of a suicide often blame themselves, but I don't. I know the
choices my husband made in his life were his choices, not mine. Because
of my faith in a loving, merciful God and because I have experienced
many difficult trials in my life, I have learned how to survive and
choose to survive well. I am fully alive and I believe my late husband
is also. He was a man who loved his family and who is no longer burdened
by a disease that had him in its awful grip. I take one day at a time,
enjoy the rain and the sun, endure the ice and the freezing winds--- and
feel peace. Ann Best The only useless endeavor is to resist the command
knit into our very souls, move. Move on. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 26

We play a variety of roles in life, but we should not depend on roles to
define ourselves. A role always involves someone else's needs,
expectations and agendas, which may have little to do with our own. The
power of a role lies in its "possessive other": parents' child;
children's parent; boss's assistant; spouse's mate. His. Hers. Theirs.We
must sometimes put the word "my" into that place of possessive power. "I
am my . . . what?" What role do I play for me? Having no answer for that
makes us as dependent as the sound of that old, proverbial tree falling
in the forest---if there's no one around to hear us, our very existence
becomes questionable. Maribeth Pittman To know what you prefer instead
of what the world tells you you ought to prefer, is to keep your soul
alive. Robert Louis Stevenson

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 27

Many years ago, while in detox, helpless and hopeless, I came to know
the real meaning of true love--one drunk looking after another drunk. It
was there that I learned that if I took certain simple steps, my life
would improve in ways that I could not then imagine. These promises have
become my reality. Sobriety subtly makes itself manifest in my spirit.
It is as though I have been given the chance to relive part of my life
again. Only in retrospect does each year become gentler than the year
before and the change is as inconspicuous as the beating of my heart.
Peter Wright Man improves himself as he follows his path; if he stands
still, waiting to improve before he makes a decision, he'll never move.
Paulo Coelho

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 28

While riding to a weekend recovery convention, my children heard theword
"crackpot" on the radio and began incessantly joking, "You crackpot!" I
focused onfeeling the presence ofmyHigher Power and being grateful for
the kids. The breakup of a relationship bore heavily on me and one of my
intentions that weekend was to process my emotional pain after the loss
of my dream romance. In a serendipitous moment, the finalworkshop
speaker told a Zen story of blooming that resulted from water dripping
from an imperfect "cracked pot." The "God-incidence" of hearing those
uncommon words again tickled my soul. I headed home with a mending
heart,mindful of the joy recovery brings tomy life. Pamela Knight
Coincidence is when God chooses to remain anonymous. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 29

As I gain an understanding about food and it no longer controls me, a
sense of power arises. I replace eating for other non-injurious
pleasures: new activities, new friendships, rediscovering creativity. My
ability to distinguish physical hunger from emotional hunger grows and
this growth makes it less possible to fool myself that filling up my
stomach fills up my heart. Donna LeBlanc Experience is a hard teacher
because she gives the test first, the lesson afterward. Vernon Law

Footnotes for Life

JUNE 30

Behind the giggles, eight-year-old Amanda struggled with her mother's
steady descent into the abyss of alcoholism. Although they were
separated, Amanda's dad respected the deep bond she had for her mother.
He encouraged Amanda to understand and cope with the family's
circumstances. She quickly learned she was not alone, that millions of
other kids love parents challenged by alcoholism and other drug
addiction. She was relieved to know she didn't make her mother drink and
more importantly, couldn't make her stop. With Dad's loving act and his
extraordinary commitment he gave his little girl the gift he himself had
been denied as a child--a safe place to grow, learn and heal. Jerry Moe
If they drop the atom bomb, if I want to have a chance at survival, I
want to be with a bunch of ACoAs. Cathleen Brooks

Footnotes for Life

JULY 1

When we call something by its right name, we have stopped pretending. We
are facing the truth, refusing to dress up what we see. It is then that
life is put in perspective, and we begin to understand. Only after we
call things by their right names do we have the privilege of renaming
them. Barbara A. Croce The beginning of wisdom is to call things by
their right names. Traditional Chinese Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JULY 2

May all your days be blessed with someone who cares for you, accepts you
and your flaws, who will watch over you and protect you. Someone who
will encourage you to believe in life and in your wishes and dreams, who
will give you strength and guidance and care for you throughout
eternity. Stacey Chillemi The curious paradox is that when I accept
myself just as I am, then I can change. Carl Rogers

Footnotes for Life

JULY 3

As you do, so you become. Every action that you perform is recording in
you, the soul. These imprints ultimately mold your character and
destiny. When you understand this principle, you will pay more attention
to bringing your best to everything you do. React less; respond more. As
you learn to tell yourmind what to do, old ways of thinking and doing
will change. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University Whenever life
throws you a curve ball, remember this is all just a game. Brahma
Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JULY 4

Whispers solve a lot of problems. You can't argue in a whisper. You have
to listen carefully to hear a whisper. "Whispers" in the night make
everything right. What seemed so gigantic in the brightness of the day
loses its significance in the security of a whisper. How do I know? In
fifty-seven years of marriage, my husband's whispers in the wee hours of
the morning have brought a lifetime of "I love you's." Love lies behind
a whisper. Love always triumphs. Love wins over all. The next
misunderstanding can end with a whisper. Whisper today. It works every
time. Joan Clayton Before you speak, ask yourself, is it kind, is it
necessary, is it true, does it improve on the silence? Sai Baba

Footnotes for Life

JULY 5

Ida was the cleaning lady. I was the new admission. As she worked, she
asked why I was there. "I lost my wedding band and my sanity last week.
I'm trying to calm down," I explained."You should talk to St. Anthony.
He finds things when you ask," she offered kindly. The next day she
persisted, obviously serious about this saint thing. Unfamiliar with
saints, prayer, even dumb luck, I wrote St. Anthony a poem. Days later
while cleaning the garage my husband walked inside with shaking
hands--and my ring. "It fell out of an empty six-pack container," he
said. I don't know if St. Anthony was impressed with my poetry, but I
knew Ida believed and had lent me both her belief and her favorite
saint. Carol J.Bonomo We are each of us angels with only one wing, and
we can only fly by embracing one another. Luciano de Crescenzo

Footnotes for Life

JULY 6

Recovering from an illness or from some dreaded disease of the heart or
mind--from alcoholism, drug addiction or abuse---can scar us but they
cannot destroy our spirit, not if we refuse to allow it. It takes great
courage to believe that we can overcome. There is a certain bravery in
facing up to our own weaknesses, to our own mortality, to all of the
possibilities that might be visited upon us. Life is what it's all
about. Life is taking a stand with someone, loving through the
hardships, encouraging the defeated, teaching the young. And in the
simple touch of a hand or a warm embrace we heal each other, one person
at a time. Todd Outcalt Find a purpose in life so big it will challenge
every capacity to be at your best. David O. McKay

Footnotes for Life

JULY 7

Growing up, my husband's house was "party central." It was so bad his
neighbors nicknamed his cul-de-sac "alcoholic's circle." The first time
Rich brought me home to meet Mom, she was so drunk she was sliding out
of the chair and spoke with slurred speech. I was shocked. Later he
calmly explained, "Didn't I tell you? My mom's a party girl." He could
have said she was a drunk or a loser, but he didn't. He accepted her for
who she was. When people complain about their alcoholic I tell them what
I learned from my husband, "Quit trying to change them and try some
compassion. Life is a lotmore peaceful that way." Carla Riehl As I
surrendered my imaginary power over others, I gained a more realistic
view of my own life. Al-Anon World Service

Footnotes for Life

JULY 8

The more I learn the more I know that I do not understand. Life is full
of new and wonderful information; paradoxes and confusion abound; every
new idea leads to a further truth and the journey seems endless. In a
sense we are all disciples; we are all learning from each other and the
role of teacher and student is forever being exchanged. In my sobriety I
am able to see how many wonderful "things" exist in the world; so many
fascinating and interesting places to visit, so many loving and
insightful people. God has given me much. I am so grateful to be able to
learn in His garden. To teach is to learn. Japanese Proverb

Reverend Leo Booth Footnotes for Life

JULY 9

My graduation dress made a surprise appearance from the back of my
closet last spring. I heard the faint rattle of bones as the skeleton I
had zipped into the folds of yellow chiffon was suddenly released. I had
never admitted to anyone that I was bulimic; not my teenage daughters,
nor my mother, who died never knowing my secret. As I eyed the soft
fabric in my lap I realized that eating disorders never disappear, they
simply shuffle themselves to the backs of closets and lurk. Now that the
skeleton is out ofmy closet, I hope I can learn to accept the teenager
who wore that dress and forgive her the dark secret she's been hiding.
Elva Stoelers Truth has a healing effect, even when not fully
understood. Mary Baker Eddy

Footnotes for Life

JULY 10

Through the years, I have channeled my anger in many ways . . . in order
not to face it. I have used competence as a weapon, exercising my power
by becoming a taskmaster. I have vented my anger by using chemicals or
food, abusing myself and others by my erratic, destructive behavior. I
was led to believe that if I cut myself off from my rage, it would go
away. Today I know that it is precisely from cutting myself off from my
emotions that I lack skills in resolving them. I am learning how to turn
to others for assistance and support to resolve my emotions without
letting my anger run my life. Rokelle Lerner The fly cannot be driven
away by getting angry at it. African Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JULY 11

It calls to me, like an angry father calling a child. I don't want to
go, but feel powerless to resist. It is an addiction, my addiction. It's
in my blood and clouds my judgment, but not my heart. This is my
struggle, my fight, and I will win. Alcoholism may wage a war, but it
will not take me prisoner.We are not alone in this battle. Together we
will find the strength to overcome an enemy that does not like to be
ignored. Day by day, one step at a time. Raquel Strand Destiny is not a
matter of chance; it is a matter of choice. It is not a thing to be
waited for; it is a thing to be achieved. William Jennings Bryan

Footnotes for Life

JULY 12

Finding myself in prison was both the worst and the best thing that ever
happened to me. I was nothing but a number to the prison system, but
Carla, my counselor in the court-ordered drug program, always treated me
with respect and dignity. When I finally walked out of prison I was
convinced I would put that part of my life completely out of my mind. It
hasn't quite worked out that way. In my day-to-day living when I get a
little shaky in my recovery I still hear Carla's warm voice telling me,
"I am so proud of you, you've earned this," or feel her hug, as loving
as if she were my own mother. You can find angels everywhere. Christine
Learmonth A true friend never gets in your way--unless you happen to be
going down. Anonymous

Footnotes for Life

JULY 13

Forgiveness is not about weakness. It's about freedom and strength. The
strong and courageous face the reality that forgiveness needs to happen
for their own sakes more than for the sake of the ones who caused the
pain. Forgiveness says, "I am not responsible to seek my own justice. I
choose to let life's consequences and the Almighty God deal with you."
Then the forgiver steps forward in life, having removed the chains that
held her to the ones who caused the pain. Neither they, nor the past,
can harm her any longer. Stephanie Ziebarth Be kind, for everyone you
meet is fighting a great battle. Philo of Alexandria

Footnotes for Life

JULY 14

When we let go of the energy it takes to hold on to anger, blame and
resentment, we have the energy to get our own needs met. Feeling all the
feelings and forgiving someone else is a gift we give to ourselves. It's
called serenity. SharonWegscheider-Cruse The weak can never forgive.
Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong. Mahatma Gandhi

Footnotes for Life

JULY 15

The process of self-transformation is not a ten-yard dash, but a
onehundred-fifty mile run. Patience makes the journey possible. It keeps
you cool and calm. So pace yourself. Self-confidence is to know your way
around yourself so instinctively that you always have a strength to draw
on. Somewhere inside, from the stillness, you can always find something
to meet your need. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University Not
repeating your mistakes is a form of progress. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JULY 16

Today I will learn something new. I will open my mind to new ways of
looking at the same old thing. I will intervene in my habitual, hypnotic
patterns of thought that keep me doing the same thing over and over
again. I will recognize that if I am going to feel truly alive I need to
bring my renewed self to each day. Though my body will grow old, my
brain can stay young and flexible through new learning. Tian Dayton
Anyone who stops learning is old, whether at twenty or eighty. Anyone
who keeps learning stays young. The greatest thing in life is to keep
yourmind young. Henry Ford

Footnotes for Life

JULY 17

Sometimesourbodiesfailus.Andifourspiritsfailustoo,the
worldisfullofbravepeoplefromwhomwecangrabahand-ful of courage.When Iwas
very ill, I receivedweekly intra-venoustreatmentsforalmosttwoyears.
Somewhereinthemiddle,
Ilostmycourage.Onedaythesearchforahealthyveinbecametoo painful.
Ipushedtheneedleawayandcried.Ayounggirlofabout
ten,whohadbattledcancerallherlife,smiledatmeand,liftingher
Tshirt,showedmetheholethathadbeencutintoherabdomenso that she could
receive her treatments throughapermanentplasticport.Thenshe put her
hand, so small and soft, onmine andsaid,"Youcantakeit."AndIdid. Nancy
Burke There is strength in knowing that it can be borne, although it
tears. Emily Dickinson

Footnotes for Life

JULY 18

During a traumatic period in my life, I learned to elevate my spirits
daily by concentrating on finding some reason to feel grateful. Many
times I would start with someone else's life. I was always grateful that
my children were healthy. I began to write down the blessings. The list
grew, and as it grew, my health seemed to improve and my enthusiasm for
life began to return. I became aware of the genius of a Creator who
designed our bodies, the intricacies of a respiratory system, our
amazing hearts. Now, I am happy to say that I am amazed at just how many
miracles it takes to make an average day. Nancy Eckerson Life is just a
blank slate, what matters most is what you write on it. Christine
Frankland

Footnotes for Life

JULY 19

There were times I thought that I would never survive the tension, the
stress, the unresolved problems and unsatisfying relationships. But I
look back and know that I have survived. I see that I remove myself from
tense situations by letting go of the responsibility I feel to change
other people and events. Ironically, serenity surrounds me if I don't
avoid the barriers of over-responsibility that are thrown in my path.
These barriers are my challenge, now and forever, and I accept that as a
lesson in life. In challenging myself to conquer them, I reach new
heights, new realms of self-determination and inner strength. Rokelle
Lerner I will acknowledge rewards for they are my due; yet I will
welcome obstacles for they are my challenge. Og Mandino

Footnotes for Life

JULY 20

The flowers had an odd, unnatural appearance as the shopkeeper lifted
them from their shipping box. Tiny nets captured the largest blooms,
squeezing them inward like miniature straightjackets. She prepared a
place for them and then patiently, gently, she pulled the netting away.
With their bindings removed, the petals burst open, revealing hidden
beauty and fragrance. Recovery removes the confinements that hinder me
from experiencing life's full bloom. Rhonda Brunea A single rose can be
my garden . . . a single friend, my world. Leo Buscaglia

Footnotes for Life

JULY 21

Iwatched the rain bouncing on the sun deck through my kitchen window. I
focused on heavy clouds and raindrops snaking down the glass as I
absently washed the dishes. I settled on the dullness of the day and let
my mood reflect the vision. My melancholy was interrupted by the
movement of a squirrel teetering on a brittle branch of our apple tree.
An apple dangled like aChristmas ornament just beyond his grasp. I
watched himlose his balance as he reached for it. Undaunted, he regained
his footing and tried again. The branch swayed with his effort and the
apple bounced to the ground, the squirrel in hot pursuit. As if by magic
the view from my window began to drip with promise. Elva Stoelers No
rain--no rainbows. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

JULY 22

Fear holds my memories hostage. If I remember, I may break into a
thousand pieces. Then I realize that I am already broken. Who was the
person who disappeared when the abuse began? I pick up a piece of memory
here and another one there. I arrange the memories in correct order. As
I remember, I reassemble the sculpture of my life to its original
design. Darlene Franklin The past is malleable and flexible, changing as
our recollection interprets and re-explains what has happened. Peter
Berger

Footnotes for Life

JULY 23

It is up to each of us to determine how we are going to recover from
adversity or tragedy in our lives. It is easy to fall victim to the
loss, to use it as an excuse for personal failure, emotional or social
problems. My mother's death when I was eighteen was a tremendous
obstacle for me to face, but I made a decision not to allow myself to be
victimized by the loss. Being angry or questioning God left me feeling
emptier than ever. Instead, having unwavering faith in him and trust in
his greater purpose allowed me to find mine. I honor my mother's memory
by being the person she raised me to be--the person she invested her
life in. Letitia Trimmer Meeks However long the night, the dawn will
break. African Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JULY 24

One moment. Now. The past is but a fragile web of regret and memory. The
future is full of joys and sorrows that are yet to have substance. All
that you can really touch is this moment. Savor this moment completely.
Smell the wet grass. Listen to a loved one's laughter. Take the time to
sip your coffee. Study the sunset from an overstuffed chair. Embrace
what is good. Cherish what is pure. We cannot hoard yesterday. Neither
can we spend tomorrow. We can only treasure today. Renee Hixson Do not
dwell in the past, do not dream of the future, concentrate the mind on
the present moment. Buddha

Footnotes for Life

JULY 25

"Ours is adiseaseof attitudes." I recognize thatmy negative attitudes
hamper my recovery path. The negative thinking and destructive attitudes
that I learned growing up with addiction and dysfunction remain with me
until I do something to change them. Forcing positivity on top of
negativity does not work, neither side rings true when I do that. What I
need to do is remember that I have trouble with my attitudes and that I
need special work in that area to restore them to sanity. Acknowledging
the problem, sharing it out loud and turning it over helps.As I reworkmy
past issues, Iwill remember that I need to make constant attitude
adjustments so that I can maintain the good work that I am doing. Tian
Dayton Be led by reason. Greek Proverb

Footnotes for Life

JULY 26

Why do we destroy our emotional well-being withmembers of the opposite
sex who will never be relationship material? Sound familiar? Then
chances are you've heard the word "codependent" before. Seems as if we
put more thought into our next meal than in choosing our mate. I, for
one, would like to start with an appetizer of romance and
thoughtfulness, with a dash of passion. For the main course, I'll have
an emotionally stable, commitment-oriented, dependable, trustworthy,
considerate, all-around decent guy, please! Oh, and can I have a side
order of good communication skills to go with that? Linda S.Day Flatter
me, I may not believe you. Criticize me, I may not like you. Ignore me,
I may not forgive you. Encourage me, I will not forget you. William
Arthur Ward

Footnotes for Life

JULY 27

There is a part of you that is perfect and pure. It is untouched by the
lessthan-perfect characteristics you have acquired by living in a
less-thanperfect world. This part of you is a still and eternal pool.
Making time to reach it will bring you untold benefit. Your physical
identity is a world of limited thoughts, feelings and roles. It is quite
apart from the being of inner peace and power that is your spiritual
personality. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University You have the key
to unlock a direct connection with God--and that key is self-respect.
Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

JULY 28

My lungs ached as I climbed what seemed to be a vertical path until
three hours later I reached the top. To the east lay the broad expanse
of a valley-- its emerald lake cradled by the rugged Rockies. But to the
west, was one more summit. It seemed impossible to go any farther, but
with grueling determination, I climbed on. At the crest I beheld a vista
of three glorious valleys, their splendor breathtaking; an image that is
forever etched in my memory. In life, never quit when there's one more
summit, the reward at the top is worth every ounce of pain along the
way. Linda Mehus-Barber In order to succeed we must first believe that
we can. Michael Korda

Footnotes for Life

JULY 29

Attitude is everything or so it seems. It determines the outcome of what
life brings. So never look beyond yourself for answers to your prayers.
Instead, look inside your heart, and you will find what you need right
there. Theresa Meehan Nothing can stop the man with the right mental
attitude from achieving his goal; nothing on Earth can help the man with
the wrong mental attitude. W. W. Ziege

Footnotes for Life

JULY 30

As a child in an alcoholic home, I made decisions impulsively and the
results were inconsistency, chaos and unpredictability. I must make
choices in my recovery and I must act on them, but I must think before I
act. This is not indecisiveness, but rather a disciplined decision to
avoid impulsiveness in my behavior. When I try to satisfy my desires
without success, I take the time to listen to my inner voice. When I am
concerned by what people think, say or do, I pause and decide what I
really want. I think before I act and take my thoughts seriously.
Rokelle Lerner Thought is the blossom; language the bud; action the
fruit behind it. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

JULY 31

Every few years, I drag out the pine box with brass hinges I made in
seventh-grade wood shop. There between my second-grade report card and a
poem from a high school girlfriend, are the two photos of Calvin and
Allen, friends from long ago. They had so much in common, loving
families, doing well in school and in athletics. Another similarity had
the greatest impact--both became entangled in the terror of drug
addiction. Allen overdosed at twelve and Calvin never saw his twentieth
birthday. So, periodically I bring out the box, dust off the photos and
hope I've learned what I need to prevent history from repeating itself
with my two children who mean everything to me. David R.Wilkins Good
people come to wisdom through failure. William Saroyan

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 1

Be grateful for what you have at this moment in your life and you will
feel a sense of calm. Sit in a quiet place. Write the words, "Today, I
am grateful for . . .", then write what comes to mind. You may be
grateful that you have these few moments to sit quietly. You may be
grateful for the kind words of a friend or for the life of someone close
to you. There are many tangible things to be grateful for that can be
easily overlooked: a warm bath, a cool drink, a comfortable chair to
sink into. When we practice gratitude, we begin to accept our lives and
ourselves. Be good to yourself, practice gratitude. Barbara Elizabeth
Lowell We need to be grateful for many things that did not happen.
Langenhoven

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 2

Standing in line at our town post office impatiently waiting for my
turn, I noticed a woman struggling to get through the door because she
was carrying so many packages. She stood next to me. I noticed that no
one volunteered to help her and I was thinking, "I can't believe these
people just don't want to lose their precious place in line." A voice
inside me told me that I could help--but that I too would lose my place
in line. Believing, however, that I am a person who does help, I
volunteered to hold some of her packages. Did I learn anything that day?
Yes, sometimes to do the right thing you need to get out of line. Robert
J. Ackerman If you think about what you ought to do for other people,
your character will take care of itself. Woodrow Wilson

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 3

Ibelieve that life wants to work out if we let it. I believe that God is
in charge and that if we hold that thought and release it every time it
occurs to us, good things will follow. I believe life is a gift and that
it is my responsibility to work it till it works. I believe that a good
attitude is worth more than money, a good heart is worth more than a
high birth and that a good character is a foundation upon which at least
three generations can be built. I believe in love and its power to heal,
restore and reveal our next lessons. I believe in the gift of recovery
in my life. Tian Dayton Shared joy is joy doubled. Shared sorrow is
sorrow halved. Anonymous

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 4

Some days you arise with a zestful feeling knowing a fresh new day is
before you. Other days your first thought is of a problem, a fear or
perhaps simply a mundane task awaiting you. Perhaps it's a rainy day
outside, or perhaps it is a rainy day in your heart. Whether you are new
or old to recovery dark days will come. Just as a squirrel stores up
nuts, we should fill our pantry with nuggets of hope. A favorite poem or
spiritual passage can lighten your mood. Uplifting music or physical
activities can get our spirits and bodies moving in a positive
direction. Joyce McDonald Hoskins Life is just a blank slate, what
matters most is what you write on it. Christine Frankland

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 5

Love is the most healing and therapeutic gift I can give myself. I don't
have to reach outside of myself to find love--it already exists within
me. My parents, my friends, my lovers may not have given me the love I
need, but love has never left me. It is when I don't nurture myself that
I frantically search for someone to love me. This desperation leaves me
as I go inside myself, when I open the door of my heart and embrace
myself in unconditional love. Rokelle Lerner The main source of good
discipline is growing up in a loving family, being loved and learning to
love in return. Dr. Benjamin Spock

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 6

God, let me see the ways you are working in my life today. Help me be
ever mindful of your presence, and grateful for all the things you send
me. Let me be open to the lessons that come my way, and let me treat
every person the way you would treat me. Use my voice to speak, use my
hands to do your work. Help me to see every situation through your eyes.
Kelly L. Stone Lord, make me an instrument of thy peace. St. Francis of
Assisi

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 7

Once you accept that you have "no control" over others, you begin to
relax and take one moment at a time. This week whenever you start to
feel tension in the pit of your stomach, say to your mind, "I have no
control over what they choose. They have a right to choose whatever they
think they need." Experience the freedom from accepting what you already
knew--you have no control over anyone but yourself. Have a busy week of
getting on with your life rather than trying to get on with someone
else's! Lana Fletcher How simple it is to see that all the worry in the
world cannot control the future. How simple it is to see that we can
only be happy now. And that there will never be a time when it is not
now. Gerald Jampolsky

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 8

Irealize that taking care of myself means different things in different
situations--there is no one way to do it and that is why, as a concept,
it is so hard to get a hold of. To think that if I do recovery
perfectly, do it all just right, I will produce stress-free
relationships is magical thinking. It is a repetition of my childhood
fantasy that if I just tried a little harder or understood a little
better, I could make my family well. When we talk about recovery, we are
talking about life and life offers no guarantees. We do what we can do
and let go of the results. My real challenge in life is in expanding the
interior of my own soul. Tian Dayton The nurse of full grown souls is
solitude. James Russell Lowell

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 9

Ihave come to recognize that the person my resentments and grievances
hurt most is me. So, if I wish to preserve my health and to enable my
continuing recovery and growth, I must regularly practice forgiveness.
When I do, I release those emotion-filled perceptions that otherwise
will inhibit my ability to experience and express love and also will
continue to color and poison my relationships and interactions with
others. The benefits are enormous-- immediately, a "lightness" of
spirit, and over time, greater serenity and joy. Jeff McFarland Always
forgive your enemies, nothing annoys them so much. Oscar Wilde

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 10

Discouraged and disheartened, I stood on the dusty roadside, my journey
nearly half over, my reserves of strength and will ebbing away in the
searing summer heat. Should I turn back now, or continue to an uncertain
fate? As I deliberated, a tiny ant labored in the dry powdery dust. Just
like me, he was scuffling and stumbling along, yet he pressed forward
with dogged determination toward an unknown goal. I watched with silent
fascination until he finally reached the edge of the road. What great
fortitude! Inspired, I mustered the courage and determination to move
ahead and complete my own journey. That tiny ant's example set me on a
sure course out of poverty, homelessness and despair. David Claerr Life
shrinks or expands in proportion to one's courage. Anaïs Nin

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 11

Violence, sexual abuse, alcohol and drugs were the hallmarks of my life
by the time I was fourteen. My path of self-destruction was my destiny.
I married young and soon had two beautiful children, and that was the
turning point in my life. I discovered that being a good mother was
something I could accomplish. I faced my problems and learned healthy
parenting and life skills. I faced the loathing and shame, and grieved
for the loss of my childhood so that the cycle stopped with me. In its
place a life centered on love and nurturing has taken root. I am careful
to plant more seeds and water them daily. Marilyn Joan The most common
sort of lie is the one uttered to one's self. Friedrich Nietzsche

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 12

Much of the incredible confusion of growing up with dysfunctional
parents came from never knowing what they wanted. Our sense of self was
nonexistent. We were important enough to be there when they felt good,
but weren't important enough to be there when they didn't. We never
learned to think of ourselves as successful, because we never knew when
we would be praised and when we would be pushed away. As adults, we can
give ourselves consistent acceptance and affirmation. We can learn to
pay attention to what we want. Yvonne Kaye Come here. I love you. Go
away. I can't stand you. We have visitors, so stay in your room. James
C.

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 13

In the far recesses of my soul there is a place of quietness, of meeting
of heart and mind; a place of deep serenity, of where my true love
dwells; a place where I can breathe easy and be my own true self. It is
there that I find freedom to speak the truth in love; there, where
honesty abounds in all simplicity and humility and God is more than
enough. No guile, no deceit, no pretense. Masks unveiled, and true self
revealed. I have lost my way to this blessed place, O Lord. HowI long
for this sanctuarywithin. Will you take me there again? Lilian Chee Sau
Leng God asks no man whether he will accept life. That is not the
choice. You must take it. The only choice is how. Henry Ward Beecher

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 14

Ihave the strength to lift up the rugs of my life and see what emotions
have been swept underneath. I acquire this strength by exploring the
notion that my old ways of seeing things aren't the only ways to see and
in doing so I discover and practice healthier ways of observing myself
and others. Donna LeBlanc Watch what you are doing instead of thinking
about what you are doing. Seeing, not thinking, is believing. Donna
LeBlanc

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 15

Thoughts have a creative power of their own. I can see my thoughts come
to life and I create the possibility of what I would like by first
experiencing it in my mind. I visualize what I would like to have in my
life in my mind's eye and accept what I see in my inner eye as being
there for me. I am specific about what I see, smell, taste and feel, and
accept it as fully as possible. I enjoy my vision, then let it go and
move on in my day, releasing it with no thought of controlling it
further. I let it happen if it is right for me in God's time and knowing
all good things are possible for me. Tian Dayton If one advances
confidently in the direction of his dreams, he will meet with a success
unexpected in common hours. Henry David Thoreau

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 16

The reality may dawn on us only after exhausting years wasted in
attempts to orchestrate the behavior of others. The truth is, it doesn't
work. We may have the best motives and the most sensible suggestions but
in the end, people will do as they please regardless of our good advice.
What a tremendous relief it is to finally grasp this and drop the
crushing load of minding others' business. We are then free to tend our
own affairs and make this one life as pleasant as it can be. Rhonda
Brunea Be not angry that you cannot make others as you wish them to be,
since you cannot make yourself as you wish to be. Thomas à. Kempis

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 17

Ican do a great deal to impact my world for the better without making
major lifestyle changes. I recognize that this world will change only
when the people in it change. It is people who have the power to destroy
or save this planet. Today I resolve to channel my personal power toward
good, to open myself to be worked through and with. The world in which I
live is my world; it is all that I have. If I see myself as powerless,
it will only depotentiate me and make me feel impotent. That is a
position I choose not to take today. Tian Dayton There is only one thing
that is fully our own and that is our will or purpose. Epictetus, 1st
century A.D.

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 18

You hear the familiar voice and footsteps coming down the hall. The door
opens and his voice breaks off, questions in his eyes as he scans the
room. Confusion and fear, the very look you dreaded, erode his half
smile and you struggle to look loving, yet firm. The intervention has
begun. You wonder if he'll ever again say, "I love you." Several days
later when you drop by the treatment center to pick up his dirty
laundry, there is a note attached. Tentatively you open it, "Thank you.
I love you. I'm Ted--and I'm an alcoholic." Jann Mitchell I believe that
man will not merely endure; he will prevail. William Faulkner

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 19

Take time to discover the eccentricities of your personality. As you
come to an understanding of yourself, rejoice in the knowledge that God
created you on purpose, for a purpose. Be willing to share yourself with
others so that they might open up and begin their own healing process.
Spend time with them, speaking encouraging words while listening to
their hurt and pain. Share dreams, emotions, disappointments and
victories. There's nothing more powerful in your own healing than
comforting others and giving them the precious gift of your time. Linda
Mehus-Barber The art of being yourself at your best is the art of
unfolding your personality into the person you want to be. Wilfred
Peterson

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 20

The jangling of keys and slamming of gates brought me back to the
reality of the cold, crowded cell. A prison guard bellowed, "Get out
here, crack head!" I rose, along with forty other women, none of us
certain to whom the guard was talking. It was not me. It would be two
years before I saw my children again and once I was released from prison
I entered a residential treatment program. I was no longer afraid to
die, I was afraid of living my life the way I was. God works in
mysterious ways. Recovering addicts know that better than just about
anyone else. Mary Barr A friend is one who walks in when others walk
out. Walter Winchell

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 21

When I look out my window, I see the beauty of the world that God has
created and the opportunities it holds. His beauty includes me. I need
to feel good about myself; I need to have hope. I must love myself and
accept who I am. I must succeed in order to be an inspiration to others,
as others were for me. Stacey Chillemi Man is, and forever has been,
God's reflection. Mary Baker Eddy

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 22

When we come into this world, the first thing we do is breathe in.
Divine inspiration. When we leave this world, the last thing we do is
breathe out. Everything in between is just gravy. It's all been taken
care of. We leave home and we go home. Children of God. And if we really
believe he holds us in the palm of his hand for the journey, then
anything can be endured. Nancy Burke Sitting quietly, doing nothing,
spring comes and the grass grows by itself. Zenrin

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 23

When life caves in on me and I feel like giving up, I force myself to
list twenty things I am thankful for. Sometimes it can be as lame as
"fingers," or "a chair to sit on," but I keep going until I reach my
magic number. Somehow by then I find myself in a different frame of
mind. When I am thankful, I move from being pitiful to being powerful.
Barbara A. Croce An attitude of gratitude creates blessings. Sir John
Templeton

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 24

Drinking helped me deal with my depression. I drank myself into a stupor
to numb my internal pain. Repeated efforts at treatment failed until my
last admission when they rolled me into the trauma unit on a gurney and
began by addressing my depression. Thirty-two days later, I came away
with a clear understanding that the only way I was going to be
successful in my recovery was to be more involved in my recovering
community. I had occasion to visit that facility again, not as a
patient, but as a guest. I was there to discuss a collaboration between
their program and the new treatment center I had just opened. I remember
once wondering if life was worth living. Now I know. Perry D. Litchfield
I welcome happiness as it enlarges my heart; I endure sadness for it
opens my soul. Og Mandino

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 25

"There are great, exciting adventures waiting for you out there!" This
is what one of my good friends in recovery said to me after I told her I
just got divorced. I wasn't feeling very enthusiastic about my life at
that point. As time passed though, I was grateful for her perspective
and her positive approach to something about which I didn't feel very
optimistic. How grateful I am for the people, a philosophy and a way of
life that helps me see the positive in any given situation. Anne Conner
The way I see it, if you want the rainbow, you gotta put up with the
rain. Dolly Parton

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 26

Our life is today. When we lay our head on the pillow tonight, this day
will never come back--this is a one-time deal. We will miss it if we
wait for the illusive perfection of tomorrow, next week or next year. In
the eternal scheme of things, today is just a shallow breath. But
without each breath linked to another, we cannot fulfill our destiny.
Barbara A. Croce All of us tend to put off living, dreaming of some
magical rose garden over the horizon instead of enjoying the roses that
are blooming outside our windows today. Dale Carnegie

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 27

Standing at the bottom of the stairs, unable to put my foot on the first
step, I had never been more tired or more depressed in my entire life. I
had to use the bathroom and I couldn't get off the floor. Suddenly I saw
myself, a young woman, hand on the rail, tears in my eyes, looking up.
As I closed my eyes to banish the image, one foot made it to the first
step. Two hands grabbed the rail and pulled me to the next step. With my
eyes still closed I made it to the top of the stairs. Success.
Incredible. The road to recovery really did begin with that first step.
Anne Tiller Slates Do not wait for ideal circumstances, nor the best
opportunities; they will never come. Janet E. Stuart

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 28

For nearly thirty years I had little contact with my family until, one
day, the phone rang. My dad was dying. I harbored no illusions of making
up for a lifetime lost, but hoped to make the most of what little time
we had left. One afternoon after talking around the edges, I told him
that I was sorry for all the time we had missed. He smiled, reached for
my hands, closed his eyes and spoke softly. Listening to him, I laid my
head in his lap and cried for the little girl he had left so many years
ago. That day, he became my father again, and I, his daughter. The
sunlight faded as we held each other, perhaps not for a lifetime, but at
the very least, for a childhood. Theresa Peluso The longer you carry a
grudge the heavier it gets. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 29

When my sister, who suffered from both addiction andmental illness
wasmurdered, I turned tomy Higher Power and asked that simple question:
Why? I felt the enormity of the vacuum of silence. I no longer felt any
connection to the resilient part of who I thought I was. I wanted to be
with those who knew the misery I was experiencing, so I accepted a
position helping abused, hurt children. What I discovered was hope.
Despite everything that life had dished out to them, these kids refused
to throw in their cards. They kept striving. They kept dreaming. They
kept living. I needed to remember to do that and I have. Together we
have healed. Patricia O'Gorman The way to happiness is to lose yourself
in a cause greater than yourself. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 30

Iwas the model teenager trying desperately to gain my stepfather's
approval and love, but I never seemed to succeed. With high school
nearing an end, I recognized that nothing I could do would change his
behavior. For his birthday, I found a meaningful card that represented
all the hopes of my heart. I wasn't sure what would happen, but I took
the risk of being vulnerable. A few days later I found a caring note
from him, the first correspondence I could recall written in his hand to
me. The more time I spent on seeking growth in forgiveness and in my own
character, rather than trying to fix or improve others, the more things
turned around for us. Erin Hagman Do not look back in anger, or forward
in fear, but around in awareness. James Thurber

Footnotes for Life

AUGUST 31

Icut--any part of my body covered by clothes, although my wrists were my
body part of choice. The slashes became my words, the only way I knew to
express myself, a way of denying my sexual abuse. I cut not to feel.
Cutting left me in a dull trance, entirely calm, numb and empty. Even in
a society where so much has lost its shock value, cutting remains
scandalous. It's been three years since I last cut. Because of those who
helped me peel away my layers of defenses to understand what was at the
root of my fears and pain, because of them, I am finally alive.
ElizabethWalton The rung of a ladder was never meant to rest upon, but
only hold a man's foot long enough to enable him to put the other
somewhat higher. Thomas Henry Huxley

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 1

Many small steps make a journey. When stuck in a dispirited state of
mind, take one step to move yourself forward. Get out of bed. Walk your
dog. Smile at a stranger. No matter how insignificant that step may
seem, your action will create a course of hope on which to proceed. As
momentum soars, so will your spirit. Vicki Graf When there is no wind,
row. Chinese Proverb

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 2

Awoman lives with an abusive husband. She hates her life. She is angry
and unhappy. She remains with the abuser another day. A teenager is
grossly overweight and is teased by classmates. He hates his life. He is
angry and unhappy. He overeats another day. A man drinks, gets into
fights and ends up in jail often. He hates his life. He is angry and
unhappy. He drinks another day. Today we must learn from our mistakes of
the past and go down a different path or we will surely end up in the
same place as yesterday. Kay Conner Pliszka Insanity is doing the same
thing over and over again and expecting different results. Albert
Einstein

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 3

We enjoy living at the edge of town. One night while sitting in the
living room we heard sounds on our front porch. My husband turned on the
porch light and there stood seven little sheep all in a row, staring as
if to say, "Will you please help us?" Emmitt opened the gate to the
backyard and safely enclosed those cute little balls of wool until he
could find the owner. Emmitt, unknowingly, became their shepherd for a
while. The sheep followed him around wherever he went, displaying their
trust and dependence. Without a shepherd, sheep are in danger. Without
the Good Shepherd, so am I. Joan Clayton It is only destined by your
attitude where you will end up in life. Don't let yourself get lost in
the crowd. Angela Duvall

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 4

Idon't want to minimize the seriousness of money dysfunction, but I use
humor as a tool to help me recover from it. Humor is a valuable part of
our rediscovery. To be so deadly serious about getting well is a real
bummer. We can have fun looking back at the things we did trying to
balance our accounts. How many of us put money into a savings account
and get so excited that we're earning 5% interest, completely
overlooking the fact that we owe \$10,000 on credit cards at 19.2%? I
did all that. Now, I have to laugh. I am serious about my recovery, but
I don't take it or myself too seriously. Yvonne Kaye Money doesn't
always bring happiness. People with \$10 million are no happier than
people with \$9 million. Hobart Brown

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 5

It's important that when I experience problems, I remember that
solutions are close at hand. Knowing this starts the flow of ideas
needed to solve my problems. Changes do not just "happen." Solutions
involve drastic changes in thought and expectations. Solutions require
action and when I have a positive attitude, I can tackle any issue.
Today I know I am free. I can use my freedom to indulge in all kinds of
negative beliefs, or I can use my freedom to discipline my mind and
concentrate on finding answers to my difficulties. The decision is mine
to choose my experiences. Rokelle Lerner Do not now seek the answers,
which cannot be given to you because you will not be able to live them.
And the point is, to live everything. Live the questions now. Rainer
Maria Rilke

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 6

Illness is a chance to teach the mind to remain independent of physical
circumstances and thus to connect with our inner resources. Experiencing
these qualities is a powerful medicine. Hope, enthusiasm and wisdom are
to the mind as food is to the body. Everyone needs daily sustenance.
Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual University The trick to problem solving
is to get to the root of the problem before the rest of it shows up.
Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 7

To feel fear is human, but we must never allow fear to halt our forward
momentum in the healing way. Sometimes the thing we must do is
frightening. It's challenging, difficult, different from anything we've
known before. But rather than give up and slide backward, we do well to
gather our little shreds of courage and forge ahead--fear or no
fear--remembering the presence, goodwill and help of our Higher Power.
We must do the thing, though we do it trembling. I will not let the
emotion of fear hinder my growth. I will trust that I am being led and
keep moving forward. Rhonda Brunea When I am afraid, I will trust in
you. Psalm 56:3, NIV

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 8

Today is a plowing day. I will dig deep within the soil of my heart and
prepare the dirt for what is to come. Even good seed cannot fulfill its
purpose in hard, uncultivated ground, but when sown in dirt that has
been worked, it will flourish and explode with fruit. Don't ask me about
the harvest quite yet; I am still pushing the plow. Barbara A. Croce The
real issue is not whether to grow, it is how to grow and for what
purpose. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 9

Stop looking at things as endings, look at them as beginnings. Change is
scary; the unknown is frightening but only because we can't see what's
coming next. Take a step forward, one at a time, to build your courage.
Soon you won't hesitate. That one step may be full of fears but still
you move forward. Open yourself to experiencing whatever it is life has
for you at any given moment; a beautiful spring morning, thewonders of a
gentle snowfall, the joyful sound of children playing in a schoolyard,
the simple pleasure of just being able to draw another breath. Aingeal
Stone The greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and be loved
in return. Eden Ahbez

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 10

Admitting that I was an alcoholic was a difficult first step, but it was
only a first step. The admission wasn't enough. It felt flat. What was
missing turned out to be acceptance. Acceptance meant I had to move
forward, tell others, ask for help, work on my sobriety. Until I fully
accepted and embraced this, I was emotionally paralyzed. Fear and shame
held me captive. Acceptance has liberated me. Deb Sellars Karpek Life is
what happens, after you make other plans. Ralph Marston

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 11

Following a loss, how do you grow a new heart? You don't. You work with
the heart you have left. The missing parts can never be replaced. The
bruised areas of the heart, however, have the ability to mend. It's not
an easy or quick process. The balm is patience, support, acceptance,
understanding, love fromothers and fromoneself, aswell as the gift of
time used wisely. Along the way, the sensitive, healing heart acquires
wisdom and compassion for fellow travelers. Not all broken hearts
inherit these gifts. They only come with intention, inner strength,
persistence, courage and openness to the grace of God. Joyce Harvey Be a
life long or short, its completeness depends on what it was lived for.
David Starr Jordan

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 12

Almost every day I see a young girl running along our backcountry road.
She is nothing but bone, her face classically anorexic: all cheekbones
and large eyes sunk into dark sockets. I've watched her run for nine
months now, seeing her grow thinner and more fragile every day. She is
not like the other runners, all rounded muscle, strong, sweaty, solid.
My girl is grim and solitary, a slash on the landscape. I wonder who her
family is and know they cannot stop her self-punishment any more than I.
She started running and stopped eating because she heard some wicked
voice inside telling her she wasn't right, she wasn't thin enough. You
will grow old if you're lucky, and being thin is no guarantee against
misery. Nancy Burke The body never lies. Martha Graham

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 13

Inever met my grandfather, however I did know his son and I knew that my
father had very bitter feelings toward his father. According to the
stories I heard, my grandfather drank himself to death at the age of
fifty-two. During a breakfast outing with my five-year-old son my father
looked at me and said, "Your grandfather sure wasn't much of a father."
After a pause he let out a sigh and said, "But I guess the man did the
best he could." Eight years into his own recovery and thirty-one years
after the death of my grandfather, my dad had started to make peace with
his father. Sometimes it takes a long time for things to heal. Robert
J.Ackerman The greatest lesson to be learned is that the most difficult
way is, in the long run, the easiest. Henry Miller

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 14

Today I will ask for a miracle. I trust that nothing is more real in
this universe than the love and the power of God. I understand that the
medium of miracles and shifts in perception is prayer. I will clear my
mind of all negativity and ask for what I really need. I will pray for a
miracle. In the past I have not dared to ask for enough but today is
different. With love in my heart I ask for a true shift in perception. I
ask for help to see what I am not seeing, help to release the cloud of
doubt and negativity that surrounds me, help to set my mind free of fear
and anxiety. Tian Dayton The direction of the mind is more important
than its progress. Joseph Joubert

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 15

When I see the persistence exhibited by the tiny ant, as it builds its
mound and drags along food it has found, I know the size of an obstacle
has nothing to do with success. It is not the physical proportion of an
impediment, but the diligence we possess that gets us what we desire and
the reward we receive. Betty King He is a man of sense who does not
grieve for what he has not, but rejoices in what he has. Epictetus

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 16

Although it may feel like I am alone, I am not. There is a circle of
love around me. My circle includes neighbors, relatives, coworkers or
those who are also recovering. If I reach out to these people I will
feel their presence and concern. I don't need to feel unworthy because I
accept them with their imperfections and they do the same with me. My
circle will help me recover if I ask. Brenda Nixon Let us not look back
in anger or forward in fear, but around in awareness. James Thurber

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 17

Igive thanks for my life, knowing that all experiences have added to my
growth and understanding. I see the promise of the future, anticipating
only good. But today I center my attention on the present moment and
look around my world. I see much in the way of good and much for which
to give thanks. In all my activities I pause, I reflect, I give thanks.
I look forward to happiness and opportunity and acknowledge the
blessings surrounding me that are meant to be enjoyed now. Rokelle
Lerner When asked if my cup is half full or half empty my only response
is that I am thankful I have a cup. Sam Lefkowitz

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 18

Some folks spend half their lives brooding about the past--chiding
themselves for their mistakes and reliving in their minds, over and over
again, what might have been. Others worry about the future--condemning
their weaknesses and worrying that they will not be strong enough to
overcome what may arise. But those of us in recovery strive to put the
pain of our past and the fear of our future behind us. Rather, we find
comfort and strength in the innocence of now, the present. With each new
dawn we are reborn. And so we live . . . one day at a time. Kay Conner
Pliszka Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a mystery, and today is a
gift: that's why they call it the present. Eleanor Roosevelt

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 19

Isee the full picture of recovery and my responsibility to let go and
move on. Doing so is a tall order, requiring a kind of releasing that I
still find difficult to do. My past will always be in the shadows of my
memory to haunt me if I do not recognize it as a part of me. If I
pretend it's not important, grit my teeth and force myself to numb the
pain, I have missed the point of recovery. On the other hand, if I am
unwilling to let go, I am not allowing myself to be fully healthy and
alive. Part of recovery is a flowing through the stored pain and part is
a decisive, forward-moving action. Tian Dayton Our concern is not how to
worship in the catacombs but how to remain human in the skyscrapers.
Abraham Joshua Heschel

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 20

Everyone has problems and it's easy to get overwhelmed, thinking there
is no solution. Small steps can make a big difference. Today, instead of
thinking about what I can't do, I'll think about what I can do to solve
the problem. Whether something is wrong in my personal life, my work
life, my neighborhood, my community or the world--I can make a
difference. If I continue to focus on and do what I can do, I find that
what I thought was impossible suddenly becomes doable. SarahWhite
Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence. Calvin Coolidge

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 21

God graces us with personal power to make unlimited choices. This
amazing capacity can positively transform our lives when we reserve it
for healthy decisions. Respect the gift of power in your life. Recognize
that it is bestowed with a significant expectation: Responsibility.
Linda Suroviec No individual raindrop considers itself responsible for
the flood. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 22

Anew normal . . . each day is a new "normal" for me as I progress in my
recovery. The challenge is to see the progress--recognize the positive
movement no matter how small--and celebrate it. In the end, my "normal"
may never be what it was before the day, the event, that forever changed
my life. But, I will celebrate the fact that there is another day. And,
I am a stronger person because of my challenge, my progress and my
attitude. A new normal. A better me. Charmi Schroeder When we move out
of the familiar here and now, we set in motion a series of events that,
taken together, bring about changes at the very root of our being.
Joseph Dispenza

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 23

Iwalk through this day because of you, Lord. No personal power of my own
gets me out of bed and onto my knees. By your strength, I walk. By your
grace, I keep going. When I stumble, you catch me in your arms, and when
I fall, you carry me. You hold my breath in your hands and you
understand all of my ways. Because of you, I can flee from self pity,
and I am thankful beyond words, just to be alive! Jaye Lewis I have
taken a moment here to rest, to steal a view of the glorious vista that
surrounds me, to look back on the distance I have come. Nelson Mandela

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 24

Like a time traveler from a science fiction movie, I bumped into myself
the other day. I shouldn't say myself because the self I encountered in
an old journal hasn't been around for decades. As I fingered the crinkly
pages of loose-leaf notebook paper, deeply scored by the anxious tip of
a ballpoint pen, I felt as though I'd stepped into another time and
place. I read the strangely familiar writing, more rounded and innocent
than I remembered, wondering whether I had really been so naïve. So
idealistic. So noble. My old journal brought me face-to-face with myself
and taught me that I was worth knowing. Eleanor Kirk Man does not weave
this web of life. He is merely a strand of it. Whatever he does to the
web, he does to himself. Chief Seattle

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 25

In my journey I have purpose on Earth and I will continue to strengthen
my direction. When I get confused and flounder around, searching for my
bearings, I take time to remind myself that my Higher Power is guiding
my journey and I feel tranquil and at peace. Growing up in a
dysfunctional family, my energies were blocked by my inability to
separate from the emotions of others. When the alcoholic was drinking, I
felt uptight, fearful and filled with anxiety. Today, I don't live in
extremes. I have purpose. Being alive is a miracle to celebrate and I
feel the harmony that comes when I channel my energy into good
directions. Rokelle Lerner Find a purpose in life so big it will
challenge every capacity to be at your best. David O. McKay

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 26

We learn in recovery that the definition of insanity is doing the same
thing over and over again and expecting different results. Many times I
swore that I would only have two drinks at a party only to wake up with
a horrific hangover. With no memory of how I'd gotten home, I would try
to piece the evening together and I would promise myself, never again!
But then came the next party and my promises flew out of my head as
quickly as you can say "punch bowl."Mine was a soul sickness whose name
is Alcoholism. I have learned to swallow my medicine--I gratefully
attend A.A. meetings now. When the urge to say "yes" hits I remember
that no drink will ever taste as good as my sober dignity feels. Dorri
Olds We choose our joys and sorrows long before we experience them.
Kahlil Gibran

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 27

As I stand behind the Plexiglas at the rink watching my son on the ice,
I recall a doctor's visit when Paul was three. Paul couldn't talk, had
terrible tantrums, always kept to himself. He had autism. That dark day
I felt like we had been pushed off a cliff, but instead of a living
death we foundmiracles. Angels in the formof teachers, therapists and
childcare workers intervened, some of whom I would never have chosen if
I had done the choosing. I gladly admit I was wrong. God, who knows the
end from the beginning, knew what Paul needed in his challenging journey
and that I needed to learn a lesson in faith and letting go. Jayne
Thurber-Smith Mistakes are the portals of discovery. James Joyce

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 28

Isearched for a way to pour out my heartache and sorrow, struggling to
find comfort and solace after the death of my four-year-old son. I
needed a friend, non-judgmental, who would never tell a soul what I had
shared. Feeling like a bottle capped too tightly I needed to unwind, to
release some of my pain. My search brought me to pen and paper, to the
pages of a safe book--my journal--where I experienced the healing in
writing to recover. For eight years I have filled the pages and what
began as pain and undeniable anger now reads as sweet joy. Alice
J.Wisler Children are innocent and love justice, while most adults are
wicked and prefer mercy. G.K. Chesterton

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 29

Once you've been sober a while you realize that sobriety is not just
about putting down your addiction. That's only the beginning. Sobriety
is about letting the light of the spirit shine through, and letting you
be the person you were always meant to be. Putting down the addiction is
like scrubbing longdirty windows, what you finally see behind the glass
has been there all the time, you just never saw how beautiful it was.
Kelly L. Stone If one advances confidently in the direction of his
dreams and endeavors to live the life which he has imagined, he will
meet with a success unexpected in common hours. Henry David Thoreau

Footnotes for Life

SEPTEMBER 30

When I look in the mirror today, let me see beyond the obvious. Beyond
the tired eyes, let me see strength I didn't know I had. Past the lines
on my face, let me see character that wasn't there before. Let me see
someone who has grown and changed and will continue to do so. Someone
who is a little bit stronger, a little bit wiser and a little bit better
than yesterday. When I look at myself, let me see not only what's there
. . . but what else is there. Lori Othouse There are no shortcuts to any
place worth going. Beverly Sills

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 1

Life does not pass me by--I pass through it. There are stars to count,
flowers to touch, people to greet, fragrances to enjoy, sounds to hear.
I am alive. Today I will take an active role in the quality of life all
around me. Intention and action are my reality. Brenda Nixon Life is
like playing a violin solo in public and learning the instrument as one
goes on. Samuel Butler

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 2

The dance of life has simple moves. Follow your heart. Lead with your
soul. Be true to yourself. Find what sparks your soul and kindles your
inner fire. When disappointments bring on ominous skies and threatening
storms, embrace your dreams. Your dreams are those warm rays of hope
that will keep you anchored until the sun shines tomorrow. Know that
soon you will whirl and waltz with the wind again. Maryellen Heller If
you're already walking on thin ice, you might as well dance. Gill
Atkinson

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 3

Ahumble person dismisses nothing, recognizing that whatever life
presents needs to be respected. Inside even the smallest things there is
often enormity. Being humble does not require you to give of yourself
indiscriminately. Have the wisdom to know the value of your inner
resources and to give accordingly. Brahma Kumaris World Spiritual
University By maintaining an attitude of love and regard for every soul,
you create a life filled with dignity and purpose. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 4

Today I will surround myself with people who care about me. I take deep
satisfaction in knowing there are people in my life I can turn to. I,
too, can be a friend. I can give support and nurturing to others without
becoming responsible for their lives. In the past, I avoided friendships
because they became too painful, too demanding. I expected too much of
myself and I expected too much of others. I now realize that I no longer
need to isolate myself from friendship. I cannot solve the problems of
my friends, and they cannot solve mine. But we can give each other
support, we can listen, we can care for each other. Friendship and
recovery go hand in hand. Rokelle Lerner A true friend never gets in
your way unless you happen to be going down. Arnold Glasgow

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 5

Your recovering journey may require some U-turns along the way, but
there is a plan, a destiny that awaits you. Do not question your
destiny, do not ask "why me?" Be proud of who you are, walk with courage
and your head up high. Believe in yourself and focus on the positive,
for every step along the way will become a solid foundation for your
future. Stacey Chillemi Confidence is that feeling by which the mind
embarks on great and honorable courses with a sure hope and trust in
itself. Cicero

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 6

Iam not alone. Today I will remember there are others facing the same
hurdles and struggles I am facing. Others understand and feel the same
pain I feel. There are available means and people that care about my
recovery, and want to see me heal. I can reach out to others. I am not
my own island. I want to seek opportunities for connection. I can break
the silence and tell someone trustworthy. That will make me feel better!
Kimberly Davidson I was never less alone than when by myself. Edward
Gibbon

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 7

As you navigate through life, there will be times when you will feel
overwhelmed. When you do, it is important to take a step back and assess
the situation, try to view it from another perspective. The obstacles in
your life will enable you to grow into the person you are meant to
become. Karen Marie Arel Today, I can choose to celebrate what I do
have--or mourn what I don't. I choose to make today a celebration.
Charmi Schroeder

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 8

Going through my trunk one day, I stopped to read and memories of my
life appeared, blessing me again. I lingered on some photos of those no
longer here. I thanked God for the time with many held so dear. I found
my granddad's Bible, its pages old and torn. My name is written in that
book on the day that I was born. I closed the trunk remembering our
lives are short at best. Fill your trunk with goodness and God will do
the rest. Joan Clayton Good memories are precious photos upon our
hearts. Joan Clayton

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 9

In every journey there can be meaning; every conflict, growth; in every
action, there can be purpose but only if I allow it to be so. I will
look at my mistakes as learning what works and what doesn't. Today, I
will allow meaning, growth, purpose and learning in my life. Brenda
Nixon Be not afraid of growing slowly; be afraid only of standing still.
Chinese Proverb

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 10

My son's drug rehabilitation counselor was a petite grey-haired lady
with enough leverage to impact a wayward group of teens. Her personal
struggle with alcohol and drugs was the source of a spirit of
determination, and week after week her motto, "You gotta wanna!", spewed
from her lips. The powerful testimony of an achiever made a difference
inmy son's life and over the years, whenever I find myself in a
situation that takes strong will and determination, I hear those words
"You gotta wanna!", echoing like a voice of victory in my ears. Annettee
Budzban Great beginnings are not as important as the way one finishes.
Dr. James Dobson

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 11

Every day is a new page; the words are up to you. Will the page be
filled with "if only . . ." or with "I did it!"? When your life winds
down will you be wallowing in your regrets or celebrating your
experiences and accomplishments? When you share that book of memories,
will there be a smile on your face as you relive your journey or a tear
in your eye for the missed opportunities and the what might have been?
It is your choice, tomorrow is a new day, turn the page and write your
life the way you want it to be. You do not always travel the path of
your choosing; sometimes it is the path you were meant to take. Karen
Marie Arel I find the great thing in this world is not so much where we
stand, as in what direction we are moving. Oliver Wendell Holmes

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 12

Healing demands energy. To sustain my energy I will remember that in my
loving of and giving to others, I must keep a little for myself. It's
good to give but not so much that I am emptied. The healthy balance
between giving and keeping is important for my recovery. Today, I can
give to others and I can also be my caretaker. I will not feel guilty
for loving and giving to myself, as this is the energy needed for
recovery. Brenda Nixon Fond as we are of our loved ones, there comes at
times during their absence an unexplainable peace. Anne Shaw

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 13

Likemany others who have found themselves in trouble, I returned to the
church of my childhood when things seemed their darkest. At our
Thanksgiving Mass this year, a day we hold as sacred as any other holy
day, there was a moment in the liturgy when we stood, held hands and
said the Lord's Prayer together. I held the hand of my eight-year-old,
who held the hand of an eighty-year-old, and the circle moved on,
handover-hand, unbroken, among the five hundred in church. The presence
of God was indisputable, the power of faith breathtaking. In our
collective gratitude, we all became, at the moment, immortal. Nancy
Burke The body is a universe in itself and must be held as sacred as any
thing in creation. It is dangerous to forget the body is sacramental.
May Sarton

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 14

In days past, it seemed that everything she touched died. But she tended
a little herb garden. At least there she could make things live . .
except for the lemon balm. Year after year, it grew well for a while and
then died. It was a little thing, only one plant out of many, but it had
become symbolic of all her failures. She finally gave up. Years later,
she watched curiously as a tiny plant that was obviously not a weed
emerged from the soil. When the leaves grew large enough, she pinched
them gently and sniffed. It was a baby lemon balm! Sometimes seeds
hibernate. Be patient. They are only waiting for the right time to
emerge. Rhonda Brunea Don't judge each day by the harvest you reap, but
by the seeds you plant. Robert Louis Stevenson

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 15

Iwas thirty-eight years old before I understood that no matter what I
did or said, my mother and father could not parent any better than they
had. It was beyond their ability and more important, was nothing
personal. One of the most precious gifts of my recovery was accepting
that my mom and dad just didn't possess boundless love, endless
nurturing, playfulness, tenderness or fun to give. I was lucky enough
and had the courage to find a way to let go of my idealized vision of
what my parents' love should look like. Before they passed away, the
expressions of love that had started out as unilateral behaviors on my
part became mutual. Ted Klontz It is a wise father who knows his own
child. William Shakespeare

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 16

Before recovery I didn't understand choices; I didn't realize I actually
had them. I spent my life reacting to situations I believed were out of
my control. Now my life is based on choices; I choose how I think, and
my thoughts create my reality. I choose how to respond, or not to
respond. I move forward, learn to live with my choice, or change my
direction. Deb Sellars Karpek Right now you are one choice away from a
new beginning. Oprah Winfrey

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 17

My dad once said, "Everybody has a string pulled a little too tight." He
drew a circle and from the center he drew rays to represent taut
strings. One line he labeled VANITY, another GREED; the next, LUST, etc.
I guess Dad was trying to say that nobody is perfect and that, on some
level, each of us has a weakness that makes us a bit "nutty." But we
learn and we grow. And if, in the challenges of each day, we persevere
and hold firm to our beliefs and our goals, we will flourish. Kay Conner
Pliszka Today's mighty oak is just yesterday's nut that held its ground.
Unknown

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 18

You never truly stop being beautiful. Your age creates a glow of wisdom
and confidence that silvers your hair and puts a step of grace into your
walk. You shine as your true self, the one that took the years to
perfect. Nadia Ali The truly important things in life--love, beauty, and
one's own uniqueness--are constantly being overlooked. Pablo Casals

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 19

In times of great trial, we often find ourselves not knowing what to do,
or which way to turn. In the midst of confusion, it's easy to block out
the needs of those around us, choosing to inwardly focus on our own
misery. However, reaching out to others helps us regain balance in our
lives. In redirecting our energy toward easing another's burdens, our
own burdens not only become lighter, but we find reasons to rejoice . .
. newly blessed by all we've been given. In walking a mile in the other
man's shoes, we have an opportunity to gain new appreciation for the
perfect fit of our own. Michelle Close-Mills We must learn our limits.
We are all something, but none of us are everything. Blaise Pascal

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 20

The fragility or strength of the motivating force behind your will
determines the success of dreams and the distance they travel. As we
live our lives we run into successes or failures; our choosing makes the
difference in the two. Ideas originate in the hallowed hallways of the
mind, from feelings and beliefs, and are spurred on into the heart where
they meet up with will and determination, or die from apprehension. It
is when the soul grabs hold of dreams and refuses to release them until
they see fruition, that a person truly knows the joy that imaginings can
bring. Betty King What I can imagine, I can see. What I can see, I can
grab hold of, what I can grab hold of is mine. Betty King

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 21

Recovery takes time. If I am impatient with my healing I cheat myself of
the necessary time it takes to go through my own grief. To pretend that
I have never experienced real despair is to sabotage myself, to become
complicit in emotional dishonesty. I know I have the strength I need to
get through my pain and part of my strength is not ignoring my emotions.
I entrust myself to God with a sure knowledge that my healing is now
taking place. Rokelle Lerner Health is not a condition of matter, but of
mind. Mary Baker Eddy

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 22

In our culture, we emphasize the body, exalt the intellect and worship
talent. Yet, the flesh is just the package, the wrapping paper for the
true prize--our spirit. Life leaves the bows and ribbons a bit frayed
and the brightly colored paper fades with time, but through difficulties
our spirit grows. The spirit shapes our true destiny. It is the spirit
that makes each one of us intrinsically priceless and eternally
precious. Renee Hixson Faith is a knowledge within the heart, beyond the
reach of proof. Kahlil Gibran

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 23

Iknow that I can do anything I need to do with God's help. When I feel
alone or shaken up, I can ask for help within myself and know that it is
there. Each of us has to learn our own lessons, that is what we are here
to do.We can't learn anyone else's lessons for them and learning our own
is difficult enough. To plow through my own psyche and face the
insecurity and wounds that are there is all that I can handle. To try to
live other people's lives for them is to separate myself from God
because my first access to God is through and within me. Tian Dayton One
on God's side is a majority. Wendell Phillips

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 24

It feels wonderful to love someone else and to have someone love you,
but there's nothing more wonderful than loving who you are. Allow
yourself to see your inner beauty, your strengths and how much you have
to offer this world. You are special and unique; you brighten the lives
of others. Take the energy and passion you put into loving others, and
direct it to loving who you are. Cori Sachais Swidorsky I pay no
attention whatever to anybody's praise or blame. I simply follow my own
feelings. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 25

Ihave a little booklet my grandfather wrote. He speaks to me through
words on a yellowed page and I hear the voice of a man I have never met.
Sometimes I think he left the stories especially for me, although for
him I was only a prediction. I come from a long line of
storytellers--their wares passed from one generation to the next in the
fashion of heirlooms. Like any inheritance the value lies with the
recipient. I hold the stories passed to me close to my heart. My mother
used to tell me that I was the promise her father made--the baby sent to
her after his passing. At fifty years old I still love that story. Elva
Stoelers Your scars are evidence that you have healed. Dr. Julia Boyd

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 26

Sometimes indulging yourself is the best answer to feeling wonderful.
Cook something that is simply delicious that takes a lot of effort!
Something you would make for company. Today you are making it just for
yourself, so don't rush through the process. Then when it's done, set
the table beautifully. Use candles. Use your best dishes. And one
beautiful rose in a bud vase. You are celebrating yourself. Enjoy!
Felice Prager Without haste, but without rest. Goethe

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 27

Living a life of honesty is a commitment to forthright thinking and
behavior--a willingness to be fully responsible. Honesty enables me to
live with an open heart and to avoid the self-loathing, guilt and shame
that accompany deception and manipulation. Perhaps most significantly,
it is an outward display of self-acceptance and a statement to the world
that I am worthy of respect. Jeff McFarland No legacy is so rich as
honesty. William Shakespeare

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 28

Diamonds are nothing special, really. They started out as simple chunks
of coal. They just got a lot of preferential treatment--and not the kind
they would have chosen. They became diamonds because they were put under
enough heat and pressure to crystallize. No pressure, no diamonds. We
are diamonds in the making. Let us persist under pressure. Barbara A.
Croce Diamonds are nothing more than chunks of coal that stuck to their
jobs. Malcolm S. Forbes

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 29

Today I will learn to see soul in the simple things of life. It is
oftentimes the things that I take for granted that are truly responsible
for the deep underpinnings of my sense of well-being and personal
happiness. When I let myself have and enjoy events of life, I will see
soul radiate from the simple and the little things. Life is a tapestry
woven of small threads. I appreciate what I take for granted. Tian
Dayton When you see ordinary situations with extraordinary insight, it
is like discovering a jewel in rubbish. Chögyan Trungpa

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 30

Growing up in an alcoholic home, crisis was common and made life
confusing. Feelings of anxiety and fear were my constant companions.
Crisis is no longer a condition I live with. I do whatever I can to
ensure my serenity and my peace of mind. I allow enough time for myself
to do what I need. I eliminate clutter from my life and shun discord and
overcomplication. I think before I act, I'm kind to myself and I avoid
situations filled with pandemonium and turmoil. Slow down and let
serenity flow into your life. Rokelle Lerner A person needs at intervals
to separate from family and companions and go to new places. One must go
without familiars in order to be open to influences, to change.
Katharine Butler Hathaway

Footnotes for Life

OCTOBER 31

It is difficult to pretend to be happy when I am not. The hurt and anger
lingers as I try to recover from the pain of loss. As I try to drink my
hurt away, I reach for the wine bottle from the cabinet in my kitchen.
Just as I move my hand away from the top shelf, my Bible topples down
and lands on my kitchen table. A reminder, what would be more
refreshing, a temporary cure or lasting tranquility and inner peace. I
have replaced my drinking hour with my thinking hour. I devote some time
each morning for inspirational reading and thought as I learn to take
one day at a time. Theresa Meehan Every trial endured and weathered in
the right spirit makes a soul nobler and stronger than it was before.
James Buckham

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 1

Newly sober, Grace quickly returned to a high-risk environmentworking as
a flight attendant. One day she was hit with an overwhelming desire for
a drink. She tried to just "think through" or "forget about" it, but it
was too powerful and she headed for the airport bar. Deep down inside
she really wanted to stay sober and in a moment of sanity she picked up
the airport page and said "Will friends of Bill W. . . .," she paused
quickly looking for an empty gate, ". . . please come to Gate 12?"
Within minutes strangers from all over the world joined Grace for a
little meeting. Grace did not drink that day. Help is there for all who
ask. It never fails. Jim C., Jr., Scottsdale, Arizona Begin somewhere;
you cannot build a reputation on what you intend to do. Liz Smith

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 2

When I enter into a relationship with the idea that another person can
make me happy and content, I become concerned over what I might or might
not get back. If I relieve others from the responsibility for making me
happy, I can enjoy intimate relationships based upon mutual caring, not
on need. I deserve a relationship, not to make me happy, but to share
the richness of who I am with others. Rokelle Lerner Always do what you
say you are going to do. It is the glue and fiber that binds successful
relationships. Jeffrey A. Timmons

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 3

Life is a glorious mystery. After we have understood one thing, we are
presented with a fresh problem. We are not perfect. We are not God. We
will never understand completely. Some years ago this used to anger and
irritate me. I wanted to know everything. I wanted to have the answer to
all life's problems. I wanted the "power" that comes with perfection. I
hated being vulnerable, weak and confused! I hated being human! Yes,
that was my problem. I hated being a human being. Today I am enjoying
the adventure of life, and I kneel in awe at its mingled complexity.
Today life is a paradox that I can live with. Father Leo Booth The
future is hidden even from the men who made it. Anatole France

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 4

When faced with tossing a few bucks into the jar of an unfortunate soul
I wonder if by doing so I'm supporting a person's addiction or falling
victim to a scam. I usually decide that for the price of a scratch
ticket, I'd rather give a person the benefit of the doubt. With
thousands swallowed up by substance abuse, alcoholism, unemployment and
homelessness each day, it could easily be me or someone I love walking
in those worn shoes. The next time you ask yourself why God has given so
much to so few, and so little to so many, consider this: perhaps God has
given enough and the problem is that people have forgotten how to share
his generous gifts. Steven Manchester More people would learn from their
mistakes if they weren't so busy denying them. Unknown

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 5

Arainy day can get me feeling down. The gray skies, the dull colors, the
dripping rain. I see and hear this and my spirit sags. Occasionally,
responding this way sets me on a downward spiral of feeling even worse,
because I expect myself to be cheery and positive. The self judge comes
alive with, "Why am I letting a little rain get me down?" My body can be
very sensitive to changes in the environment and knowing that can help
me ease up on judging myself. I can't always be upbeat and happy in the
same way that it can't always be sunny and bright, however I can always
allow myself to be with every mood I feel. Anne Conner She said she
usually cried at least once each day, not because she was sad, but
because the world was so beautiful . . . and life was so short. Brian
Andreas

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 6

When you are in the grips of a compulsion to act on an addictive
behavior, be kind to yourself; stop, breathe and, above all, remember
the feeling will pass. Reach out to supportive friends, go for a walk or
see a movie and wait; one minute, one hour, one day--until the agony and
temptation pass leaving strength, determination and pride in their
place. Lisa Jo Barr Be very careful, then, how you live, not as unwise
but as wise, making the most of every opportunity. Ephesians 5:15,16 NIV

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 7

Everything needed for our happiness and serenity already lies within.
Problem is, it's often buried deeply beneath the lies, prejudices, chaos
and traumas that we experience or are taught. Life's challenge, your
challenge, my challenge, is to avoid the search for happiness or
serenity through external or chemical means. Rather, we must commit to
passionately and to consciously find the kingdom of heaven within us,
sifting through the debris, finding the best parts of our inner selves,
finding that which connects us spiritually, and bringing that inner self
to life. Kevin J.Holmes There is always a certain peace in being what
one is, in being that completely. Ugo Betti

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 8

Isearch for silver linings, for the deeper meaning of events in my life.
When I feel pain or confusion, when I am discouraged or hurting, I look
for the hand of spirit in my life. I try to understand what I am meant
to see that I am not seeing, what I am meant to hear that I am not
hearing. My life is a journey and I cannot stay on my path of spiritual
development if I am not willing to experience the truth of my inner
world. I can grow in joy and pain. It doesn't need to be one or the
other because pain can transform into joy. It can be the fire that
clears the field for new and tender growth. Tian Dayton Whatever you can
do or dream you can begin it. Boldness has genius, power and magic in
it. Begin it now. Goethe

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 9

Iwas cleaning out my files when I came across some things I had written
during my darkest hours. The writing was full of pain and anger. I felt
for that woman, for the horrible things she had been through. Tears
rolled down my face as I looked into the black hole where I used to
live. My first instinct was to throw the pages of despair into the
trash, then I realized that this is what all the work had been for.
Everything I had been through had allowed me to move outside the
hopelessness to a place where I could recognize the light. Anne Tiller
Slates The life of every man is a diary and his humblest hour is when he
compares the volume as it is with what he vowed to make it. James M.
Barrie

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 10

Time is the currency of our lives. We get another stash of it every
morning. We trade it for what we want or need, or we waste it--it's
really up to us. But one thing is for sure: we can't save time for
tomorrow. We have to use it up today. It won't wait for us. If we do not
spend it on purpose, it'll disburse itself, one second at a time. It
runs out at midnight. Barbara A. Croce Life is meant to be a
celebration! It shouldn't be necessary to set aside special times to
remind us of this fact. Leo Buscaglia

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 11

Driver's license suspended, I did what any normal person would do. I
bought a horse and I rode him every night to my hangouts. Morning would
find the horse out back and me in my own bed with no recollection of how
we had gotten home. Years later a newcomer in the rooms told us about a
young man arriving at her bar drunk on a horse. "I wonder what ever
happened to that guy?" she mused. To the amusement of the rest of the
group, I took the opportunity to properly introduce myself. I am often
asked why I still attend meetings after so many years of sobriety. The
answer: my presence might help the newcomer. Reverend Bob Lew Man is
condemned to be free; because once thrown into the world, he is
responsible for everything he does. Jean-Paul Sartre

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 12

Awinter landscape can be cold, hard and bleak. The ground is unyielding
and barren, devoid of vegetation and hungry for the sun's warming touch.
There is no sign of spring, and you wonder if it will ever come. The
tulips of March and the daffodils of April are nothing but a hazy dream.
Life can feel like that. You become lonely and hardened because of
attacks and defeats. You step back from relationships and avoid
challenges. It is easier to isolate yourself than to be vulnerable once
more. And then, out of the hard, snow-covered ground, when it is least
expected, a crocus blooms. Ava Pennington Have patience with all things,
but first of all with yourself. St. Francis de Sales

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 13

Iwill not insist upon perfection from myself in order to feel good. Why
should each thing I do have to be excellent in my eyes, or someone
else's, in order for me to feel happy with it? The idea is that I enjoy
the process, that what I do feels satisfying and interesting. Being
addicted to success every time means that eventually I will dry up my
own creative source because success every time is not natural. When I
allow myself to enjoy and experience satisfaction with whatever I am
doing, I keep the doors open for my own creative flow. When I do not
accept what I do unless it's just right, I close off my own inner flow.
Tian Dayton I think I did pretty well, considering I started out with
nothing but a bunch of blank paper. Steve Martin

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 14

It is by experiencing something's opposite that we come to know the
thing itself. Fearful, we find faith; a victim, we become empowered.
Knowing lack, we understand abundance. Being stuck, we can embrace flow.
Enduring pain, we can embody joy. Because we have hated, we can know
love. In flirting with insanity, we can understand clarity. Having
locked ourselves in a mental prison, we can know freedom. As we peer
over the ledge of death, we can truly embody life. To the exact degree
that we have cut ourselves off from the divine, infinite flow of God, we
can now recognize its presence. Jeffrey R.Anderson God gives every bird
his worm, but he does not throw it into the nest. Swedish Proverb

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 15

What is the difference between maintaining sobriety and living a life in
recovery? Staying sober often means just hanging on with white knuckles
or facing the day with clenched teeth. Recovery brings heartfelt
gratitude and joy to life. Both require a commitment to yourself and
both are based on choices. Sobriety is a choice to avoid the negative
behaviors that draw you back to the old ways of living and thinking.
Recovery is a choice to incorporate positive behaviors into your life
that allow you to move toward health and well-being, physically and
spiritually. Joyce McDonald Hoskins Things do not change, we change.
Henry David Thoreau

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 16

When you believe you've committed an offense, do not berate yourself or
your mistake will be compounded. Instead, offer prompt amends, correct
your awareness for the future and move the experience into your past.
Remember, even at our very best we will never surpass being human.
Accept the fact that recovery does not prevent you frommakingmistakes,
itmerely provides the tools you'll need to fix the things that need
mending. Lisa Logan He who keeps his face towards the sun, will find
that the shadows fall behind him. Native American Saying

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 17

Iam sorting out my relationships with a new awareness, with a new vision
of what I desire in an intimate relationship and I am slowly making the
changes necessary to get what I want. In my alcoholic home, intimacy was
confused with smothering or caretaking. In my adult life, I have
isolated myself for periods of time to avoid it. My notions about what
it means to be close to another human being are being redefined. I'm
beginning to understand that I don't have to be responsible for someone
to show my love for them, nor do I have to give up my identity in order
to achieve intimacy. Allowing the ones I love to be human means I can
search for happiness not perfection. Rokelle Lerner Love demands
infinitely less than friendship. George Jean Nathan

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 18

It is heroic to feed a starving village and noble to give water to a
thirsty man who is about to perish. Yet, when someone is obnoxious,
irritating and generally unpleasant we stay away. Their chosen demeanor
isolates them, deepening the loneliness that reinforces their unpleasant
personality. Such a person is starving and thirsting for love, dying for
the very commodity we withhold. To reach past the thorns and touch such
a soul is an act of true compassion. This is what changes the world.
Renee Hixson To be hopeful in bad times is not just foolishly romantic.
It is based on the fact that human history is a history not only of
cruelty but also of compassion, sacrifice, courage, kindness. Howard
Zinn

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 19

Iwill pay attention to the contents of my thoughts. Even when I do not
give voice to them, others feel them as nonverbal messages. What I think
is more powerful than I care to admit. The thoughts I think exist in
living tissue and move through and beyond me. They become a part of the
creative substance of life. They take a shape, they have an impact. I
see myself as a traveler moving through the world knowing I am not here
forever. I am here to experience where I am. I will observe my thoughts
and my actions and see how they affect my life. Tian Dayton We cannot
withdraw our cards from the game. Were we as silent and as mute as
stories, our very passivity would be an act. Jean-Paul Sartre

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 20

Emergency room personnel transported the dirty outsider to the sterile
world of the cardiac care unit. Thick, scaly, ruddy skin told a story of
an abusive lifestyle, punctuated by addictive behavior to food, alcohol
and drugs. As his nurse began to bathe him she prayed for the soul of a
little boy grown up, rejected by life and striving for acceptance in a
hostile world. She finished with warmed lotion and baby powder, such a
contrast on the huge, rugged surface. As he rolled over onto his back,
tears fell from beautiful brown eyes and a quivering voice whispered,
"Thank you." In this hurting world, with its concern about the
appropriateness of touch, dare to touch the untouchable. Naomi Rhode
When love and skill work together, expect a masterpiece. John Ruskin

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 21

When we are truly ready to surrender--after weeks or months or years of
pining halfheartedly for that something greater than ourselves, that
intangible power that has always seemed just beyond reach--we find the
faith to fall into the arms of hope and love that have been there all
the while. Candy Killion There is no need to go to India or anywhere
else to find peace. You will find that deep place of silence right in
your room, your garden, or even your bathtub. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 22

Every so often, the enormity and complexity of my work gives me the
impression that there is little I can really do to help people. I become
frustrated and overwhelmed with the problems of others. And with this
powerlessness, I may become controlling. As a helper, I am a catalyst.
It isn't my job to provide others with "the answers," rather I can be a
powerful change agent, providing others with opportunities to discover
their own solutions. I believe in the inherent beauty and strength in
all human beings, and I will not assume that I know what's best for
everyone. Instead I will model decisiveness, strength, security and
inner peace that will reverberate to those around me. Rokelle Lerner The
first step towards the solution of any problem is optimism. John Baines

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 23

Some things eat away at us, nibbling like mice on Swiss cheese. And, if
we allow it to continue, we risk winding up as nothing more than holes.
Revenge is one of those things. A canker. A corrosive. A corrupter of
our souls. Entertaining thoughts of vengeance can satisfy our taste for
spite, at least for the moment. But, in the end, it is, quite simply,
exhausting. It prevents us from healing and moving on. How much wiser of
us to recognize that the only people we need to get even with--to pay
back--are those who seek only to help us. Carol McAdoo Rehme Do not let
the hero in your soul perish in lonely frustration for the life you
deserved, but have never been able to reach. Ayn Rand

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 24

Real recovery has little to do with what the path that we walk looks
like-- where we live, what we drive, how much money we have--but
everything to do with how we choose to walk our life path. It is our
perspective, our attitude and our choices that transform us into who we
are, that make our life experience what it is. We get to choose. Real
recovery means learning to look at life in ways we never have before.
Jeffrey R.Anderson Life is like an echo. We get from it what we put into
it and, just like an echo, it often gives us much more. Boris
Lauer-Leonardi

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 25

It is easy to confuse greatness of character with strength and brawn.
Greatness of character, however, is usually best defined in the grace of
inability or dependency. It is in the humbleness in asking for help
without being forced through defeat to do it. Greatness of character is
when you know that weakness is momentary and it ends when it seeks the
strength of another. Michelle Gipson Discover something about yourself
that will make you great: your weaknesses. Michelle Gipson

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 26

The bird doesn't know he flys. He has no "faith" in his wings. What he
has is a lifetime of little experiences in which, when he feels the edge
of the earth disappear and sees nothing but emptiness beneath his feet,
still he flys. A well-intentioned person will sometimes say to you,
"Have faith." If faith were such an accessible commodity why are we such
a spiritually-hungry people? Perhaps faith emerges because we humans can
look back and reflect. We see, in a lifetime of strung-together
experiences--many of which would have felled a lesser soul--that we have
endured. We did not endure because we had faith. We find faith because
we endure. Nancy Burke Be like the bird, who halting in his flight on
limb too slight, yet sings-- knowing he has wings. Victor Hugo

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 27

Iexperienced blackouts in my drinking. Often I would wake up and not
know where I had been, what I had said or done. I would peer through
windows searching for my car. I would telephone to find out what time I
had left the party and if anything had happened. Often as I bathed I
would discover bruises or bleeding from an unremembered incident. There
were other times I knew what I had done, knew what I had said,
remembered how I behaved--and yet still I went back for more. I drank
alcoholically for years because my pride would not allow me to be
alcoholic. I created the wisest excuses for staying sick! Today my
sobriety requires a wisdom that is based on reality. Father Leo Booth It
is human nature to think wisely and act foolishly. Anatole France

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 28

It took me a long time to understand what people meant when they said,
"God speaks to me through other people." I wondered why I wasn't hearing
any earth-shattering advice or wisdom from on high. Then I opened my
mind, and my ears, to the experience, strength and hope all around me.
My Higher Power was trying to speak to me, at meetings, through my
sponsor, even through friends not in recovery, but I was refusing to
listen. My willingness to see the divine in everyone is rewarded with
precisely the wisdom and strength I seek. Today, may I be willing to
open my heart to divine wisdom all around me. Amy Ellis Love truth, but
pardon error. Voltaire

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 29

There is a new order in my life that allows me to fully experience love
and excitement, peacefulness and harmony. I have important and
worthwhile things to do. My life has meaning, even in the minutest
details. My sense of purpose allows my energy and power to flow, and my
purpose in life is to reveal the nature of my higher self in whatever I
do. Within myself there exists all I need for this day, and every one
that follows, to be one of fulfillment and success. As the sun sets, I
can be content, knowing that I am deserving of rest and peaceful
solitude to renew my spirit for the day to come. Rokelle Lerner There
are many things we are capable of, that we could be or do. The
possibilities are so great that we never are more than one-fourth
fulfilled. Katherine Anne Porter

Footnotes for Life

NOVEMBER 30

Happiness is an inside job. It comes from within me--something that I
express and share. And contrary to what I learned through most of my
life, its presence is not dependent on things "out there." So, as I
learn to take full responsibility for the way I feel about, and react
to, people and situations, I begin to consciously create my life
experiences. In the process, I come to understand that in order for me
to be happy no one has to behave himself, nothing has to go "right," and
no one has to love me--except me. Jeff McFarland People are about as
happy as they make up their minds to be. Abraham Lincoln

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 1

R ecovery is not about getting well, it is about getting real. When I
was active in my disease I couldn't tell real from unreal. I was
constantly swayed by lies, a void of truth within myself. When I pay
attention to what I feel, what I perceive, what I know deep in my gut, I
value my own being and I find that I can no longer be fooled. Here lies
my strength. Here lies my freedom. I step confidently into my life. Anna
Joy Grace Courage is the form of every virtue at the testing point,
which means, at the point of highest reality. C.S. Lewis

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 2

Strength: noun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
spreading hope where there is doubt, love where there is hate, standing
through trials, working through pain, getting up when you fall down,
spreading joy where there is grief, and forgiving where forgiveness is
absent. Sarah Boesing Life only demands from you the strength you
possess. Only one feat is possible--not to have run away. Dag
Hammarskjold

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 3

Push yourself like a machine and you will eventually run low on energy.
Love your mind by allowing it spaces of silence and it will serve you
tirelessly. Notice how your senses are connected to your mind. Anything
negative they pick up or generate will disturb the mind's workings. To
maintain peace of mind, use your eyes, ears and mouths with care. Brahma
Kumaris World Spiritual University Rather than become a judge of others,
become an advocate of their dreams. Brahma Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 4

Iwas sitting in a meeting at a very low point in my life, not knowing
where to turn. Despair occupied every fiber of my being when the room
suddenly disappeared and I was floating in an all-encompassing white
light. There was no fear, no sadness, only unconditional love flowing
around and through me. Then a voice that was an incredibly comforting
presence told me to take what I needed. I had no idea what that might be
but I knew I would find it. When the room came back into focus I was
left with a tiny speck of that white light in my heart and the word
"hope" in my mind and soul. Anne Tiller Slates Hope can be miraculous!
Michael Jordan Segal

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 5

We as human beings are all in the same boat and are all on the same
journey we know as life. Wouldn't it be nice if we could join hands in
this journey and help each other through the struggles and challenges
and together as a whole enjoy our successes? Reach out your hand today
and experience the peace and ecstasy of uniting with the human race as
we collectively live together and help one another. The essence of
spirituality is our connection with the world around us. Richard Singer
I expect to pass through this world but once. Any good thing, therefore,
that I can do or any kindness I can show to any fellow human being let
me do it now. Stephen Grellet

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 6

There are strangers who live around me. People I work with every day.
Neighbors who sleep each night in houses close by. A grandmother. My own
children. What do they think? How do they feel? We live side by side but
we know so little about each other. It's time to look into the eyes of
human beings who mow the lawn, use the office coffee pot or who sit on
the other side of our own supper table. There is no greater tragedy than
to live next to the treasure of another soul and never even look inside.
Renee Hixson Life is too great of an adventure to live it indecisively.
I'd rather step out in faith, take a risk and make a decision. Renee
Hixson

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 7

As a child, I was sometimes ignored--even abused. It was too risky to
show myself to the world so I hid my true self and found safety--refuge
in invisibility. Now as an adult, I've discovered that too often I am
invisible to myself. I ignore my needs, deny my emotions and I don't
risk showing people who I really am. If I come out of hiding I can
participate fully in life without fear of punishment or other negative
consequences. I no longer have to be a victim of my biography. Rokelle
Lerner The kindest way of helping yourself is to find a friend. Ann
Kaiser Stearns

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 8

As I began the wonderful journey into recovery, I realized the
paradoxical beauty of my "powerlessness" over alcohol. I was unaware of
the exacerbating factors that fueled my familial predisposition to
alcoholism; my declaration of my "powerlessness" was replaced with a
vigorous sense of responsibility to myself and my family generations to
come. As I kept a daily journal, I developed a great deal of insight,
which increased my desire to do my part in breaking the devastating
cycle of addiction within my family. It was high time for me to become
an advocate and leave behind the role of victim forever. Brenda L.
Petite Ridgeway Sobriety and recovery are not just about abstaining from
alcohol, but more importantly about taking responsibility. Brenda L.
Petite Ridgeway

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 9

It was a stress-filled time and I was happy to have a cup of tea with my
friend George. Being ninety-five years of age, he held the answers to
all my unspoken questions. Sculptor and artist, George had escaped the
Russian Revolution, leaving behind a home of considerable wealth. His
family had been murdered by the Bolsheviks and he had fled by foot
across Europe, carrying only memories. Sensing my despair, George took
my hands and, with deep emotion, boomed, "Look out another window! If
you don't like what you see in your life, then find another view!" Since
that afternoon I have been looking through other windows, and I like
what I see. Irene Budzynski Man is made by his belief. As he believes,
so he is. Bhagavad-Gita

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 10

Anger was fashionable in the seventies. Otherwise-normal people spent
hours screaming at and punching pillows. Fortunately, encounter groups
soon went the way of disco. Letting go of unhealthy behavior is
difficult work. Getting a handle on anger, with its delicious rush of
selfrighteousness, is particularly hard. Many of us cling to a kind of
quiet fury, and at its worst, it batters the heart, sullies the soul and
is altogether enervating. I don't know how much anger contributed to my
own bad health, but it surely hurt my recovery. Practicing not getting
angry a day at a time has been a tough job. I have found only two
antidotes to anger: forgiveness and walking away. Nancy Burke I
internalize everything. I can't express anger; I grow a tumor instead.
Woody Allen

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 11

Sometimes when we're scared, all we want to do is hide from the world.
But when we do this, our fears just get bigger. Isolation doesn't
nurture recovery. Stay connected to people in simple ways; go to the
mall, make light conversation with someone in a coffee shop, take a
class or attend a free lecture at a bookstore. Come out of your shell so
the world can show you love and how much you deserve happiness. Lisa Jo
Barr When you are alone you are all your own. Leonardo da Vinci

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 12

Ibelieve in the dignity of every soul. Like a fine antique, addicts have
a patina. They may be broken and need a bit of salvaging, but there is
beauty under the surface, qualities that endure hardship and abuse, and
a presence born of history and value. By showing compassion and
kindness, by seeing the potential, not the past, I can make a difference
in the life of every person I encounter. PeterVegso To laugh often
andmuch; to find the best in others; to leave the world a bit better, to
know even one life has breathed easier because you have lived--this is
to have succeeded. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 13

The catharsis of laughter can be just as powerful and transforming as
the catharsis of tears or anger. To laugh with my entire being--to
really get the joke and the joy of it all--is an unforgettable
experience, one that leaves me forever a little different. Laughter is a
symphony to the soul, and those we truly laugh with become special kinds
of friends. When I cannot laugh, I cannot be. It means that I am so
rigidly locked within myself that no air can get in. When I laugh,
everything sort of loosens up inside, flies around and settles back down
in an easier place. I remind myself that it is important to cry and
equally so to laugh. Tian Dayton No man who has once heartily and wholly
laughed can be altogether irreclaimably bad. Thomas Carlyle

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 14

Ikeep wishing and hoping that someone I know and love will change.
Whatever I want them to do, I have no power over their choices. I cannot
change anyone but myself. Only by taking care of my own "stuff" can I
make a difference in my world thus becoming a happier, healthier person.
Just for today, God, I'll try to keep my side of the street clean;
they'll have to sweep theirs all by themselves. Sallie A. Rodman The one
unchangeable certainty is that nothing is unchangeable or certain. John
F. Kennedy

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 15

Self-respect is not a matter of what you are doing in your life, but
rather of how you are doing it. It requires that you bring quality and
virtue into each action, whatever that action may be. Sometimes you must
burrow to find the good qualities in your nature that have gone
underground and then coax them to the surface. Stopping for a moment and
being silent can bring the steadiness you need for this task. Brahma
Kumaris World Spiritual University The world is your garden from which
you remove weeds of doubt and replace them with seeds of hope. Brahma
Kumaris

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 16

Iwill imagine a dream fulfilled right now, this moment. I will see the
table prepared before me. Life means to support me in the realization of
my desires. It will move in and help if I can truly allow myself to see
and feel that what I wish for is possible and indeed ready to be. Over
and over again, I will visualize the circumstance that I wish to have in
my life. I will mentally interact with it as if it were real. I will
accept it as possible for me as if it were actually happening right now.
Then I will let it go. I will see in my mind what I wish to see manifest
in my life. Tian Dayton Only those who have, receive. Joseph Roux

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 17

If I am to grow into the awesome promise of my life, I must embrace the
truth that I am not a victim, except by my own choosing. Yes, painful
things have happened in my life, but there is a big difference between
feeling the pain and wallowing in it. In fact, if I listen to my pain it
will tell me where I have beliefs that no longer serve me, where I need
to set healthy limits and boundaries, and where I have given away the
power to decide how I will feel about the events, relationships and
circumstances of my life. Jeff McFarland Man is equally incapable of
seeing the nothingness from which he emerges and the infinity in which
he is engulfed. Blaise Pascal

Footnotes for Life

MDECEMBER 18

Money isn't something to fear. It isn't the root of all evil. With a
good attitude, money improves living. In recovery, we change our
attitudes and find joy in money. As we prosper, we can help those around
us prosper as well. Ideas and creative thoughts flow from us as we
direct our energies toward specific goals. Money can be one of those
goals. It is a powerful source of success when that wheel of fortune
starts spinning around in our favor. It is a magnificent feeling and a
divine right. Being comfortable with money helps us be confident, have
fun, affect and infect those around us with positive attitudes. Yvonne
Kaye Wine maketh merry; but money assureth all things. Ecclesiastes
10:19

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 19

For this alcoholic there is great irony in the choice of words when we
talk about choosing to look at the glass half empty or half full. But
choosing the optimistic approach makes all of the difference in every
day of my recovery. A good day starts out with me remembering how far
I've come and how strong I am. It is easy for me to get wrapped up in
any problem du jour but then I see someone on the street, down and out,
panhandling, drunk, and I am reminded that my problems today are
luxurious compared to those I struggled with as an active alcoholic. I
have a new lease on life, a second chance. I am forever grateful! Dorri
Olds Perspective has helped me to see there is no way to happiness.
Happiness is the way. Stonewall Jackson

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 20

Today I will open myself to healing in my relationships. So much of life
depends on the quality of intimacy with myself and so much of the
quality of my intimacy is the quality of my relationships. It is
synergistic. As my relationship with myself and my Higher Power gets
better, my other relationships grow. Deep healing with people I care
about has much more significance than might appear; it is soul and
life-transforming. I experience moments of quiet expansion when my heart
and mind actually feel as if they are widening in all directions. I am
willing to grow a step at a time and heal little by little. Tian Dayton
Life is not living, but living in health. Martial

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 21

"So, it's been six weeks, Mom. How long do you suppose it's going to
last this time?" Stunned, I looked deep into the eyes of my ten-year-old
son. I saw skepticism, pain and disgust at my recent attempt at
sobriety. He had heard it all before when I assured him numerous times
that I would stop getting drunk. Today, I have the privilege of looking
that same, trusting son in the eye as I have every day since that night
of reckoning. I have earned credibility. I am responsible. I will
reassure him and he will hug me tightly! This time, I will say, "It's
been twenty years, son! It's going to last." Janell H. There will come a
time when you believe everything is finished. That will be the
beginning. Louis L'Amour

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 22

When traumatic events shake the foundations of your life, get out into
the natural world--God will speak to you through his handiwork. Walk in
solitude, drink in the regenerating air, open your senses to creation
and take a lesson from nature. The healing in my life began when I came
upon a field of fireweed while hiking. This magnificent wildflower
shoots forth in splendor after an area is ravaged by fire; its magenta
plumes wave proudly in stark contrast to its burned-out surroundings.
The image opened my eyes, and I took what I learned from that moment to
rise up from the ashes and go forth stronger and more alive than ever.
Linda Mehus-Barber And hark! How blithe the throstle sings! He, too, is
no mean preacher. Come forth into the light of things, let nature be
your teacher. William Wordsworth

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 23

Feelings flirt with our desires while faith nurtures our needs. Feelings
focus on the moment while faith concentrates on the future. Feelings
flourish in immediate gratification while faith is willing to wait for
what's better. Feelings react without thinking while faith takes the
time and the thought to respond. Feelings are fickle and fleeting while
faith considers the long run. Feelings want only to receive while faith
decides to believe. What feelings do I still allow to control me? What
can I choose to place my faith in today to better serve my true needs
tomorrow? Anne Calodich Fone Faith can take us farther than any of our
feelings. Anne Calodich Fone

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 24

Isuffered much from the effects of my loved one's addiction.
Disappointments, manipulation, emotional abuse and betrayal dimmed my
will to live. It was hard just to keep going. After all this, surely I
am not expected to forgive! I let go of my old definition of
forgiveness. I consider this--forgiveness is not about letting someone
who hurt me off the hook. It is about letting me off the hook. I can
feel, heal, express and live in the joy of this moment. I know I have
forgiven when the cloud of past hurt no longer blocks today's sun. In
what part of my life do I welcome more sunshine today? Anna Joy Grace It
is easier to forgive an enemy than to forgive a friend. William Blake

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 25

The Christmas tree was destroyed; presents were smashed; our father was
drunk, but for a moment, one brief moment, none of it mattered. My
nineyear-old brother shot up out of bed like a rocket, took in a sharp
breath and said, "Listen, reindeer!" So I listened silently to the
scraping on the roof, something more magical than the familiar sound of
squirrels. Staring at my brother, I saw something amazing--a smile. When
belief and awe sparkled in his aqua eyes, for that moment in time, I,
too, believed in the miracle of Christmas. Those heart-wrenching
holidays are a distant nightmare, but I remember the gift I received
that Christmas--a gift of hope. Raquel M.Strand Do what you can, with
what you have, where you are. Theodore Roosevelt

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 26

Iam on a journey of spirit. Spirit calls to me within and without. In a
still, small voice I sense spirit whispering in my inner ear. My body
feels an increasing sense of aliveness as I invite spirit to make itself
known. Spirit breathes in each pore within me. It fills the numbness
with energy. It fills the emptiness and causes my inner being to
overflow with its presence. Whenever I become still and allow spirit to
enter my world, it is always there waiting for me to discover it, to
remember it, to invite it in. Tian Dayton On a long journey of human
life, faith is the best of companions; it is the best refreshment on the
journey; and it is the greatest property. Buddha

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 27

The door through the darkness is human touch. We do not need to see the
light if we can hold a hand. A hug speaks languages that have no letters
and need no translators. A gentle embrace can acknowledge sorrows too
deep to speak aloud. When loneliness builds an island far away from hope
it is not a land alone. The touch of one caring soul can build a bridge
of hope, healing and a sense of belonging. We need not be eloquent or
brilliant or even totally whole. We just need to care enough to reach
out and touch another soul. Renee Hixson To touch the soul of another
human being is to walk on holy ground. Stephen Covey

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 28

It is our children who will reap the consequences of our endeavors to
find ourselves. It is the truth that lies within us that they often see
us avoid or confront. It is they who gain wisdom from the truth we tell
ourselves, the failures we refuse to acknowledge, the mountains we climb
and the summit we reach. Betty King As the bird sits in its nest and the
winds blow, it is the safety of its eggs the robin is concerned with,
for it is the next generation the future owns. Betty King

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 29

One of the best gifts I can give a person is my full attention when they
need someone to listen. Truly listening is an unselfish act. Without
saying a word, we can give the gift of insight and perspective to
someone who is struggling with a problem, processing the changes in
their lives or thinking through a new idea. For best reception, tune in.
There is no need to offer advice. All we need to do is open our minds
and hearts to hear what is being said. Sherrie M.Johnston Listening, not
imitation, may be the sincerest form of flattery. Dr. Joyce Brothers

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 30

Iunderstand that recovery is many little acts and subtle changes in
attitudes. Recovery is not talking differently--it is being different. I
will follow through on plans that I make and keep my life simple. I will
not allow abuse in my home, of me or anyone else. I will take a positive
attitude toward my life. Recovery is not only about reworking my
past--it is about not repeating it. It is the little steps I actually
take that count. A small inner change, if it is real, can have a more
transforming effect than a large outer one. Setting impossible,
unreachable goals for myself is just another way to stay sick. Doing
something small well will give me self-respect and serenity. Tian Dayton
Our health is our sound relation to external objects; our sympathy with
external being. Ralph Waldo Emerson

Footnotes for Life

DECEMBER 31

You are a unique individual with gifts; to dream, to become, to use your
talents and to realize your potential. Build your life's dream by
reaching out with love, inspiration, forgiveness and selflessness. Touch
the souls of people. Make a difference with unbridled enthusiasm and a
positive approach. You might just be able, through example, to transform
someone else's dream into a reality. George H.Moffett Dream as if you'll
live forever, live as if you'll die today. James Dean

Footnotes for Life

Reprints We have excerpted passages from the following books: 366
Encouragements for Prosperity ©1992 Yvonne Kaye, Ph.D. Call (215)
393-5464. Visit www.yvonnekaye.com. Chicken Soup for the Nurse's Soul.
©2001 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. To order:
www.hci-online.com. Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen. To order: www.hci-online.com. Daily
Affirmations for Adult Children of Alcoholics ©1985 Rokelle Lerner. To
order: www.hci-online.com. Daily Affirmations for Forgiving and Moving
On and Daily Affirmations for Parents ©1992 and The Soul's Companion
©1995 Tian Dayton, Ph.D. To order: www.hci-online.com. Wings of Soul and
Pearls of Wisdom ©1999 and Eternal Blessings ©2000. Brahma Kumaris
Information Services, Ltd., London. For information, contact
www.bkwsu.com. To order: www.bkpublications.com. Say Yes to Life ©1997
Reverend Leo Booth. Visit www.fatherleo.com. You Can't Quit 'till You
Know What's Eating You ©1990 Donna LeBlanc. Visit www.donnaleblanc.com.
To order: www.hci-online.com. Robert J. Ackerman, Ph.D. Passage on
September 13th reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004
Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Nadia Ali, ©2005 Nadia Ali. Jeffrey R. Anderson,
©2005 Jeffrey R. Anderson.

Karen Marie Arel, ©2005 Karen Marie Arel. Maria Isabel A Arellano, ©2005
Maria Isabel A Arellano. Suzanne Baginskie, ©2005 Suzanne Baginskie.
Lisa Jo Barr, ©2005 Lisa Jo Barr. Passage on January 29th, reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc.
www.hcibooks.com. Godwin H. Barton reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Elizabeth Batt, ©2004 Elizabeth Batt. Amelia
Rose Bederka as told to Steve Bederka-Toth, ©2005 Steve Bederka-Toth.
Ann Best reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Linda C. Bird reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Nurse's Soul
©2001 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Loretta McCann Bjorvik reprinted from Chicken Soup
for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Claudia Black reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Sarah Boesing, ©2004
Sarah Boesing.

Carol J. Bonomo reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Joanna Booher, ©2005 JoannaBooher. Leo Booth,
reprinted from from Say Yes to Life ©1997 Reverend Leo Booth. Cynthia
Borris reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Nicole Braddock, ©2005 Nicole Braddock. Brahma Kumaris World
Spiritual University reprinted from Wings of Soul ©1999, Pearls of
Wisdom ©1999, Eternal Blessings ©2000, Brahma Kumaris Information
Services Ltd., London, www.bkwsu.com, www.bkpublications, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Stuart Brantley reprinted from Chicken Soup
for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Carol Van Dyke Brown, ©2005
Carol Van Dyke Brown. Rhonda Brunea, ©2005 Rhonda Brunea. Annettee
Budzban, ©2005 Annettee Budzban. Irene Budzynski, ©2005 Irene Budzynski.
Nancy Burke, ©1995 Nancy Burke. Jim C., Jr., Scottsdale reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc.

Rachel Caplin reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004
Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Jenna Cassell reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Emily Chase, ©2005 Emily Chase. Lilian Sau
Leng Chee, ©2005 Lilian Sau Leng Chee. Stacey Chillemi, ©2005 Stacey
Chillemi. David Claerr, ©2005 David Claerr. Joan Clayton, ©2003 Joan
Clayton. Michelle Close-Mills, ©2005 Michelle Close-Mills. Anne Connor,
©2005 Anne Connor. Ann Coogler, ©2005 Ann Coogler. Barbara A. Croce,
©2005 Barbara A. Croce. Joseph R. Cruse, M.D. reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. John Crusey reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. www.hcibooks.com.
Kimberly Davidson, ©2005 Kimberly Davidson. Linda S. Day reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc.

Sala Dayo, ©2005 Sala Dayo. Passage on January 26 reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Tian Dayton reprinted from
Daily Affirmations for Forgiving and Moving On ©1992, Daily Affirmations
for Parents ©1992, The Soul's Companion © 1995 Tian Dayton, Health
Communications, Inc. Rev. Ed Donnally reprinted from Chicken Soup for
the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Nancy Eckerson,
nancyq2@bluemoon.net. ©2005 Nancy Eckerson. Julia Jergensen Edelman
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Carla
Edmisten, ©2005 Carla Edmisten. Amy Ellis, ©2005 Amy Ellis. Lana
Fletcher, ©2005 Lana Fletcher. Anne Calodich Fone, ©2005 Anne Calodich
Fone. Darlene Franklin, ©2005 DarleneFranklin. John C. Friel,
Ph.D. reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Valerie Frost, ©2005 Valerie Frost. Michelle Gipson, ©2005 Michelle
Gipson. Anna Joy Grace, ©2005 Anna Joy Grace. Vicki Graf, ©2005 Vicki
Graf.

Carol Davis Gustke reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Janell H. reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Erin Hagman reprinted from Chicken Soup for
the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Karen Hall, ©2005 Karen Hall.
Joyce Harvey, ©2003 Joyce Harvey. Shary Hauer, ©2005 Shary Hauer. Debbie
Heaton reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Maryellen Heller, ©2005 Maryellen Heller. Miriam Hill reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Renee Hixson,
©2005 Renee Hixson. Elaine Ingalls Hogg, ©2005 Elaine Ingalls Hogg.
Patricia Holdsworth reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Kevin J. Holmes, ©2005 Kevin J. Holmes. Joyce
McDonald Hoskins, ©2005 Joyce McDonald Hoskins.

Christyna Hunter, ©2004 Christyna Hunter. Debra Jay reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Marilyn Joan reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Sherrie M.
Johnston, ©2004 Sherrie M. Johnston. Deb Sellars Karpek, ©2005 Deb
Sellars Karpek. Yvonne Kaye, Ph.D., (215)393-5464. Reprinted from 366
Encouragements for Prosperity ©1992 Yvonne Kaye, Ph.D. Joy Neal Kidney,
©2005 Joy Neal Kidney. Candy Killion, ©2005 Candy Killion. Betty King,
©2005 Betty King. Eleanor Kirk, ©2005 Eleanor Kirk. Ted Klontz reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Pamela Knight,
©2005 Pamela Knight. Lisa Kugler reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Laura Hayes Lagana reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Nurse's Soul ©2001 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communimcations, Inc.

Myrna Beth Lambert, ©2005 Myrna Beth Lambert. Earnie Larsen reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Christine
Learmonth, ©2005 Christine Learmonth. Passage on July 12th, reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield andMark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Donna LeBlanc
reprinted from You Can't Quit Till You Know What's Eating You ©1990
Donna LeBlanc, published by Health Communications, Inc. Tracey W. Lee
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Lynne
Lepley, ©2005 Lynne Lepley. Rokelle Lerner reprinted from Daily
Affirmations for Adult Children of Alcoholics ©1985 Rokelle Lerner,
Health Communications, Inc. Rev. Bob Lew, ©2005 Rev. Bob Lew. Passage on
November 11th, reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004
Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Jaye Lewis, ©2005 Jaye Lewis. Passage on January
15th, reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Perry D. Litchfield reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering
Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Lisa Logan. ©2005 Lisa Logan. Barbara Elizabeth
Lowell, ©2005 Barbara Elizabeth Lowell.

Steven Manchester reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Lee R. McCormick reprinted from Chicken Soup for
the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Jeff McFarland, ©2005 Jeff
McFarland. Elaine Young McGuire, ©2005 Elaine Young McGuire. David Mead
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Theresa
Meehan, ©2005 Theresa Meehan. Letitia Trimmer Meeks reprinted from
Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Linda Mehus-Barber,
©2005 Linda Mehus-Barber. Jane Middelton-Moz reprinted from Chicken Soup
for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Teri Mitchell, ©2003 Teri
Mitchell. Jann Mitchell reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering
Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Jerry Moe reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. George H. Moffett, ©2005 George H. Moffett.

Mary Lee Moynan, ©2005 Mary Lee Moynan. Linda Myers-Sowell, ©2005 Linda
Myers-Sowell. Irma Newland, ©2005 Irma Newland. Brenda Nixon, ©2005
Brenda Nixon. Patricia O'Gorman, Ph.D. reprinted from Chicken Soup for
the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Dorri Olds, ©2005 Dorri Olds.
Julie Orlando reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004
Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Lori Othouse, ©2005 Lori Othouse. Todd Outcalt
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc.
Alexandra P., ©2005 Alexandra P. Theresa Peluso reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Ava Pennington, ©2005 Ava
Pennington. Maribeth Pittman, ©2005 Maribeth Pittman. Kay Conner
Pliszka, ©2005 Kay Conner Pliszka. Passage on September 18th, reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc.

Felice Prager, ©2004 Felice Prager. Reiki Principle excerpt is in the
public domain. Reiki is an ancient Japanese technique that balances the
life force energy by the laying on of hands which promotes healing,
stress reduction and relaxation. Peggy Reeves, ©2005 Peggy Reeves. Carol
McAdoo Rehme, ©2005 Carol McAdoo Rehme. Jennifer M. Reinsch reprinted
from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark
Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Naomi Rhode
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Nurse's Soul ©2001 Jack Canfield and
Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Brenda
Ridgeway, ©2005 Brenda Ridgeway. Carla Riehl reprinted from Chicken Soup
for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Sallie A. Rodman, ©2005 Sallie
A. Rodman. Passage on February 20th reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Thom Rutledge, ©2004 ThomRutledge. Adpated
from an article originally appearing in The Phoenix. Benneth Lee as told
to Mark Sanders reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Harriet May Savitz, ©2005 Harriet May Savitz.
Jennie Schaefer reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health

Communications, Inc. Glenda Schoonmaker, ©2005 Glenda Schoonmaker.
Charmi Schroeder, ©2005 Charmi Schroeder. Shannon reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Sharon Siepel, ©2005 Sharon
Siepel. Richard Singer, ©2005 Richard Singer. Anne Slates, ©2005 Anne
Slates. Bruce Squiers, ©2005 Bruce Squiers. Elva Stoelers, ©2005 Elva
Stoelers. Passage on July 9th reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc. Aingeal Stone, ©2005 Aingeal Stone. Kelly L.
Stone, ©2005 Kelly L. Stone. Raquel M. Strand, ©2005 Raquel Strand.
Passage on December 25th reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering
Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Linda Suroviec, ©2005 Linda Suroviec. Cori Sachais
Swidorsky, ©2005 Cori Sachais Swidorsky. Diane Thompson, ©2005 Diane
Thompson. Jayne Thurber-Smith. ©Reprinted from Chicken Soup for the
Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by
Health Communications, Inc.

Isa Traverso-Burger, ©2004 Isa Traverso-Burger. Abraham J. Twerski,
M.D. reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack
Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications,
Inc. Peter Vegso reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Shelley Wake, ©2005 ShelleyWake. Elizabeth Walton
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Sharon
Wegscheider-Cruse reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul
©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health
Communications, Inc. Sarah White, ©2005 Sarah White. David R. Wilkins
reprinted from Chicken Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield
and Mark Victor Hansen, published by Health Communications, Inc. Alice
J. Wisler, ©2005 Alice J. Wisler. Peter Wright reprinted from Chicken
Soup for the Recovering Soul ©2004 Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen,
published by Health Communications, Inc. Stephanie Ziebarth, ©2005
Stephanie Ziebarth.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this ebook onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of the
publisher. Subject matter, locality and/or people in the photographs may
not be the actual locality or people in the stories. Names of certain
individuals have been changed to protect their identity. copyright ©
2012 Chicken Soup for the Soul Publishing, LLC Interior design by Dawn
Von Strolley Grove and Larissa Hise Henoch ISBN: 978-1-4532-8520-6
(Mobi) Cover design by Andrea C. Uva This 2012 edition distributed by
Open Road Integrated Media 180 Varick Street New York, NY 10014
www.openroadmedia.com

Available wherever ebooks are sold

FIND OUT MORE AT WWW.CHICKENSOUP.COM follow us: @chickensoupsoul and
Facebook.com/ChickenSoupfortheSoul Chicken Soup for the Soul is one of a
select group of publishing partners of Open Road Integrated Media, Inc.

Open Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia content
company. Open Road creates connections between authors and their
audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online
platform, which uses premium video content and social media.

Videos, Archival Documents, and New Releases Sign up for the Open Road
Media newsletter and get news delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up
now at www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters FIND OUT MORE AT
WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM FOLLOW US: @openroadmedia and
Facebook.com/OpenRoadMedia


