5 Ways To Kill Imposter Syndrome (#3 is most important)

1. Understand it's a healthy sign of growth When you enter a new
industry, get a promotion, or start at a new company, of course you're
going to feel like a fraud.

You're going to feel like you got lucky and you don't deserve success.
It means you're growing. That's a good thing!

2. Document your past successes If you're feeling overwhelmed with self
doubt, take out a journal and write down (in detail) your last big win.
This will put things in perspective and remind you that success is in
your DNA.

3. Get a coach There is nothing more powerful than getting an outside
perspective. They will help protect you from your own destructive
thoughts. If you want the mindset coach I worked with on my path to
earning \$1.5M in a single year, DM me.

4. Become a neutral observer In your sales role, there are countless
circumstances you have to deal with. For example, "I have to communicate
with others."

The more you remove your opinion - like, "I don't communicate well with
clients" - the more you can make high quality decisions based on the
facts.

5. Swap negative thoughts with positive ones If you constantly tell
yourself, "I suck on the phone or in meetings," your thoughts will turn
into feelings, and feelings into action, and those drive results.

Garbage in, garbage out. So when you have a negative thought, adopt the
opposite.

TL;DR Imposter Syndrome is inevitable in sales, but it doesn't need to
hold you back if you do these 5 things: 1. Understand it's a sign of
growth 2. Document past successes 3. Get a coach 4. Become a neutral
observer 5. Swap negative thoughts with positive ones

Did you overcome Imposter Syndrome? If so, how did you do it? Share one
tip in the comments below

↓↓↓↓


