QUICK GUIDE

WELLNESS CHAMPIONS

Using Check-in Questions to Promote Well-being Using prompts to check-in
during meetings, team huddles, hand-offs, etc. is a simple way to help
each other reconnect to purpose, be more present and focused, connect to
each other, and be more engaged at work. Checking-in also creates time
and space to process events and experiences in a helpful, adaptive way.

HOW TO LEAD A CHECK-IN

Script for Introducing a Check-in

1.  Have every person check-in one by one. This tends to work well if
    the group is smaller than 14 people or if you have ample time to
    check-in.

Let's do a check-in.

2.  Have the group break-up into pairs or groups of 3-4 people and
    converse for 510 minutes. This works well for groups consisting of
    15+ individuals. When the whole group comes back together, you can •
    request for a few people to share • ask for highlights from each
    group • ask what it was like to connect this way for a few minutes

Everyone pause for a moment to think of your response and what you would
want to share with each other. Please remember that you do not have to
check-in and can simply say "pass" when it's your turn.

FACILITATION SUGGESTIONS 1. Be sure to note the context of the situation
and the general mood of the room. You want to ensure that your check-in
question fits with current circumstances. 2. Note what kind of
experience you want the group to have with the check-in. Is it time to
be silly, inspired, grateful, etc.? 3. Consider how much time you have
for the check-in and what parameters you need to set in order for the
group to participate. For instance, you can use the prompts, • "in one
or two words..." • "In one or two sentences...." • "Taking a couple of
minutes each..."

RESILIENCY CENTER

The prompt for today is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (choose from
the list below).

Sample Check-in Questions • What is a high and a low from the day? •
Share one thing that is going on in your life (personal or
professional.) • What is one thing that went well (yesterday, during
your shift, etc.)? • What is one thing that you are grateful for right
now? • What is one thing you are going to do for yourself (during your
shift, after you leave, etc.)? • Give a shout out to yourself and a
shout out to someone on the team. • What is something that you want to
remember or remind yourself during your shift/ workday today? • What is
one thing that is currently giving you hope? Find the complete
step-by-step guide online at:
accelerate.uofuhealth.utah.edu/explore/wellness


