Prepared By: Tasha Olsen

Clinician Notes Set a timer and stand up from desk every 45 minutes or
at least check your posture and get out of a slouched position

Seated Scapular Retraction REPS: 5 Exercise image step

SETS: 1

HOLD: 10 SECONDS

Exercise image step

1

2

Setup Begin sitting in an upright position. Movement Gently squeeze your
shoulder blades together, relax, and then repeat. Tip Make sure to
maintain good posture during the exercise.

Seated Cervical Retraction REPS: 5 Exercise image step

1

SETS: 1

HOLD: 10 SECONDS

DAILY: 1

Exercise image step

2

Setup Begin sitting in an upright position with your feet flat on the
floor. Movement Gently draw your chin in, while keeping your eyes fixed
on something in front of you. Tip Make sure that you do not look down as
you do this exercise, or bend your neck forward.

Disclaimer: This program provides exercises related to your condition
that you can perform at home. As there is a risk of injury with any
activity, use caution when performing exercises. If you experience any
pain or discomfort, discontinue the exercises and contact your health
care provider.

Login URL: uofutahhealth.medbridgego.com • Access Code: HFJEJPWJ • Date
printed: 02/26/2021

Page 1

Seated Cervical Sidebending Stretch REPS: 1 Exercise image step

SETS: 2

HOLD: 30 SECONDS

Exercise image step

1

2

Setup Begin sitting in an upright position. Movement Use one hand to
tilt your head sideways, pulling your ear toward one shoulder until you
feel a stretch in the opposite side of your neck, and hold. Tip Make
sure to keep your back straight and do not let your head rotate, or bend
forward or backward.

Seated Levator Scapulae Stretch REPS: 1 Exercise image step

1

SETS: 2

HOLD: 30 SECONDS

Exercise image step

2

Setup Begin sitting upright in a chair, grasping the edge with one hand.
Movement Rotate your head to the side opposite your anchored arm, then
tuck your chin towards your chest. With your free hand, grasp the back
of your head and gently pull it downward until you feel a stretch and
hold. Tip Make sure to keep your back straight during the exercise.

Disclaimer: This program provides exercises related to your condition
that you can perform at home. As there is a risk of injury with any
activity, use caution when performing exercises. If you experience any
pain or discomfort, discontinue the exercises and contact your health
care provider.

Login URL: uofutahhealth.medbridgego.com • Access Code: HFJEJPWJ • Date
printed: 02/26/2021

Page 2

Seated Child's Pose with Table REPS: 1 Exercise image step

SETS: 2

HOLD: 30 SECONDS

Exercise image step

1

2

Setup Begin seated in a chair with a table in front of you. Your hands
should be resting on the table, one on top of the other. Movement Bend
forward at the waist to rest your head on the table. Hold this position,
then return to the starting position and repeat. Tip Exhale as you bend
forward into the stretch and inhale as you return to the starting
position.

Seated Hamstring Stretch REPS: 1 Exercise image step

1

SETS: 2

HOLD: 30 SECONDS

Exercise image step

2

Setup Begin sitting upright with one leg straight forward and your heel
resting on the ground. Movement Bend your trunk forward, hinging at your
hips until you feel a stretch in the back of your leg. Hold this
position. Tip Make sure to keep your knee straight during the stretch
and do not let your back arch or slump.

Disclaimer: This program provides exercises related to your condition
that you can perform at home. As there is a risk of injury with any
activity, use caution when performing exercises. If you experience any
pain or discomfort, discontinue the exercises and contact your health
care provider.

Login URL: uofutahhealth.medbridgego.com • Access Code: HFJEJPWJ • Date
printed: 02/26/2021

Page 3

Seated Figure 4 Piriformis Stretch REPS: 1 Exercise image step

1

SETS: 2

HOLD: 30 SECONDS

Exercise image step

2

Setup Begin sitting upright in a chair with both feet on the ground.
Bring the ankle of one leg up onto the knee of your opposite leg.
Movement Apply a gentle pressure with one hand on the top of your bent
knee, and lean forward until you feel a stretch in your buttocks. Relax,
then repeat. Tip Make sure to keep your shoulders relaxed and back
straight during the exercise.

Disclaimer: This program provides exercises related to your condition
that you can perform at home. As there is a risk of injury with any
activity, use caution when performing exercises. If you experience any
pain or discomfort, discontinue the exercises and contact your health
care provider.

Login URL: uofutahhealth.medbridgego.com • Access Code: HFJEJPWJ • Date
printed: 02/26/2021

Page 4


