Pain Control through Diaphragmatic Breathing Fight or Flight

Consistent/chronic pain can often affect our nervous system and cause
autonomic dysregulation/central sensitization. •

•

• •

•

Autonomic Dysregulation = the automatic functions of your body (nervous
system) don't know how to regulate themselves appropriately. Automatic
functions include: o Heart rate, blood pressure, temperature control,
respiratory rate, digestion, muscle tightness, etc. The nervous system
acts like a teeter-totter; when fight or flight is high, rest and digest
tends to be low. Things that can cause fight or flight: o Stress o Pain
o Anxiety o Lack of sleep Fight or flight generally causes: o Increased
heart rate and blood pressure o Increased respiratory rate; while
shutting off the diaphragm o Increased sweating o Increased muscle
tension

A person should not feel like they are caught in fight or flight mode
all of time (feeling of living on edge). This generally means that your
nervous system needs a "reset".

Rest or Digest

Stress

Pain

Decreased sleep

Increased anxiety

Increased fight or flight

The "Reset" -- Autonomic Quieting Just like electronics need a reset,
our bodies often need a reset when we are out of sync. One of the
easiest ways to control that is through breathing exercises. Breathing
is the easiest of the automatic functions to control voluntarily. If you
were asked to hold your breath or breathe faster/slower, you could.

(Thoracic Cavity)

(Abdominal Cavity)

By breathing "appropriately" you can decrease your fight or flight
response by increasing your rest and digest. Breathing with your
diaphragm will automatically slow the fight or flight, while massaging
the nerve that stimulates rest and digest. This combination allows the
"reset".

Diaphragmatic Breathing Diaphragm Facts: • • •

Dome shaped muscle that separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal
cavity. It is the primary breathing muscle. With inhalation the
diaphragm contracts into the abdominal cavity increasing the space of
the thoracic cavity. o Search 3D Diaphragmatic breathing on youtube o
Watch rib expansion

Breathing Practice: •

• •

• •

•

Find a comfortable position, in a quiet room. o On your back with your
legs propped up usually works best. Place hands on lower ribs, to
encourage lower rib expansion (think of the youtube video). Also try one
hand on upper ribs and one on lower ribs to see which ribs move first
(lower ribs should move first). It may help to visualize air coming in
through your mouth traveling to your hands placed at lower ribs.
Remember your belly will move passively due to decreased room in
abdominal cavity, but you're not trying to inflate your belly with air.
You don't have to breathe deeply.

Meditation and Relaxation with Breathing: The last part of autonomic
quieting is shutting off your brain and not letting the stress or pain
interrupt your breathing "reset". It will impede your breathing
exercises if you're sitting stressed the whole time while trying to
relax. Many medical professionals will walk you through guided
meditation, but this can be somewhat stressful in the beginning when
you're trying to relax and learn to change your breathing. One of the
easiest cues to clear your mind is to think of one simple thing (i.e. a
color, candle flame, piano, etc.), something that is easy to focus on
when your thoughts start to wander.

\*\*\*It is important to not get discouraged and to remember this is
supposed to be a relaxing technique. Don't try and overthink it.


