Appropriate Pacing Strategies •

Pacing -- Rate of progress or the speed at which an activity/movement
proceeds o Patients that suffer from chronic pain have a difficult time
with either doing too much or too little due to increased pain levels.
Our goal is to find a happy medium.

Poor Pacing

Ideal Pacing

Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Day 6 Day 7 Day 8

Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Day 6 Day 7 Day 8

Pacing

•

•

Threshold

Pacing

Threshold

Poor pacing is like getting over a sickness. You have a string of bad
days and when you finally have a good day, you tend to overdo all the
activities you have been neglecting. The overabundance of activity
causes another dip in in your stamina or possibly a huge increase in
pain. Which in turn sets you back to another round of down days. (Graph
1). Ideal Pacing -- even when you're not feeling great you still get up
and move within you 1-2 point threshold above baseline. By not overdoing
it, you should have more energy and ability to have more good days. And
hopefully the bad days decrease, while your pain threshold also
improves. o Ideal pacing can be compared to a tank of gas. If you only
have one tank of gas for the whole week you have to decide what the best
way to use your gas will be. The idea is with good planning that you
will have less down days and will slowly build up your tolerance for
activities on good days.

Rules for Pacing: 1. Pacing takes time and appropriate planning. a.
Helpful hints: i. Buy a planner you can write things down in ii. Start
small with what your 3 main priorities are for the week iii. Build your
schedule around those priorities and make sure you schedule breaks when
needed 2. Pacing involves good communication with your support team. a.
Be sure to discuss with your friends and family your goals and what
you're trying to achieve. 3. It is important to listen to your body.
Your pain should never be 1-3 above your baseline pain. a. When pain
starts getting too high, take a 10-15 minute break and relax. 4. Pay
attention to the small strides that you are making and take note of the
good days!


