Teaching Mindfulness

Donald McCown Marc S. Micozzi

●

Diane Reibel

Teaching Mindfulness A Practical Guide for Clinicians and Educators

Donald McCown School of Health Professions Thomas Jefferson University
Philadelphia, PA USA don.mccown@jefferson.edu

Diane Reibel Jefferson Medical College Thomas Jefferson University
Philadelphia, PA USA diane.reibel@jefferson.edu

Marc S. Micozzi School of Medicine Georgetown University Washington, DC
USA marcsmicozzi@aol.com

ISBN 978-0-387-09483-0 e-ISBN 978-0-387-09484-7 DOI
10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7 Springer New York Dordrecht Heidelberg London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009932118 © Springer
Science+Business Media, LLC 2010 All rights reserved. This work may not
be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 233
Spring Street, New York, NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts in
connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in connection with
any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed is forbidden. The use in this publication of trade
names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are
not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion
as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. Printed on
acid-free paper Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media
(www.springer.com)

For the light and love of my life, Gail. Donald McCown For my beautiful
daughters, Rachel and Lauren, with love. Diane Reibel For my dear,
departed father, Edio, with gratitude Marc S. Micozzi

Acknowledgments

We are indebted to Jon Kabat-Zinn, whose vision and dedication in
bringing mindfulness to the world has transformed and informed our work
and our lives. Our teaching arises from and is grounded in the embodied
wisdom of the teachers of the Center for Mindfulness at UMASS Medical
School, present and past, and we thank Saki Santorelli for his clarity,
compassion, and fire, Melissa Blacker for her limitless love and
patience (especially when supervising us!), Florence Meleo-Meyer for her
kindness and gentleness, Elana Rosenbaum for the brilliant light she
emits, and Ferris Urbanowski for the delight of her loving presence. We
are continually nourished and challenged to grow by our noble friends in
the Delaware Valley MBSR teacher sangha. Special thanks to our proofing
team: Eileen Abrams, Julie Agresta, Carleton Dallery, and Aleeze Moss.
We are grateful for the ongoing support of the staff at the
Jefferson-Myrna Brind Center of Integrative Medicine. And, after years
of teaching, we remain awed and humbled by the incredible courage and
unique wisdom of the participants in our classes --- they truly are our
most powerful teachers. Donald McCown: I am grateful to those who have
shaped my practice, teaching, and way of being in the world: Warren
Soule and Chip Prehn for Christian formation and friendship, Larry
Kaiden for psychological courage and comfort (and the worst-ever puns),
Steve Antinoff for the hard questions about compassion and ethics, Chip
Dallery for subtleties of scholarship and social constructionism.
Gratitude and bows to Stephen Batchelor and Charles Genoud for bringing
Western minds to Eastern thought and teaching in a way that touches my
heart and mind, and to Louise Boedeker for connecting me to the
transforming power of sensory awareness practice and its lineage. I
offer deep appreciation for those who read and commented upon various
drafts of the manuscript and important bits and pieces, including Jon
Kabat-Zinn, John Dunne, Kenneth Gergen, Jeffrey Brantley, Carleton
Dallery, and especially Daniel Siegel --- for neuroscience help and
encouragement. Given all this wonderful support, any deficiencies and
stumbling blocks that have found their way into this book may be laid at
the authors' feet. Thanks to the Bryn Mawr College Graduate School of
Social Work and Social Research for making space and resources available
for research and writing, and to the staff of the Bryn Mawr College
library for bearing with all my ILLs, misplaced books, and teetering
carts. Finally, much appreciation to Guy Tourangeau, who turned my
sketches and scribbles of diagrams into art. vii

viii

Acknowledgments

Diane Reibel: Many thanks to my dear friends and colleagues Steven
Rosenzweig, MD, and Bud Brainard, PhD, who co-founded the Stress
Reduction Program at Jefferson in 1996 at a time when mindfulness was
not "hot". They trusted in me to teach MBSR and supported me to develop
the program from the ground up (literally, from its start in a dingy
basement --- a somewhat common theme in MBSR!). Special thanks to Steve,
who, at a time when I was uncertain if I had what it takes to teach
MBSR, told me, in his infinite wisdom, not to worry: "Your students will
be your greatest resource." I share this story with my students till
this day, acknowledging that they are indeed my greatest resource. A
deep bow to all of my friends from the CFM Teacher Development Intensive
2000. What a blessing to be supported by you and to support you as we
continually grow in our own unique way bringing mindfulness to the
world! Through the years I have studied with many teachers from
different wisdom traditions, each one of you who has enriched my
spiritual path beyond measure. I am deeply indebted to Jack Kornfield,
Tara Brach, Sylvia Boorstein, Thich Nhat Hanh, Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche,
Tsoknyi Rinpoche, Lama Orgyen Zangpo, Rabbi Zalman Schachter-Shalomi,
and Jason Shulman. Deepest gratitude to my dear teacher Rabbi David
Cooper for his accessibility, generosity, wisdom, and love. His guidance
has been invaluable to me as I navigate the waters of the unknown. Marc
S. Micozzi: I am grateful for having met Don McCown and renewed my
contact with Diane Reibel while serving as Executive Director of the
Thomas Jefferson University Center for Integrative Medicine
(2002--2005). We persisted in our intention to create this book and it
will be the lasting legacy of my time there. You might wonder why a
university and hospital in Philadelphia are named after Thomas Jefferson
of Virginia (my own birth state) given all the distinguished
Philadelphians who were also "Founding Fathers." The answer is a long
story for another time and something upon which to meditate.

Foreword

What you have in your hands is an important and finely honed work, the
first of its kind, as far as I know --- a guide for exploring from the
inside and making explicit what is involved in teaching mindfulness to
adults in mainstream secular settings within mainstream society. This is
a pioneering and courageous breaking of new ground, in part because it
explicitly brings together different ways of studying and knowing the
world of human experience from the perspectives of the scientific,
meditative, and philosophical traditions. The authors provide a great
deal of context and substance for developing the rich interior space
from which all good teaching emerges, as well as the background and
history relevant to the emergence of the growing interest in teaching
mindfulness among professionals in health care, education, and beyond.
They offer a close examination of the range of skill sets required, and
the potential positive effects of this pedagogy associated with the
cultivation of mindfulness within the community of a classroom. What I
hope to contribute to this offering are a range of perspectives and
concerns that are essential, in my view at least, to understanding the
great responsibility and challenges of teaching mindfulness, and the
great benefits that can emerge for others and for oneself if we can keep
certain principles and contexts in mind as we engage in this potentially
life-transforming work.

Many Streams, One Ocean In the year 2000, during a meeting in
Dharamsala, India, organized by the Mind and Life Institute, in which
the Dalai Lama and a group of psychologists, neuroscientists, scholars,
and contemplatives explored together the subject of destructive emotions
and what might be done to mitigate the enormous personal and societal
harm that so often stems from them, the Dalai Lama, amazingly and yet
characteristically, challenged the scientists to come up with
non-Buddhist, secular methods for working with and transforming the
energies of these said emotions.1 He acknowledged that Buddhism might
have a lot to offer, in terms of its elaborate and detailed
understanding of what he termed afflictive emotions, including a range
of meditative practices that have been utilized for centuries and
millennia in monastic settings to ix

x

Foreword

work with them in skillful ways. At the same time, he was saying that
the real hope lay in a non-Buddhist, a truly universal and secular
approach that would make use of whatever elements of Buddhist
understanding and methods were found to be helpful, but only combined
with and integrated into Western culture, its understanding of the
psyche, and in particular, its scientific understanding of emotions,
emotional expression, and emotion regulation.\* It was truly impressive
that the Dalai Lama was encouraging such a secular approach. It affirmed
the view that it was only by bringing together the epistemologies and
practices of the different cultures represented in the dialogue that
whatever might develop would be of any use to people in non-Buddhist
countries. Out of that meeting came a very strong and ongoing effort to
respond to the Dalai Lama's challenge. It has given rise to a range of
new approaches, innovations in teaching methods, books, and studies just
now being published in the scientific literature, reporting on major
efforts to operationalize this secular challenge and the outcomes of
these efforts in terms of brain science, psychology, and medicine. It
was also pointed out at that meeting that there already was an approach
that had been doing much of what the Dalai Lama was calling for in
clinical settings, primarily hospitals, for twenty-one years at that
point, namely mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) and the family
of mindfulness-based interventions that have arisen around it. It was
also pointed out and discussed in considerable detail that there was a
growing base of evidence from scientific studies that MBSR training
resulted in profound effects on medical patients and others in terms of
relief of pain and suffering, and also in terms of immune response and
specific brain changes related to more effective emotion regulation. Of
course, it was well known by many of the participants in that meeting
that the curriculum of MBSR and other mindfulness-based interventions is
deeply rooted in a universal expression of the Buddhadharma z; and that
the curriculum features the cultivation of mindfulness of mind states
and body states, including in particular, awareness of reactive
emotions, as well as how to deploy specific strategies to respond
mindfully rather than react reflexively when they are triggered --- and
even more so if these emotions tend to linger and color one's longer
term experience, actions, and relationships, as they so frequently do.
In the emerging of new and compelling fields of inquiry and
understanding, in this case the various potential applications of
mindfulness in mainstream society, there are usually many different
streams of thought and effort that arise more or less simultaneously,
sometimes running in parallel, sometimes taking very different
directions, but all issuing into the one ocean of what is. All can be
said to add value in one way or another to the overall vector of the
work because their experience and findings, particularly if the
individual efforts have integrity, expand

- This would include supporting the development of new research agendas
  to investigate our understanding of emotions, including happiness, and
  those not usually studied in the West, or even seen as emotions, such
  as kindness and compassion. z The foundational teachings of the
  Buddha.

Foreword

xi

our understanding of what works well under what circumstances, and what
doesn't. But, sooner or later, the different streams tend to recognize
each other, take stock of each other's virtues and limitations, and
finally come together in the emergence of a new and inclusive synthesis,
one that does indeed add value to what has come before. In the context
of this book, that synthesis would be the emerging in this era of a new
way of understanding the nature of the mind and how it works, grows, and
continues learning, its relationship to the new-found plasticity of the
brain and to the self-healing body, and, in terms of practical
applications, what might be possible in a vast array of different venues
in society and its institutions, such as medicine and health care,
education, business, sports, economics, and politics, were we to
individually and collectively avail ourselves of the depths of these
emergent discoveries that shed new light on core dimensions of our true
nature as human beings.

Motivation and Integrity Teaching Mindfulness is a welcome and very
timely response to the exponential growth of professional interest in
mindfulness and its applications in society, and to the need, now upon
us, to scale up the teaching of mindfulness to a much broader level
within many of society's institutions, as noted above, in response to
the rapidly growing interest and demand. This of course, requires a very
large cadre of well-trained and highly competent and skilled mindfulness
teachers. One critical challenge that the authors are well aware of is
that of maintaining the highest levels of mastery and integrity
necessary to insure that there is deep authenticity and fidelity in the
teaching of mindfulness. Otherwise, it wouldn't be mindfulness, it
wouldn't be dharma, and the effort itself wouldn't be very mindful or
tap the vast potential energies that lie at the heart of why people are
so drawn to mindfulness in the first place. For mindfulness is not just
one more method or technique, akin to other familiar techniques and
strategies we may find instrumental and effective in one field or
another. It is a way of being, of seeing, of tapping into the full
dimensionality of our humanity, and this way has a critical
non-instrumental essence inherent in it. From the very first chapter,
the authors describe a process and pedagogy that speak to the depths of
what the work is, what it asks of those who come to teach it, and what
the challenges are for anyone hoping to pursue such a path. One of those
challenges is to examine one's own motivation for embarking on such an
unusual path in the first place. Motivation is an ongoing and crucial
factor for teaching mindfulness, and even more so, for maintaining,
sustaining, and deepening one's practice. It invites continual
re-examination and reflection, as motivations can grow and change, and
richly mature over time and with experience. In terms of initial
motivations, the authors recognize that the mushrooming professional
interest in mindfulness in different arenas carries with it the
inevitable risk that for some, becoming a mindfulness teacher is now
something of a smart career move. This is not necessarily bad. Actually
it is a sign of success that

xii

Foreword

so many young people, graduate students, medical students, new teachers,
are wanting to work in this area, sometimes even introducing mindfulness
as a field of professional inquiry to their mentors and advisors. So
even if mindfulness is a smart career move for some at this point in
time, that is still simply a starting off point on an extended journey,
a place to begin, and a profound opportunity to follow one's intuition
and ambition into something far deeper than one might suspect at first.
It is almost inevitable that one will discover that the trajectory one
has embarked upon goes way beyond the concept that mindfulness is merely
a technique that one can easily pick up at a workshop or professional
training and then integrate into one's repertoire of skills. This
challenge will become, whether anticipated or not by those drawn to this
work, a central feature of one's effectiveness as a teacher. The early
years of MBSR and the development of other mindfulness-based clinical
interventions were the province of a small group of people who gave
themselves over to practicing and teaching mindfulness basically out of
love, out of passion for the practice, knowingly and happily putting
their careers and economic well-being at risk because of that love,
usually stemming from deep first-person encounters with the dharma and
its meditative practices, often through the mediation of Buddhist
teachers and acknowledged masters within a number of well-defined
traditions and lineages. For better or for worse, the next generations
of mindfulness teachers may not have the same opportunities or even
interest in studying and practicing with Asian Buddhist teachers, or
Asian teachers in other traditions that value the wisdom of mindfulness,
such as Sufism, the yogas, and Taoism. Fortunately, there are ample
opportunities, for those who wish to pursue them, to study and practice
with Asian teachers and with seasoned Western dharma teachers who have
themselves practiced in Asia with respected teachers, and to sit long
retreats at wonderful Dharma centers in the West. I personally consider
sitting long teacher-led retreats periodically to be an absolute
necessity in the developing of one's own meditation practice,
understanding, and effectiveness as a teacher. But while sitting
periodic long retreats may be necessary, it is not in itself sufficient.
Mindfulness in everyday life is the ultimate challenge and practice. The
practice of mindfulness is a life-time's engagement. Growth,
development, and maturation as a mindfulness practitioner and teacher of
mindfulness are a critical part of the process. It is not always
painless. Self-awareness can be very humbling, so the motivation to
carry on and face what needs facing must mature as well in the process.

Opportunity and Calling Why is mindfulness so sought after in this
moment, and so necessary? In part, I would say, because the world and
its institutions and denizens are literally and metaphorically starving
for authentic ways to live and to be and to act in the world. We long
for some degree of effective balance and wisdom that supports
meaningful, embodied, and significant work --- the work of making a
difference in the world,

Foreword

xiii

of adding value and beauty, of individually and collectively waking up
to the full range of human intelligences and capacities we share for
wisdom, ease of being and kindness. Those capacities and intelligences
also include a love of learning, the urge to continue growing into our
full potential as beings across the lifespan, into our capacity for
healing ourselves and society, into becoming agents of healing out of
the response of our compassionate hearts, in a word, an aspiration from
deep within our bones and cells and DNA for contributing to the
flowering of what is deepest and best in ourselves as human beings, as
the species name homo sapiens sapiens \[the species that knows and knows
that it knows\] suggests. Without this waking up from the endemic
unawareness and self-absorption that we are also subject to, our
propensity as a species for ignoring what is most important, coupled
with our intellectual and technological precocity and tendency to be
blinded by our own volatile emotions and desires, may get us and our now
small and crowded planet into even greater trouble than it is already
in. If we were to name some of the emergent streams at the moment that
are germane to the subject of Teaching Mindfulness, the list would
include the domains of mind/body medicine, integrative medicine,
mindfulness-based clinical interventions of all kinds in health care,
medicine, psychology, and psychotherapy, including mindfulness-based
stress reduction (MBSR), mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT),
mindfulness-based relapse prevention for binge drinking (MBRP),
mindfulness-based childbirth and parenting (MBCP), mindfulness-based art
therapy for cancer patients (MBAT), mindfulness-based eating awareness
training (MB-EAT), mindfulness-based trauma therapy (MBTT),
mindfulness-based relapse prevention --- Women (MBRP-W),
mindfulness-based elder care (MBEC), dialectical behavior therapy (DBT),
acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT), ­mindfulness-based
psychotherapy, mindfulness-informed psychotherapy, mindfulness-based
mind fitness training (MMFT) in the military, the Shamatha Project, the
Contemplative Mind in Society, Google's main campus employee program in
mindfulness-based emotional intelligence --- Search Inside Yourself
(SIY), the emerging fields of contemplative neuroscience and
neuro-phenomenology, and perhaps the biggest challenge of all in many
ways, the emerging stream of bringing mindfulness into education,
especially K-12 education, but also higher education. That is a lot of
mindfulness-based work. Of course, this trend implies that we will soon
require a lot of mindfulness teachers, a lot more than are presently
available. And good ones. It is up to us, individually and collectively,
to recognize what that might mean. This remarkable and ambitious book is
a uniquely welcome contribution to the flowering of mindfulness in the
West in mainstream professional circles. To date, no other book has even
attempted to synthesize the various elements of the MBSR model into a
coherent and explicit teaching pedagogy that could serve as a foundation
for the skillful development of new teachers, and the ongoing deepening
development of experienced teachers of mindfulness in this wholly
secular idiom, yet which is wholly based on the non-dual universal
dharma that the Dharma within Buddhism is and has always pointed to....
a basic lawfulness in the universe, and in the nature of what we call
"the mind" and its behavior. In this context, which can

xiv

Foreword

sound quite daunting, it is important to keep in mind that the Buddha
himself was not a Buddhist, and that even the term Buddhism was coined
by Westerners only several hundred years ago.2 This book has many
virtues. One salient example is the explicit emphasis on and
fine-structure analysis of the pedagogy of the classroom and the
processes of inquiry and dialogue that lie at the heart of good dharma
teaching. The emphasis on the group experience is critical, since almost
all mindfulness-based approaches work in a class setting with sizable
groups of people, whether they be medical patients or children in a
kindergarten or high school classroom. The authors address many domains
in the field of mindfulness-based interventions that have remained up to
this point more implicit than explicit. One is an overview of the
historical roots of Western, and particularly North American interest in
meditation. Another is the art and the science and the skill set of
teaching mindfulness in a professional clinical context. Every element
of the pedagogy offered here, as the authors themselves point out, is
potentially subject to debate and reflection, and to be put to the test
in practice. What makes a "good enough" mindfulness teacher is something
of a lifetime koany, at least I have found it to be so in my own life,
and that koan reminds me constantly of how audacious the undertaking is
(and how inadequate we all may feel), and yet, how important and
priceless it is as well (see section 8).

Fidelity and Innovation in Any Curriculum One characteristic of the MBSR
curriculum that the authors explicitly point out is that it has what
they refer to as "integrity." Where MBSR itself is concerned, and other
clinical interventions modeled on it, this integrity needs to be
protected, especially in the face of the inevitable impulse on the part
of new teachers to improve the curriculum, or add new "modules" to it,
or put in their favorite pedagogical material to enrich the program to
make it there own. These are all understandable and in some cases,
admirable and creative impulses. And in some instances, they work and
work well, and are a necessary element of making the teaching your own.
At the same time, because the foundation lies in mindfulness, it also
lies in silence, stillness, and spaciousness. For that reason, we need
to guard against the

y a koan is a Zen teaching device, like a puzzle in the form of a
question or statement or dialogue one attempts to hold in mind during
meditation and understand and respond to without responding with the
discursive thinking mind, since no response coming out of thought will
be authentic and adequate to the circumstances of the moment. An example
would be "What am I?" or "Does a dog have Buddha nature" or "What is
Buddha?" Almost any life circumstance could be seen as a koan. You could
think of it as "What is this?" or even, "What now?" In every moment, the
response might be different. The only requirement is that it be
authentic and appropriate, and not come out of dualistic thinking.
Responses can be non-verbal.

Foreword

xv

impulse we might have, especially if we feel uncomfortable with extended
silences or uncertain that the participants in the class are "getting"
what we want them to "get," to fill all the empty space in MBSR with
extra "stuff." The emptiness, the "sparseness" of the curriculum is that
way for a reason. Without the silence, the stillness, the spaciousness
of the non-conceptual, it would merely become a cognitive exercise, no
longer speaking to or cultivating the heart of mindfulness, which is
practice. Several MBSR teachers have shared with me over the years that
they have tried at times to change the curriculum in one way or another,
to add things, or take things out, even the core practices themselves.
In the end, they came back to the core structure of MBSR, having found
that their changes didn't work as well as they had thought. One of the
reasons they returned to the core curriculum was discovering that,
without meaning for it to happen, all the space and feelings of openness
and silence had been filled up. So when teaching MBSR, it is important
that it be MBSR and not simply whatever one wants to put in or take out
or modify according to one's liking or feelings of inadequacy under that
umbrella. This means that if you don't feel competent to teach mindful
yoga, then you develop that competency through study and practice with
good yoga teachers. You don't bring a yoga expert in to do the yoga, any
more than you would bring a breathing expert in to teach the breathing.
You don't throw out the body scan because you think it is too slow, or
too threatening to some, but you learn to work skillfully with the body
scan in various ways, realizing that it does have the potential to
trigger reactions in people with histories of abuse, etc. One lesson
that scientists have learned from evolution is that certain molecular
structures within our cells have been conserved and relatively or even
highly invariant over time, and across species. An example would be the
structure of actin and myosin molecules, which work together to form
muscle that is capable of contracting when it needs to contract, and
releasing when it needs to release. Another even more elemental example
would be the structure of ribosomes and other cellular organelles.
Having refined a process and a structure that functioned effectively
over unthinkable amounts of time, almost any change in the structure is
bound to lead to a diminishment of function. People have said that MBSR
may be similar in some ways. It is important to be innovative, and pull
on everything the teacher knows and loves, as appropriate. There is a
great deal of latitude and space built into the MBSR curriculum for the
teacher to bring in himself or herself in critical ways, including,
where appropriate, new information and practices. That latitude in
creativity is essential for the curriculum to come alive. But at the
same time, there is little room in the 8-week MBSR curriculum for
putting in more stuff, however interesting or relevant, without
sacrificing something perhaps more important. It is usually more space
that is needed, rather than more information or methods or learning
modules. What is important is that the structure reflects the depths of
the opportunity that mindfulness offers both each individual and the
class as a whole. For the teachers, all that comes out of throwing
oneself into the practice itself, and trusting the practice and life to
be the real teacher.

xvi

Foreword

Thus, the emergence of the pedagogy elaborated in this book will be, as
the authors hope and suggest, an ongoing contemplation in its own right
regarding what the teaching of mindfulness is all about. While the
8-week format and curriculum of MBSR in the clinical setting may have
its own inner logic for conserving the format and not introducing all
sorts of extraneous concepts because of the teacher's pet interests,
other forms of mindfulness teaching in other contexts will require and
demand just this kind of spontaneous creativity. When developing new and
innovative mindfulness programs for new venues, whether it be at Google
headquarters, or in stressful workplaces, prisons, the inner city,
sports teams, or for bringing mindfulness into elementary and middle
schools, it is important to keep in mind that modifications and
innovation are absolutely necessary. At the same time, you wouldn't want
to lose the essence. In order not to, you have to live inside that
essence yourself, and know who you are working with, what the dominant
culture and idiom are, what the specific needs of the culture and its
community of constituents might be, in a word, the full spectrum of what
each teaching opportunity presents you with. Just dealing with the fact
that in many venues a high proportion of participants may have known or
unknown histories of trauma requires a degree of sensitivity and
flexibility that may change how the curriculum is unfolded, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Of course, you may never know the
culture you are entering all that well, so a lot of your capacity to
innovate effectively will rely, once again, on trust, on your intuition
and sensitivity, as well as on your own good will and clarity, and of
course, on your practice.

Languaging and Reification In my own teaching and practice, I try to
bring a highly refined ear to the possible uses of the language so that
the languaging itself recognizes and points to and embodies the
non-dual. Without opening to this dimension of experience, there is no
reason for teaching mindfulness, nor for practicing it. Thus the
valuable gift of present participles in the English language, what the
Buddhist scholar, John Dunne termed, in observing how much care is given
to it in MBSR, "the secret heart of the English gerund." It's virtue is
that it transcends duality. That is not the case in all languages, but
in English, we are blessed with this part of speech, and it can be very
effective in the teaching of mindfulness and dharma. For one thing, it
can help us to avoid unwittingly falling into the imperative verb form
in guiding meditations, as in "breathe in" or "breathe out," which
posits an authority (me), telling someone, namely you, who I expect to
obey this command, what to do. But by saying "breathing in," you the
teacher are no longer giving an order, privileging your position over
the student's. We are in this together, and the breathing takes care of
itself. The only question is, can we be here for it? Is there any
awareness of it? For it is never the objects of attention that are the
key to mindfulness practice. It is the attending itself. In the
attending, there need not be any subject reified who is "doing the
attending," or "doing the meditating," for that matter.

Foreword

xvii

With a modicum of awareness, we do not need to fall into what amounts to
a very strong habit, built right into the language, of identifying
ourselves as the seer, the listener, the smeller, the taster, the
toucher, the doer, the knower, absolutely separate and distinct from
what is seen, heard, smelled, tasted, touched, done, or known, as
opposed to a more co-creative and co-arising, relational unity. At
first, it might seem artificial in the extreme, and certainly the use of
present participles can be overdone or mindlessly abused, just like
anything else. But, as pointed to over and over again by the authors,
there is a profound opportunity in every moment to rest in awareness
without falling into separation and a reification of self or other, and
disregarding the relationality and interconnectedness that is so
fundamental to experience. So, while there is observing, for instance,
we do not have to create, or reify, an "observer;" while breathing a
"breather;" while thinking a "thinker;" or while meditating, a
"meditator." Needless to say, from a relative point of view, of course
it is we who are breathing. It is not somebody else's breath coming out
of our body. It is not somebody else's checking account that has your
name on the checks. We certainly are seeing, we are hearing, etc. But
the mystery lies in who we think that "we" or "I" or "me" is. The
mystery lies in the personal pronouns, and how much we identify with
them without awareness of the reciprocity of relationality, of
interconnectedness, and what Thich Nhat Hanh calls interbeing. That may
be why the Buddha once said that all of his years of teaching could be
encapsulated into the one sentence: "Nothing is to be clung to as I, me,
or mine."3,4 One valuable use of the present participle in the English
language is that it can leave subject and object indeterminate,
unvoiced. This is a new (and very old) kind of experiencing, underneath
thought itself, in the domain of being, the domain of the timeless, of
knowing without a knower, of pure awareness. This understanding lies at
the heart of the pedagogy presented here.

Trust Donald McCown and Diane Reibel are experienced teachers of
mindfulness in various contexts, particularly MBSR and its applications
in heath care and business. They are very clear to point out that the
pedagogy presented here is a beginning, a means rather than an end. It
is meant to be exploratory, tentative, and invitational, clay on the
wheel, shaped by their own experience and backgrounds, and aimed at
getting us as readers and teachers or possible teachers of mindfulness
in secular settings to think and talk together about how we see and work
with the challenges of bringing mindfulness in various ways into
different contexts and settings. The invitation is to enter into a
conversation, to share approaches and perspectives, to reflect together
on skillful means for igniting passionate engagement in people, whatever
the context, for being more present in their own lives, and for
understanding the value of consistent practice and cultivation of
embodied mindfulness. They are explicit about this being a collective
inquiry,

xviii

Foreword

dialogue, and investigation within the community of mindfulness
teachers, as well as an occasion to reflect deeply within oneself as to
one's motivation for doing this work or for being drawn to it as a
professional, one's relationship to one's own practice of mindfulness
and the never-ending learning curve it entails, and to situate one's own
understanding within a much broader historical and social perspective
that we sometimes shy away from or frankly ignore. It also asks us to
reflect on the synergies of practicing and teaching mindfulness in the
context of a gathering of people, specifically in a classroom, where the
potential for maximizing attunement within oneself and among the group,
what the authors term "intersubjective resonance," based on the work of
Ed Tronick, Daniel Siegel, and others in attachment theory and
interpersonal neurobiology5, is profound and enormously valuable.
Importantly, such resonances are not something one attempts to bring
into being. That would be a tantamount to forcing or seeking a
particular effect, and thus, an attachment to a particular outcome. The
desire to bring about an effect is a trap that, if one falls into it,
belies one's understanding of mindfulness and the work in the first
place, and potentially betrays it as well as yourself and your students,
at least for that moment. Of course, we all have fallen into that trap
at one moment or another, and hopefully, we learn from such moments as
we grow into becoming good-enough teachers. But if we can anticipate and
appreciate the potential of such impulses arising, notice them when they
do, and resist filling the space with one's own thoughts, anxiety, and
agenda-driven aims, that noticing itself allows for the ultimately
mysterious emerging of such intra- and inter-subjective resonances
within the container of stillness, silence, and awareness in the room.
For this to have even a chance to unfold, trust is paramount. Trust in
the practice, trust in the silence, in the spaciousness of awareness
that does not have to be filled with anything, trust in a moment that
does not have to give rise to anything else, or be described, trust in
the beauty of each person in the room as they are. This is one of the
many many reasons why we frequently say, as a sort of short-hand, that,
when it comes right down to it, the teaching has to come out of one's
practice. There is simply no other way. Therefore, exquisite intimacy
with one's own mind states, including those invariable impulses that do
want to fill any empty space, that are very much attached to
preconceived outcomes that are favorable to one's aims and philosophy or
ego, is essential. And you who take on this challenge, or will, or have,
will know or come to know that you are probably the greatest beneficiary
of your own teaching, practice, and study, more than anybody you teach
no matter how much they benefit from it. And you will realize that your
students, whoever they are, whatever the context, whatever the chosen
mindfulness-based vehicle you are working within, are teaching you at
least as much as you are teaching them, until you come to realize that
it is life itself that is the only teacher of any note here, life itself
that is both the curriculum, the path, and the end of any path, right
here, in the present moment, in the circumstances and context we have
chosen to walk into and stand within, wherever and however that might
be.

Foreword

xix

Lineage To stand within such human potential for learning, growing,
connecting, healing, transformation, realization, liberation, however
you want to frame it, usually requires some sense of lineage. How did
you arrive at this spot, in this moment, carrying the message of
awareness, of mindfulness, of presence, allowing yourself to be a
catalyst in its dissemination to others? Chances are, it wasn't totally
by yourself. In all likelihood it has resulted from a journey, perhaps
an inner one, perhaps since childhood, perhaps it has come as a
transmission from someone else, a gift of sorts, a structure, a
curriculum, or the opportunity and necessity to craft a curriculum of
your own out of sometimes very trying and often unfamiliar
circumstances. Here is another place where your recognition of your
personal journey, your path, your teachers, what Yeats called "the
unknown instructors," is so essential. Sometimes, you have to answer,
when the question is posed: "What tradition do you teach in?" It
happened to me in an unanticipated moment, in Shenzhen, China in 2004,
when I was visiting a Chan temple along with some friends, Helen Ma and
Rosalie Kwong, who teach MBSR in Hong Kong. Venerable Ben Huan, a
sparkling-eyed 98 year-old Chinese Chan master, after MBSR had been
explained to him by one of his senior monks and Dharma successors \[the
Venerable Hin Hung, who had read and studied the literature on
mindfulness-based applications in medicine and health care and was
bringing similar principles into both psychotherapy and the education of
children, and so was equipped to explain it accurately\], commented:
"There are an infinite number of ways in which people suffer; therefore
there must be an infinite number of ways in which the Dharma is made
available to them." He said this looking straight at me. When it was
translated by Hin Hung, I realized that this old Chan Master was giving
me and the other teachers in the room a tremendous gift by saying such a
thing, by according such a profound recognition and acceptance to
another dharma vehicle, potentially suspect, of course, from halfway
round the world, that he could easily have felt might be inauthentic.
Then, totally unexpectedly, in his very next utterance, he asked, "What
tradition do you teach in?" He clearly wanted to push this foreigner a
bit and in a friendly way, "test his understanding," as is the way of
Chan and Zen, by probing with a bit of dialogue, with what is sometimes
called dharma combat. In such exchanges, it is not so much the specific
response to a question in words that is critical, but how one responds
to the challenge it throws out. I responded, "I teach in the tradition
of the Buddha and of Hui Neng\*." It was an attempt to be authentic
while at the same time, giving him a reference frame that he would
recognize and understand. He came right back with "What's the primary
point?" I smiled and replied, "Why non-attachment, of course," at which
point he

- The sixth Patriarch of Chinese Chan Buddhism (638-713 AD).

xx

Foreword

said, "Would you like to become my student?" I smiled again, leaned in
close to him, and said, "I thought I already was your student." He
laughed and said, "Let's go eat lunch." All this is to say that you
cannot worry about being "enlightened" or "a realized being" if you
aspire to be an MBSR teacher, or an MBCT teacher, or any other kind of
mindfulness-based instructor. But what you very much do need to take
care of --- and not worry about --- is tending to, deepening, and
nurturing in every possible way, many of which may be unconventional and
untraditional, your own meditation practice. This might include exposure
to and studying with great teachers in the various Buddhist traditions
and lineages: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana to whatever degree
possible. Because if mindfulness-based interventions have anything
profound, healing, and transformational to offer the world, it is only
because they are firmly grounded in the Dharma --- not so much as
expressed in the particular cultural and religious forms of the
Buddhadharma --- but as universal dharma, which it is up to us to
understand, realize for ourselves (clearly a life-time's engagement),
find ways to language, and share authentically with others without
idealizing any of it. Matter-of-fact is the way to go. I answered Ben
Huan as I did in that moment. In another place, or at another time, or
under different circumstances, I might have answered very differently.
The answer itself is not important, but one's open awareness of the
question and where it is coming from is very important. There is never
one right answer, just as there is no one right way to practice. This is
one small way in which we have to shoulder responsibility for our own
work, situating it honestly within our own practice, our own
understanding, our own lineage, learning from everything that arises for
us in our lives, in our searching for right livelihood, in our
professional calling and fields of expertise, and certainly in our
desire to be a mindfulness teacher. Not knowing is preferable to too
much knowing. But when we are on the spot, any spot, we will need to
respond, and respond authentically. Our students require it. The
curriculum requires it. Your very integrity requires it. At the same
time, the dharma is very forgiving. If you make a mis-take, as we all
have done countless times, if you regret something you did, or said, or
forgot to do, or didn't say, the very next moment, or week, provides
amply opportunities for correcting, adjusting, apologizing, whatever
feels appropriate. This work is not about being perfect, whatever that
might mean. It is very much about being human, and about learning as we,
like everybody else, get caught by our own unawareness, our own fears,
our own feelings of inadequacy, whatever it might be in a particular
moment when we feel we do not measure up to our own standards and
expectations, or those of others we admire. These too, are
opportunities, precious ones: for mindfulness, for practicing what we
may too often be preaching as good for others, forgetting that we will
always be the greatest beneficiary of our own teaching, and experience,
because it really isn't ours, it just is what it is. It is hard not to
take things personally, especially when we feel we have made a serious
mistake, but taking personally what is not personal might be the
biggest, and the most recalcitrant mis-take of all.

Foreword

xxi

The koan of "What is good-enough teaching." No one ever said it was easy
to be a mindfulness teacher, or practitioner. In many ways, it is the
hardest work in the world, just to be present for a moment, and
openhearted. That is why it might just be worthy of our energy and
commitment. We need to be grounded in our own practice and trust that it
will be adequate when we most need it, and have to act out of it without
thinking but with that other core capacity we have, the only one capable
of containing and taming thoughts and emotions, namely awareness.
Competency in teaching mindfulness within secular mindfulness-based
frameworks is a combination of knowing and not knowing. It helps to know
from the inside, through your bones and skin, the general framework of
the Dharma, including the Four Noble (Ennobling) Truths, the Eight-Fold
Noble Path, something of the Abhidharma, stories of certain teachers and
teaching stories, and perhaps the teaching lineage of at least one
Buddhist tradition. But not for the purpose of teaching any of it, or to
tell any of those stories. Only to use it in a wordless way, to inform
yourself, remind yourself about the meaning of practice, and of key
elements embedded in our experience, such as anicca, anatta, dukkha, the
kelesas, the four foundations of mindfulness, the four immeasurables
(Brama Viharas --- loving kindness, compassion, empathic joy, and
equanimity), etc. Also, it might be essential for you to participate in
various professional training programs in mindfulness and its myriad
applications, offered by a number of centers in various parts of the
world. These are listed in the Appendix of this book. All are the
product of an intensive commitment to the practice on the part of the
founders and staff, coupled with unique perspectives on professionalism
and skillful means for training people to do the work of teaching
mindfulness in different professional settings and fields. The one I
know best is the one offered by the Oasis Institute for
Mindfulness-Based Professional Education and Innovation of The Center
for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care, and Society (CFM) at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School, where MBSR originated. Oasis
offers teacher certification in MBSR, and a range of professional
training programs in mindfulness and divers specific applications
throughout the world.6 Hopefully you will become intimate over time with
classroom moments of not knowing what to do, what to say, who your
students are, and what or who you are, and yet be willing to
sit/stand/be/move in the not-knowing and reside in the present moment in
full awareness --- with an agenda (since you are the teacher) and with
no agenda (since you are the teacher), and no attachment to any outcome,
yet with the intention to be of service and the aspiration that
everybody's suffering in the room will be honored and held in awareness,
without any attempt to fix anything that you think might be broken. The
invitation for yourself is that you are, together with all the classroom
participants (who are equally as wise and beautiful and worthy as
yourself), co-creating or "enacting" or "allowing" the mindfulness-based
curriculum to emerge, and trusting in that emergence moment by moment as
you rest in awareness --- an awareness that is intrinsically boundless,
spacious, luminous, empty, and kind.

xxii

Foreword

So a question we might address to ourselves, and which Teaching
Mindfulness will help us in exploring, comes down to "What is good
enough?" What is good enough in terms of preparation for teaching,
beyond all the essential planning and thought that may need to go into a
class? What is good enough in terms of the quality of one's own
mindfulness practice? What is good enough in terms of the teachers you
have trained with, and the books you have or haven't read, or the
retreats you have or haven't sat? What is good enough in terms of your
presence in the classroom? In terms of your comfort with silence and
stillness? Or lack thereof? Here are a few offerings from my experience,
although the only authentic responses will be those of your own heart:
It is "good enough" for now if you don't contribute to or exacerbate the
harm and suffering others are experiencing, or become aware that you are
and alter your approach and even apologize when you inadvertently do. It
is "good enough" for now if you know you don't really know what you are
doing but somehow find a way to be real within the container of the MBSR
curriculum or other curriculum you are facilitating in support of
mindfulness, and bring it to life in the face of life unfolding and
expressing itself in the human beings you are working with, and in
yourself, of course. It is "good enough" for now if you carefully drink
in what is being offered in this book and take it to heart as you
develop your own unique strengths and skills and questions as a
meditation teacher and mindfulness instructor. It is "good enough" for
now if you keep in mind at all times that life is the real meditation
teacher, and life is the real meditation practice. It is "good enough"
if you can remember from time to time, especially when you forget, that
nothing you think is personal is personal, so it is best not to take
things personally, including your own performance, since it is not a
performance but an exchange, a gift, a love affair. Then you just might
make a very big and beneficial difference in some people's lives, and in
your own. Jon Kabat-Zinn September 18, 2009

Endnotes 1. Goleman, Daniel Destructive Emotions: How Can We Overcome
Them?, Bantam Books, NY, 2003. 2. Batchelor, Stephen The Awakening of
the West: The Encounter of Buddhism and Western Culture, Parallax Press,
Berkeley CA, 1994, Chapter 14. 3. Buddhadasa Bhikkhu The Heartwood of
the Bodhi Tree: The Buddha's Teachings on Voidness, Wisdom, Boston,
1994, pp 15--17. 4. Goldstein, Joseph One Dharma: The Emerging Western
Buddhism, HarperSanFrancisco, 2002, pg 134. 5. Siegel, Daniel The
Mindful Brain: Reflection and Attunement in the Cultivation of
Well-Being, WW Norton, NY, 2007. 6. See
http://www.umassmed.edu/cfm/oasis/index.aspx

Preface

Why We Wrote this Book It would be simple and easy to say that this book
is about passing on the gift of mindfulness. But that would be a bit
glib, and would miss a subtle and vital point. Mindfulness, the capacity
to be with and in the constant flow of awareness, is an inherent ability
that we all share: It's not so much a gift as a given. The real gift,
then, is the teaching of mindfulness, the act of pointing out and
tending to the development of what is already given in the other. This
gift of teaching mindfulness flows in two directions. There is the
possibility of mutual transformation. The one who is taught is enriched
beyond measure as the practice of mindfulness helps reveal and realize
her unique, authentic being, and she participates more deeply and with
greater freedom in her own inner life and life with others. The one who
teaches receives powerful instruction through this process. In finding
ways to reach the other in her difference, a teacher is continually
brought up short, pressed in each moment to question, adjust, even
overturn, her own understandings and assumptions of the practice, her
teaching, and herself. The value of such destabilization --- and the
attendant opportunities for growth --- is limitless. This book is our
contribution to keep the gift of teaching mindfulness in circulation. It
is rooted in gratitude for the grace of the practice, the generosity of
our own teachers through the years, and the power of the challenges
posed by the uniqueness and authenticity of those we have taught --- and
those we have been teaching to teach.

Who Should Read this Book If the practice of mindfulness has transformed
your life in huge or tiny ways (or both!), this book is for you. You can
most fully express gratitude for the teaching you've received by sharing
it with others. However large or small an undertaking that may become
for you, you'll find hints and help here. We're writing from a frame of
reference defined by a complex of influences, the most salient of which
are many years of teaching within the Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction
curriculum, the requirements of working within hospital and xxiii

xxiv

Preface

academic settings, and the demands of training professionals from across
a range of disciplines. As a result, the book may seem at first glance
to be most accessible to clinicians, such as physicians, psychologists,
social workers, marriage and family therapists, professional counselors,
nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, and others, as
well as to clergy and educators. Yet, the accessibility is ultimately
much wider. If you have experienced the benefits of mindfulness
practice, the material here can help you better understand your own
practice, reveal ways that you can deepen it, and bring clarity to how
you speak about mindfulness practice with others in your life.

How to Use this Book The three-part structure of this book gives you
several points of entry. If you're coming with just a little background
to investigate the possibilities of teaching mindfulness, Part I
(Chapters 1, 2, and 3) may be the place to start. Chapter 1 provides an
overview of the contemporary mindfulness-based interventions in medicine
and mental healthcare. Chapter 2 places those interventions in the wider
historical and cultural context of the meeting of East and West in
Western, particularly North American culture, suggesting the ripple
effects and the expanding openness to contemplative practices in general
and mindfulness in particular. Chapter 3 attempts to offer a pragmatic
definition and felt understanding of mindfulness that will be useful for
a teacher when inquiring about her practice or the practice of those she
is teaching. For those who have ongoing personal practices of
mindfulness meditation and are currently teaching or considering
stepping out in that way, Part II (Chapters 4 and 5) may make a sensible
beginning. Chapter 4 will help you towards a realization of what is
required of you in the process of teaching, and what you might wish to
explore or develop further in your practice and teaching. Chapter 5
outlines the skills of teaching, explaining how and when they come into
play, and offering vignettes of the skills in use with participants.
Part III (Chapters 6, 7, and 8) is the most pragmatic way in, for those
concerned primarily with curricular and pedagogical questions. The final
three chapters focus on the unfolding of the pedagogy of mindfulness (as
we understand it at this moment) and its concrete expressions in
curricula and guided practice. Chapter 6 provides a schematic of the
process of teaching and learning within mindfulnessbased interventions,
whether with groups or individuals. Chapter 7 is our identification and
description of a series of "gestures" of the process of teaching and
learning, illustrated with interchanges between teachers and
participants. Chapter 8 is meant as a resource for teaching, with
scripts for audio recordings and step-by-step descriptions of activities
and practices that can be used as jumping off points for development of
any teacher's own presentations. Wherever you are in your development as
a teacher, wherever you start in this book, we trust that you'll find
something you can use immediately, something that challenges your
assumptions, and something that brings you right to the breath in the
present moment -- an inspiration to share the gift of teaching
mindfulness.

Contents

Part I 1

2

3

Clinical and Cultural Context

Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability).
.........................................

3

Why? Responding to the
Demand...............................................................
Who? Confronting Considerable
Confusion............................................... How? Entering a
Mystery............................................................................
From Questions to Dialog.
..........................................................................

4 15 27 29

A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now.
................................

31

Early Encounters.
........................................................................................
In the Aftermath of World War
II................................................................ The
Zen
Boom.............................................................................................
The Boom and
Beyond................................................................................
The Revolutionary
1960s.............................................................................
Growth and Definition of Buddhism in America.
....................................... Passage to Maturity.
....................................................................................
A Universalizing and Secularizing
Discourse.............................................

32 38 40 42 46 50 54 56

Defining Mindfulness for the
Moment.....................................................

59

Making Choices for "Working"
Definitions................................................ Defining
Mindfulness in
MBSR..................................................................
Mindfulness in
Buddhism............................................................................
The Western Discourse of
Mindlessness--Mindfulness............................... A (Tentative)
Discourse of Intersubjectivity and Mindfulness....................
Conceptualizing Mutually Expanded States of
Consciousness................... Integrating the Theory of Living Human
Systems......................................

62 64 67 73 76 83 85

xxv

xxvi

Contents

Part II Authenticity, Authority, and Friendship 4

5

The Person of the Teacher.
.......................................................................

91

Authenticity: What You
Know....................................................................
Authority: What You Have
Learned............................................................
Friendship: Offering All That You Are.
......................................................

92 97 98

The Skills of the
Teacher...........................................................................
103 Stewardship of the
Group............................................................................
Homiletics: Talking with the Group.
........................................................... Guidance:
Not Performance but
Connection............................................... Inquiring:
Curiosity About Participants'
Experiences.................................

Part III 6

Towards an "Empty" Curriculum

Organizing the Intentions of Teaching.
................................................... 137 The MBSR
Curriculum.
..............................................................................
A Spectrum of Teaching
Intentions.............................................................
Defining the Teaching Intentions within the Context of the
MBIs.............. Applying the Teaching Intentions to Shape Curricula
and Guide
Responses...................................................................................
Example 1: Adjusting Standard
Content............................................... Example 2: Using
the Intentions to Guide Inquiry................................ Example
3: Improvising One-On-One Teaching...................................
Example 4: Creating Unique
Content....................................................

7

139 142 145 146 147 155 157 158

Fulfilling the Intentions of
Teaching........................................................ 163
Experiencing New
Possibilities...................................................................
Discovering
Embodiment............................................................................
Cultivating
Observation...............................................................................
Moving Towards Acceptance.
.....................................................................
Growing
Compassion............................................................................

8

104 115 121 127

164 168 175 179 185

Practice Scripts and Descriptions.
........................................................... 193
Practices for Experiencing New
Possibilities.............................................. Practices
for Discovering
Embodiment.......................................................
Practices for Cultivating
Observation..........................................................
Practices for Moving Towards
Acceptance................................................. Practices
for Growing
Compassion.............................................................

193 196 206 211 215

Contents

xxvii

Appendix...........................................................................................................
221
References.........................................................................................................
235 Index.
................................................................................................................
247

Part I

Clinical and Cultural Context

Chapter 1

Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

The applications and use of mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) in
medicine and mental healthcare have been expanding as rapidly as the
empirical evidence base that is validating and recommending them. This
growth has created a powerful demand for professionals who can
effectively deliver these interventions and for training new
professionals who can enter the fold. The very idea of teaching
mindfulness as a professional creates a conundrum. Questions of why, and
who, and how arise immediately to send us into a spiral of alternating
definitions and possible doubts. The terrain of our cultural moment is
unstable ground on which those of us who choose to do this work must
stand. One answer to why one should teach mindfulness as a professional,
then, is simple and cold: because of market demand. A simultaneous and
likewise simple answer adds some warmth: because mindfulness really
seems to help relieve suffering. Next, the who question sidles up to
lean on the why answers, and the spiral begins. The person of the
teacher of mindfulness is little considered and loosely defined in the
scientific literature. Depending on the intervention, the "mindfulness
professional" may be placed anywhere along a continuum that extends from
a workshop-trained instructor who provides introductions to some useful
techniques, all the way to an accomplished meditator with decades of
intensive practice and study with traditional masters, who embody to a
large degree mindfulness as a way of being. So, at this point, the how
question gives a push, and the spiral speeds up and spins. The art, or
craft, or science of teaching mindfulness is too rarely discussed in
public forums. Many mindfulness teachers work in relative isolation,
following their pedagogical whims and intuitions into success in one
direction, frustration in another, and uncertainty at every turn. Even
where local communities of practice have sprung up, sharing and
development of pedagogical theory and best practices are more sought
after than found. Perhaps the first step in resolving the conundrum
presented by teaching mindfulness as a professional is to become more
solidly grounded in our own instability, to look more closely at the
questions of why and who and how. Let's take them in order.

D. McCown et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians
and Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_1, © Springer
Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

3

4

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

Why? Responding to the Demand Certainly, implicit and explicit practices
that can be identified as "mindfulness" have long been a part of
medicine and mental healthcare in the West. Influences from the
philosophies and spiritualities of both Eastern and Western cultures
have helped to shape professional practice in important ways since the
middle of the nineteenth century and especially since the middle of the
twentieth. Such influences are evident in the course of development of
what are now called complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) and
integrative medicine (IM), and in both the psychodynamic and humanistic
traditions of psychotherapy --- and related approaches --- since their
inceptions. We will discuss this history in more depth in Chapter 2. The
current demand for professionals who can teach mindfulness is much more
recent. According to commentators, the year 1990 was a watershed, after
which "mindfulness" as a discrete term began to take hold in the
discourse of academic medicine and psychology (Dryden and Still, 2006).
That's the publication date of Jon Kabat-Zinn's Full Catastrophe Living,
describing the mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) program that he
developed in 1979 at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center. The
book made the concepts and content of the program and the benefits of
mindfulness accessible to a general audience. The enterprise quickly got
a boost when Bill Moyers featured Kabat-Zinn and the MBSR program on his
Healing and the Mind public television series in 1993. Interest by
medical and mental healthcare professionals as well as healthcare
consumers grew dramatically from that point onward. In a count taken
five years after the Moyers series, there were MBSR programs in more
than 240 hospitals and clinics in the Unites States and in other
countries (Salmon et al. 1998). Ten years after the series, meditation
and mindfulness were featured in cover stories in both Time and Newsweek
(Kalb, 2003; Stein, 2003). The professional and public acceptance of
MBSR epitomized a wider cultural change, as contemplative philosophies
and practices --- such as yoga, Tai Chi, meditation, and prayer --- came
into the mainstream not merely of medicine and academia, but of church
basements and shopping malls, daytime talk shows, and primetime sitcoms.
As Dryden and Still (2006) suggest, the epochal growth and influence of
MBSR have arisen from its position at the confluence of certain social
and institutional factors. Perhaps most important is its emerging status
as an "evidence-based treatment," creating a theoretical appeal to
academic, government, and public sector funding sources and service
providers. From the beginning, MBSR has been the focus of outcome
studies with specific medical or psychiatric conditions and populations,
as well as with the general population. Although early studies often
lacked methodological rigor, as interest and evidence have mounted,
resources and funding have become available for randomized, controlled
clinical trials, which have continued to provide support for the
efficacy of MBSR and other mindfulnessbased and informed interventions.
As we are writing this, clinical trials have been funded or are underway
to study the efficacy of mindfulness-based interventions in

Why? Responding to the Demand

5

asthma, bone marrow transplant, breast cancer, chronic pain, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), fibromyalgia, human
immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS),
hot flashes, hypertension, immune response to human papillomavirus,
irritable bowel syndrome, lupus, myocardial ischemia, obesity, prostate
cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, solid organ transplant, type-2 diabetes,
and other medical conditions, as well as psychiatric disorders,
including anxiety disorders, delusional disorder, depression, drug abuse
and dependence, eating disorders, personality disorders, post-traumatic
stress disorder, schizophrenia, suici­dality, and others (Clinical
Trials, 2008). It would seem that MBSR and other mindfulness-based
interventions are filling an aching need within academic medicine and
psychology for new avenues of research. For example, at this writing, in
one of the academic psychology programs with which we are familiar, 11
of 12 approved doctoral dissertation topics concern mindfulness.
Mindfulness-based interventions and health benefits: Meta-analyses The
two meta-analyses abstracted in the tables below act as a snapshot of
the state of the empirical research at a moment when interest in MBSR
and other MBIs began to surge. Strict criteria were set in both
meta-analyses for selection of the studies to be analyzed. Conclusions
may be characterized by this statement from Grossman et al. (2004),
"Thus far, the literature seems to clearly slant toward support for
basic hypotheses concerning the effects of mindfulness on mental and
physical well-being". Baer (2003) Variable By research design Pre--post
Between group By population Chronic pain Axis 1 (anxiety, depression)
Medical (fibromyalgia, cancer, psoriasis) Nonclinical (medical students,
healthy volunteers) By outcome measure Pain Anxiety Depression Medical
symptoms (self-report) Global psychologicalb Medical symptoms
(objective)c

N

Mean effect sizea

8 10

0.71 0.69

4 4 4 4

0.37 0.96 0.55 0.92

17 8 5 11 18 2

0.31 0.70 0.86 0.44 0.64 0.80

At post treatment. POMS --- total mood disturbance; SCL-90 R global
severity index. c Urine and skin. N = Number of studies included in the
meta-analysis. Of the studies included in the analysis, two employed
MBCT as the intervention, one employed listening to mindfulness tapes,
and the remaining used MBSR or a variant of MBSR as the treatment
intervention. a

b

6

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

Grossman et al. (2004) Variables Mental health variables Pre--post
Between groups Physical health variables Pre-post Between groups

N

Mean effect sizea

18 10

0.50 0.54

9 5

0.42 0.53

At post treatment. N = Number of Studies included in the meta-analysis.
Between Groups (controlled studies) include both wait list controls
(WLC) and active controls (AC). No difference in mean effect size noted
between WLC and AC.

a

There is also a human dimension, an affective and relational set of
factors in the success of MBSR. The personal energy and charisma of Jon
Kabat-Zinn must be reckoned into the equation. The sheer drive and
chutzpah with which he argues the case for mindfulness has been on
display across a range of venues: a continually growing presence in the
professional literature of both research and commentary; an expanding
catalog of best selling books, including Full Catastrophe Living (1990),
Wherever You Go There You Are (1994), and Coming to Our Senses (2005),
plus popular audio and video recordings; exposure in the public media,
alone and in association with other bellwether cultural figures such as
the Dalai Lama, author Daniel Goleman, and integrative physician Andrew
Weil; ongoing speaking engagements, workshops, and retreats; and
training of professionals who may choose to teach MBSR or other MBIs. At
last count, Kabat-Zinn and colleagues at the University of Massachusetts
Medical School's Center for Mindfulness (CFM) had helped more than 9,000
mindfulness researchers and teachers expand their understanding of the
MBSR curriculum and pedagogical theory. What also must be mentioned here
is Kabat-Zinn's thoroughly welcoming stance to those who would
contribute to moving mindfulness into the mainstream. His gift of
enthusiasm and encouragement is best described by the statement of the
freedom granted to those who choose to teach MBSR: "Rather than 'clone'
or 'franchise' one cookie cutter approach, mindfulness ultimately
requires effective use of the present moment as the core indicator of
the appropriateness of particular choices" (Kabat-Zinn, 1996). Beyond
Kabat-Zinn's personal magnetism, there is a powerful attraction in the
intervention itself. MBSR is multifaceted, yet it may be epitomized by
three distinctive characteristics. It is secular, non-pathologizing, and
transformational for teachers and participants alike. Kabat-Zinn is
direct and unapologetic about the Buddhist roots of the mindfulness
practices in MBSR, yet he also goes to great lengths to assure his
audiences that there is nothing exclusively Eastern, or Buddhist, or
even generically religious about mindfulness. Paying attention to what
is arising in the present moment is a universal human capacity. That
means, of course, that the MBSR program itself can be seen as purely
secular, carrying no denominational charge or baggage. This secular
identity, coupled with many participants' intuitive recognition that

Why? Responding to the Demand

7

­mindfulness practice does indeed mesh with their own spiritual
traditions or lack thereof, increases MBSR's appeal and reduces barriers
to participation. MBSR is inherently non-pathologizing. It is designed
for a heterogeneous population from all walks of life, with almost any
medical and/or psychological diagnosis --- or none at all. No one needs
to carry her specific diagnosis into the class; in effect, all
participants share the same one, the "stress" or suffering of the human
condition. Perhaps the clearest non-pathologizing statement is
Kabat-Zinn's (1990, p. 2) insistence that "...as long as you are
breathing, there is more right with you than there is wrong...."
Further, MBSR is not positioned as a clinical intervention at all, but
rather as an educational program. It is not about training to remove
something unwanted from your experience, but rather about learning to
open up to all that you are from moment to moment, to live life to the
fullest. Within the secular and non-pathologizing environment of an MBSR
class, then, there is a democracy of participants and teachers. There is
no hierarchy. In the emerging present moment, no one (or everyone!) is
special. Participants and teachers practice mindfulness together from
the very start. They explore their own experiences and, at times, share
inquiry into those experiences. New insights and understandings become
available to touch and transform anyone and everyone. This sense of
shared possibilities, of a community of growth and healing, accounts for
much of MBSR's appeal, we believe. Further, this sense is renewed for
the teacher in each new class, and reinforces us in our choice of
vocation. The power of the evidence base, the charisma of the
leadership, and the humanity of the MBSR program itself combine to
suggest an answer to why there is such a need --- and desire --- for
professionals to teach mindfulness. The MBSR curriculum and pedagogical
approach to mindfulness have become a framework, an armature on which
programs are being built to reach out to and serve particular
populations. The list of such interventions is growing continuously. As
just a few examples, mindfulnessbased art therapy (MBAT) adds an
expressive dimension in an approach to medical patients, particularly
those with cancer (Monti et al., 2006); mindfulness-based relationship
enhancement (MBRE) adds interpersonal practices for couples (Carson et
al., 2004); and mindfulness-based eating awareness training (MB-EAT)
adds elements of cognitive behavioral therapy and specific practices
around eating and body image for patients with eating disorders
(Kristeller and Hallett, 1999). In addition, of course, other approaches
to bringing the benefits of mindfulness to various populations grew up
in the early 1990s. Many have their roots in the evidence-based world of
cognitive and behavioral approaches to psychotherapy. These
interventions have added considerably to the evidence base for
mindfulness, and to the legitimization of mindfulness-based
interventions in the eyes of the public and of other professionals.
Perhaps a quick overview of the most influential streams of MBIs will be
valuable. This would include, of course, MBSR, which needs but little
further description; mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT), an
integration of MBSR and cognitive therapy developed to prevent relapse
in depression; dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), developed
independently of MBSR and integrating mindfulness skills among others
for treatment of borderline personality disorder; acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT), developed independently as a "third wave"
within the cognitive-behavioral

8

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

tradition, and applied across a wide range of conditions; and, within
the psychodynamic and humanistic traditions of psychotherapy, the
ongoing engagement of the world's contemplative traditions for use in
the therapeutic encounter. By understanding the parallels and
crosscurrents of these approaches, both the need for and the complexity
of teaching mindfulness as a professional may become more clear.
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction The structure of the MBSR program
developed and modeled by Kabat-Zinn (1990) and colleagues at the Stress
Reduction Clinic at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center is a
group-based, 8-week, 9-session course that is educational and
experiential. Participants attend 2½ hour sessions once a week for eight
weeks, with a full-day (7-hour) class between the sixth and seventh
sessions. Class time, apart from a very few didactic presentations on
stress by the teacher, is divided between formal meditation practice,
small and large group discussions, and inquiry with individuals into
their present-moment experiences. Formal mindfulness practices include
body scan, sitting meditation (with focus on the breath), mindful Hatha
yoga, sitting meditation (moving from focus on the breath to an expanded
awareness of other objects of attention, i.e., body sensations, hearing,
thoughts, emotions, and ending with an open awareness of all that is
arising in the present moment), walking meditation, and eating
meditation. Class discussions focus on group members' experiences in the
formal meditation practices and the application of mindfulness in
day-to-day life. Home practice is an integral part of MBSR. Participants
are asked to commit to formal practice, supported by audio recordings
that guide the meditations, once a day, six days a week.
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy Segal et al. (2002) used the 8-week
structure and the core mindfulness practices of the MBSR curriculum as
an armature on which to mount an integration of cognitive therapy to
help people with histories of major depressive episodes to avoid
relapse. Their intervention is based on the parallel between the actions
of cognitive therapy in helping patients to decenter or distance from
their negative thoughts and emotions and the work of mindfulness
practice in cultivating nonjudgmental awareness and acceptance of all
experience --- including thoughts. Following on a distinction in Full
Catstrophe living pertaining to MBSR, MBCT contrasts two modes of mind:
doing and being. In doing mode, one compares the wished-for with the
actual (comparatively unsatisfactory) situation and struggle or
suffering begins. In being mode, one settles into the actual situation
and allows it to be a focus of exploration, revealing its impermanent
nature. By cultivating the capacity for being, MBCT gives participants
the opportunity to encounter their triggers for depressive relapse in a
way that provides the extra time and affective distance to make skillful
choices. MBCT is a shift away from the more traditional cognitive
therapy conceptualizations, because thoughts are allowed rather than
evaluated, disputed, and (in theory) changed.

Why? Responding to the Demand

9

MBCT varies from MBSR in several significant ways that characterize and
set precedents for other integrations of cognitive/behavioral therapies
and mindfulness training. First, it narrows the focus to a particular
population. This allows the incorporation of very specific didactic
materials and fine-tuning of the practices and guidance to bring out the
most germane experiences and potential knowledge. Second, it manualizes
the curriculum. This provides greater support for beginning teachers
and, of course, ensures the reproducibility of the intervention in
research studies. These two features set the pattern for the elaboration
of MBCT-based curricula for a very quickly growing list of populations
and disorders, including children, the elderly, stroke survivors,
bipolar affective disorder, conversion disorder, eating disorders,
generalized anxiety disorder, suicidal behavior, and co-occurring
addictive and mood disorders. Dialectical Behavior Therapy Linehan
(1993a,b) developed DBT originally to treat chronically suicidal
patients who have the symptoms of borderline personality disorder. It
synthesizes strategies for change from the cognitive-behavioral therapy
tradition and strategies for acceptance from Eastern and Western
contemplative traditions. It is a yearlong, multimodal program that
incorporates weekly individual therapy and group-based skills training
sessions, plus individual skills coaching by telephone when needed. The
key is mindfulness: "it is both the practice of the therapist and the
core skill taught to clients" (Robins et al., 2004, p. 37). The client
population has difficulties complying with extended formal mindfulness
practices, so mindfulness in DBT is instead taught as an interlocking
set of skills through structured exercises. The first of the skills is
wise mind, which is the result of integrating two more commonly accessed
states of mind, emotion mind and reasonable mind. In emotion mind, the
client feels controlled by emotional reactivity, while in reasonable
mind, the client can apply logic and critical thinking. Wise mind
arises, then, when clients know what they feel and can think clearly
about it --- a capacity that DBT trusts is inherent in everyone. There
are six other skills, which amount to a practical definition of
mindfulness. The three "what" skills are what one does to be mindful.
Observing: sensing and attending to the experience of the present moment
without being caught up in it, or attempting to change or escape it.
Describing: labeling present-moment experience very simply with words;
identifying thoughts, emotions, urges --- without acting on them.
Participating: becoming completely involved in the unfolding of the
present-moment experience; acting spontaneously and un-self-consciously.
The three "how" skills are how the "what" skills are done.
Nonjudgmentally: does not imply approval of an experience; rather, it
means accepting both the experience and any judgment that arises as
ultimately neither good nor bad. One-Mindfully: attending to one thing
at a time; single-tasking in sequence, rather than multitasking.
Effectively: instead of being caught up in how things should be, having
the freedom to do what works in the present moment.

10

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

The evidence base for DBT's efficacy as a discrete intervention is very
strong, and it shares the evidence of the efficacy of mindfulness. DBT
was one of the first manualized treatments to place mindfulness at its
core. And Linehan's imaginative and effective translation of formal
meditation practices into everyday skills significantly broadens the
applicability of mindfulness to challenging populations. Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy Hayes et al. (1999), Hayes and Strosahl (2004)
developed ACT originally as a general approach to individual therapy
that allows for brief, targeted interventions for specific issues. They
defined a theoretical outlook called relational frame theory (RFT), to
provide an empirically testable explanatory platform upon which to build
and extend ACT. RFT proposes that people suffer because they become
embedded in the language of their problems, creating a psychological
rigidity. This is manifested in two pathological positions: cognitive
fusion and experiential avoidance. In cognitive fusion, a situation and
one's thinking about it become inextricably linked through language. For
example, the logical construction of the thought "I can't change careers
because I need to keep paying the mortgage" blocks counter action. In
experiential avoidance, one develops and consistently applies
maladaptive strategies to escape inner and outer events that cause
distress. For example, one may drink alcohol to suppress painful
memories, or isolate oneself to avoid social anxiety. The goal of ACT
therapy, then, is psychological flexibility, defined as the capacity to
accept what each situation or moment brings and, when possible, to
choose to work towards change in the direction of one's closely held
values. The ACT model of therapy has six core processes, which can be
evenly divided (with overlaps) between the processes for mindfulness and
acceptance, and the processes for commitment and behavioral change. The
mindfulness and acceptance processes include acceptance and defusion,
plus contact with the present moment and self as context. The commitment
and behavior change processes include values and committed action, plus,
again, contact with the present moment and self as context. A brief
review suggests that the insights derived from mindfulness practice
predominate in assisting clients towards psychological flexibility.
Acceptance: interventions to demonstrate the futility of avoidance or
control strategies, and to promote choice and action when change is
possible. Defusion: to separate the thought from the thinker. Contact
with the present moment: to reveal that "now" is when one is connected
to living, both its pain and its vitality and infinite possibilities.
Self as context: to demonstrate that one's awareness is larger than any
given self-concept, e.g., that one is bigger than the bad or good or
suffering version of the self. Values: to help clarify and choose values
and goals, and to understand what one might do as well as what may need
to be overcome to move towards them. Committed action: to establish a
pattern of behavior driven by values and taking place in the present
moment. ACT intentionally does not include explicit meditation
practices. However, principles or facets have been extracted from the
meditative experience, and are presented as experiential exercises,
metaphors, paradoxes, stories, and the

Why? Responding to the Demand

11

like --- many of which are intuitively shared or approximated by
teachers within the other interventions. The result is a kindred sense,
an identification of ACT as an MBI. Further, ACT's growing base of
empirical evidence and continually widening range of applications,
including group approaches, contribute to the overall interest in and
expansion of MBIs. Psychodynamic and Other Psychotherapies As we will
see in Chapter 2, the history of engagement with contemplative practices
from both the West and the East is much longer in psychotherapies
outside the cognitive-behavioral tradition, with the particular
influence of Buddhist philosophy, psychology, and practice associated
with mindfulness assuming considerable importance in their development
or ­elaboration after World War II of recent developments will add to the
evidence of need for competent professionals to teach mindfulness. The
psychodynamic therapies, from the beginning, were in touch with the
contemplative traditions --- implicitly and explicitly. Although Freud
claimed to be constitutionally incapable of the meditative/mystical
"oceanic feeling" (1930/1961, p. 65), the disposition of
"evenly-suspended attention" he prescribes for the analyst (1912/1953,
p. 111) is a marvelous intuition of the almost inestimable value of
mindfulness in the therapeutic encounter, which is just now a subject of
empirical research (e.g., Grepmair et al., 2007). Jung, on the other
hand, was constitutionally predisposed to engagement with contemplative
practice. He used "yoga exercises" for decades to help him quiet his
emotional reactivity enough to work with the material arising in his
unconscious (1965, p. 177), was acquainted with a number of Eastern
traditions, and was in dialog with the contemporary Zen Buddhist
thinkers and practitioners D. T. Suzuki and Shin'ichi Hisamatsu (e.g.,
Meckel and Moore, 1992). The pragmatism inherent in these early
manifestations also characterizes the latest wave of influence of
Buddhism on psychodynamic clinical approaches. As the discourse about
meditation and mindfulness heated up in the 1990s, Mark Epstein's
Thoughts without a Thinker (1995) was published, with the imprimatur of
a foreword by the Dalai Lama, bringing a higher cultural profile to the
idea that analytic psychotherapy and meditation practice are
complementary --- that each can provide tools and insights to make the
other more fruitful. And mindfulness is singled out: It is through
mindfulness practices that Buddhism most clearly complements
psychotherapy. The shift from an appetite-based, spatially conceived
self preoccupied with a sense of what is lacking to a breath-based,
temporally conceived self capable of spontaneity and aliveness is, of
course, one that psychotherapy has come to envision. It is one of the
most significant paradigm shifts to have taken root in psychoanalytic
theory in recent years and is one of the reasons why the Buddha's
message is now so appealing to the therapeutic community" (p. 147).

Further, the practicality and willingness to confront the strengths and
weaknesses of both paths, evidenced by Jeffrey Rubin in Psychotherapy
and Buddhism: Toward an Integration (1996), and by the contributors to
Jeremy Safran's (2003) Psychoanalysis and Buddhism: An Unfolding Dialog,
for example, suggest a level of commitment beyond fad or fashion.

12

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

Attachment theory and research have done much to shape relational and
intersubjective approaches to psychotherapy, and to precipitate an
interest in mindfulness practice. Just as a child's attachment to the
caregiver --- a co-created and sustained relationship --- may become a
physically and emotionally secure base from which the child can explore
her inner and outer worlds to learn and grow, so the therapist and
client can co-create a relationship that allows new learning and growth
in the direction of freedom and health. In seeking something more than
interpretation to account for change in psychotherapy, the Boston Change
Process Study Group (Lyons-Ruth and BCPSG, 1998) propose an "implicit
relational knowing" developed as the two members of a caregiver ---
child or therapist --- client dyad are present to each other in
encounter after encounter. A focus of research and clinical interest,
then, is these moments of meeting, always in the present moment,
explored at book length by BCPSG member Daniel Stern (2004). This is, of
course, the moment into which mindfulness practice is an instrument of
exploration, leading the attachment-based psychotherapist David Wallin
(2007) to suggest that mindfulness training is essential for the
therapist and useful for some clients. As a sidelight, Wallin's approach
supports the sense that there is a growing need for competent
professionals to teach mindfulness, as he comments that the clients to
whom he recommends mindfulness training value the structure and support
of a group or class. In addition, mindfulness is historically ingrained
in a panoply of other approaches to therapy, particularly those that
were birthed or came of age in the earlier surge of interest in
meditative practices in the 1950s and 1960s. The privileging of
presentmoment experience and embodied knowing in today's
mindfulness-based approaches resonates with the practice traditions of
existential, Gestalt, transpersonal, humanistic, and systemic therapies,
as well as the expressive and body-based therapies. Possibly, all of
these approaches will benefit from the multifaceted ways in which
empirical evidence for the efficacy of mindfulness is accumulating.
Certainly, these approaches could have much to contribute to the
development of a mature pedagogy of mindfulness and an expansion of the
ranks of professionals teaching mindfulness. Neuroscience The rising
visibility of neuroscience, as evidenced by, for example, the U.S.
government's naming the 1990s "The Decade of the Brain," has sought to
build bridges of shared research and practice across medical and mental
healthcare disciplines. Further, it has engendered connections to the
broader domains of culture --- the arts, religion, the social sciences,
and education, all benefit from the insights of this new perspective on
and new vocabulary for the ways we experience ourselves and our world.
Likewise, neuroscience would benefit from the acceptance of insights
from the arts, religion, and social sciences. For example, the new
perspectives on how relationships influence infant, child, and adult
brain development (e.g., Siegel, 1999; Cozzolino, 2006) continue to add
new dimensions to psychotherapy, particularly within relational and
systemic approaches. And the discovery of mirror neurons (Gallese et
al., 1996; Rizzolatti, 2008; Iacoboni, 2008)

Why? Responding to the Demand

13

which provide our capacity to simulate other people's subjective
experiences, is illuminating our understanding of embodied knowing,
language, empathy, group dynamics --- in fact, a great many of the
concerns of this book, as you will see. It is logical that a major
stream of neuroscience research would arise from the confluence of the
newest technologies of imaging and measurement and the ancient
technologies of introspection and transformation. And that certainly has
been the case. Much of the awareness in the culture at large of the
linkage of contemplative practices and neuroscience come from that
wonderful flagship of scientific --- contemplative dialog, the Mind and
Life Institute, through which the Dalai Lama and leading international
scientists began meeting privately to explore the intersections of
Buddhist philosophy and practice with contemporary scientific theory and
experimentation. Begun in the late 1980s and meeting biennially, by 1990
the group had begun collaborations on contemplative neuroscience using
highly accomplished meditators, monks, as subjects; now monks are
scientific collaborators, and, in fact, the curriculum at the Dalai
Lama's monastery now includes training in western science. Perhaps the
neuroscientist Richard Davidson's research on emotion has the highest
profile of the outcomes of such collaborations, as the public meetings
of the Mind and Life Institute with His Holiness in attendance have
produced the kind of publicity that helps to bring ideas into cultural
currency, capturing media interest, including front page space in major
newspapers like the New York Times, and cover stories in respected
general interest magazines, such as Newsweek, and Time (Goleman, 2003;
Kalb, 2003; Stein, 2003). Davidson's work with the monks generated
further empirical support for the concept of neuroplasticity, the idea
that, contrary to long-held scientific dogma, the adult brain can create
new functioning neurons and actually change. Further, it showed that the
dramatic differences brought about by years of intensive meditation
­practice --- particularly on compassion --- resulted in much greater
activation of areas in the prefrontal cortex associated with "positive"
or "approach" emotions. The suggestion, therefore, is that it is
actually possible to change one's brain, even one's disposition, by
practicing meditation. There is a unique, controlled study --- a
collaboration by Davidson et al. (2003) --- that reflects and reinforces
much of what you have read so far. The study, using employees recruited
from a biotechnology firm as subjects, was designed to investigate
longer term changes in physiology that may be brought about by training
in mindfulness, using the 8-week MBSR program. Specifically, they
predicted that the subjects who received mindfulness training would show
reduced trait anxiety (essentially, less nervousness and worry) and
increased disposition towards positive emotion (in effect, more
happiness). They measured this immediately after the 8-week course and
four weeks later with an anxiety questionnaire and recordings of brain
electrical activation in the left anterior regions of the prefrontal
cortex that reflect positive emotions and a more positive "set point"
for emotional response. Further, they expected that the immune systems
of the more mindful subjects would respond more strongly to a challenge.
They investigated this by giving subjects an influenza vaccination at
the end of the eight weeks and measuring the level of antibodies
generated in response at about one month and two months after the
course.

14

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

Results were very much as they predicted (Fig. 1.1a--c). Compared to the
control group (who actually took the course later), the subjects who had
been trained in mindfulness through MBSR showed significantly less trait
anxiety at the end of the course (time 2) and four months later (time
3), and also showed signifi-

Chart 1a Reduction in mean trait anxiety

a

40 39 38 37 36

Control Treatment

35 34 33 32

Time 1

Time 2

Chart 1b Means of asymmetric brain activation

b

0.1

0.05 0 Control Treatment

--0.05 --0.1 --0.15

Time 1

Time 3

Chart 1c Means of antibody rise

c 2.3 2.28 2.26 2.24 2.22

Control Meditation

2.2 2.18 2.16 2.14 Antibody Rise

Results of a study by Davidson, Kabat-Zinn, and colleagues (2003) show
that healthy subjects who completed an 8-week MBSR course reported that
they were less nervous and worried day to day (Chart 1a). The electrical
activity in their brain showed that they had shifted their "emotional
set point" more towards the positive (Chart 1b). And their immune
systems responded more strongly to threat of infection than the control
subjects (Chart 1c).

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

15

cantly greater left-sided brain activation at the two post-course
measurement times. Response to the flu vaccine again reflected
significant differences between the groups. The question arising, then,
is a happy one: Who wouldn't want to worry less, be closer to happiness,
and have a greater capacity for staying healthy? The potential demand is
­enormous, which is a concise way of answering the original question of
why one would teach mindfulness as a professional. And further, it sets
up the next question of who would, could, or should teach. Mindfulness
training reduces anxiety, makes emotional disposition more positive, and
improves immune function.

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion Just looking across the four
MBIs that are drawing the most professional and cultural attention in
this moment --- MBSR, MBCT, DBT, ACT --- we see a wide disparity in the
characterization and expectations of the professional who teaches
mindfulness. Based on the abstract, theoretical positions staked out in
the literature for each intervention, there appears to be a continuum of
who --- running from a teacher with a total existential commitment to
the embodiment of mindfulness in the world, to a professional with a
basic understanding of the principles of mindfulness and a
one-step-ahead-of-the-client experiential knowledge of certain
techniques. Yet, despite the "official" positions, the nearly
unavoidable personal encounters with the transformative potential of
mindfulness practice inherent in all the interventions seem to be
bringing the expectations and actions of developers and practitioners of
every stripe closer and closer together. Among professionals, there is a
shared unease --- with different questions and resistances, to be sure
--- about defining a teacher. In MBSR, the minimum expectations for the
who of the teacher are mapped out in the guidelines for entry-level
teachers in the MBSR program at the Center for Mindfulness at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School (Santorelli, 2001a). The
minimum educational requirement is a Master's degree in the social
sciences, health sciences, education, or related fields, suggesting that
the capacity for critical thought cultivated in graduate education is
valuable, as is a knowledge base that offers perspectives on how people
work individually and in groups. Plus, specific education in MBSR would
include the 7-day residential Professional Training in MindfulnessBased
Stress Reduction in Mind-Body Medicine with Jon Kabat-Zinn and Saki
Santorelli. The expectation for mindfulness training and commitment is
striking: a 3-year history of daily meditation practice; participation
in two 5-day or longer mindfulness retreats in the Theravada or Zen
traditions; three years of body-centered practice, such as Hatha yoga.
The existential commitment to mindfulness as a way-of-being is strongly
implied in these criteria. Santorelli (2001b) makes it explicit that the
demand for ongoing practice is not so much about learning to teach

16

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

how to as it is about the teacher's presence --- "...an authentic
embodiment of this commitment to be awake to one's life no matter what
is occurring" (p. 11--8:1). The willingness to live mindfully allows
teachers to connect deeply, empathically, compassionately with their
students. So, as Santorelli notes (2001b, p. 11--8:4), "When patients
feel this unspoken connection with their instructor, it offers them the
possibility of feeling the same kind of warm connection with
themselves." Thus, the person, the being, of the teacher is what does
the teaching in MBSR. Santorelli's (2001b, p. 11--85) summation is an
epiphany: "For me and all of us at the clinic, this is nothing less than
a lifetime's work." In MBCT (Segal et al., 2002), the educational
expectations of a professional degree/license in counseling or
psychotherapy, plus training in cognitive therapy and group dynamics, is
shaped by the specifically therapeutic outlook of the intervention. The
signal requirement for therapists of "having your own practice" (p. 83)
comes directly from the developers' failed attempts to teach without it,
as well as with their positive experiences with MBSR teachers. The
requirement of "having your own practice" has, perhaps, a more pragmatic
justification in MBCT than in MBSR, as the foreground reason is to
experience what it is you are teaching --- to be a swimmer teaching
swimming, to use the MBCT analogy. Yet, beyond that, there is an
acknowledgement of the ideal of teachers "embodying" the way of being
they present to their patients. The implied existential commitment is
still strong. In DBT (Linehan, 1993a,b), educational expectations are
shaped by the identity of DBT as a manualized therapy delivered within a
specific tradition. As to mindfulness practice for the therapist, the
"rubrics" are different from MBSR and MBCT. There is no requirement that
the therapists have their own practices, although they are expected to
practice and have experiential knowledge of the DBT mindfulness skills
activities. As well, occasional formal practice is built into the
overall program. Weekly consultation team meetings begin with a
mindfulness practice led by one of the therapists. There also appears to
be a philosophical resistance about asking the therapist for the kind of
commitment that is assumed in MBSR. There is an understanding that
mindfulness practice can help the therapist maintain the balanced stance
between change and acceptance, nurturing and benevolent demanding, and
unwavering centeredness and compassionate flexibility that makes DBT
effective. Yet, because Linehan (Dimidjian and Linehan, 2003) privileges
the spiritual (religious) roots of mindfulness, she feels that asking a
therapist to undertake a personal commitment to daily practice and
regular retreats is "outside the bounds of what a therapeutic model can
require." She has, however, also suggested (2001, cited in Welch et
al. 2006) that both a connection with a mindfulness teacher, either in
person or through reading, and a connection with a practice community
could be "the most important element of a therapist's training"
(p. 123). In ACT, again, the educational expectation is congruent with
the identity as a therapeutic intervention. As to therapist mindfulness
practice, there is no specific requirement. It is as if, as the
Melbourne Academic Mindfulness Interest Group (2006, p. 291) has noted
about ACT, "Mindfulness from this perspective has a coherent

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

17

theoretical model and the ideas are easily conveyed to the 'student' by
a practitioner who practices little or not at all." Yet, Strosahl et
al. (2004) note that core competencies of the ACT therapist is to be
able to contact the ACT "space" of mindfulness and to be able to model
the skills and benefits of getting in contact with the present moment.
To help in developing these competencies, Strosahl et al. (2004) suggest
the ongoing study and practice of ACT techniques, including ACT
intensive retreats, and attendance at mindfulness retreats, which are
characterized as "good for contacting the ACT 'space', less useful with
ACT techniques" (p. 57). Here, again, is an implicit acknowledgement of
the power and value of the teacher's way of being. In the psychodynamic
and other psychotherapies, the identity of a mindfulness teacher repeats
the spectrum of possibilities, with implications for the level of
existential commitment and, relatedly, commitment to ongoing practice.
At one end of the spectrum we could locate Jeffrey Martin's (1999)
conceptualization of mindfulness as a common factor in all
psychotherapy. For Martin, mindfulness is identified with psychological
freedom, in which the potentially problematic permanent sense of self is
softened, and it is possible to explore experience in fresh, nonhabitual
ways. It arises in collaboration with the client, facilitating insight,
self-acceptance, and change. In this view, which is entirely secular,
nonhistorical, and integrative, every therapist is implicated as an
informal teacher who may choose to make mindfulness more or less
explicit in her work. As Martin puts it, "In a sense, mindfulness is
right under our feet when we and our patients are doing our best work"
(p. 310). At the other end of the spectrum, we would place mindfulness
teachers trained within spiritual traditions who are also
psychotherapists, such as Jack Kornfield, Sylvia Boorstein, or Tara
Brach within the Western Vipassana Buddhist tradition, in whom the two
identities seem fused. We can also place at this end other contemporary
Westerners who are not necessa­rily therapists but who have trained and
been authorized to teach within particular traditions. Many of these
Westerners trained with Asian teachers, often in Asia, although that
generation is now giving way to a younger generation of "home grown"
Western-trained teachers. The Decision to Teach. Any professional who
might consider teaching mindfulness, then, will approach such a decision
from a set of expectations and an identity somewhere along the continuum
in Fig. 1.1. For anyone considering this work, there's natural location
between the total existential commitment of an MBSR teacher or the
privileged position of a teacher within a specific lineage on one end,
and the polished ­professional or the inherently mindful therapist on the
other. The precise location on that continuum potentially will reflect
both what draws the professional to mindfulness and how difficult the
decision will be to actively teach. Professionals who are nearer the
existential commitment end of the continuum will likely be drawn by the
resonance of mindfulness practice with their life experiences. This
might include those who have histories of physical and or psychological
suffering moderated through engagement with spiritually based practices
as well as through medical or psychotherapeutic interventions. Such a
person may conceive the mindfulness teacher's role as extra-ordinary;
may see the teacher as responsible for a powerful, enduring
transformation in the other --- a metanoia, a conversion, a healing. The
person may know through her own encounters with

18

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability) The Person

Existential commitment transforms self and other

Professional with common-factor mindfulness

The Training

Highly trained and deeply practiced in mindfulness

Highly trained in theory, skills, and techniques of intervention

The Question

Is my practice deep enough?

Is my understanding right?

Fig. 1.1 Continuum of the who of teaching mindfulness as a professional.
The view or construct of the mindfulness teacher in a wide range of
interventions or approaches could be located on this continuum between
the existential commitment of one's personal life to ongoing
investigation and transformation in order to help others do the same,
and the polished professionalism that demands clinical perfection. In
either case, and everywhere in between, the questions of Who am I? and
What do I know? may engender enthusiasm or resistance to the possibility
of teaching.

mindfulness that students internalize their teacher, and that an
affective connection can be created that neither time nor distance will
diminish. For that person, then, the decision to assume the role of
teacher is inherently fraught with an inner turmoil, a wrestling with
feelings of overwhelming responsibility and perpetual inadequacy. The
decision is layered with assumptions about what a teacher with a capital
"T" is: with essential questions of training, lineage, authorization to
teach, and fidelity to received views and practices becoming ever more
insistent. Professionals at the common factor end of the continuum
initially may be drawn by the novelty, excitement, and evidenced
effectiveness of the MBIs. The decision to become a teacher may first
engage the professional interests and persona of the How do I dare to
assume a teaching role? and Do I --- could I ever --- have what it
takes? to Is my practice strong enough? and Who says? to How much is
really at stake when I work with others --- just the reduction of
symptoms or the fate of an eternal soul? person, so that the weighting
of time and financial investment, the strategies of differentiation in
the market, and the needs of the populations served may take precedence
over the more existential considerations of personal transformation and
vocational calling. The questions arising first: What do I know? and Do
I Know It well enough to teach It? This is not to say that the
existential commitment dimension does not play a part in every decision.
Certainly, once the person has investigated any of the interventions on
a deep enough level, questions of personal readiness to teach arise to
play a significant part in the pursuit of training and experience ---
and often an encounter with a resistance to begin teaching. It may be
informative to look at the ways that the backgrounds and histories of
the MBIs have shaped

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

19

specific definitions of and attitudes towards the person of the
mindfulness teacher. MBSR and DBT could be located at very different
points on the continuum in Fig. 1.1, yet, both are uneasy about the who
of teaching. As we will see, that unease stems from the particular
traditions of mindfulness training privileged by the developers. The
extent of commitment expected of the MBSR teacher has been encapsulated
by Jon Kabat-Zinn (2002) in a quote from T. S. Eliot's Four Quartets: "A
condition of complete simplicity/(Costing not less than everything)."
The MBSR conceptualization of the person of the teacher can be seen as a
version of the ad hoc teacher selection process of Western Vipassana
practitioners. Rawlinson (1999) gets the pith of it as he discusses how
Jack Kornfield, ordained and trained within a traditional Asian
Vipassana lineage, and Joseph Goldstein, trained as a layperson mostly
by lay teachers, are judged as equal. "People do not think that one is
superior or inferior because he has or has not been a member of a
traditional bhikkhu sangha. It is depth of Vipassana practice that
counts, not how one got there or where one comes from" (p. 590). Even
more crisply, Rawlinson (1999, p. 590) notes a principle: "the only
credentials that are of any value are practice and experience."
Kabat-Zinn's training in both Zen and Vipassana have had a profound
influence on both the form and formless elements of MBSR. MBSR's ties to
the Western Vipassana sangha are close. Vipassana retreats (and,
parenthetically, Zen retreats) are recommended for MBSR teacher training
(Santorelli, 2001b). In fact, in 2008, a silent retreat specifically for
MBSR and MBCT professionals was a joint benefit for the UMASS Center for
Mindfulness (CFM) and Insight Meditation Society (IMS) --- a flagship
retreat center of the Vipassana sangha, founded by Joseph Goldstein,
Sharon Salzberg, and Jack Kornfield --- with Jon Kabat-Zinn and John
Teasdale representing MBSR and MBCT and Cristina Feldman, an IMS guiding
teacher, representing IMS. It is not surprising, therefore, that the
emphasis on readiness to teach in MBSR comes from faith in depth of
practice and experience. This has been tempered somewhat by a worldly
pragmatism. There is a very conscious and insistent recognition in MBSR
that more is not always better: "We have had instructors with five or
six years of meditation experience who do very well in the classroom.
Conversely, we have met people seeking jobs who have twenty or more
years of meditation practice in their background who we did not feel at
the time were capable of teaching in the classroom" (Santorelli, 2001b,
p. 11--8:4). Yet the faith in practice is strong, so it is unsurprising
that individual reluctance to teach MBSR resounds with the question:
Have I practiced enough to be ready to teach? DBT's development was
influenced by different mindfulness practice traditions. Marsha Linehan
(2008) discusses it in terms of both her ongoing Zen training and the
training she received as a spiritual director in the Christian tradition
early in her career. These two influences can be seen to shape the very
different questions and resistances that arise about the who of the
mindfulness teacher in DBT. Western Zen

20

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

is far more lineage-oriented than the Vipassana sangha. In Zen --- to
risk making a very technical process overly simple --- a student may,
depending upon the level of practice attainment judged by the teacher,
be given a particular level of authority to train others. The highest
level of authority given is to be named a Dharma heir by a master, and
thereby be able to authorize teachers and name heirs oneself. This
method of recognized succession is considered by some to be a direct
link back through the generations to the historical Shakyamuni Buddha,
implying an unbroken transmission of the teachings. Within this view,
then, any change, ­contamination, or wateringdown of what is taught and
the way it is taught would be problematic, threatening the authority and
integrity of the community --- teachers and students alike. With such a
background view, Linehan's resistance and questions about professionals
as mindfulness teachers, then, first focus on adherence and competence
in delivery of the intervention. DBT's skill-based approach to teaching
and learning mindfulness, developed by Linehan in association with her
Zen teachers, is a way of addressing these concerns, as is the
requirement for regular meetings of DBT therapists in a "community" that
functions not just for peer support, but also oversight and
reinforcement of protocols. Also, it is interesting to note that
Dimidjian and Linehan (2003) suggest that engaging with spiritual
teachers of mindfulness acknowledged within traditions to understand how
they teach and recognize teaching competence in their students may
provide guidelines for the mindfulness-based clinical interventions. The
second focus of resistance and questions can be found in Linehan's Roman
Catholic religious background and her early training in spiritual
direction. She attended the program at the Shalem Institute, which,
while ecumenical, arose within the small "c" catholic Christian
tradition in which questions of authority, lineage, and "truth" of
teachings are salient. In fact, the doctrine of "apostolic succession,"
in which Bishops are supposed to be created by other Bishops in an
unbroken chain of laying on of hands that extends back to the 12
apostles, parallels the Zen lineage model. Again, concerns of adherence
and competence arise, but more important still in this tradition is the
character of the spiritual director --- the person of the teacher.
Shalem's founder Tilden Edwards (1980) is deeply concerned with this
question. He interviewed 29 spiritual leaders to create a consensus
delineation of the qualifications for a spiritual director. The
consensus revealed two sets of qualities (p. 126): 1. "Personal
spiritual commitment, experience, knowledge, and humility, and an active
discipline of prayer/meditation." 2. "The capacity to be caring,
sensitive, open, and flexible with another person, not projecting one's
own needs or fostering long-term dependency." In such a description, we
see inherent expectations for a limitless, ceaseless engagement in the
investigation and transformation of one's own life and the lives of
others. Therefore, we can see how, in the DBT view, this may seem too
intimate, too personal, too spiritual of an undertaking to require of
most clinicians. Wherever and however we find ourselves as teachers or
potential teachers, we face, perhaps at first, perhaps forever, the push
and pull of the questions of Who am I? and

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

21

What do I know? As we will see in Part 2, these are the questions of our
authenticity and authority. How you work with these questions, how you
ultimately decide to begin teaching, is --- up to you! It may help,
though, to learn how others came to take up this work. Who Becomes a
Teacher? Professionals who are teaching mindfulness now come from a
surprising array of educational and professional backgrounds. They have
found their way from hard science or religious life, from nursing or the
business world, from teaching or therapy. And they have arrived at the
decision to teach after journeys that are very different as well. For
one, it may have been a personal crisis that ignited the process, for
another, a professional insight. The sense of calling may have been
anything from a whisper to a shout. In the capsule autobiographies
below, you may find some connections. Perhaps you'll find some
inspiration for beginning your own journey, or perhaps some affirmation
for the direction you've already chosen.

Diane Reibel, Co-Author: From Researching the Heart To Healing it In the
mid-1980s I was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physiology
at Jefferson Medical College, investigating cardiac metabolism and
function. My research was funded by the National Institutes of Health
(NIH). I was presenting regularly at scientific meetings, publishing
scientific papers, and teaching cardio vascular physiology to medical
and graduate students. This time of my life was highly successful and
stressful professionally. I became ill with an immune disorder, and was
in chronic physical pain. I suffered emotionally as well, with the
uncertainties of whether my illness would progress, and whether I would
be able to care for my child, have more children, and continue my
career. After batteries of medical tests, repeated visits to
specialists, and an exhausting array of conventional medical treatments,
I was told to "learn to live with the pain." Despite all my years of
higher education, that was learning I had never approached. But I made a
beginning. Although as a scientist I was skeptical, I explored
alternative medicine, trying biofeedback, hypnosis, and meditation for
pain management. After practicing meditation for several months I found
that I was struggling less emotionally and experiencing a general sense
of well-being even in the midst of my chronic illness. I continued to
meditate regularly for two years. Reflecting on my first hand experience
of the benefits of meditation and other mind/body techniques, I became
interested in learning more about the use of these modalities in
healthcare. So, in true scientist fashion, I sought out more information
through professional conferences. At a behavioral medicine conference,
the workshop on biofeedback that I originally signed up for was
canceled, so on an impulse I shifted to something that was new to me ---
a workshop with Jon Kabat-Zinn on Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction.
The experience moved me deeply. It fueled

22

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

my personal meditation practice. It also gave me some hard evidence that
mindfulness was beginning to be integrated into mainstream medicine.
With continued practice through the years, mindfulness became a way of
life. Life became richer and fuller. My health improved. And my passion
for wanting to share mindfulness meditation with others grew. I let go
of my academic position to embark on a new career. I attended
professional trainings with Jon Kabat-Zinn and began teaching MBSR at
cardiac rehabilitation centers in local hospitals --- keeping some
continuity with my life experience. After I had been teaching MBSR
primarily to cardiac patients for about four years, a former colleague
of mine at Jefferson asked me if I would run a stress reduction program
for medical students. So I closed the circle, going back to Jefferson to
teach medical students again. But this time teaching meditation.
Following the success of the pilot course, MBSR was soon integrated into
the medical school curriculum. I was offered a faculty position and
found myself back on staff at Jefferson, now as Director of the Stress
Reduction Program at the Center for Integrative Medicine, developing and
teaching MBSR programs for patients. My research background came in
handy as we began to study the effects of MBSR, both in our medical
students and the patient population. The Stress Reduction Program has
grown over the years to include programs for patients, healthcare
professionals, corporations and nonprofit organizations, students, and
the homeless. Our research involvement has grown as well, and currently
we are funded by NIH to study the effects of MBSR on immune function. I
have been living my passion for the practice and teaching of
mindfulness, both of which have nourished me in ways I could never have
imagined. I would like to give a personal thanks here to Saki Santorelli
of the UMASS Center for Mindfulness for his fierce, loving presence.
Many years ago, Saki sat with me in the hallway at a professional
training retreat as I tried to control uncontrollable tears. I will
never forget his invitation to me to uncover my face and hold nothing
back. I have sat with many people since then and shared the same
invitation, offering them a healing presence as they dive into the river
of grief. Each time, I feel Saki's presence and his reassuring words
that my personal longing for "eyes of compassion" will come as I
continue on this path of awakening. In describing my career change, one
of my colleagues said that I have gone from being a heart researcher to
a heart healer. Whether in practice or teaching, mindfulness is very
much about healing the heart.

Tom: Creating a More Comfortable Medical Practice My interest in MBSR
arose out of concern for my own cardiovascular health. I have a very
strong history of cardiovascular disease on both sides of my family.
Both my parents died before age 60. As a physician, I paid close
attention to information about prevention of cardiovascular disease and
practiced those preventive measures. I read Dr. Dean Ornish on the
benefits of meditation and yoga for cardiovascular disease management,
and sought out these modalities. I found yoga to be a very joyful
practice, much more than a workout.

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

23

About 10 years ago, following my older brother's coronary artery bypass
surgery at age 54, I sought out instruction in MBSR. My experience with
a 7-day MBSR program with Jon Kabat-Zinn and Saki Santorelli was
profound. It provided an opportunity to be immersed in the present
moment, attending to the breath in the body for long periods in a large
room full of other seekers. (Plus, the program qualified as accredited
continuing medical education, a gold standard of intellectual
respectability for physicians!). Being mindful grew in importance as I
engaged in my medical practice, which focuses on neurodevelopmental
disabilities. It reduces my stress level and enables me to have a stress
reducing effect on my patients and their parents during our interactions
and discussions in the office. I came to learn this in surprising ways.
I found myself abandoning my usual reserved, slightly ironic,
"professional" demeanor, and becoming more direct. I got more
comfortable pausing to find the right word. I began to feel freer to
abandon a set agenda for an appointment and to turn my attention jointly
with parents and children to what was concerning them at the moment. In
situations with patients and their families where there seemed to be
unacknowledged tensions or feeling of anger in the room, I became more
likely to express my perception of this. This often led to open,
fruitful discussions about problems that might otherwise not have come
up. I have come to see stress reactivity as a very significant
neurodevelopmental issue. This awareness has helped me develop a more
refined, practical framework for developing treatment plans for children
and families. I have given formal presentations for families regarding
mindfulness practices. I frequently bring up and teach mindfulness and
yogic breathing techniques for stress management. Yet, the bigger effect
on my medical practice has been the arising of awareness in the present
moment. As I dictate this note, I recall the last patient I saw, a
7-year-old boy. He stated a preference for having his mother in the
room. I was uncomfortable with this, but proceeded. As we spoke, I noted
his hesitant speech and rigid body posture. I proposed that we move to
another room for one-to-one interview. As he sat in the room, away from
his mother and two younger sisters, I watched his shoulders drop, saw
his face become more relaxed, and listened as he began speaking in much
greater detail with much more fluency. I felt my own sense of ease as
well. The value of present-moment awareness was confirmed once again.
So, mindfulness informs in my life, both in and out of my medical
practice.

Julie: Bringing Mindfulness to At-Risk Students I am a Licensed Social
Worker and Certified School Psychologist. I have worked in the field of
mental health for more than 20 years, and have provided clinical
services to adults, children, adolescents, and families in a variety of
settings. I took my first MBSR course five years ago and found it very
helpful with managing my own chronic pain and general life stressors. My
personal involvement in mindfulness

24

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

practices has grown considerably since then, as has my desire to bring
mindfulness practices into my work with others. I am currently working
in an elementary and middle school, leading skill-building groups with
children who are identified as "at-risk," as well as working with
teachers and staff to improve overall school climate. The schools are
located in urban neighborhoods beset by poverty and gang violence. Many
children do not play outside because they do not feel safe. At least
once a month, the administrators at the elementary school cancel outdoor
recess because of neighborhood violence. Not surprisingly, many children
and teachers do not feel safe in school. It became apparent to me that
the children were trying to function in school while dealing with
chronic and often pervasive life stressors without the coping strategies
to manage them. It was also apparent that many teachers were struggling
over how best to support and teach the students. Keeping in mind how
useful mindfulness practices have been in my life, I began to integrate
mindfulness activities and practices into the groups I lead. I also
began to introduce mindfulness practices during the teacher trainings.
The feedback I have received from both groups has been overwhelmingly
positive.

Yaacov: Integrating Jewish Spirituality with Psychology and Mindfulness
My interest in meditation began during my college days. I didn't know
anyone who meditated, so I tried to learn through books. The written
exercises didn't seem to get me anywhere, so I gave up. I began doing a
series of spiritual meditations which I found engaging and meaningful.
Those meditations continue to be part of my ­spiritual practice. While
attending graduate school, studying psycho-educational processes, I
became involved in the human potential movement. I was exposed to and
began practicing mindfulness in a very informal way --- not sitting
meditation, just bringing myself back to the present moment as often as
I could throughout the day. Walking and jogging became the primary
activities I used to practice mindfulness. After receiving my doctorate
and rabbinical degrees, I began to become more involved in counseling
and therapy. On a personal level, I worked at integrating what I knew
about psychology, mindfulness, and spirituality. As a therapist, I was
continually challenged to bring myself into the moment and to do
whatever I could to facilitate the same for my clients. Finally, about
10 years ago I began a formal mindfulness practice and received training
in MBCT and ACT. These approaches were instrumental in helping me
integrate mindfulness with my therapy practice. Much of the therapy I
now do is mindfulness-based, and I lead two or three MBCT groups a year.
My mindfulness practice has also influenced my approach to spirituality.
The ACT understanding of the psychological processes involved in
meditation has been a wonderful inspiration and has deepened my
understanding of the processes involved in a program I have developed,
which integrates psychology, mindfulness, and spirituality.

Who? Confronting Considerable Confusion

25

Don McCown, Co-author: From Business to Wholeness My engagement with the
contemplative traditions began in my rather troubled adolescence in the
ferment of the late 1960s and early 1970s. As a middle child between two
developmentally disabled siblings in a family that struggled to cope
with its challenges, sadness and suffering dominated my experience.
Depression was a close companion. To help understand and (somewhat)
assuage what was happening with me, I investigated the traditions that
suggested themselves by birth, by friends, and by the compulsive reading
that placates an unquiet mind. The esthetic glory of the liturgy of the
Episcopal tradition into which I was born was a focus of my adult life
for decades, and my private prayer, rooted in the very homely English
spirituality of the fourteenth century (Julian of Norwich, Margery
Kempe, The Cloud of Unknowing) looped and flowed, pushed by Alan Watts's
and Thomas Merton's books, in and out of the Asian traditions.
Psychotherapy of various flavors was a constant undercurrent, as well,
including work with a therapist who brought meditation into our sessions
and encouraged me to be focused and regular with practice. That helped
immeasurably. This was one stream of my life. In the other, I worked in
advertising for a Fortune 100 corporation, and then as a creative
executive in an advertising agency. The 1980s and 1990s were filled with
career stress and the tensions of childrearing and a maturing marriage.
As I struggled for balance at work and at home, I came to rely on my
spiritual practices more and more. But I couldn't find a way to bring
the two streams together in a meaningful way. More by convenience than
design, it seemed, I was drawn from the little meditation group at my
parish church into the Shambhala center just a few blocks from my
office. I attended workshops, trainings, and retreats. But mostly I sat.
In the empty shrine room. Every possible day at lunchtime. Then one day,
on the brochure table, I found a catalog for a Master's program in
Applied Meditation Studies at the Won Institute, a brand new venture at
a Won Buddhist seminary. It felt right. I thought I would shift my
career into corporate communications consulting based on meditation! At
last, that would bring my two streams together. I began the highly
experiential program, which included a meditation practice class or a
moving meditation class before every academic class, as well as two
10-day retreats. For the two-semester practicum in my second year. I
worked in the MBSR program at the Jefferson-Myrna Brind Center of
Integrative Medicine, with Diane Reibel. I developed a Mindfulness at
Work program, and was quickly able to sell a few workshops, which Diane
and I co-led, and I later taught solo. I was also a participant-observer
in the 8-week patient courses. I was indelibly impressed with how --- by
week three! --- many patients began to carry themselves differently.
Something shifted in me. I felt drawn to the work with patients, yet
reticent about undertaking it. I had helped my own suffering in deep
ways, but could I possibly help others? I attended the 7-day
professional MBSR training with KabatZinn and Santorelli, and returned
only more sure that I was not prepared to teach patients. I graduated
from the Won Institute and began a year-long internship in the Jefferson
program, running workshops and classes in the workplace, and co-teaching

26

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

in patient classes, and at last teaching on my own. Advanced MBSR
training and supervision built my confidence. But simply staying
connected to my own practice, and making my teaching my own, built it
more. The workplace and academic courses that I teach are satisfying.
Yet it's been the work with patients that has transformed me. So, to go
further and deeper, I took a clinical social work degree, to help
families with children with developmental disabilities. With
mindfulness. There's a wholeness to my life now, and, with practice, I
even experience it sometimes.

Paradox The More We Know About Mindfulness-Based Interventions, the Less
We Know About Mindfulness Teachers Public dialog around the who and the
how of teaching mindfulness has been cramped by the same forces that are
bringing mindfulness further and further into the mainstream and
creating the demand for more and more teachers. Worldwide, the clinical
research enterprise has been building a strong evidence base for MBIs.
It has been a marvelous boon to all of us, researchers, teachers, and
patients alike. Yet here's the thing of it --- it's all been happening
inside the modern scientific paradigm, the land of either --- or, where
every confounding influence must be neutralized or controlled.
Mindfulness teachers, though, have been working outside that paradigm,
in the land of both-and, where new possibilities arise moment by moment
and the placebo effect is a welcome guest, or even host. The "gold
standard" research model of randomized clinical trials holds great sway
in Western biomedical culture. There is an endless loop, a
self-reinforcing cycle, an embeddedness in the system that is shaped and
maintained by the funding sources for research and the expectations of
healthcare payers. Criticism from within the system is rare (e.g.,
Beutler et al., 2004; Blow et al. 2007; Lebow, 2006; Wampold, 2001), but
comes right to the points that touch mindfulness teachers as they
attempt to grow and develop. First, the dominant paradigm assumes that
the ingredients of an intervention are significantly more important than
the person delivering the ingredients. From that assumption, it follows
that manualized models and fidelity measures will control for "therapist
effects" or "operator effects" and spotlight the efficacy of the
ingredients. All of this has allowed the secondary needs of researchers
to overshadow the primary needs of teachers and students. The research
on MBIs is the sunny side of the mountain --- warm, inviting, and a
topic of much animated discussion. The pedagogy of mindfulness, then, is
the shadow side --- forbidding, less explored, and spoken of only in
small groups and rarely above a whisper. It has been suggested (McCown &
Wiley, 2008, 2009) that robust public dialog must be engaged between the
two "sides," which are not opposed but interdependent. In fact, many
researchers are also teachers (or vice versa). Such a dialog would
involve accommodating both researchers' requirements for fidelity ---
the strict reproduction of a specific curriculum and structure of an
intervention --- and teachers' desires for integrity --- the authentic
response to the moment-to-moment context in delivery of an intervention.
We trust that the community will take this book as a contribution to the
dialog.

How? Entering a Mystery

27

How? Entering a Mystery To someone looking into the community of
practitioners using MBIs, the how of teaching would be a black box. The
public discussion of the pedagogy of mindfulness is either hidden inside
highly experiential training programs, or transformed into specific
scripts and concrete moves in manuals and workbooks. Further, the unique
environment of the group setting, although of central importance to most
of the interventions, is more or less disguised within a requirement for
the teacher to have some generic knowledge and experience of group
development and dynamics. The issues raised here result from a
combination of factors embedded in the construction of the most recent
MBIs. Three of those factors are particularly salient and could drive
the professional dialog we hope this book will help engender: (1) the
varied conceptualizations of the person of the teacher within the
interventions; (2) the institutional and financial influences that
privilege empirically validated, and preferably manualized approaches to
psychotherapy; (3) the overshadowing of the group experience due to a
focus on measurement of individual outcomes. Experiential Training
Teacher development in MBSR and MBCT, for example, is weighted towards
development of the teacher's personal practice and transformation of her
way of being, because the teacher's presence is deemed central to how
the class learns. The authors are products of the MBSR training program,
and can attest to the powerful influence the courses have had on who
they are. The pedagogical approach taught in the program reflects an
eclectic pragmatism, drawing on a wide range of medical,
psychotherapeutic, educational, and anthropological-sociological
insights and techniques. Integration is not theoretical, but, rather,
pragmatic and personal. It is expected that each teacher will integrate
the ideas that resonate most into her practice and presence when
teaching. Certainly, a teacher developed in this way can have a profound
effect on students through the dimension of her being. Santorelli
(2001b) also identifies another dimension of teaching that he deems
equally important --- the ability to bring the experience of mindfulness
into language that can affect others; that is, the ablity to "eff" the
ineffable. While, again, personal mindfulness practice is essential, two
specific pedagogical skills are also implied. First, a teacher must have
a capacity to think conceptually about the experience of mindfulness.
She must be able to take a question or observation from anyone in the
class at anytime, and place it within some workable theoretical scheme
of how students learn, grow, and develop their mindfulness practices, in
order to consider a response. Only then can she bring the second skill
to bear, the ability to create within each class a highly evocative
shared vocabulary of terms, metaphors, and allusions --- to the class's
history together, as well as to stories, poems, and personal anecdotes
--- that will help make her points in very concrete, affecting ways. In
the teacher trainings, with their experiential focus, these skills are

28

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

developed implicitly; the conceptual knowledge becomes available to each
individual teacher in an idiosyncratic way, and is likely to be embedded
within the context of the intervention's curriculum. This individual,
implicit approach is effective and logical, particularly given the
dominance of manualized models. However, it can also be seen as having a
restrictive effect on development of both the individual teacher and the
larger community of professionals teaching mindfulness. Without a
well-articulated and integrated theoretical account of the important
lines of development of mindfulness skills in the class, it is difficult
for individual teachers to critique and refine their own pedagogical
efforts, and, as well, critique and refinement of the curricula and
general approaches to teaching across the community of professionals
teaching MBIs are also hindered, as dialog is difficult without a shared
outlook and vocabulary. Manualization The pairing of a highly practiced
and trained teacher with an empirically validated and refined manualized
intervention may consistently produce the predicted positive outcomes.
These conditions are ideal. Under such conditions, teacher and
intervention may mesh closely enough to generate powerful innovations.
This is suggested in ACT (Hayes and Strosahl, 2004), in which the ideal
therapist ultimately does not rely on set pieces and technique, but
improvises a unique intervention tailored to the shared history and the
present-moment situation in the flow of the session. This, it is noted,
requires a deep understanding of ACT theory as well as extensive
experience. As we trust has been revealed, all the MBIs are aligned,
ultimately, on the existential commitment of the teacher, regardless of
their individual positions on demands for specific formal practice. In
essence, the manuals come alive when they are connected to the practice,
or, in ACT terms, the "space," of mindfulness. Yet, the growth in demand
for professionals to teach MBIs mitigates against the ideal pairing as
the norm. The prospect of teachers working with less training and
theoretical understanding increases as demand rises. The words of the
manuals could easily lose their liveliness --- a haunting thought.
Again, if the community can work to make explicit and to refine the
learning that is implicit in each teacher's development, perhaps
teachers can grow to competence more quickly. The Barely Visible Group
The group format dominates the MBIs, yet, we know very little about the
importance of that format. This is due in great part to the conventions
of the empirical research model in use, which prefers to observe
outcomes for individuals. To make the point, all of the data reported in
the studies in the two meta-analyses discussed earlier are based on
measures of individual participants. It is also interesting to note that
the empirical record on correlations between individual mindfulness

From Questions to Dialog

29

practice by subjects and improvements in outcome is ambiguous (compare,
e.g., Carmody and Baer, 2008 and Davidson et al., 2003). Across the
MBIs, it is suggested that adequate understanding of the development and
dynamics of a mindfulness class, can come from a group therapy or adult
education perspective (Santorelli, 2001a; Segal et al., 2002; Hayes and
Strosahl, 2004). Dissenting voices such as Allen et al. (2006) suggest
that "there may be some unlearning to do" (p. 292), particularly because
the teacher's embodiment of mindfulness is an unusual influence on the
group. Dimidjian and Linehan (2003), noting the historic prevalence of
group-oriented teaching and practice across spiritual traditions, go so
far as to suggest that, "It may be important for future research to
address whether the group format is an essential quality of teaching
mindfulness in the clinical context" (p. 169). If research shows this to
be true, they further suggest that teaching in those circumstances would
demand unique skills and techniques, which might best be developed in
concert with master teachers from spiritual traditions that use
mindfulness. This area of mindfulness pedagogy has been but barely
visible: under-researched, under-theorized, and under-taught. In our
experience in teaching, and in helping other professionals to develop
their teaching, mindfulness-based groups are distinctive in the ways
they develop over time, and in the ways they respond moment by moment to
the needs or actions of their members. Much of the discussion in
debriefing after a class with an intern or a practicum group is prompted
by the changes the group went through, prompted by group practices,
encounters of individuals in the group, or dyadic exchanges with the
teacher with the group as witnesses and context. The teacher's role in
the group is crucial --- as the word suggests, there's a crossroad
formed with every decision --- and it deserves a vital place in the
discussion of mindfulness pedagogy.

From Questions to Dialog Why and Who and How are certainly insistent
questions. Perhaps this survey of them has helped to ground you in the
instability of this cultural moment. If you have read this far, you may
feel that why is obvious, and the evidence just keeps pouring in. Who,
however, may be more of an open question. Maybe even more of a personal
question. To invoke T. S. Eliot once again, this time from The Lovesong
of J Alfred Prufrock: "Do I dare/Disturb the universe?" Finally, how is
still unanswered. It's why you're still reading. It's also your
­invitation to join a community, and a dialog, and to keep going. With
this book, we intend to deepen discussion around the who and how of
teaching mindfulness as a professional. We intend to engage everyone,
all across the community. We are staying with the core questions
involved in teaching, the basics of who and how that transcend the
specific interventions, even as they

30

1 Getting Grounded (In Our Own Instability)

multiply, grow, and change. We're not proposing that what we describe
here is the right way or the best way to consider these two questions.
We're simply professionals who are deeply engaged in teaching because we
find ourselves so deeply nourished by it, and who want to grow and learn
in the most direct and powerful ways, by teaching others, and by sharing
in open dialog. We invite you to join us. In Part Two, we'll offer our
understanding, from what we know inside and what we've learned from
outside, of who it is that teaches. We'll try to help you get in touch
with your authenticity, your authority, and the friendship that you can
bring to help others. In Part Three, we'll outline best practices that
we've developed ourselves and collected in our dialogs with other
teachers. We'll lay out the theories that underpin our approach to
pedagogy, not because we believe they're profound, or even correct, but
because we find them helpful in the moment in the classroom to ground us
and guide us. We'll consider just what the mechanisms are that make a
mindfulness class "work" as a group, and how to use them to ensure
optimum learning. We'll look at the essential teaching intentions for
mindfulness practices, to help maintain continuity and fidelity when you
must shift, adapt, or change your curriculum to meet challenges of
unique times, places, contingencies, or populations. And we'll cover the
real nuts and bolts of this unique vocation, giving you information on
equipment and processes for making your own recordings of mindfulness
practices. We'll even provide sample scripts for the core practices, and
share with you a selection of our favorite activities, and ideas for
working with challenging groups and individuals. And we hope that at
some point you'll share your insights and experiences with us as well.
First, though, we need to build a bit more scaffolding. Our teaching is
located at a certain time and place in our culture, so we'll provide a
brief overview of the history of the cultural shifts that have allowed
mindfulness to move further and further into the mainstream of
healthcare --- and the rest of society as well. And, of course, we need
to understand just what we mean --- in this book --- by the term
­mindfulness. Then we can start. So, let's get going.

Chapter 2

A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

The practice of mindfulness is an experience that from a certain
perspective is inexpressible. You gain a tacit knowledge of it that is
yours alone; you "know more than \[you\] can tell," as Michael Polanyi
(1966) phrases it. Yet, from a different perspective, the practice is
also a product of all the communications that you have around your
experience. Your explicit knowledge, what you can tell, is co-created in
relationship with all of those with whom you share your experience now
or in the future, from your mindfulness teachers and fellow students, to
your colleagues and supervisors in working with mindfulness-based
interventions, to the clients or patients that you teach. This
co-creation takes place most obviously in verbal language. You learn
from a talk or a book by a teacher, a conversation with a colleague, or
a dialog with a client. But the nonverbal dimensions are also important.
There is much to be learned from a teacher's posture, gestures, tone of
voice, and rate of speech, or from the way a colleague meets your eyes,
or from the quality of the pause before a supervisor responds in a tense
moment. So, within such relationships, within your own small community,
there is an evolving discourse, through which you learn to better
understand and, thereby, better express your tacit knowledge of
mindfulness practice. Further, it is within such a community and its
discourse that you are learning, or will learn, to teach mindfulness as
a professional. The small community, even in an isolated place, is
meaningfully connected in its discourse to larger communities of
discourse and practice. For example, an MBSR program at a local hospital
is connected to the MBSR community and its founders and senior teachers
through ongoing personal relationships supported by writings,
recordings, retreats, trainings, and conferences. There is a further
connection to the discourse of all the mindfulness-based interventions,
which are increasingly associated (e.g., Baer, 2006; Didonna, 2009;
Hayes et al., 2004). From there, it is anticipated that teachers and
practitioners make connections as well to the valuable insights and long
history of mindfulness and acceptance within the psychodynamic,
humanistic, and experiential psychotherapies. Last, but perhaps most
important, connections may be made even further out into the many other
cultures of spiritual practice. In the current discourse of
mindfulness-based interventions, these cultures are predominantly Asian
in origin, specifically certain forms of Buddhism D. McCown et al.,
Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians and Educators,
DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_2, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC
2010

31

32

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

that have become popular in the West. It should be remembered that
Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Jainism, and Sufism could be easily
connected as well, as is evident in Linehan's work and in the work of
many individual teachers within the interventions. To teach effectively,
it serves well to have awareness of the history, language, images,
metaphors, and assumptions of the current discourse of mindfulness. That
is the reason for this chapter. We present here a sketch of how the
context in which you are learning to practice and teach has been shaped
historically by a rapprochement of Western and Eastern philosophical,
religious, medical, and psychological thought over the past two
centuries. Given space limitations and our very pragmatic intentions,
what follows is not meant as an exhaustive critical analysis. Rather, it
serves two parallel purposes. First, it provides essential background
for the attempt at defining mindfulness that occupies in Chapter 3.
Second, it acts as an appreciation of how our Western culture,
particularly in the United States, got to this exciting moment in
history, and offers some jumping-off points for deeper exploration of
this discourse within which you are teaching, or will teach, as a
professional.

Early Encounters It is possible to date a European intellectual
connection to Eastern spiritual thought and practice as early as the
ancient Greek histories of Herodotus, Alexander the Great's Indian
campaign in 327--325 BCE (Hodder, 1993), or, to Petrarch's mention of
Hindu ascetics in his Life of Solitude, written during 1345--1347
(Versluis, 1993). A more substantive start, however, would be 1784,
which marks the founding by British scholars and magistrates of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal, from which quickly flowed first translations
of Hindu scriptures directly from Sanskrit texts into English. Sir
William Jones was the preeminent member of the group. His tireless work
included translations of Kalidasa's Sakuntala (1789), Jayadeva's
Gitagovinda (1792), and the influential Insitutes of Hindu Law (1794).
His early tutor in Sanskrit, Charles Wilkins, holds the distinction of
making the first translation of the Bhagavad Gita (1785). In 1788, the
group founded a journal, Asiatik Researches, widely circulated among the
intelligentsia, including the second U.S. President John Adams, an
enthusiastic subscriber (Hodder, 1993; Versluis, 1993). The effect of
this flow of scholarly and objective information about Indian culture
and religion began a profound shift in Europe's view of the East: "from
the earlier presupposition of the East as barbarous and despotic, to a
vision of an exotic and highly civilized world in its own right"
(Versluis, 1993, p. 18). The new language, ideas, images, and narratives
embedded in such texts immediately touched something in poets,
philosophers, and artists, particularly in England and Germany ---
powerful influences on the development of American

Early Encounters

33

­culture. In England, the Romantics embraced all things "Oriental" as a
celebration of the irrational and exotic. Their use of the scriptures,
stories, lyrics, and images becoming ever more available to them from
Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Islam was not discrete, but rather
an amalgam. Their drive was not for a practical use of these new
elements of discourse in expressing some tacit knowledge heretofore
inexpressible; to the contrary, as Versluis (1993) notes, "their
Orientalism was not serious but rather a matter of exotic settings for
poems" (p. 29). The later confounding of international relations by
"Orientalism" (Edward Said) was an unforeseen serious consequence.
Herder, Goethe, and the Romantics who followed them in Germany found
"Oriental" thought a refreshing alternative to the stifling rationality
(and then nationality) of their time. Yet, again, their usage of the new
material available was not entirely pragmatic. Their philosophical and
poetic insights could have been expressed in the preexisting discourse
of Christian mysticism, Neo-Platonism, and Hermeticism and the
charismatic movement. What the use of Oriental religious discourse by a
poet of spiritual power such as Novalis (Freidrich von Hardenberg) did
do was to suggest that the full range of Eastern and Western religious
expression pointed to a Transcendent reality, and that all --- in
essence --- offered truth (Versluis, 1993). It is this last point that
brings us to America, to the Transcendentalists, and, at last, the
pragmatic use of the Eastern discourses to better understand and express
a personal tacit knowledge. In writers such as Ralph Waldo Emerson and
Henry David Thoreau, and the utopian vision of the Transcendentalist Old
Concord Farm and other communities, the influence of Eastern thought is
evident (Brooks, 1936; Versluis, 1993; Hodder, 1993). Through the Dial,
their journal that did much to shape American Transcendentalism, they
brought out translations of Hindu, Buddhist, and Confucian texts, and of
the Sufi poets, such as Hafiz, Rumi, and Saadi. In these
"transcendentalations" a new, rich brew began to find ways to give voice
to tacit experience. It is possible to see both Emerson and Thoreau as
both natural (and learned?) contemplatives whose entwined literary and
spiritual lives reflect experiences that demanded a larger discourse
than the West provided for more explicit understanding and more
elaborated communication. Emerson's early (1836) essay, "Nature,"
written before his deep engagement with Eastern thought, contains a
description of such an experience: Crossing a bare common, in snow
puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without ­having in my thoughts
any occurrence of special good fortune, I have enjoyed a perfect
exhilaration. Almost I fear I think how glad I am. In the woods, too, a
man casts off his years, as the snake his slough, and at what period so
ever of life is always a child. In the woods, is perpetual youth. Within
these plantations of God, a decorum and a sanctity reign, a perennial
festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of them
in a thousand years. In the woods, we return to reason and faith. There
I feel that nothing can befall me in life, --- no disgrace, no calamity,
(leaving me my eyes,) which nature cannot repair. Standing on the bare
ground, --- my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into infinite
space, --- all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent eyeball. I
am nothing. I see all. The currents of the Universal Being circulate
through me; I am part or particle of God.

34

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

As Emerson began reading the amalgam of Oriental writings in earnest,
which consumed him for the rest of his life, his enterprise became the
essentialization (distillation) and integration of the insights that
supported his experience and vision on both a personal and a cultural
scale. Versluis notes that, "For Emerson... the significance of Asian
religions --- of all human history --- consists of assimilation into the
present, into this individual here and now" (1993, p. 63). He was
reading and feeling and thinking his way towards a universal, literally
unitarian religion. (Imagine if the early New England settlers had not
thought to provide "Commons" as the centerpieces of their settlements as
spiritual practices evolved from Puritanism to Congregationalism to
Unitarianism.). It seems Thoreau had a different enterprise under way,
using the same materials. Where Emerson was grappling with universals
and theory to make sense of his world, Thoreau was intent that
particulars and practice would make sense of his own world. Though he
had only the translated texts to guide him, he did more than just
imagine himself as an Eastern contemplative practitioner. He wrote to
his friend, H. G. O. Blake, in 1849, "... rude and careless as I am, I
would fain practice the yoga faithfully... To some extent, and at rare
intervals, even I am a yogin" (quoted in Hodder, 1993, p. 412). Thoreau
offers descriptions of his experience, such as this from the "Sounds"
chapter of Walden: I did not read books that first summer; I hoed beans.
Nay, I often did better than this. There were times when I could not
afford to sacrifice the bloom of the present moment to any work, whether
of the head or hands. I love a broad margin to my life. Sometimes, in a
summer morning, having taken my accustomed bath, I sat in my sunny
doorway from sunrise till noon, rapt in a revery, amidst the pines and
hickories and sumachs, in undisturbed solitude and stillness, while the
birds sang around or flitted noiseless through the house, until by the
sun falling in at my west window, or the noise of some traveler's wagon
on the distant highway, I was reminded of the lapse of time. I grew in
those seasons like corn in the night, and they were for me far better
than any work of my hands would have been. They were not time subtracted
from my life, but so much over and above my usual allowance. I realized
what the Orientals mean by contemplation and the forsaking of works.

Like Emerson, Thoreau read the "Orientals" back into his own
experiences, to help express that which was inexpressible without them.
A journal entry from 1851 states that "Like some other preachers --- I
have added my texts --- (derived) from the Chinese and Hindoo scriptures
--- long after my discourse was written" (quoted in Hodder, 1993,
p. 434). That original inarticulate discourse of ecstasy in nature was
capable of transformation with the insights he found in the translations
of Jones and Wilkins. It was the here-and-now value of the new language,
images, and stories that counted. An emphasis on the moment-to-moment
particulars of nature and his own experience was the central concern of
his later life. He became, in his own words, a "self-appointed inspector
of snowstorms and rainstorms," which is, perhaps, as cogent a
description of a mindfulness practitioner as any from the Eastern
traditions. While India and, particularly, Hindu thought have taken the
prime place in the discussion so far, America's engagement with the East
by the middle of the nineteenth century also included East Asian
culture, with Chinese, Korean, and Japanese

Early Encounters

35

arts, literature, and religion --- including the Buddhism of these areas
--- shaping the intellectual direction of an emerging American
modernism. For example, the work of Ernest Fenollosa, American scholar
of East Asian art and literature and convert to Tendai Buddhism, brought
this spirit into wider intellectual discourse (Bevis, 1988; Brooks,
1962). Fenollosa represents a more specific, scholarly, but no less
engaged, use of the East by an American. A few lines from Fenollossa's
poem, "East and West," his Phi Beta Kappa address at Harvard in 1892,
reflect a growing need of Western thought for contemplative space.
Addressing a Japanese mentor, Fenollossa says, "I've flown from my
West/Like a desolate bird from a broken nest/ To learn thy secret of joy
and rest" (quoted in Brooks, 1962, p. 50). At Fenollossa's death, his
widow gave his unpublished studies of the Chinese written language and
notebooks of translations from the classical Chinese poet Li Po to the
American poet Ezra Pound, for whom a whole new world opened. Pound's
Chinese translations drawn from Fenollossa's work radically transformed
the art of the time. Indeed, Pound had, arguably, the most powerful
influence of any single poet in shaping the poetry, not only of his
modernist contemporaries, but of the generation that would come to
maturity in the middle of the twentieth century. While Pound's use of
Eastern influences was mainly stylistic, a very different sort of poet,
Wallace Stevens, used his own encounter with the East --- studying
Buddhist texts and translating Chinese poetry with his friend the
scholar-poet Witter Bynner --- to better understand and express his
tacit experience (Bevis, 1988). Perhaps "The Snow Man," an early poem
(written in 1908 and first published in 1921), suggests this (Stevens,
1971, p. 54). One must have a mind of winter To regard the frost and the
boughs Of the pine-trees crusted with snow; And have been cold a long
time To behold the junipers shagged with ice, The spruces rough in the
distant glitter Of the January sun; and not to think Of any misery in
the sound of the wind, In the sound of a few leaves, Which is the sound
of the land Full of the same wind That is blowing in the same bare place
For the listener, who listens in the snow, And, nothing himself, beholds
Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is.

Here is the description of an undeniably meditative stance, using an
image from the poet's Connecticut landscape, and rhetoric from his East
Asian studies, perhaps. Yet, it is possible that this is also an
articulation of personal experience. Stevens did not study meditation
formally, but, like Thoreau, he was a prodigious walker. In any season
or weather, a perambulation of 15 miles or so --- in a business suit ---
was a

36

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

­common prelude to writing (Bevis, 1988). This is neatly captured in a
few lines from "Notes for a Supreme Fiction": "... Perhaps/The truth
depends on a walk around a lake,// A composing as the body tires, a
stop/To see hepatica, a stop to watch/ A definition growing certain
and// A wait within that certainty, a rest/In the swags of pine trees
bordering the lake ..." (Stevens, 1971, p. 212). A transparent eye-ball.
An inspector of snowstorms. A mind of winter. These are powerful
metaphors to describe experiences that sought and found elaboration
through encounters with Eastern thought. For these individuals, there
was a willingness to use whatever comes to hand --- from whatever
culture or tradition suggests itself or is available --- to understand
what is happening in the here and now. This reflects a perennial
American pragmatism, which endures today in much of the discourse of the
mindfulness-based interventions: Hatha yoga mixes with Buddhist
meditation, while Sufi poetry and Native American stories illuminate
teaching points, and the language of the Christian and Jewish
contemplative traditions hover in the background. In the same early time
frame we've been discussing, a more specific connection to Buddhism
began developing, as well. Of the major traditions in the Oriental
amalgam, Buddhism appears to have been the least understood and the most
scorned during the earlier part of the nineteenth century. Reasons
include Christian defensiveness and hostile reporting from the mission
field; a portrayal of Buddhist doctrines as atheistic, nihilistic,
passive, and pessimistic; and, even, the contagious anti-Buddhist biases
of the Hindu scholars who taught Sanskrit to the English translators of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal (Tweed, 1992; Versluis, 1993). The
"opening" of Japan with Commodore Perry's visit in and the subsequent
travels, study, and writing of American artists, scholars, and
sophisticates, including Ernest Fenollossa, Henry Adams (great-grandson
of aforementioned John Adams), John LaFarge, and Lafcadio Hearn, who all
had direct contact with Buddhism did much to increase interest and
sympathy for Buddhism. Then, the 1879 publication of The Light of Asia,
Edwin Arnold's poetic retelling of the life of the Buddha, drawing
parallels with the life of Jesus, turned interest into enthusiasm. Sales
estimates of between 500,000 and a million copies put it at a level of
popularity matching, say, Huckleberry Finn (Tweed, 1992) or the
number-one bestseller of that time, Ben Hur, by retired Civil War
General Lew Wallace. Buddhism became a new possibility for those at the
bare edge of the culture who intuited the tidal shift of Christian
believing that Matthew Arnold had poignantly articulated in "Dover
Beach" in 1867: The Sea of Faith Was once, too, at the full, and round
earth's shore Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled. But now I
only hear Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, Retreating, to the
breath Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear And naked shingles
of the world ...

Early Encounters

37

And for some, Buddhist belief became a formal identity. Madame Blavatsky
and Henry Steele Olcott, founders of the Theosophical Society (and the
alternative practice of Theosophical Medicine), were long engaged with
Buddhism, and in Ceylon in 1880, made ritual vows in a Theravada temple
to live by the five precepts and take refuge in the Buddha, the
teachings, and the community. The most powerful event, however, was the
face-to-face encounters with Buddhist masters afforded by the Parliament
of World Religions, particularly the Theravadin Anagarika Dharmapala and
the Rinzai Zen Master Soyen Shaku. Both of these teachers continued to
raise interest in Buddhism through subsequent visits. In fact, Soyen
Shaku bears significant responsibility for popularization of Buddhism
through the present day. The vision of Buddhism that he presented jibed
perfectly with the early modern scientific and moral outlooks. The
themes he presented --- "an embrace of science combined with the promise
of something beyond it, and a universal reality in which different
religions and individuals participate, but which Buddhism embodies most
perfectly" (McMahan, 2002, p. 220) still resonate. (These themes
resonate with contemporary reconciliation of ancient, traditional
ayurvedic precepts with quantum mechanics and fundamental particle
physics in the formulations of Maharishi Ayurveda.) He also had a
"second generation" impact through the 1950s and 1960s, as he encouraged
his student and translator for the Parliament visit, the articulate Zen
scholar D. T. Suzuki, to maintain a dialog with the West through visits
and writing (Tweed, 1992; McMahan, 2002). It is important to note that
the character of Buddhist "believing" during this period was just that
--- an engagement with philosophy and doctrine, a search for a
replacement for the Judeo --- Christian belief system that some felt was
no longer sustaining. Consider that two other Buddhist "best sellers"
beside Arnold's The Light of Asia were Olcott's Buddhist Catechism and
Paul Carus's The Gospel of Buddha, whose titles even reflect a
Christian, belief-oriented approach to Buddhism. In the best Evangelical
Protestant tradition comes the story of the first "Buddhist conversion"
in America. In Chicago in 1893, Dharmapala was speaking on Buddhism and
Theosophy to an overflow crowd in a large auditorium. At the end of the
talk, Charles Strauss, a Swiss-American businessman of Jewish
background, stood up from his seat in the audience and walked
deliberately to the front. One can imagine the hush and expectancy. As
planned in advance, he then --- to use an Evangelical Protestant phrase
--- accepted Buddhism, repeating the refuge vows for all to hear (Tweed,
1992; Obadia, 2002). The connection of most of the two or three thousand
Euro-American Buddhists and the tens of thousands of sympathizers at
this time (Tweed, 1993) was, with a few exceptions, intellectual. The
popular appeal of Buddhism was as a form of belief, not as a form of
spiritual practice. According to Tweed (1993), the fascination with
Buddhist believing reached a high water mark around 1907, and declined
precipitously thereafter. A small nucleus of Euro Americans interested
in the academic or personal study of Buddhism maintained organizations
and specialized publishing, but few Asian teachers stayed in the United
States, and impetus for growth was lost. Dharmapala, in 1921, wrote in a
letter to an American supporter, "At one time there was some kind of
activity in certain parts of the U.S. where some

38

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

people took interest in Buddhism, but I see none of that now" (In Tweed,
1993, p. 157). Charges by the status quo religious and cultural powers
that Buddhism was passive and pessimistic --- terrible sins in a culture
fueling itself on action and ­optimism --- drowned dissenting Buddhist
voices.

Three Buddhisms in America It is important to note that the narrative
that has shaped the discourse of mindfulness among professionals today
sidelines the story of ethnic Asian Buddhism in America. Religion
scholar Richard Hughes Seager (2002) describes three Buddhisms in
America: 1. Old-line Asian-American Buddhism, with institutions dating
back into the ­nineteenth century; 2. Euro-American or convert Buddhism,
centered in the Westernized forms of Buddhism --- often generically
parsed as Zen, Tibetan, and Theravada (or Vipassana or Insight), which
are centered on meditation practice; and Soka Gakkai International, an
American branch of a Japanese group, which with a rich mix of
Asian-Americans, Euro-Americans and substantial numbers of
African-Americans and Latino-Americans is the most culturally diverse
group, and is centered on chanting practice rather than meditation; and
3. New immigrant or ethnic Buddhism, which is most easily parsed by the
country of origin.

In the Aftermath of World War II The applications of Eastern thought to
Western experience developed a powerful momentum immediately following
the Second World War. Western soldiers, many drawn from professional
life into active duty, were exposed in great numbers to Asian cultures,
from India, Burma, and China. In Japan, physicians, scientists, and
artists and intellectuals who held posts in the occupation forces were
exposed to a culture that included the esthetic, philosophical, and
spiritual manifestations of Japanese Buddhism, particularly its Zen
varieties. Some stayed to study, and East --- West dialogs that had been
suspended were resumed, such as with D. T. Suzuki and Shinichi
Hisamatsu. Most important for the discourse of mindfulness in medicine
and psychotherapy, American military psychiatrists were exposed to
Japanese psychotherapy, particularly that developed by Shoma Morita,
which is based on a paradox that had enormous repercussions in Western
practice. Instead of attacking symptoms as in Western approaches, Morita
asked his patients to allow themselves to turn towards their symptoms
and fully experience them, to know them as they are (Dryden and Still,
2006; Morita, 1928/1998). Morita therapy was of interest and
intellectually available to those Westerners in Japan for two powerful
reasons. First, it is a highly effective treatment for

In the Aftermath of World War II

what Western practitioners would identify as anxiety-based disorders;
reports of cured or improved rates greater than 90% are common (Morita,
1928/1998); Reynolds, 1993). Morita developed a diagnostic category of
shinkeishitsu for the disorders he targeted, which he describes as
anxiety disorders with hypochondriasis (Morita, 1928/1998). Second,
Morita did not develop his work in cultural isolation. Working
contemporaneously with Charcot, William James, Freud, and Jung, Morita
read, referenced, and critiqued Western developments. He was
particularly interested in the therapies that paralleled his own in
certain ways, such as Freud's psychoanalysis, S.Weir Mitchell's rest
therapy (also rest cure, "west cure', and Nature Cure), Otto
Binswanger's life normalization therapy, and Paul DuBois's persuasion
therapy (Morita, 1998). It integrated East and West --- from an Eastern
perspective. While the entire regimen of Morita therapy, a four-stage,
intensive, residential treatment (see sidebar) has rarely been used in
the Unites States, --- David Reynolds (1980, 1993) has adapted it and
other Japanese therapies for the West --- two of its basic insights had
immediate and continuing effects. First is the paradox of turning
towards rather than away from symptoms for relief. Second is the
insistence on the nondual nature of the body and mind. Although the
influence of Zen is easily seen in his therapy, Morita did not wish to
promote a direct religious association, fearing that it might be seen as
somehow less serious, exacting, and effective (LeVine, 1998).
Paradoxically, perhaps the Zen connection actually drew the interest of
the Westerners.

39

Morita Therapy: Mushoju-shin and the stages of treatment. In the
nutshell version of Morita therapy, the Zen term mushoju-shin points to
the end, or the beginning. It describes a healthy attention. In Morita's
(1928/1998) metaphor, it is the attention you have when you're reading
while standing on the train. You must balance, hold the book, read,
remember the next station, and be aware of others. That is, you cannot
focus on any one thing too tightly. You must be willing to be unstable,
open to whatever happens, and able to respond and change freely. In
short, you are not "self" focused, rather, mind = body = environment are
one. "This is the place from where my special therapy begins" (p. 31),
says Morita. It is also the place that Morita therapists are required to
inhabit as they work. First Stage: Isolation and rest (5--7 days).
Disposition: After careful assessment to ensure safety, patients are
isolated and asked to remain in a lying-down posture, except to use the
bathroom. Instructions: Experience the anxieties and illusions that
arise; let them run their course, without trying to change or stop them.
Purpose: There is a Zen saying that if you try to eliminate a wave with
another wave, all you get is more waves, more confusion. This becomes
clear. Second Stage: Light occupational work (5--7 days). Disposition:
Isolation is maintained; no conversation or distractions. Sleep is
restricted to 7 or 8 hours a night. Patients must be working during the
day, and may not return to the room to rest. Instructions: Move gently
into mental and physical activity again, tidying the yard by picking up
sticks and leaves, and moving into more effortful activities over time.
Allow physical and mental discomfort to be just as it is. Purpose:
Breaking down the "feeling-centered attitude," by deemphasizing
judgments of comfort and discomfort; promoting spontaneous activity of
mind and body.

40

The Zen Boom

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

Third Stage: Intensive occupational work (5--7 days). Disposition: As in
stage two. Instructions: Patients are assigned more strenuous labor,
such as chopping wood and digging holes, and are encouraged to do art or
craft projects that please them and to be spontaneous. Purpose: Learn to
be patient and to endure work, build self-confidence, and own their
subjective experiences.

Zen had a double-barreled influence in the United States, particularly
in the postwar "Zen boom" years of the 1950s and 1960s, touching both
the intelle­ctual community and the popular culture. With the first
barrel, it had significant impact on the serious discourse of scholars,
professionals, artists, and Western Fourth Stage: Preparation for daily
living (5--7 days). religious thinkers. One person was so Disposition:
Patients may interact purposefully with profoundly influential in
conveying the others but not speak of their own experience, spirit of
Zen that he epitomizes this and may leave the hospital grounds for
errands. impact: D.T. Suzuki. As a young man, Instructions: The work and
activities are not chosen you'll remember, Suzuki had played a by the
patient. role in the Buddhist enthusiasm of the Purpose: Learn to adjust
to changes in circumstances; 1890s and 1900s, as translator for Soyen to
not be attached to personal preferences. Shaku. Suzuki had then lived
for a time Prepare for return to the natural rhythms of in the United
States, working for Open living. Court, a publishing company
specializing in Eastern thought, and had married an American woman.
After the war, Suzuki returned to the West, where he continued to write
books of both scholarly and popular interest on Zen and Pure Land
Buddhism, traveled and lectured extensively in the United States and
Europe, maintained a voluminous correspondence, and affected an
incredibly varied range of thinkers. Three short examples give a glimpse
into the effects of Suzuki's Zen on intellectual discourse: Thomas
Merton, John Cage, and Eric Fromm. The Trappist monk Thomas Merton was
greatly influenced by Suzuki's work --- which he had first known in the
1930s before entering the Monastery. An engagement with Eastern
religious and aesthetic thought --- particularly Zen, and particularly
through Suzuki's work --- shaped Merton's conception of and practice of
contemplative prayer, which has had a powerful influence on Christian
spiritual practice to the present day (e.g., Merton, 1968; Pennington,
1980). Merton began a correspondence with Suzuki in 1959, asking him to
write a preface for a book of translations of the sayings of the "Desert
Fathers." Merton's superiors felt such collaboration in print was
"inappropriate," yet in practice, they encouraged Merton to continue the
dialog with Suzuki, one telling him, "Do it but don't preach it" (Mott,
1984, p. 326). This stance represented a reversal of the earlier
Buddhist fusion of belief without practice. The dialog did indeed
continue, each endeavoring to explore and understand Christianity and
Zen from their own perspectives. The relationship meant so much to
Merton that, although his vocation had kept him cloistered in the
Monastery of Gethsemane in Kentucky from 1941, he sought and gained
permission from his Abbott to meet Suzuki in New York City in 1964,
Merton's first travel in 23 years (Mott, 1984; Merton, 1968; Pennington,
1980). Suzuki summed up the burden of their two long talks this way:
"The most important thing is Love" (Mott, 1984, p. 399).

The Zen Boom

41

The composer John Cage, who was deeply influenced by Hindu, Buddhist,
and Taoist philosophy and practice, regularly attended Suzuki's lectures
at Columbia University in the 1950s. His statement that in choosing to
study with Suzuki he was choosing the elite --- "I've always gone ---
insofar as I could --- to the president of the company," (Duckworth,
1999, p. 21) --- suggests the value of Suzuki's thought to him and to
much of the avant garde. The Zen influence on Cage's work is captured in
his conception of his compositions as "purposeless play" that is "...
not an attempt to bring order out of chaos, nor to suggest improvements
in creation, but simply to wake up to the very life we are living, which
is so excellent once one gets one's mind and desires out of the way and
lets it act of its own accord" (Cage, 1966, p. 12). Suzuki's expansive
sense of play is reported by Cage (1966) in an anecdote: "... an
American lady said, 'How is it, Dr. Suzuki? We spend the evening asking
you questions and nothing is decided.' Dr. Suzuki smiled and said,
'That's why I love philosophy: no one wins'" (p. 40). The psychoanalyst
Eric Fromm was one of many in the psychoanalytic community of the time
to be drawn by Zen and Suzuki's exposition of it. At a conference held
in Mexico in 1957 entitled "Zen Buddhism and Psychoanalysis," which was
attended by about fifty psychoanalytically inclined psychiatrists and
psychologists, Suzuki was a featured speaker, and engaged in dialog
particularly with Fromm and the religion scholar Richard DeMartino. A
book of the lectures was published after the conference (Fromm et al.,
1960). Fromm suggests that psychoanalysis and Zen both offer an answer
to the suffering of contemporary people: "... the alienation from
oneself, from one's fellow man, and from nature; the awareness that life
runs out of one's hand like sand, and that one will die without having
lived; that one lives in the midst of plenty and yet is joyless"
(p. 86). The answer, then, would not be a cure that removes symptoms,
but rather "the presence of well being" (p. 86; Fromm's italics). Fromm
defines well being as "... to be fully born, to become what one
potentially is; it means to have the full capacity for joy and for
sadness or, to put it still differently, to awake from the half-slumber
the average man lives in, and to be fully awake. If it is all that, it
means also to be creative; that is, to react and respond to myself, to
others, to everything that exists ..." (p. 90). For Fromm, the work was
not just to bring the unconscious into consciousness, as Freud
suggested, but rather to heal the rift between the two. What was most
intriguing for Fromm in the possibilities Zen offered for such a project
was koan practice --- the use of paradoxical or nonrational questions,
statements, and stories to back the student's ego-bound intellect
against a wall, until the only way out is through. This process of
amplifying the root contradiction of ego-consciousness, leading to its
overturning --- satori, or enlightenment --- was the subject of
DeMartino's contribution to the conference and book. Fromm drew a
parallel between this process and the work of the analyst, suggesting
that the analyst should not so much interpret and explain, but rather
should "take away one rationalization after another, one crutch after
another, until the patient cannot escape any longer, and instead breaks
through the fictions which fill his mind and experiences reality ---
that is, becomes conscious of something he was not conscious of before"
(p. 126). Love, play, and well-being: it was not just Suzuki's erudition
that attracted so many, it was his embodiment of what he taught. Alan
Watts, the scholar-entertainer to whom

42

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

we shall turn next, who got to know Suzuki at the Buddhist Lodge in
London in the 1920s, described him as "... about the most gentle and
enlightened person I have ever known; for he combined the most complex
learning with utter simplicity. He was versed in Japanese, English,
Chinese, Sanskrit, Tibetan, French, Pali, and German, but while
attending a meeting at the Buddhist Lodge he would play with a kitten,
looking right into its Buddha nature" (Watts, 1972). Suzuki should have
the last word on his way of being, and what he wished to communicate to
others (Fromm et al., 1960): We cannot all be expected to be scientists,
but we are so constituted by nature that we can all be artists --- not,
indeed, artists of special kinds, such as painters, sculptors,
musicians, poets, etc., but artists of life. This profession, "artist of
life" may sound new and quite odd, but in point of fact, we are all born
artists of life and, not knowing it, most of us fail to be so and the
result is that we make a mess of our lives, asking, "What is the meaning
of life?" "Are we not facing blank nothingness?" "After living
seventy-eight, or even ninety years, where do we go? Nobody knows,"
etc., etc. I am told that most modern men and women are neurotic on this
account. But the Zen-man can tell them that they have all forgotten that
they are born artists, creative artists of life, and that as soon as
they realize this fact and truth they will all be cured of neurosis or
psychosis or whatever name they have for their trouble (p. 15).

Certainly, such a vision of unfettered creativity and immediate relief
from the pains of living would be resonant in postwar American culture.
It should be noted, however, that in the 1950s and 1960s, despite his
tremendous stature, Suzuki was also criticized --- accused by the
academic Buddhist community as a reductionist "popularizer" of Zen ---
and dismissed by the practice community as one who did not sit in
meditation with enough discipline and regularity. On one hand, these may
be valid charges, yet on the other, they may be significant reasons for
Suzuki's influence. This was a time when Western intellectuals were in
search of new rhetoric and new philosophy to help express and ground
their shifting experiences and intuitions; for many, it was a time of
wide-ranging dialog, of exploring possibilities, of framing a debate,
rather than a time of grounding, of digging in, of focus on details.
Indeed, the charges might simply be moot, when Suzuki's enterprise is
cast in the mode of his teacher Soyen Shaku, or even the mode of Ralph
Waldo Emerson, of attempting to universalize spiritual experience. In
his dialog with Christian mysticism, for example, Suzuki (1957) found it
possible that "Christian experiences are not after all different from
those of the Buddhist" (p. 8).

The Boom and Beyond Just as Suzuki epitomized the intellectual reach of
the Zen boom, it may be possible to capture the more popular facets of
the time and continue the story through the 1960s by focusing on a
single character: the transplanted Englishman Alan Watts. Watts's
eccentric career as a scholar-entertainer travels a ragged arc from the
1930s to the early 1970s, along the way touching most of the important
figures and movements in the meeting of Eastern and Western religious
thought and practice, particularly as they offered insights that could
be used in psychotherapy. The arc described here is drawn with the help
of his autobiography, In My Own Way (1972),

The Boom and Beyond

43

whose punning title suggests the paradox of sustaining a powerful public
self to earn a living while discussing the dissolution of the ego, and
Monica Furlong's feet-of-clay biography, whose original title, Genuine
Fake (1986), carries an ambiguous truth. An intellectually precocious
and sensitive religious seeker, Watts spent his early years at King's
School, Canterbury, which is next to the ancient cathedral. There, the
history-steeped atmosphere and rich liturgical expression cast a spell
and created a love of ritual that never left him. In his adolescent
years at the school, he developed an interest in Buddhism, which he was
able to defend on a very high level in debates with faculty. He wrote to
Christmas Humphries, the great promoter of Buddhism and Theosophy and
the founder of the Buddhist Lodge in London, who assumed the letters
were from a faculty member. When they finally met, Humphries became a
mentor, providing guidance for reading and practice, and connecting
Watts to other Asian scholars, including D.T. Suzuki. By 1935, having
foregone an Oxford University scholarship to study what appealed to him,
Watts published his first book, written at age nineteen, The Spirit of
Zen, which was almost a guidebook to the densities of Suzuki's Essays on
Zen. Watts' studies expanded, he came to read and write Chinese at a
scholarly level, and read deeply in Taoism, as well as Vedanta,
Christian mysticism, and Jung's psychology. Through the Buddhist Lodge,
he met a mother and adolescent daughter, Ruth Fuller Everett and
Eleanor. Ruth had been a member of the ashram-cum-zoo, as Watts called
it, of Pierre Bernard --- known as Oom the Magnificent --- who catered
to the New York society ladies by teaching Hatha yoga and tantrism.
Through that association, she learned of Zen Buddhism, and, taking
Eleanor as a traveling companion, set off for Japan. The two became the
first Western women to sit in meditation in a Zen monastery. Years
later, Ruth married a Zen teacher and eventually became a teacher
herself. Watts and Eleanor courted, in a way, and attended meditation
sessions together. Watts's practice at the time was simply to be in the
present moment, learned from the independent spiritual teachers J.
Krishnamurti (who called it choiceless awareness) and G. I. Gurdjieff
(who called it constant self-remembering). He was becoming frustrated
with his inability to concentrate on the present, and discussed this
with Eleanor on their walk home from a session at the Buddhist Lodge.
Eleanor said, "Why try to concentrate on it? What else is there to be
aware of? Your memories are all in the present, just as much as the
trees over there. Your thoughts about the future are also in the
present, and anyhow I just love to think about the future. The present
is just a constant flow, like the Tao, and there's simply no way of
getting out of it" (Watts, 1972, p. 152--153). That was it. He came to
think of this as his true way of life, and continued to practice in this
way in various guises throughout his lifetime. The couple married and
moved to the United States, just ahead of the war in Europe. After all
his resistance and protest, at this point in his development Watts felt
drawn to try to fit himself into a vocation that made sense in the West.
With his rich Anglican background, the logical choice was the priesthood
of the Episcopal Church. Although he had no undergraduate degree, Watts
proved the depth of his

44

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

learning and entered Seabury-Western Seminary in Chicago for a 2-year
course of study. In his second year, his standing was so far advanced
that he was excused from classes and undertook expansive theological
reading in personal tutorials. His researches resulted in the book
Behold the Spirit, which brought insights from the Eastern religions
into profound dialog with a Christianity he painted as in need of
refreshment. Reviewers in and outside the church greeted it warmly.
Ordained, he was made chaplain of Northwestern University, where his
feeling for ritual, his skills as a speaker, and his ability to throw a
great party brought quick success. Yet tensions in his growing family
and his own tendency for excess ended his career; the church in 1950 did
not take affairs and divorce lightly. With a new wife and no job,
Watts's prospects were, indeed, uncertain as he began work on a new
book, The Wisdom of Insecurity (1951). An influential friend, Joseph
Campbell, managed to get Watts a grant from the Bollingen Foundation,
funded by one of C. G. Jung's wealthy patients, to support research on
myth, psychology, and Oriental philosophy. The book, fueled perhaps by
the indigence and indignities of his situation, brought him to the
directness and clarity of expression that characterizes work from here
on. Here is a description of working with pain by trusting that the mind
"... has give and can absorb shocks like water or a cushion" (p. 96):
\[H\]ow does the mind absorb suffering? It discovers that resistance and
escape --- the "I" process --- is a false move. The pain is inescapable,
and resistance as a defense only makes it worse; the whole system is
jarred by the shock. Seeing the impossibility of this course, it must
act according to its nature --- remain stable and absorb. ... Seeing
that there is no escape from the pain, the mind yields to it, absorbs
it, and becomes conscious of just pain without any "I" feeling it or
resisting it. It experiences pain in the same complete, unselfconscious
way in which it experiences pleasure. Pain is the nature of this present
moment, and I can only live in this moment .... This, however, is not an
experiment to be held in reserve, as a trick, for moments of crisis ....
This is not a psychological or spiritual discipline for
self-improvement. It is simply being aware of this present experience,
and realizing that you can neither define it nor divide yourself from
it. There is no rule but "Look!" (pp. 97--99)

In no time, Watts landed on his feet, invited into a position at the
founding of the American Academy of Asian Studies in San Francisco, a
precursor of today's California Institute of Integral Studies. He also
landed in creative ferment. Instead of the business people and
government officials learning Asian languages and culture that were the
expected students, the Academy drew artists and poets and religious and
philosophical thinkers who were open to the kind of exploration for
which Watts and his faculty colleagues had prepared their whole lives.
Students included the Beat poet Gary Snyder, with whom Watts struck up a
deep friendship; Michael Murphy and Richard Price, who would found
Esalen; and Locke McCorkle, who would become a force in EST (Erhard
Seminars Training). As Watts added administrative duties to his
teaching, he brought in an amazing range of guest lecturers: old friends
such as D.T. Suzuki; his ex-mother-in-law Ruth Fuller Sasaki who spoke
on Zen koan practice; Pali scholar G.P. Malalasekera and Theravada
Buddhist monks Pannananda and Dharmawara; and the Zen master Asahina
Sogen. As the Academy found its place in the community, local
connections

The Boom and Beyond

45

were made with Chinese and Japanese Buddhists. Through the Academy, the
Zen Master Shunryu Suzuki came to understand the need for a Western Zen
institution, later creating the San Francisco Zen Center. Watts himself
spoke and gave workshops up and down the West Coast, and began a
relationship with the Berkeley radio station KPFA, the first community
funded station in the United States, broadcasting regularly, and
appearing as well on the educational television station KQED. He was
stirring what was fermenting, and that would soon distill itself as a
kind of renaissance. The core of the Beat writers coalesced for a moment
in 1956 in San Francisco, and Jack Kerouac captured it in his novel, The
Dharma Bums (1958). Its central character is the poet and Zen student
Japhy Ryder (Gary Snyder), whom the narrator Ray Smith (Kerouac)
idolizes for his "Zen lunatic" lifestyle, combining Zen discipline and
esthetics with freewheeling sensuality. One scene in the novel recounts
the Six Gallery poetry reading, at which Snyder, Philip Whalen, Michael
McClure, and Philip Lamantia read, and Allen Ginsberg's incantation of
Howl did, indeed, scream for a generation about the agonies of 1950s'
fear and conformity (and fear of conformity). The Dharma Bums, coming
fast on the heels of Kerouac's best selling On the Road (1957), drew a
huge readership of the young and aspiring hip, who saw in Ryder/Snyder a
new template for living, a chance to go beyond the confines of suburban
expectations. This fueled the Zen boom from the popular culture side,
prompting complaints from the Western Zen community of practitioners and
academics about the authenticity of the Beat's Buddhism. Both the
popular and elite outlooks drew a chastening commentary from Watts in
his essay "Beat Zen, Square Zen, and Zen" (1958/1960), as he showed that
their differences arose from the same fundamental background and
impulse: \[T\]he Westerner who is attracted to Zen and who would
understand it deeply must have one indispensable qualification: he must
understand his own culture so thoroughly that he is no longer swayed by
its premises unconsciously. He must really have come to terms with the
Lord God Jehovah and with his Hebrew-Christian conscience so that he can
take it or leave it without fear or rebellion. He must be free of the
itch to justify himself. Lacking this, his Zen will be either "beat" or
"square," either a revolt from the culture and social order or a new
form of stuffiness and respectability. For Zen is above all the
liberation of the mind from conventional thought, and this is something
utterly different from rebellion against convention, on the one hand, or
adapting to foreign conventions, on the other (p. 90).

Watts, already a friend and admirer of Snyder, whom he exempted from his
criticisms due to Snyder's level of Zen scholarship and practice, soon
came to count the rest of the beats as friends, and accepted many of
them as "serious artists and disciplined yogis" (Watts, 1972, p. 358).
He had connections to many seemingly disparate worlds. There were
old-guard spiritual seekers, like expatriate friend Aldous Huxley;
members of the highest circles of art, music, and literature; Asian
meditation teachers from many different traditions and cultures;
psychotherapists of every stripe; and the old-guard bohemians, the
beats, and the students: all of whom, as the 1960s began, would come
together to create a culture into which Watts was not fitted, but built.

46

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

The Revolutionary 1960s The catalyst of the new culture was the
beginning of experimentation with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and
other psychedelic drugs in the 1950s, and the publicity surrounding it.
Aldous Huxley's descriptions of his experiences in The Doors of
Perception (1954) were illuminating, but for Watts, it was about
embodiment --- that his once ascetic and severe "Manichean" friend had
been transformed into a more sensuous and warm man made the promise
real. Watts's own controlled experiments, in which he found his learning
and understanding of the world's mystical traditions and meditative
practices extremely helpful, resulted in powerful experiences, followed
(inevitably) by enthusiastic essays and broadcasts, as well as by a
book, Joyous Cosmology: Adventures in the chemistry of consciousness
(1962). His position as a proponent of the drugs for experienced,
disciplined explorers of consciousness helped fan an interest --- the
more so when Watts coincidentally was given a two-year fellowship at
Harvard just as Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert (later Ram Das) were
beginning their engagement with psychedelics. The spread of psychedelics
beyond the specialists added a key facet to what Roszak (1969) dubbed
the counter culture: "It strikes me as obvious beyond dispute, that the
interests of our college-age and adolescent young in the psychology of
alienation, oriental mysticism, psychedelic drugs, and communitarian
experiments comprise a cultural constellation that radically diverges
from values and assumptions that have been in the mainstream of our
society since at least the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth
century" (Quoted in Furlong, 1986, p. 143). The 1960s, then, mapped
directly to Watts's life's work. Just as the 1950s' Zen boom can be
captured in the Fromm --- Suzuki meeting in Mexico in 1957, the 1960s
can, perhaps, be captured in a meeting --- admittedly much larger ---
the "Human Be-In" in the Polo Field in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco,
in 1967. A procession led by Snyder, Ginsberg, and Watts, among others,
circumambulated the field as in a Hindu or Buddhist rite to open the
day. Tens of thousands found their way there, dressed in colorful
finery, raising banners, dropping acid, listening to the Grateful Dead,
Jefferson Airplane, and Quicksilver Messenger Service, and digging the
mix of the crowd --- Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert, political radical
Jerry Rubin, Zen Master Shunryu Suzuki, and activist/comedian Dick
Gregory suggest the organizers' intention to unify "love and activism."
The Be-In became a model for gatherings around the United States and the
world. The color, light, and promise of the day were captured by Paul
Kantner of Jefferson Airplane in "Won't You Try/Saturday Afternoon"
(Kantner, 1967). The soaring harmonies and instrumental arrangement
convey a fuller experience; but if you can't listen, try to visualize
this stanza: Saturday afternoon, Yellow clouds rising in the noon, acid,
incense and balloons; Saturday afternoon, people dancing everywhere,

The Revolutionary 1960s

47

Loudly shouting "I don't care!" It's a time for growing, and a time for
knowing love ...

And another shift had already begun. At the leading edge of cultural
change, seekers had learned what was to be learned from psychedelic
experience, and were turning toward the practice of meditation. As Watts
(1972) put it in his unique blend of the pontifical and the plain:
"\[W\]hen one has received the message, one hangs up the phone"
(p. 402). Where an infrastructure for teaching and practice of Zen
Buddhism already existed, such as in San Francisco, seekers turned in
that direction, following Watts and Snyder. Another infrastructure had
also been building, since 1959, using a mass marketing model to
encompass much of the Western world: The Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's
Transcendental Meditation (TM). This was an adaptation of Hindu mantra
meditation for Western practitioners, in which the meditator brought the
mind to a single pointed focus by repeating a word or phrase --- in TM,
the mantra was secret, potently exotic, and specially chosen for the
meditator (Mahesh Yogi, 1968; Johnston, 1988). The Beatles, among many
other celebrities, discovered (or were "recruited" into) TM in 1967,
bringing it to prominence on the world stage. The connection seemed
direct. Perhaps the psychedelic experience linked more directly to Hindu
meditation than Zen, as well. Watts (1972) describes this from his own
experience: "... LSD had brought me into an undeniably mystical state of
consciousness. But oddly, considering my absorption in Zen at the time,
the flavor of these experiences was Hindu rather than Chinese. Somehow
the atmosphere of Hindu mythology slid into them, suggesting at the same
time that Hindu philosophy was a local form of a sort of undercover
wisdom, inconceivably ancient, which everyone knows at the back of his
mind but will not admit" (p. 399). Transcendental Meditation was able
aggressively to take advantage of the publicity available to it. In
1965, there were 350 TM meditators in the United States, and by 1968,
there were 26,000; by 1972, there were 380,000; and by 1976, there were
826,000. (Later Deepak Chopra was able to vault onto the New York Times
bestseller list with appropriated ancient AyurVedic wisdom by asking
each of the TM meditators to buy ten copies of his first book.) The
marketing strategy targeted specific populations, giving the practice
and its benefits a spiritual spin, a political-change spin, or a
pragmatic "self help" spin depending on the target. The pragmatic
approach, designed to reach the middle-class, middle-management heart of
the market, was given impetus through scientific research into TM's
physical and psychological outcomes (e.g., Wallace, 1970; Seeman et al.,
1972), which subsequently captured the attention of the medical
establishment. The result was development of and research on medicalized
versions, such as the Relaxation Response (Benson, 1975) and Clinical
Standardized Meditation (Carrington, 1998). The factors at work here ---
translation into Western language and settings, popular recognition,
adoption within scientific research in powerful institutions, and the
use of sophisticated marketing and public relations techniques ---
represent a model for success in the building of new social movements
(Johnston, 1988).

48

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

On both the substantive and popular levels, then, the market for Eastern
and Eastern-inflected spiritual practices grew steadily. Looking from
1972 back to himself in 1960, Watts provides perspective on this growth:
In my work of interpreting Oriental ways to the West I was pressing a
button in expectation of a buzz, but instead there was an explosion.
Others, of course, were pressing buttons on the same circuit, but I
could not have believed --- even in 1960 --- that \[there would be\] a
national television program on yoga, that numerous colleges would be
giving courses on meditation and Oriental philosophy for undergraduates,
that this country would be supporting thriving Zen monasteries and Hindu
ashrams, that the I Ching would be selling in hundreds of thousands, and
that --- wonder of wonders --- sections of the Episcopal church would be
consulting me about contemplative retreats and the use of mantras in
liturgy (p. 359).

At the turn of the decade of the 1960s, through political dislocations,
waves of immigration, and economic opportunity seeking, new teachers
from many of the Eastern traditions became available to offer
instruction in the West. At the same time, Westerners of the post-World
War II cohort who studied in the East, or with Eastern teachers in the
West, began to find their own approaches and voices for teaching as
well.The 1970s was a time of institution building at an unprecedented
scale, a time in which, for example, Buddhism in America took its
essential shape. Watts only flashed on this; only saw the promised land
from afar. He died in 1973, at age 58, of a heart attack. His health had
been in decline for some time, due to overwork and problems with
alcohol. And in that, his example was again prophetic --- foreshadowing
the revelations in the 1980s of many spiritual teachers' feet of clay.

Paradox The West Went a Long Way to Find What It Left at Home The
injunctions to relieve suffering and to live a more integrated, creative
life by paying attention to what is arising in the present moment and
turning towards discomfort --- mindfulness and acceptance --- are easily
located within the three Abrahamic religions: the ones closest to home.
But the encrustation of tradition and the carelessness of familiarity
hide them quite well. In Judaism, there is the marvelous text from
Ecclesiastes (3:1--8), here in the King James' Version, which may ring
in your ears with the "To everything turn, turn, turn" motion of the
chorus of the song by Pete Seeger. To every thing there is a season, and
a time to every purpose under the heaven: a time to be born, and a time
to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a
time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to
build up; a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
time to dance; a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones
together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; a
time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast
away; a time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak; a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a
time of peace.

There is also the tradition that everything should be blessed. Indeed,
when one hears good news, the blessing traditionally said is "Blessed
are you G-d, Sovereign of the Universe (who is)

The Revolutionary 1960s

49

good and does good." On hearing bad news such as the death of a friend
or relative one says, "Blessed are you G-d, Sovereign of the Universe,
true judge." Such blessings acknowledge G-d as the source of everything,
good or bad (Kravitz, personal communication), or in Buddhist
perspective: "could be good, could be bad." In Christianity, the natural
mode for many is to do for others, to focus outward. This "Letter to a
Christian Lady" from C. G. Jung (who had carved over his fireplace in
Zurich, "summoned or unsummoned, G-d will be there"), which was made
into a text for speaking by Jean Vanier (2005, pp. 63--64), is a
refreshing corrective: I admire Christians, because when you see someone
who is hungry or thirsty, You see Jesus. When you welcome a stranger,
someone who is "strange," you welcome Jesus. When you clothe someone who
is naked, you clothe Jesus. What I do not understand, however, is that
Christians never seem to recognize Jesus in their own poverty. You
always want to do good to the poor outside you and at the same time you
deny the poor person living inside you. Why can't you see Jesus in your
own poverty, in your own hunger and thirst? In all that is "strange"
inside you: in the violence and the anguish that are beyond your
control! You are called to welcome all this, not to deny its existence,
but to accept that it is there and to meet Jesus there.

The Christian contemplative teacher Richard Rohr (1999) suggests that,
for him, Jesus' refusal of the drugged wine as he hung on the cross is a
model of the radical acceptance of what is happening in the moment. The
Sufi poet Rumi makes the injunction for mindfulness and acceptance come
alive in "The Guest House" a poem translated by Coleman Barks (1995,
p. 109) that has become a very common teaching text in mindfulness-based
interventions: This being human is a guest house. Every morning a new
arrival. A joy, a depression, a meanness, some momentary awareness comes
as an unexpected visitor. Welcome and entertain them all! Even if they
are a crowd of sorrows, who violently sweep your house empty of its
furniture, still, treat each guest honorably. He may be clearing you out
for some new delight. The dark thought, the shame, the malice. meet them
at the door laughing and invite them in. Be grateful for whatever comes.
because each has been sent as a guide from beyond.

50

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

Growth and Definition of Buddhism in America There was a great variety
of teaching and practice available as the turn away from psychedelic
culture to more disciplined and thoughtful practice began. There was a
range of Eastern and Western teachers in Hindu, Buddhist, Sufi, and the
independent and occult traditions. There were new takes on Western
traditions such as the Jesus People or Jesus Freak manifestation of
Christianity, or the resurgence of interest in the mysticism of Kabbalah
in Judaism. Yet, in tracing the discourse of mindfulness, by far the
most influential tradition was Buddhism. This turn-of-the-decade moment
is a fruitful place to focus, as all of the elements at play today come
into view. This was a time of growth. For example, the San Francisco Zen
Center (SFZC), which had been started for Western students under the
teaching of Shunryu Suzuki Roshi in 1961, expanded in 1967 to include a
country retreat center at Tassajara Hot Springs, for which more than a
thousand people had contributed money; and by 1969, SFZC had moved to
larger quarters in the city and had established a series of satellite
locations. The Zen presence in the United States was the most well
established, while Tibetan and Theravada-derived teaching and practice
infrastructures were in early developmental stages. It is these three
traditions, generalized, that represent the shape that Buddhism in
America has taken. The discourse of mindfulness draws from all, so
understanding them as a group, and individually, will be helpful. The
task of characterizing and defining something that could be called
"American Buddhism" is an enormous task, as it requires the parsing of,
at minimum, two phenomena under that title. Prebish (1999) suggests that
two divisions called Asian Immigrant Buddhism and American Convert
Buddhism can be informative: noting, however, that there is considerable
disagreement among researchers about how and if such distinctions can be
made. For our purposes, it might reasonably be said that the former
group is more interested in preserving religious and community
traditions, while the latter is more interested in transforming
religious traditions for an elite population. That American convert
Buddhism is the preserve of an elite is indisputable, and is an
extremely important factor in the development of the discourse of
mindfulness that we are pursuing. The group is highly educated,
economically advantaged, politically and socially liberal, and
overwhelmingly of European descent. This was as true of the crowd at the
World Parliament of Religions in 1893 as it was of the students and
intellectuals who made the shift from psychedelic experience to
­meditative experience, or as it is now of the medical, mental
healthcare, and other professionals exploring the roots of mindfulness.
Indeed, there is a continuity not just of types but of persons (Coleman,
2001; Nattier, 1998). The signal characteristic of the American converts
is a focus on meditation, almost to the exclusion of other forms of
Buddhist practice and expression (Prebish, 1999). It is not surprising,
then, that the expressions of world Buddhism they have "imported" for
their use (as Nattier, 1998, would characterize it) are the
meditationrich Zen, Tibetan, and Theravada-derived traditions. A quick
overview of the development and essential practice of each in the United
States may be of value.

Growth and Definition of Buddhism in America

51

Zen was the first wave and the "boom" of Buddhism in America. In keeping
with the elite nature of American interest, the highly aristocratic
Rinzai sect, represented by Soyen Shaku and D. T. Suzuki, was
influential until the 1960s. Rinzai emphasizes koan practice leading to
satori or kensho --- concentrating on a paradoxical question or story to
heighten intensity and anxiety until a breakthrough occurs. This is
central in the dialogs of D. T. Suzuki, Fromm, and DeMartino, for
example. In the 1960s, however, the more popular Soto Zen sect began to
reach out of the Japanese-American communities to American converts. Two
of the most important figures in this shift, and in the development of
Buddhism in America, are from this community: Shunryu Suzuki and Taizan
Maezumi. Maezumi Roshi founded the Zen Center of Los Angeles in 1967 to
reach Western students. He was in the Harada --- Yasutani lineage, which
includes koan practice and significant intensity and push for
enlightenment. Two Western teachers were also part of this lineage and
began their teaching at this same period: Robert Aitken founded the
Diamond Sangha in Hawaii in 1959, and Philip Kapleau founded the
Rochester Zen Center in 1966. Shunryu Suzuki Roshi of the SFZC was of a
more traditional Soto lineage and presented an approach that must have
clashed with what most of his students would have read or known about
Zen. His focus was not on enlightenment, but on what he presented as the
heart of the matter, just sitting. That is, "Our zazen is just to be
ourselves. We should not expect anything --- just be ourselves and
continue this practice forever" (In Coleman, 2001, p. 71). Zen in its
original Chinese form, Chan, as well as Korean (Son) and Vietnamese
(Thien) arrived much later in the United States. Yet, teachers such as
the Korean Seung Sahn and the Vietnamese Thich Nhat Hahn have had
significant influences on Buddhism in America --- particularly the
genuine witness of "engaged Buddhism" advocate Thich Nhat Hahn, who was
nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by Martin Luther King for his peace
work during the Vietnam War. The foundational teachers mentioned here
have authorized others to carry on their lineage of teaching. These
teachers have often gone on to found their own centers. Some have hewn
closely to their teachers' approaches, while others have continued to
make adaptations to bring Zen to more Americans. To suggest the flavor
of this process, in the Maezumi line, John Daido Loori founded Zen
Mountain Monastery in Mt. Tremper, New York, keeping more towards
traditional monastic training, yet creating a highly advanced
computer-based communications and marketing infrastructure. Bernard
Glassman Roshi, Maezumi's heir, has extended not simply Zen training but
a deeply felt social engagement, from highly successful initiatives to
bring education and employment opportunities to the homeless in Yonkers
to the founding of the Zen Peacemaker Order (Prebish, 1999; Queen,
2002). In Kapleau's line, Toni Packer, who had been his successor in
Rochester, became disillusioned by the traditional hierarchy and
protocols and left that all behind to form an independent center with a
Zen spirit all but devoid of the tradition --- including that of lineage
(Coleman, 2001; McMahan, 2002). If it were possible to characterize
"typical" Zen practice, one might see most of the following (Coleman,
2001; Prebish, 1999) protocols for meeting teachers and entering and
leaving meditation halls, including bowing; chanting, often in the

52

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

original Asian language; ceremonial marking of changes in status,
anniversaries of events, and the like; and a meditative engagement with
manual work around the center. Central to Zen is the sitting practice,
zazen, in which the adherence to correct physical posture is considered
extremely important. Initial instruction may be to count one's breaths
--- say, to ten --- and, when the attention has wandered, to just notice
that this has happened and begin the count again. When capacity for
concentration has grown, one may begin shikantaza, "just sitting" with
full awareness, without directing the mind (Coleman, 2001; Suzuki,
1970). Retreats, or sesshins, are intensely focused on sitting
meditation, with short periods of walking meditation in between;
retreats are rarely longer than seven days. Tibetan teachers began to
leave Tibet in response to the Chinese repression in the 1950s that
killed or drove more than a third of the population into exile.
Buddhism's central role in the culture made teachers and monastics a
major target. While a few scholars had come to the United States in the
1950s --- notably Geshe Wangal, Robert Thurman's first teacher --- it
was not until 1969 that Tibetan teachers reached out seriously to
American students. Tarthang Tulku established the Tibetan Nyingma
Meditation Center in Berkeley. The basic approach was very traditional,
with students asked to undertake hundreds of thousands of prostrations,
vows, and visualizations before receiving meditation instruction.
Tarthang Tulku created the Human Development Training Program to teach
Buddhist psychology and meditation techniques to a professional
healthcare and mental healthcare audience, and create as well the
Nyingma Institute to support Buddhist education and study. In 1971, Kalu
Rinpoche, who had been asked by the Dalai Lama to teach in North
America, came first to Vancouver to start a center, and later created a
center in Woodstock, New York (Coleman, 2001; Seager, 2002). Chogyam
Trungpa, who had escaped from Tibet to India in 1959, came to the West
to study at Oxford University; during the years he spent in the United
Kingdom, he moved away from the traditional monastic teaching role and
eventually gave up his vows. In 1970, as a lay teacher, he came to the
United States, where he had an instant effect. He had arrived after the
"boom," after the beats, but "Beat Zen" described him better than any
Zen master. Allen Ginsberg became a student, and many of the original
beat contingent taught at the Naropa Institute (now Naropa University)
in Boulder, Colorado, which Trungpa founded. The appeal to the
counter-culture was swift and far reaching. In a very short time, he
created a thoroughgoing infrastructure, including a network of practice
centers (now worldwide), and developed a "secular path" called Shambhala
Training, to make the benefits of meditation practice and Buddhist
psychological insights more available. Trungpa's approach to teaching
was not the traditional one, but an amalgam that included much that he
had learned from his Oxford education in comparative religion, as well
as wide-ranging exposure to Western psychology. He not only powerfully
shaped Tibetan Buddhism in the West, but he offered spiritual
perceptions that had a much wider reach --- particularly the idea of
"spiritual materialism," which he defined in this way: "The problem is
that ego can convert anything to its own use, even spirituality. Ego is
constantly

Growth and Definition of Buddhism in America

53

attempting to acquire and apply the teachings of spirituality for its
own benefit" (Trungpa, 1973). Tibetan Buddhist practice in America is
richly varied; characterizing it in a paragraph is a hopeless challenge.
It is the most exotic and sensual of the three traditions under
consideration. The iconography and rituals are complex; the teachers are
often Tibetan, rather than Westerners as is common in the other
traditions. There is considerable emphasis on textual study. The ritual
relationship of student to teacher is hierarchical and devotional. Many
of the difficult issues of "belief" that are subdued in the other
traditions are right at the surface in Tibetan doctrine and practice ---
karma, rebirth, realms of supernatural beings. And the practices
themselves are guarded, only revealed by initiation, face to face with
an authorized teacher. Vajryana or Tantric practice, roughly conceived,
includes visualization by the meditator of him/herself with the
attributes of a particular enlightened being. Less traditional teachers
work differently; Trungpa began his students with sitting meditation
much like that of his friend Shunryu Suzuki. The dzogchen teachers have
an approach that seems easily accessible to Western students, a formless
meditation akin to shikantaza in Zen. Within the tradition, this is
considered a high teaching, available only after years of preparation.
In the West, however, it is offered differently. Lama Surya Das, a
Westerner, explains: "... one surprise is that people are a lot more
prepared than one thinks. Westerners are sophisticated psychologically,
but illiterate nomads (as in Tibet) are not" (In Coleman, 2001, p. 109).
Retreats in the Tibetan tradition may be adapted for Americans as day
long or weeks long, or more traditional lengths such as three months or
three years. Vipassana meditation is the latest tradition to flower in
North America. It is drawn from Theravada Buddhist practice, the
tradition most directly connected to the historical Buddha, and perhaps
the most conservative. Theravada was an early and profound influence on
the development of Buddhism in the United Kingdom and Europe, dating
back to the nineteenth century, through colonial connections. In the
United States, the connection came much later, in the Buddhist Vihara
Society of Washington, DC, founded in 1966, with teachers Dickwela
Piyananda and Henepola Gunaratana; and also as young Americans in the
Peace Corps or traveling in Southern Asia in the 1960s came into contact
with Theravada teachers, such as Mahasi Sayadaw, S. N. Goenka, and U Ba
Khin. The influential Vipassana or Insight movement in the United States
can be said to begin when two of those young Americans, Joseph Goldstein
and Jack Kornfield, came together to teach Vipassana at Chogyam
Trungpa's request at Naropa Institute in 1974. Their connection, which
also included Goldstein's friend Sharon Salzberg, another of the
travelers to become a teacher, deepened. In 1975, under their
leadership, the Insight Meditation Society (IMS) was founded in rural
Barre, Massachusetts. IMS grew quickly into a major retreat center as
the Insight approach found broad appeal. In 1984, Jack Kornfield left
IMS for California to found Spirit Rock Meditation Center, which quickly
became a second wing in American Vipassana practice (Coleman, 2001;
Fronsdal, 2002; Prebish, 1999). The Insight movement is the most
egalitarian and least historically conditioned of the three traditions
under consideration. Ritual, ceremony, and hierarchy are

54

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

deemphasized, and meditation is of central importance. In contrast to
zen orderliness and Tibetan richness, there is ordinariness and a very
American democratic, individualistic atmosphere. Students and teachers
alike wear casual clothes and are known by first names. Teachers are
less authority figures than "spiritual friends," and language is more
psychological than specifically Buddhist. Vipassana is highly
psychologized; in fact, many, if not a majority, of Vipassana teachers
in the Insight movement are trained psychotherapists. Meditation
practice commonly includes two forms, concentration on the breath, and
open awareness (insight) of whatever is arising in the moment. Practices
for cultivating loving kindness, as well as compassion, sympathetic joy,
and equanimity, are also a part of training. Retreats are commonly 10
days in length, with long days of intense practice in silence. A typical
schedule would find retreatants rising at five in the morning and moving
through periods of sitting and walking (walking periods are as long as
sitting periods, in contrast to the short breaks in Zen) with breaks for
meals, until ten in the evening (Coleman, 2001; Fronsdal, 2002; Prebish,
1999). Perhaps most important for the discourse of mindfulness is not
the differences in these three traditions, but rather the essential
similarities. Batchelor (1994) neatly summarizes: The distinctive goal
of any Buddhist contemplative tradition is a state in which inner calm
(samatha) is unified with insight (vipassana). Over the centuries, each
tradition has developed its own methods for actualizing this state. And
it is in these methods that the traditions differ, not in their end
objective of unified calm and insight.

Passage to Maturity If the 1960s and 1970s were the period of foundation
and growth, the 1980s and 1990s could be seen as the painful passage to
maturity. In the many Buddhist centers around the United States, large
but intimate communities had grown up, often with charismatic leaders.
In most instances, the sharp discipline of Asian monastic practice, with
celibacy and renunciation at its core, had been replaced by more casual,
worldly, "extended family" types of community. As Suzuki Roshi told
SFZC, and Downing (2001) construed as a warning, "You are not monks, and
you are not lay people" (p. 70). There was no map, as communities sought
ways forward. Perhaps the scandals around sexuality, alcohol, finances,
and power that began to plague these institutions could not have been
avoided, and were necessary in catalyzing change. By 1988, Jack
Kornfield could write, "Already upheavals over teacher behavior and
abuse have occurred at dozens (if not the majority) of the major
Buddhist and Hindu centers in America" (In Bell, 2002). None of the
three traditions was spared. A précis of a scandal from each will help
illustrate the commonality of the problems, and the importance of their
aftermaths and resolutions. At the San Francisco Zen Center, Suzuki
Roshi appointed Richard Baker his successor, not just as abbot but as
principal authority over the entire enterprise, which included
associated meditation centers and successful businesses such as

Passage to Maturity

55

Tassajara Bakery and Greens restaurant. Following Suzuki's death in
1971, Baker held a tight rein over the institution, with little input
from board members or other authorized teachers. In 1983, the board
called a meeting, and the outcome was Baker taking a leave of absence.
This was precipitated by an incident in which it became obvious that
Baker, married himself, was having a sexual relationship with a married
female student --- indeed, the wife of a friend and benefactor. This was
not an unprecedented situation; Baker had a considerable history of
infidelities with students. There was more: in a community where the
residents willingly worked long hours for low wages, Baker spent more
than \$200,000 in a year, drove a BMW, and had his personal spaces
impeccably furnished with antiques and artwork. Further, Baker had
surrounded himself with an inner circle of "courtiers" and failed to
treat other senior members who had been ordained by Suzuki Roshi as
valued peers. The most painful thing for the community was Baker's
reaction: he did not comprehend that he had done anything wrong. More
than 10 years after "the apocalypse" as it came to be known, he stated,
"It is as hard to say what I have learned as it is to say what happened"
(In Bell, 2002, p. 236; Downing, 2001). In Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche's
organization, teachers and students alike flaunted their disregard of
contemporary Western mores. Trungpa's sexual liaisons with female
students, his heavy drinking, and his aggressive outbursts were well
known, generally accepted within the community, and considered as part
of his teaching tradition. He was both open and unapologetic about his
behavior, helping to avoid scandal (Bell, 2002; Clark, 1980; Coleman,
2001; Hayward, 2008; Mukpo, 2006). In planning the future of the
organization, Trungpa named as his heir Osel Tendzin, an American, who
was not a universally popular choice. When Trungpa died in 1987, Tendzin
became what amounted to supreme ruler of the enterprise, holding
untouchable spiritual and executive power (Coleman, 2001; Sanders,
1977). In 1988, after a period of silence and disagreement, members of
the board revealed to the community that Tendzin was HIV positive, and
that although he had been aware of his condition had continued to have
unprotected sex with male and female members. At the urging of the
board, senior members of the organization, and a revered Tibetan
teacher, Tendzin went into retreat, and died soon thereafter (Bell,
2002; Coleman, 2001). It is interesting to note Tendzin's vagueness and
selfdelusion, perhaps reminiscent of Baker's. Tendzin stated, "I was
fooling myself.... Thinking I had some extraordinary means of protection
I went ahead with my business as if something would take care of it for
me" (Fields, 1991, quoted in Coleman, 2001, p. 170). Asked how it
happened, Tendzin replied, "It happened....I don't expect anybody to try
to conceive it" (Fields, 1991, p. 47). At the end of an Insight
Meditation Society retreat taught by an Asian Theravada teacher,
Anagarika Munindra, a woman came forward to say that she had had sex
with the teacher during the retreat. The woman had been psychologically
troubled, and this had traumatized her further. The IMS guiding teachers
were divided as to how to handle the situation --- how much to reveal
publicly, and how to deal with Munindra, who had returned to India.
Kornfield pushed for complete disclosure and an immediate confronting of
Munindra. As he put it, "If parts of one's life are quite unexamined ---
which was true for all of us --- and something like this comes up about
a revered teacher, it throws

56

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

everything you've been doing for years into doubt. It's threatening to
the whole scene" (In Schwartz, 1995, p. 334). Eventually, Kornfield was
sent by the board to India to speak directly with Munindra, who agreed
to apologize to the community. In the aftermath and resolution of all of
these incidents, American Buddhism lost its idealized self-image and
came to the maturity it carries now. In this process, common themes and
practices arose. Leadership power moved away from the charismatic
models, and was rationalized and distributed more widely, with checks
and balances, and boards accountable for oversight. Ethics were
addressed formally with statements and policies. The model of
teacher-student interaction was scrutinized, and methods for diluting
intensity were developed and instituted, as possible. Of course, this
remains the most difficult of all relationships to manage, as meditation
training carries the teacher-student dyad into areas of intimacy and
power differential analogous to those in psychotherapy.

A Universalizing and Secularizing Discourse The historical narrative we
have presented here captures much of the discourse up to the beginnings
of the mindfulness-based interventions as described in Chapter 1. It
remains now to draw together the overriding themes and to suggest
directions forward. The first theme is the need for an expanded
vocabulary of words, images, and ideas with which to express tacit
experience. As we have more and more shared language --- verbal or
nonverbal --- the possibilities for teaching expand. The second theme is
the drive for a universalizing of the experiences and the language
surrounding them. This may emerge as explicitly spiritual language, as
with Emerson or D. T. Suzuki, or in more secular language, as in the
mindfulness-based interventions. The third theme, more specific, is the
discovery/rediscovery of the principle of turning towards suffering and
taking on an attitude of nonjudgment alloyed with kindness. This is a
universal insight that is both spiritual and psychological in nature. As
the verbal and nonverbal discourse of mindfulness continues to expand,
universalize, and secularize, the potential for teaching will continue
to expand as well. But this is only possible if a fourth theme is
considered: the fact that this discourse is predominantly a product of
an elite social group, with significant socioeconomic advantages and a
level of education that is "right off the charts" (Coleman, 2001,
p. 193). As professionals and members of an elite, we teach from our own
experience, and give voice to it in language that may reflect our own
elite position and exclude others. Therefore, we must continually be
sensitive to, and learn from, the language of our clients, patients, and
students. One window into the possibilities of expanding discourse is
suggested in the work of the postmodern theologian Don Cupitt (1999),
who undertook an exercise in "ordinary language" theology. He collected
and analyzed more than 150 idiomatic expressions in English that use the
term life. His hypothesis was that these idioms have arisen to reflect
the overall population's reaction to the shifts in religion or

A Universalizing and Secularizing Discourse

57

spirituality from the mid-nineteenth century onward --- the era of the
development of the East-West discourse under consideration. He suggests
that for a great many people, life has become the privileged religious
object. Consider, for example, the switch since the mid-twentieth
century from funerals oriented towards the deceased's place in the
hereafter to a "celebration of the life of" the deceased. It might be
said of the deceased that "she loved life." Phrases like "the sanctity
of life," "the value of life," and "the quality of life" have become
current since the 1950s; in fact, in healthcare, there are scales to
measure "quality of life." And then there is the imperative phrase "get
a life!" that became so popular in the 1990s: What are its implications
as a religious phrase? The usual rhetoric about religion in contemporary
Western culture is that it has been secularized. Cupitt suggests just
the reverse, that ordinary life has been sacralized. We can trace the
roots of this shift back again to mid-nineteenth century. Thoreau
recorded this new attitude in Walden, as he went to the woods to "live
deliberately," as he puts it. Says Cupitt (1999): It is clear
straightaway that Thoreau is not going to live in the wilderness for any
of the Old World's traditional reasons. He's not going into the desert
like Elijah or Muhammad to listen out for the voice of God; he's not
going like Jesus or Anthony to be tempted of the devil; and he's not
going, like Wittgenstein or Kerouac, in order to seek relief for his own
troubled psychology. He's going to try to find out for himself what it
is to be a human being with a life to live ... (p. 21).

This attitude is of considerable importance in the discourse of the
mindfulnessbased interventions. In MBSR, for example, a poem such as
Mary Oliver's "The Summer Day," with the last lines "Tell me, what is it
you plan to do/With your one wild and precious life?" dropped into the
silence of a class creates a sacred space and a sacred pause for
reflection. It is secular liturgy. It is the work of teaching mindfulnes
as a professional. Another window into the further possibilities of the
discourse of the mindfulness-based interventions is suggested by the
sociologist of religion Robert Wuthnow. In After Heaven: Spirituality in
America since the 1950s (1998), he maps out three approaches to
spirituality that may suggest language, images, metaphors, and
assumptions that will promote connection of contemporary Americans to
mindfulness practice. The approaches he names follow the arc of the
narrative of this chapter: the traditional spirituality of dwelling, the
contemporary spirituality of seeking, and the emerging spirituality of
practice. Dwelling spirituality dominates in settled times in history,
when it is possible to create stable institutions and communities, when
sacred spaces for worship can be inhabited. The metaphor of this
spirituality is a place. In the narrative we have been following, the
hundred years from mid-nineteenth to mid-twentieth century were dwelling
times. In America, the overwhelming majority of the population is
identified with Jewish or Christian tradition. Towns were small, church
buildings and synagogues were central, and one --- and one's entire
family --- simply belonged. Lives were spent from infancy to funeral
within a community, a place. The few at the end of the nineteenth
century who saw and felt the withdrawal of the tide of the sea of faith
--- the first Buddhists --- were anomalous harbingers.

58

2 A History Exercise to Locate "Mindfulness" Now

Seeking spirituality dominates in unsettled times, when meaning must be
negotiated, and all that is on offer may be explored. Wuthnow notes that
a major shift was beginning in the America of 1950s, as the culture
became more fluid, complex, and threatening to individual identities.
The opening to new possibilities from the East and from the culture of
recovery and self-help brought new products and ­perspectives into the
spiritual marketplace. The seeking of the 1960s and 1970s was pervasive,
and continues today, as the market becomes more fragmented and the
culture more unstable The metaphor for seeking spirituality is a
journey. Practice spirituality is the new bright edge in the culture. In
a profound way, it integrates both dwelling and seeking. It requires
setting aside a sacred space/time for the practice, yet that space/time
is potentially fluid. Further, practice spirituality begins to reconcile
or mediate the split between dwelling and seeking. Practice encourages
both discipline and wide-ranging exploration, and can be undertaken
within the shelter of an organization and community or pursued
independently. There is not a metaphor for practice, but rather an
impulse and attitude to "live deliberately," as Thoreau and Cupitt
suggest. It is here, now, in this emerging moment, with a democratic and
ethical view of spiritual teacher-student relations, a secular
spirituality of life, and a drive for the paradoxical fluidity and
stability of spiritual practice that the mindfulness-based interventions
are growing and evolving. With one hundred and fifty years of evolving
discourse behind and within, it may now be possible to define what
mindfulness is --- at least for us.

Chapter 3

Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

In the preceding chapters, we have described both the broader discourse
of the meditative and contemplative traditions and the specific
discourse of the mindfulnessbased interventions (MBIs). In the long
journey from the nineteenth century Romantic and Transcendentalist
discoveries of Asian religious texts and practices to the current
flowering of the empirically supported MBIs, a variety of streams of
this discourse have been active. At times, one stream has predominated;
at other times another has drawn the most attention and found the most
utility. Particularly over the past 60 years or so, such shifts in the
discourse have reflected or led the spirit of the times, as we have
shown. In the 1950s, a highly intellectual and theoretical form of Zen
Buddhism --- emphasizing paradox and a sudden overturning of ordinary
consciousness --- helped to shape esthetic, spiritual, and
psychotherapeutic contributions to U.S. culture. The psychotherapeutic
manifestation of this trend was reflected in the evolution and expansion
of the Humanistic and Existential therapies. In the 1960s, the discourse
shifted to greater affectivity --- emphasizing ecstatic experiences ---
with an emphasis on spiritual practice and the place of the guru,
reflected in a growth of interest in Hindu and Tibetan Buddhist
traditions. The most salient therapeutic expressions of that time were,
perhaps, the efflorescence of experiential therapies and the adaptation
of mantra meditation for use in medical settings. Most recently, the
predominating discourse is of a more democratic, more psychologically
and therapeutically focused version of Theravada Buddhism, with
vipassana --- insight --- meditation practice at its core. This
phenomenon, by distancing itself from many traditional Asian Buddhist
features, such as hierarchies of ordained male teachers, elaborate
rituals, exclusive vows, esoteric vocabularies, and presumptions about
specific beliefs and worldviews, has helped to make mindfulness practice
accessible to a broader population than ever before. Its fit with the
culture in the United States and other Western countries has been
easier, and its acceptance, perhaps, quicker. Adding to this ease and
speed has been the willingness of many highly educated practitioners,
well placed within the academy and the professions, to submit
mindfulness practice and its expected outcomes to the rigors of research
and analysis within the modern, scientific paradigm. The result has been
the careful development, enthusiastic adoption, and rapid expansion of
the MBIs in medicine and psychotherapy described in Chapter 1. D. McCown
et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians and
Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_3, © Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC 2010

59

60

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Given such historical shifts in the dominance of the streams of
discourse and the fact that now many streams are flowing concurrently,
the task of developing a working definition of mindfulness is
challenging. And the first challenge is philosophical. We must be as
clear as we can about how we are speaking about mindfulness and the
location from which we are speaking. It will be helpful, therefore, to
become more technical and critical in approaching the discourses of
mindfulness. The Trouble with Discourses Previous chapters have used the
term "discourse" in its nontechnical, dictionary denotation of a "formal
and orderly expression of ideas" and a "conversation." With the task of
defining mindfulness before us now, it will be helpful to apply some of
the more technical insights and uses of discourse within cultural and
critical theory, and literary theory. The objective here is not to
isolate or criticize particular discourses; rather, it is to enrich the
resources of the pedagogy of mindfulness by bringing seemingly disparate
­discourses together. In cultural and critical theory, the term discourse
is perhaps most commonly associated with Michel Foucault. His work
identifies sociocultural mechanisms by which discourses are formed and
controlled. The major procedure in forming a discourse is exclusion, by
making certain subjects taboo, dividing rational from irrational, and
willing towards a truth. Discourses are then controlled from inside
through generations of commentary on preferred texts, and through the
maintenance of specific disciplines (say, medicine or psychology) with
rules, definitions, techniques, and instruments that boundary out other
ways of knowing and speaking and effectively close down alternatives
(Foucault, 1972, 1981; Mills, 1997). In literary theory, the work of
Mikhail Bakhtin suggests that competing discourses can be used for
profound exploration. Bakhtin (1984) found in Dostoevsky's highly
complex novels characters whose differing voices or discourses are
independent consciousnesses: "In Dostoevsky's polyphonic novel we are
dealing not with ordinary dialogic form, that is, with an unfolding of
material within the framework of its own monologic understanding and
against the firm background of a unified world of objects. No, here we
are dealing with an ultimate dialogicality, that is, a dialogicality of
the ultimate whole." This principle of polyphony, of polyvocal dialog,
is a model for collaborative practice when discourses are separated and
competing. Differing discourses can enter into dialog --- not to bring
about resolution but to explore options and generate possibilities
(e.g., Gergen, 1999). The suggestion, then, is that in teaching
mindfulness as a professional, you must be aware of the discourse in
which you are embedded. It may be a ­difficult --- even painful ---
process to bring those boundaries and assumptions into consciousness;
yet, there is an ultimate value. By understanding where you are located,
in the moment, you become free to meet others where they are --- to
explore the polyphonic possibilities of the pedagogy of mindfulness in
working with the infinite variety of potential participants, patients,
or clients. That is the suggestion of this chapter, in which a range of
definitions of mindfulness from various discourses is presented. When
you encounter a definition, you can fully appreciate it within its
discourse. More important, you can appreci-

3

Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

61

ate the variety of definitions and the possibilities for connections,
corrections, and ­reflections between them. It is not necessary to choose
one or to synthesize one from many. Rather, you can allow your teaching
to be enriched by all of them. You can allow them to come into dialog,
to create a rich polyphony, and to help generate as many "working"
definitions as there are teachable moments.

Dominant Voices, Silence, and Mindfulness In any professional
discipline, there are a variety of subgroups, each with their own
discourse. When one subgroup focuses enough institutional, financial,
and personal power in support of their discourse, their language and
practices come to predominate. With a dominant voice, then, comes
greater access to the popular media and to the ears of decision makers
in the public sector. As a result, other subgroups' discourses are
effectively, although perhaps unintentionally, silenced, as suggested by
Foucault (1972, 1981). This is a process with ideological and political
implications and impact, as is clearly evident in the shifts of
discourse around meditative and contemplative practice in medicine and
mental healthcare over the last 60 or so years. Early domination by
psychoanalysis was followed by the humanistic psychotherapies, followed
in turn by the current ascendance of the cognitive-behavioral
approaches. Whoever the dominant voices have been, the process
essentially has been the same, although ideologies and funding sources
involved have differed. As an example, consider the current situation.
Researchers with ideologically acceptable credentials, working within
politically approved institutions, have secured funding from highly
controlled sources in government and the private sector to pursue
research in a way that supports the accepted ideology, towards an end
that is also ideologically acceptable. Thus, empirical research efforts
in clinical trial format aim to support evidence-based treatments for
codified diagnoses and disorders that will prove cost effective for the
affected individuals. (The italics suggest the political and ideological
content of this discourse, such as its scientific, quantitative,
reductionist, free-market-based, individualist assumptions, as well as
some of the content it excludes, for example, postmodern, qualitative,
collaborative, collectivist approaches.). In the MBIs, it is not
uncommon for researchers also to be teachers, as is true for us. There
is enormous tension between the almost inexorable drive of the discourse
of research to exclude and dominate and the indispensable permissiveness
of the discourse of teaching to include and empower. In attempting to
work with this duality, this paradox, there are times in which the wise
choice is to close down for the sake of research, and others, when heart
and mind demand to open for the most healing teaching. The crucial
question, as always, is "What is this moment asking of me?" The answer
can only come through experience of the precision and kindness of
mindfulness, or from making "mistakes" and learning from them.

62

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Making Choices for "Working" Definitions In selecting specific language
and concepts to help generate "working" definitions of mindfulness, we
have knowingly made three decisions that impose limits on this
presentation. Our hope is that these decisions simultaneously make this
presentation wieldy enough for developing a practical pedagogy and offer
access to a rich polyphony of discourse. These decisions are pragmatic
and admittedly idiosyncratic. They come from our own experiences and
reflections as teachers and researchers. What matters for us is that
this polyvocal presentation works for us in the thick of the action (or
stillness!) in the group or dyad. Certainly, we also unknowingly have
made decisions that impose their own limits. What is here is here for
the moment; we know it will change through ongoing practice and
encounters with others. We invite you into dialog, to edit, expand, and
critique what you see --- and what you don't see. The first decision
reflects our emphasis on the trouble with words and discourses. We have
chosen to adopt a social constructionist perspective (e.g., Gergen,
1999), in which we accept that knowledge is not an "objective"
reflection of what is "out there in the world" but rather is co-created
within relationships. There is no "true" definition of mindfulness ---
they are all "working" definitions, shaped by the assumptions, aims, and
strategies of those at work in the moment. This is the case inside the
professions, say, as the MBIs attempt to define and operationalize
mindfulness for research purposes. More important for us, this is the
case within each group or dyad; teacher and participants will hold many
different "working" definitions throughout their time together, moving
from basic shared language to highly nuanced tacit understandings
co-constructed in practice and dialog. The second decision is to
privilege secular language, while allowing the religious and spiritual
dimensions of experience to have their essential influence. Given its
centrality in the MBIs, the Buddhist discourse is presented here, yet
professionals teaching mindfulness are encouraged to hold doctrinal
concepts and structures lightly. Such lightness is perhaps cultivated by
noticing the congruence of Buddhist thought with that of other spiritual
traditions, so that the diversity of available concepts and terms
suggests the ultimate utility of ordinary language. As the teacher and
participants struggle to bring their experiences into ordinary language,
the underlying topography of the spiritual can be revealed in a way that
opens possibilities for learning and sharing for everyone involved. As
noted in Chapter 2, the privileged religious object can be seen as life
(Cupitt, 1999). And in its broadest form spirituality can be seen as "an
individual's struggle to come to terms with his or her humanity"
(Isanon, 2001). The third decision is to promote the productive
coexistence of the proven and the proposed. The MBIs are opening new
territory inside and across professional disciplines and their
discourses. Empirical evidence may not be strong; theories may be
speculative. Yet, for teachers (and researchers) there is much that is
exciting --- and worth rubbing on the touchstone of direct experience to
see if it is indeed gold, to paraphrase the Buddha. What we present here
has been rubbed already, in our work with groups and dyads. Speculative
or not, it has been helpful in our teaching. And, as we have said, we
know that both our understanding of mindfulness and our approach to
teaching will continue to grow and change.

Making Choices for "Working" Definitions

63

Paradox The Definition Dilemma: What's Helped the MBIs Expand May Result
in Unintended Limits There is an effort underway within the discourse of
the MBIs to develop a single, scientific account of mindfulness for
researchers and clinicians. The undertaking is difficult and complex, as
many researchers admit (Allen et al., 2006; Baer, 2003; Bishop et al.,
2004; Brody and Park, 2004; Brown and Ryan, 2004; Claxton, 2006;
Grossman, 2008; Hayes and Feldman, 2004; Hayes and Shenk, 2004; Hayes
and Wilson, 2003; Ivanovski and Malhi, 2007; Rothwell, 2006; Shapiro et
al., 2006). The difficulty may arise from efforts to fit mindfulness
into the Western biomedical paradigm as a "complementary/alternative"
therapeutic modality. These attempts never work well, as the paradigm of
the alternatives is broader than that of biomedicine. The specific
reasons given for this difficulty include (1) the use of identical terms
in significantly different outlooks and discourses, from Buddhist texts
and their English translations in a variety of traditions, to humanistic
psychotherapy, to scientific psychology, as well as differences in
subjective descriptions by more, less, and differently practiced
individuals (e.g., Dryden and Still, 2006; Grossman, 2008); (2) a basic
confusion as to whether mindfulness is a practice, a process, an
outcome, a transient state to be exploited, a way of life to be
cultivated, or, indeed, even a single construct (e.g., Grossman, 2008;
Hayes and Wilson, 2003); and (3) the group contexts and inclusion of
disparate didactic and experiential components in MBIs, which provide
many competing mechanisms of action (e.g., Bishop, 2002; Ivanovski and
Malhi, 2007; Shapiro et al., 2006). Of course, from outside the effort
towards definition, all of these issues or problems may also be seen as
resources that enrich the language and perspectives of teachers and
participants, broadening understanding of direct experience in the
moment. The tension inherent in definition-building is illustrated in
the effort by Baer et al. (2006) to distil individual "facets" of
mindfulness. Their program was to synthesize the hodgepodge of
self-report instruments independently developed within the scientific
discourse of MBI researchers. Through forms of analysis acceptable to
scientific discourse, they isolated certain facets that were judged to
be common and important. The five most salient facets --- observing,
describing, acting with awareness, nonjudging of inner experience, and
nonreactivity to inner experience --- were then proposed as a superior
parsing of the facets of mindfulness. The terms of such a de facto
definition, when installed in instruments and research methods, can
guide and shape what researchers talk about when they talk about
mindfulness. Clearly, there is a powerful pragmatic drive towards this
kind of definition within the MBI research community. Such work can help
to generate a consensus on usable terms and concepts, and to further the
empirical research enterprise. From outside the community, however, such
an undertaking and the resulting definition can be seen as
self-referential, reductionist, and dismissive of other communities of
interest, their languages and perspectives, and their potential
contributions to the ultimate clinical aim of reducing suffering. Left
uncriticized, the research drive to define, operationalize, and measure
mindfulness has the potential ultimately to limit and direct the
language and pedagogical practice of professionals teaching mindfulness
in the MBIs. This problem is parallel in the general problems inherent
with trying to fit "alternative therapeutics," into the biomedical
paradigm.

64

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Defining Mindfulness in MBSR The most commonly quoted definitions of
mindfulness in the MBI literature come, not surprisingly, from Jon
Kabat-Zinn: • "...paying attention in a particular way: on purpose, in
the present moment, and non-judgmentally" (1994, p. 4). • "Mindfulness
meditation is a consciousness discipline revolving around a particular
way of paying attention in one's life. It can be most simply described
as the intentional cultivation of nonjudgmental moment-to-moment
awareness" (1996). Three key elements of the definition ---
intentionality, present-centeredness, absence of judgment --- are
repeated and reinforced both in the ongoing scientificresearch-oriented
discussions of MBSR, and through MBSR teachers in hundreds of classes
unfolding week by week around the world. These three key elements
continue to shape the thinking, practice, and experience of an
ever-changing and expanding MBI community. It is telling that the first
attempt at developing an operational definition of mindfulness took
place within the greater community of the many mindfulness-based and
mindfulness-informed interventions, in which other ad hoc definitions
are also current. The result was a two-part definition that omitted the
element of intention (Bishop et al., 2004). A "second generation" model
uses the above-quoted KabatZinn texts as a touchstone (Shapiro et al.,
2006). This model, shown graphically in Fig. 3.1, posits three axioms:
intention, attention, and attitude (IAA), which are simultaneously
manifesting elements of the moment-to-moment practice of mindfulness,
whether formal or informal. Each axiom captures a part of the direct
experience of a participant. As to the axiom of intention, Shapiro, et
al., note that a personal vision or motivation for initiating
mindfulness practice is not explicit in the "secular" construct of MBSR
in the same way that it is found in its religious corollaries. The
vision of each participant, then, is "personal" and has been shown to
shift along a continuum "from self-regulation, to self-exploration, and
finally to Model of Mindfulness Attention

Intention

Attitude

Fig. 3.1 The three axioms of intention, attention, and attitude (IAA)
are not sequential, but rather are engaged simultaneously in the process
of mindfulness (Shapiro et al., 2006).

Defining Mindfulness in MBSR

65

self-liberation" (Shapiro et al., 2006). As to the axiom of attention,
this captures the different capacities involved in attending to one's
moment-to-moment experience. Shapiro et al. (2006) suggest that the
essential capacities are sustained focus and flexibility of focus. These
are cultivated explicitly in the MBIs through formal mindfulness
practices that are introduced in a sequence that emphasizes the capacity
to focus first and then opens to emphasize flexibility. As to the axiom
of attitude, the nonjudgment that is called for is not an affect-free
"bare awareness," but rather an accepting, open, and kind curiosity
towards one's own experience (Shapiro et al., 2006) (Fig. 3.1). In the
descriptions of outcomes of mindfulness practice both inside and outside
the discourse of the MBIs, a major emphasis is placed on a particular
shift in the practitioner's relationship to self and experience --- the
awareness of an observing consciousness that is both a part of and apart
from the experience. In MBSR classes, in the authors' experiences, such
realization may be typically revealed in expressions by participants
along the lines of, "I am not my thoughts," or "I am not this pain." In
many scientific accounts across the different investigating disciplines
and the different discourses of meditation and mindfulness, this shift
has been identified as a central mechanism. McCown (2004) reviewed early
studies, pointing out that Deikman (1966) suggested a mechanism of
"de-automatization of the psychological structures that organize, limit,
select and interpret perceptual stimuli;" Linden (1973) and Pelletier
(1974) noted the increased field independence of practiced meditators,
evidenced by their ability to discern the hidden shapes in Embedded
Figures Tests; and, in pioneering EEG studies, Kasamatsu and Hirai
(1973) noted a de-habituation to stimuli in Zen Masters that they
described as "constant refreshing of perception of the moment." Martin
(1997), reviewing later concepts, notes Deikman's later observing self
(1982); and Safran and Segal's (1990) contribution of such terms as
deautomization, in which habitual modes of perception are suspended, and
decentering, in which a capacity to view experience from "outside" is
cultivated. Jon Kabat-Zinn (2005) uses the phrase "orthogonal rotation
in consciousness" to describe this shift: "...a rotation in
consciousness into another 'dimension' orthogonal to conventional
reality," in which the conventional and new "dimensions" co-exist, and
"everything old looks different because it is now being seen in a new
light --- an awareness that is no longer confined by the conventional
dimensionality and mindset" (p. 350). Flowing from their MBI-informed
definition of mindfulness, Shapiro et al. (2006) propose a
meta-mechanism that they call reperceiving and define as "a rotation in
consciousness in which what was previously 'subject' becomes 'object.'"
They further suggest that this meta-mechanism is basic to human
­development, and, therefore, that mindfulness practice simply
strengthens and accelerates the growth of this capacity. The statements
quoted above from participants in our MBSR classes illustrate this
capacity to move from a position in which one is completely identified
with one's experience to a position in which the experience becomes
available for observation. It must be noted here that within MBSR
pedagogical practice

66

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

(1) reperceiving does not create distance and disconnection from one's
    experience, but rather enables one to look, feel, and know more
    deeply; (2) importantly, the "observing self" is not reified, but
    rather is seen as a temporary platform for observation and
    questioning. With one's experience thus ­available for reflection and
    inquiry, additional mechanisms may come into play. Shapiro et
    al. (2006) highlight four. One is selfregulation and
    ­self-management, where with reperceiving one can gain knowledge
    about experiences that may previously have been too challenging to
    explore in depth or over time, and one can identify and then choose
    to override habitual Attitude: Nonjudgment as a Pillow reactions and
    respond with more balThe IAA definition is often the first one we
    give to ance and greater skill. Second is values participants. The
    challenging letter of course is the second "A" --- the attitude of
    nonjudgment. It clarification, where reperceiving procan feel cold;
    it can convict one, as in "Oh, I'm vides an opportunity to reflect
    on values judging again! I need to stop that." One way we that may
    have been adopted unqueshave found to emphasize the kindness and
    gentletioningly and to choose to adapt or ness towards oneself and
    one's experience that we adopt values more resonant with our hope
    nonjudgment will help establish is to read a current context. Third
    is cognitive, emovery short story --- one of Arnold Lobel's Mouse
    tional, and behavioral flexibility, where Tales (1972): the
    "objective" viewpoint inherent in The Wishing Well. reperceiving
    allows a clearer view of A mouse once found a wishing well. "Now all
    of my the thoughts, emotions, and ­(anticipated) wishes can come
    true!" she cried. actions of an emergent situation, from She threw a
    penny into the well and made a wish. which may follow new,
    situation-spe"OUCH!" said the wishing well. cific responses. Fourth
    is exposure, The next day the mouse came back to the well. She where
    reperceiving's "objective," nonthrew a penny into the well and made
    a wish. "OUCH!" said the well. reactive character provides the space
    The next day the mouse came back again. She and time for intimate
    encounters with threw a penny into the well. "I wish this well
    formerly disturbing emotions, thoughts, would not say ouch, "she
    said. "OUCH!" said the and body ­sensations, in which their well.
    "That hurts!" capacity for ­disruption is reduced.

So, Where Does One Point the Attention? In MBSR teaching, a connotative
distinction is made between awareness and attention. Awareness is the
flow of "data" from the senses, which include the conceptualizing mind.
Awareness is continuous and expansive --- sight, sound, smell, taste,
touch, naming, planning, emoting. Any given instant would

"What shall I do?" cried the mouse. "My wishes will never come true this
way!" The mouse ran home. She took the pillow from her bed. "This may
help," said the mouse, and she ran back to the well. The mouse threw the
pillow into the well. The she threw a penny into the well and made a
wish. "Ah. That feels much better!" said the well. "Good!" said the
mouse. "Now I can start wishing." After that the mouse made many wishes
by the well. And every one of them came true. And so, with teaching and
dialog around this story, a group or dyad begins to co-create a unique
understanding and experience of mindfulness practice.

Mindfulness in Buddhism

67

be overwhelming. Choice is necessary. You can choose, for example, to
feel the soles of your feet on the floor in this moment, leaving aside
many other possibilities in current awareness. That is an act of
attention. In working with attention within awareness, it is good to
have a map or grid, some way of sharing coordinates. Some teachers at
the University of Massachusetts Medical School's Center for Mindfulness
(UMASS CFM) created such a scheme, called the "triangle of awareness"
--- (1) body sensation, (2) thought, and (3) emotion. With this simple
way of navigating, teachers can more easily guide practice, and
participants can better locate and describe their direct experiences.

Mindfulness in Buddhism As noted in chapter two, the ways that people
have come to understand and practice Buddhism throughout Asia are
amazingly varied. Across the many cultures, different features receive
more or less emphasis: practice and "progress" in practice are
approached and understood from different perspectives, various branches
and schools have elaborated divergent beliefs and rituals, and reform
movements have punctuated tradition with change. All of this complexity
is compounded as Buddhism comes into the West, where our own cultural
conditions --- including religious and philosophical traditions, past
and current scientific paradigms, and even forms of language --- are
re-shaping what we receive from the traditions we have chosen to
welcome. It is clear, then, that making a thumbnail sketch of
mindfulness in Buddhism is a difficult undertaking, which will, however
successful, be only very partial, very "thin." Please read what follows
with the understanding that it is not sufficient background for thinking
one understands the Buddhist discourse of mindfulness adequately for the
purpose of teaching mindfulness in secular settings. That is a life-long
exploration. This is only a beginning. In attempting to create a useful
thumbnail for the very secular work of teaching mindfulness as a
professional, we have leaned on the work of Stephen Batchelor, whose
intellectual enterprise for many years has been an attempt to delineate
an "agnostic" or "atheist" Buddhism for the West --- something of the
practical essence, shorn of the religious, philosophical, and cultural
trappings of the Asian cultures from which it comes to us, and hewing as
closely to the earliest understandings of the historical Buddha's
teachings found in the original sources of the Pali canon. The life of
the Buddha is an ancient story, alive in its mythic and psychic
resonances, and enchanting in its historical reality. A prince,
Siddhattha Gotama, is raised in royal retreat from the pains of the
world. His father ensures that he cannot witness suffering or death. Yet
the prince intuits that there is more to the life of the world than
satisfaction and sensual pleasure. At last, approaching the age of 30,
he comes face to face with reality, in the forms of an old person, a
diseased person, and a corpse. He understands that he too must come to
this. He sees as well a religious ascetic. And knows what he must do.

68

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

On a day of joy, the birth of his son, he leaves the palace to follow
the ascetic disciplines in hope of transcendence. He spends the next six
years wandering. He studies every doctrine and system of thought with
the wisest of teachers. He practices dramatic austerities that leave his
body emaciated and broken. But he comes at last no nearer to the truth
of life that he was seeking. It's up to him, alone. He cleans himself
up, eats a little, and sits down under a fig tree to work it out for
himself. He does: he wakes up; the light goes on. And then he faces a
challenge. How can he explain this to others? In fact, he thinks he may
not bother --- they'll never understand. After 50 days of sifting
through what he realized, he decides that teaching is worth the risk. He
begins by finding his most recent ascetic companions and bringing his
experience into language for them. He speaks of a "middle path" that led
to his awakening, running between his former ways of royal indulgence
and extreme renunciation. And he speaks of what he awoke to as four
truths (de Bary, 1969; Gethin, 1998).

Free Sources for Resources: Access to Insight The important original
texts for this section are available free on the Internet at
accesstonsight.org. Often a number of translations are offered. Reading
the suttas (the Pali term) or sutras (the Sanskrit term) can add to the
appreciation of the discourse of Buddhism in the West. The
Dhammacakkappavatthana Sutta is the Buddha's first "sermon," setting out
the middle way and four ennobling truths. Find it at
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/ tipitaka/sn/sn56/sn56.011.than.html The
Maha-satipatthana Sutta delineates and describes the four foundations of
mindfulness. Find it at
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/dn/dn.22.0.than.html The
Anapanasati Sutta provides detailed instructions in the practice of
mindfulness specifically working with the breath. Find it at
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/ tipitaka/mn/mn.118.than.html The
Brahmavihara Sutta describes the reasons for and benefits of practicing
the four sublime states. Find it at
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an10/ an10.208.than.html

The Four Ennobling Truths After more than 2,500 years, it may be
difficult to hear with any immediacy the Buddha's struggle to bring his
experience into words. Those first pronouncements have become tenets of
belief for hundreds of millions of followers today. They are hallowed
--- or is it hollowed? --- by time. A dip into the history of our
Western discourse, into Dwight Goddard's A Buddhist Bible (1938), which
translates and

Mindfulness in Buddhism

69

formulates the truths in a way that sounds definitive and dogmatic: (1)
the Noble Truth of Suffering, (2) the Noble Truth of the Origin of
Suffering, (3) the Noble Truth of the Extinction of Suffering, and (4)
the Noble Truth of the Path that leads to the Extinction of Suffering.
Stephen Batchelor (1997) helps resuscitate these tenets by making them
the answers to a different question: not "What do you believe?" but the
"What did you do, and how did you do it?" of the Buddha's first
audience. Framed in this way, the Buddha's first teaching is revealed as
essentially relational and experiential. It is possible to imagine him
actually saying, "Don't take my word for it, check it out for yourself!"
Therefore, Batchelor (1997) prefers the term ennobling truths. There is
activity, here. By testing the Buddha's process, one can realize the
outcome oneself, and be awakened, raised up, ennobled. The four truths,
then, are a flowchart, a map of territory to be investigated. Thus, the
process is one of interdependent steps (Batchelor, 1997, 2004). As
suggested in Fig. 3.2, the first two steps state the problem, a
diagnosis, while the second two provide the resolution, a prescription.
By fully understanding suffering that stems from the mind (1), it
becomes clear that it comes from craving. Then this understanding
suggests "letting go" of craving (2). Letting go of craving results in a
(momentary!) cessation of suffering, or liberation, (3), leading to a
desire to cultivate further the path to liberation (4). The path to be
cultivated is Buddha's middle way. It is an eightfold group of moral and
practical disciplines --- right view, right resolve, right speech, right
conduct, right ­livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right
concentration. One way in which the ennobling truths can be investigated
and the path cultivated is through meditation --- the development of
mindfulness and concentration.

The four ennobling truths as a process (Batchelor, 1997, 2004) Diagnosis

Prescription

1.  Suffering (dukkha)

2.  Craving (tanha)

3.  Liberation (nirodha)

4.  Path (marga)

Understanding

Letting go

Realizing

Cultivating

Fig. 3.2 Note that the arrows point to cause and effect relationships:
(top, right to left arrows) craving causes suffering, the path leads to
liberation, and (bottom, left to right arrows) understanding suffering
leads to letting go of craving, which leads to realizing cessation, or
liberation, which leads one to cultivate the path. This is not a linear
model. These are not stages of progress, but rather an integrated
undertaking. The charge to cultivate the path lands one right back at
the drive to understand suffering. One does not leave any of the truths
behind, as they constantly inform each other.

70

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

The Three Marks of Existence These marks are hard to see because we'd
rather do just about anything than look for them. If we can bring
ourselves to "turn towards" our experience, this is what we might report
(more likely in English than in Pali). 1. Anicca (impermanence):
Everything changes; nothing is always there for me. This is true for the
things I want to hold onto and the things that I wish away. 2. Dukkha
(unsatisfactoriness): Whether I want it or don't want it, my
relationship with anything --- even the most exquisite experience --- is
ultimately unsatistfying. 3. Anatta (non-self): Things are not what I
think they are. There's nothing essential, or enduring that makes a
chair a chair, or even that makes me, me. There's nothing you can put
your finger on; there's just the way it is right now. (Analayo, 2003,
Batchelor, 2004; de Bary, 1969; Goddard, 1938; Wellwood, 2000)

Mindfulness and its Four Foundations Mindfulness is the translation of
the Pali term sati, which appears in the eightfold path --- samma-sati,
right mindfulness. It is the practice, the instrument, so to speak, for
the process of investigation suggested in the four ennobling truths. It
is to be cultivated formally in the practice of meditation and
informally at all times. It is the key to awakening. Engagement with
Buddhist terms and their possible definitions is part of the current
discourse of the MBIs, as shown in the box below titled "Working on a
definition." As an overview of the attitude and practice of mindfulness,
the following description of "bare attention," a term used by
Nyanaponika Thera (1965) is technical and concise: Bare Attention is the
clear and singleminded awareness of what actually happens to us and in
us, at the successive moments of perception.... \[A\]ttention or
mindfulness is kept to a bare registering of the facts observed, without
reacting to them by deed, speech or by mental comment which may be one
of self-reference (like, dislike, etc), judgement or reflection.

Working on a Definition (Cullen, 2008) Mindfulness has become an
increasingly popular term in the west due to the influence of several
prominent meditation teachers and authors, inclu­ ding Thich Nhat Hanh,
Jon Kabat-Zinn, and Jack Kornfield. Thich Nhat Hanh (1975),
world-renowned Vietnamese Zen master, poet and peace activist, defines
mindfulness as "the miracle which can call back in a flash our dispersed
mind and restore it to wholeness so that we can live each minute of
life" (p.14). Jon Kabat-Zinn (2005), author and founder of
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction, widely taught in secular settings
including health care, education and business worldwide, writes,
"Mindfulness can be thought of as moment-to-moment, non-judgmental
awareness, cultivated by paying attention in a specific way, that is, in
the present moment, as non-reactively, and as openheartedly as possible"
(p. 108). Jack Kornfield (2005), co-founder of two primary mindfulness
meditation centers in the U.S. has described mindfulness as "an innate
human capacity to deliberately pay full attention to where we are, to
our actual experience, and to learn from it." Nyanaponika Thera (1965),
a Buddhist monk, teacher, and scholar in the mid-twentieth century,
wrote a book in which he named mindfulness as the heart of Buddhist
meditation. All these definitions refer to a quality of mind or way of
being which is not only aware in the present, but wholesome insofar as
it is "open-hearted", "restores wholeness," and permits learning.

Mindfulness in Buddhism

So here is Kabat-Zinn'st definition of paying attention on purpose, in
the present, without judging. Then the tradition goes on to prescribe
what to pay attention to and how, elaborating four foundations of
mindfulness (here and below, Analayo, 2008; Gethin, 1998; Nyanaponika,
1965; Watson, 1998). The first foundation is mindfulness of body, which
typically begins with bare attention to the sensations of the breath,
bringing the mind and body together and calming them. Then, other body
sensations may be observed, in all the potential postures and movements
of formal practice and daily living. The second foundation is
mindfulness of feelings, in which bare attention is brought to the
feeling-tone of the experience of each moment. "Feelings," as the term
is used here, are not emotions. Rather, they are an immediate knowing of
experience as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral before reactions such as
emotions or attitudes come into play. Feelings are simply observed as
they arise, linger, and pass away. The third foundation is mindfulness
of mind, which directs bare attention to the quality of the activity of
the mind, registering awareness of states or dispositions, such as
distraction and concentration, or one of the three roots of suffering
--- desire, hatred, or delusion. Again, these can be observed as they
arise, linger, and pass away. The fourth foundation is mindfulness of
mind-objects, in which bare attention is directed towards all that the
mind encounters within and without. Here a wonderful characteristic of
Buddhism, the making of lists, shapes recommended practice, as the
traditional instructions are to observe the arising and passing of the
five ­hindrances (sense-desire, anger,

71

Historically, the Pali word sati has been translated as mindfulness but,
according to Alan Wallace (2006), the root meaning of sati is simply
that of recollection, of memory. In the Theravadan Abhidhamma \[Buddhist
psychology\], sati is precisely defined as one of nineteen "beautiful"
mental factors whose function is the "absence of confusion or
non-forgetfulness" (Bikkhu Bodhi, 1993, p.86). In the context of the
Nikaya \[Buddha's Discourse\], sati is referred to as a "kind of
attentiveness that . . . is good, skillful or right" (Nyanaponika Thera,
1965, p.9) and can become a shorthand for satipatthana which is usually
translated as the establishment of sati but also refers to the complete
methodology in which this establishment is accomplished (Nyanaponika
Thera, 1965, p.9). Bikkhu Bodhi, Buddhist monk, scholar and student of
Nyanaponika Thera, writes, "we have no word in English that precisely
captures what sati refers to when it is used in relation to meditation
practice" (Nyanaponika Thera, 1965, p.6). Here, then, are at least three
contexts in which sati is used a little differently, though the English
translation remains fixed as "mindfulness." Many contemporary Buddhist
teachers use the term mindfulness in a more comprehensive way than
simply "remembering" or "lacking confusion." According to John Dunne, a
Buddhist scholar at Emory University, the components of mindfulness as
it is more broadly construed might include not only sati, but also
sampajanna (clear comprehension) and appamada, (heedfulness). Clear
comprehension includes both the ability to perceive phenomena unclouded
by distorting mental states (such as moods and emotions) and the
meta-cognitive capacity to monitor the quality of attention. Heedfulness
in this context can be understood as bringing to bear, during
meditation, what has been learned in the past about which thoughts,
choices, and actions lead to happiness and which lead to suffering.
Though the contexts and interpretations of these terms may vary,
scholars and meditation teachers would probably agree on the factors of
sati, sampajanna, and appamada as foundational to the development of
mind. Moreover, as both Buddhist and secular mindfulness programs
proliferate in the West, this broader use of mindfulness

72

sloth and torpor, agitation and worry, and doubt), the five aggregates
(material form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and
consciousness), the six subjective/objective sense factors (eye/form,
ear/sound, nose/smell, tongue/taste, body/touch, and mind/concepts), the
seven factors of enlightenment (mindfulness, investigation of reality,
energy, enthusiasm, ­tranquility, concentration, and equanimity), and, at
last, the four ennobling truths. Perhaps it helps here to see the
connection or reflection of the four foundations of mindfulness in the
"triangle of awareness" --- body sensation, thought, and ­emotion ---
used in the pedagogical discourse of the MBIs.

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

has become a culturally meaningful and accessible "umbrella" term for
the vast majority of practitioners unversed in the intricacies of
translating Sanskrit or Pali. Bikkhu Bodhi, ed. (1993). A comprehensive
manual of abhidhamma: The abhidhammattha sangaha. Kandy, Sri Lanka:
Buddhist Publication Society. Hanh, T.N. (1975). The Miracle of
Mindfulness. Boston: Beacon Press. Inquiring Mind. (2006). "Mindfulness:
The heart of Buddhist meditation? A conversation with Jan Chozen Bays,
Joseph Goldstein, Jon Kabat-Zinn, and Alan Wallace," Inquiring Mind,
22(2): 5. Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Coming to Our Senses. London: Piaticus
Books. Kornfield, J. (2005). "Finding my religion," San Francisco
Chronicle, November 28. Nyanaponika Thera. (1965). The Heart of Buddhist
Meditation. York Beach, Maine: Weiser Books.

Two Forms of Meditation There are two main forms of meditation.
Concentrative meditation, samatha in Pali, focuses the attention on an
object such as the breath or sound to the exclusion of other mental
activity. This can lead to a calmness and ­tranquility of mind, which is
measured by levels of absorption. For example, Transcendental Meditation
is a concentrative form. In Buddhist practice, samatha is often seen as
training that will allow more effective use of the other form of
meditation, vipassana. Vipassana practice is opening to the fullness of
direct experience. This offers the opportunity for seeing into the way
one's world and self are constructed and interrelated, that is, for
insight. Vipassana, or the cultivation of mindfulness, is the
characteristic form of meditation in Buddhism --- central to all its
meditative streams. The Four Sublime States In the description of the
seventh stage of the eightfold path, right mindfulness, the Buddha
exhorts his followers to cultivate the four Brahmaviharas, variously
translated as the cardinal virtues, sublime states, divine abodes, the
immeasurables or illimitables --- each translation sheds a bit of light
on the whole meaning (de Bary, 1969; Narada, 1980). They are conceived
as parallel to a set of negative states, which could just as easily
arise. Thus, cultivating the sublime state of metta, often translated as
loving-kindness, makes it more difficult for dosa, anger, to grow;
karuna, or compassion, counterbalances himsa, cruelty; mudita, or
sympathetic joy, opposes issa, jealousy; and upekkha, or equanimity,
undermines the anxiety of attachment and aversion.

The Western Discourse of Mindlessness --- Mindfulness

73

The practices for cultivating these sublime states can be seen as
complementary to the practice of mindfulness. Traditionally, they can be
used to cultivate concentration. Rather than simply registering whatever
arises with "bare attention," the meditator inclines the mind towards
the chosen state. Loving-kindness can be thought of as a softness of
heart or an unconditional friendliness. It is the most important of the
four and can be seen as fundamental to the other three (Nyanaponika,
1965). When it is practiced, it is often directed first to oneself, then
extended outward to those one loves, then to those one is neutral to,
then to those where the relationship is difficult, and finally towards
all beings without limit. The practice is to incline one's heart towards
loving-kindness, often using phrases or verses that offer wishes of
peace and happiness, and freedom from suffering, disease, worry, and
anger. Compassion is the wish to take away the suffering of others,
whatever that suffering might be. The practice is to extend compassion
without limit to all who suffer --- the poor, the sick, the helpless,
and the lonely, as well as the ignorant, the vicious, the impure, and
the undisciplined (de Bary, 1969). Sympathetic joy is rejoicing in
another's good fortune. Just as compassion is a positive way of
addressing the suffering of the world, this is a positive way of
addressing those who are thriving. Simple enough with loved ones, but
the practice is, again, to extend this outward to others without limit.
Equanimity is the most difficult of all, as it means to embrace whatever
arises, pleasant or unpleasant, good or bad. It is easily misinterpreted
as a kind of passivity. There is a story of the Buddha that suggests its
greater dimensions and utility. The Buddha and his followers are out
seeking alms. A man, a Brahmin, in fact, invites him to his home and
then begins berating the Buddha with every epithet in his seemingly
endless repertoire. The Buddha is not moved. As the man finishes, Buddha
asks, "What do you usually do when you invite guests to your home?" The
man replies, "Why, we prepare a feast for them." Buddha inquires what he
would do if the guests refused to eat. The man replies, "Eat it
ourselves, of course." The Buddha tells him, "Well, you have invited me
to your home and offered me a feast of insults. I will not eat it; it is
yours" (retold from Narada, 1980).

The Western Discourse of Mindlessness --- Mindfulness There's a stream
of discourse in Western psychology that came to a concept of mindfulness
through a different route than the engagement with Asian spiritual
thought and practice. In fact, it started not from mindfulness, but from
its opposite, mindlessness. Ellen Langer (1989) was drawn into study of
this duality through experiments that suggested the ultimate costs of
mindlessness. Seniors in a nursing home were either offered a choice of
houseplants for which they had to care and were expected to make other
decisions about their daily lives as well, or they simply were given a
plant that staff cared for and were not expected to make the decisions.
After 18 months, the group with responsibilities and decision-making
expectations were not only in better

74

physical, mental, and emotional shape than the others, but, fewer than
half as many had died compared to the other group. From many
perspectives, the suggestion is that mindfulness enhances life,
mindlessness reduces it. What is most "Western" about Langer's
conception is its dominant orientation towards the cognitive, the
active, and the external. One overcomes the tendency to be mindless by
actively changing one's ways of thinking, particularly about the
information coming from the outside world --- one's perceptions. Langer
sees the essence of mindlessness as "premature cognitive commitment"
(1989); that is, thinking and acting from a position in which we already
know. She points to three basic ways in which this is problematic.
First, as you grow, mature, and become "educated," you create or learn
categories with which to order the world, and then they begin to order
you. Auden (1970) has great fun with this in his commonplace book,
capturing the suggestion that if you were served coffee in a wine glass,
you would be slightly disturbed, and if your place at the table for a
steak dinner was set with scissors instead of a knife, you would be
horrified. Second, while new information is essential, it is easy to
miss the the small changes because you already know what to expect. (Did
you catch the repeated the in that last sentence?) Third, your view of
the world is from a particular perspective, yours, which it seems right
and logical to accept as the only one. Coming to realize that there are
others can be a shock. Say, you agree to meet a colleague for breakfast
at 7:00 am. You rise at 5:30 to a series of mini-catastrophes --- the
cat threw up, your underwear is still in the dryer, the dog runs out of
the yard, and you have to stop for gas and directions on the way.

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Mindlessness, Novelty, and the Roots of Western Psychology In the first
half of the nineteenth century, many of the academic and clinical
disciplines and discourses we know today were just coalescing. In
Germany, the interests of E. H. Weber, a physiologist, and Gustav
Fechner, a physicist, were sympathetic. Weber's work on the perceptual
systems helped Fechner to figure out how to measure sensations. Fechner
defined a unit of measurement, the just noticeable difference (JND),
which was tied to the psychological experience of sensation to a
measurable stimulus. Thus, threshold values could be established for
perception, such as, charmingly "the tick of a wristwatch at 6 m in a
quiet room" for hearing, or "an insect falling on your cheek from a
height of one centimeter" for touch (in Schwartz, 1986, p. 50). The next
JND would begin to construct a scale. Such measures allowed for
"psychophysical" experimentation --- and Fechner's status as a founder
of quantitative psychology. From his experiments, Fechner derived his
psychophysical law, that magnitude of sensation is proportional to the
logarithm of the threshold value. More simply, as a stimulus increases,
equal increments appear to be smaller and smaller --- as they are
perceived against the growing basis of comparison. It's the basis for
the decibel scale. A clear and homely illustration is a three-way light
bulb (Dossey, 2004); from darkness to 50 watts of light is a dramatic,
easily perceptible change; the next click, from 50 to 100 watts is an
equal increment, but is much less dramatic; the third click to 150 watts
is again an equal increment, but it might easily pass unnoticed, so
embedded are we in the 100 watts of background. It's the same with the
crème brulee you're anticipating at your favorite restaurant. The first
spoonful is rapture of the highest order, the second is awesome, and the
third goes down unattended as you return to your table talk. You are
embedded in crème brulee. Fechner's law may not have held up well to
increasingly sophisticated critiques and methodologies, yet it has a
ring of truth. And it offers metaphorical possibilities for the culture
in which we are all embedded. As Langer notes, the experience of novelty
changes us, brings us out of our embeddedness and into the present
moment. Westerners seem to

The Western Discourse of Mindlessness --- Mindfulness

75

You stride (short of breath) heroically depend on new and ­powerful
experiences coming into the restaurant at 7:10 to be greeted from
outside us, to bring us to mindfulness --- to force with, "I thought we
said seven?" us to experience our world. Our relationship to the To
overcome mindlessness, Langer new is complex, however. Consider, for
example, the history of Western art from the Renaissance through (1989)
prescribes active modes of retoo­ Modernism, in which each successive
development ling one's thinking and even physical brought a new and not
always comfortable way of approaches to the world, for learning, seeing
the world, which came to be seen and acted problem solving, and
creativity. To overon as a narrative of emergence --- each succeeding
come the tendency towards premature movement brings novelty, a new
perspective, a cognitive commitments, the active use of change of
context, and a distinct new category (e.g., strategies to create or
sustain five psyDanto, 1993). The same drive for and resistance to
chological states is encouraged. The novelty can be seen in all the
histories of all the comcultivation of mindfulness can be seen to
positional and performing arts in the modern West. comprise "(1)
openness to novelty; (2) In the same vein, the advertising industry
relies on alertness to distinction; (3) sensitivity to novelty, judging
successful advertising as that which lifts a message out of sameness.
This is an explanadifferent contexts; (4) implicit, if not tion of both
the increasing use of special effects and explicit, awareness of
multiple perspecthe increasing ­vulgarity of the media. tives; and (5)
orientation in the present" It seems entirely sensible that those of us
teach(1997, p. 23). These states, then, coning mindfulness as
professionals would consider the stantly inform one another, becoming
one Western perspective as well as the Asian in our pedaanother, and
engaging the whole person. gogy. If we do it well, we can bring
participants into An example may help: Movingly, Langer the present
moment from outside with novelty and (1989) suggests that strong
emotions from inside with the ­novelty of beginner's mind. toward someone
may be tied to globalizing categories. If I feel enmity towards a
coworker, I see him as all one thing --- bad. Putting forth the effort
to view and describe him in detail, however, may reveal characteristics
that strike me as new thoughts. Now I must make distinctions about what
my coworker is like, seeing that some of his characteristics may
actually be positive in different contexts. Such an insight can suggest
that he may be different with others, and others might have a different
perspective on him. My feeling may soften, and in my next encounter, I
will be present to him in the moment --- and even more open to novelty.
Langer's Western concept of mindfulness is aligned with our active
culture, is psychologically available, and can move one further on a
path of transformation. This concept of mindfulness offers important
insights for the teaching of any subject matter, and may be especially
applicable to pedagogy within the MBIs. Langer (1997) notes that
ordinary culturally sanctioned approaches to learning emphasize top-down
or bottom-up learning of skills, with practice targeting the
"overlearning" of the skill so that it becomes conditioned --- a
mindless, context-independent skill. She opposes this with a way of
teaching that is "based on an appreciation of both the conditional, or
context-dependent, nature of the world and the value of uncertainty"
(p. 15). When we teach conditionally, with a continual awareness of and
reference to what is required in each moment, participants remain
engaged, and make creative use of the material for their personal
contexts, moment by moment, day after day. It is stunning how deeply
ingrained this is in the pedagogy of the MBIs, as will become quite
clear in the character of the skills of the teacher described in Chapter
5.

76

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

A (Tentative) Discourse of Intersubjectivity and Mindfulness This
definition or model of mindfulness is our own, and has been developed
with the challenges of teaching in the foreground. Our central goal is
to create a "clinically" useful scheme that can be remembered easily and
accessed quickly to help guide decision making in the emergent moment in
a group or dyad. Despite the insights of Buddhist thought, postmodern
philosophy, and the study of infant attachment and human development,
which have resulted in serious questioning if not rejection of the idea
of isolated, individual minds (Gergen and Hosking, 2006; Tronick, 2007),
the vast majority of the studies of mindfulness have been limited by
scientific discourses that privilege the experience of the individual.
As a result, in many areas we must extrapolate from data developed with
subjects studied in supposed isolation and considered to be practicing
an objectively defined mindfulness meditation, rather than subjects
considered in relationship, practicing a mindfulness meditation that was
co-created within a relationship. What we present here is both
provisional and pragmatic. It views the experience of mindfulness in the
classroom and therapy room from our first-person perspectives of what
we've seen help participants to "get it"; from third-person perspectives
in discourses of empirical research in the MBIs, of emerging
understandings in social neurobiology, and of ongoing research in infant
--- adult interaction and attachment; and from systems theory,
philosophy, and anthropology. Two Intriguing Starting Points The
possibilities of an intersubjective discourse of mindfulness are
manifest on both the experiential and empirical levels. It can be felt
as important, and it has been (tentatively) quantified, too. In the
realm of experience, here's a story from our teaching that may resonate
with you. Before ringing the bell to end the final meditation session of
a daylong retreat, I open my eyes and gaze around the circle of 60 other
participants. Aware of the stillness of the postures, hard fought or
simply surrendered. Aware of a softness in the faces holding everything
from subtle amusement to deepening grief. Aware of an incessant silence
interweaving with the HVAC hum, the voices in the lobby, and the traffic
in the street. Aware of a peace descending within my being. And
simultaneously aware of a desire arising to hold on to this moment, to
keep it unbroken, to dwell in it forever. I ring the bell. I ring the
bell, and the other participants come to their own awarenesses of the
group environment. Perhaps peace descends on us all as the bell sound
fades. Certainly, we sit together in a quiet all seem loath to disturb.
Curious, finally, I ask, "What are you noticing? What is the energy like
in the room right now?" Tentative answers come back. "I'm noticing I
don't want this to end." Quiet. "The energy is full...good...balanced."
Quiet again. "I'm feeling awake, but there's no pressure, no anxiety
about what's next." Nodding and murmurs of assent. "My

A (Tentative) Discourse of Intersubjectivity and Mindfulness

77

grandmother always said that when a group gets quiet an angel is passing
over." Rustles of agreement and deeper breathing in and out. I float an
image. "I'm feeling a 'companionable silence.'" Met with noddings and a
few head tiltings. "Like when you're on a long drive with someone you
know really well, and there's just no need to talk." More nodding. "But
there are sixty of us here. So, maybe we're on a companionable tour bus
ride..." Slowly, gently, gear-by-gear, as participants begin to speak,
we move deeper into shared territory. From an empirical perspective, it
took almost 30 years to happen, but the first significant study of group
effects in MBSR was completed (Imel, Baldwin, Bonus, and MacCoon, 2008).
Working with data from nearly 60 groups, accounting for more than 600
individual subjects, researchers used multilevel statistical models to
find how much group participants differed in symptom change from pre- to
post intervention, adjusted for preintervention severity. The results
are aligned with what a teacher would predict from the felt ­experience
of group mindfulness. The group effect (whatever it is!) accounted for
7% of the variability in psychological symptom outcomes. To put that 7%
in perspective, in individual psychotherapy, the therapeutic alliance,
long considered the most important predictor of outcomes, accounts for
about 5% of variability (Horvath and Bedi, 2002). In interpreting the
findings, Imel and colleagues (2008) suggest: "(a) that something about
the group impacts the ability of an individual to learn and practice
specific mindfulness techniques, (b) that something about \[the\] group
influences outcome through 'non-mindfulness' pathways (e.g., expectation
of change, provision of support, group cohesion), or (c) a combination
of these" (p. 741), with the last the most probable. Back to experience:
There is indeed something about the group. Regularly in our classes,
participants will make statements such as, "I have trouble doing the
practice at home but can do it in class," or "I don't know why, but
practice is much more profound in some way when I'm in the group." Let's
put some things together. An intrasubjective neurobiology of mindfulness
practice: Let's start with a microscopic view of a single brain cell.
Researchers working with monkeys found that the same motor neuron that
fired when the monkey grasped or tore an object also fired when the
monkey watched a researcher do the same things

Group Acceptance and Cohesion The contribution of shared mindfulness
practice to the group experience could be cast in the traditional group
therapy terms of acceptance or cohesiveness (Block and Crouch, 1985;
Yalom, 1985), or, as Yalom (1985) suggests, it could be cast in Rogers's
individual psychotherapy term as a collective form of unconditional
positive regard. Yalom (1985) notes that acceptance by the group
actually may be more powerful for its members than acceptance by the
therapist. In fact, a review of empirical evidence of the relationship
of group cohesiveness to patient improvement (Burlingame et al., 2002)
states that cohesion is a powerful predictor of outcome, and that the
group itself, rather than any individual member or the leader, is most
important in creating and maintaining cohesion.

78

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

(Gallese et al., 1996). Dubbed mirror neurons, the existence of such
cells was posited in humans and their function was extrapolated to a
simulation theory of mind reading --- in which these mirror neurons are
part of a system that helps us inwardly represent, feel, and track the
actions and even intentions of another (Gallese and Goldman, 1998).
These mechanisms may have evolved to optimize such crucial group
behaviors as hunting, gathering, and collective protection from
predators or aggression from other groups (Cozolino, 2006). As Siegel
(2007, p. 166) puts it, "This is big news: Mirror neurons demonstrate
the profoundly social nature of our brains." Humans are built from the
ground up to attune to and resonate with one another. The common term is
empathy. Reflect for just a moment on what happens in your body if you
see a friend (or even a stranger!) catch their finger in a door or a
drawer. You've just touched a live wire in what Daniel Siegel (2007)
named the "resonance circuit." In this circuit, described by Carr,
Iacoboni, Dubeau, Maziotta, and Lenzi (2003), the mirror neuron system
takes in and processes the movement of, say, finger-in-drawer, which is
sent to the superior temporal cortex where the sensory consequences are
predicted (sharp pain!). Then, this information is communicated through
the insula to the limbic regions for processing of the emotional content
(surprise, anger). This is fed back through the insula to the prefrontal
cortex where it is interpreted and, finally, attributed to your friend.
The circuit is complete. Your somatic and emotional states are now
attuned to your friend: You tense your hand, cringe, and maybe even say
"Ouch." The empathy you feel is based on perceiving your friend's
experience --- with/in your own body. When you say, "I feel for you,"
you really mean it. This example uses obvious and powerful images and
sensations that are easy to conjure in the imagination, so that you can
"get" the feelings --- and the concept --- with the very "thin" layer of
information available through reading. More important for our purposes
is the subtlety with which this works when you're actually in the
presence of someone else, and "thick" layers of information from facial
expression, posture, vocal tone, prosody, gesture, and other nonverbal
communication are available. Someone smiles, and your mirror neurons
fire for that facial expression too. Through the resonance circuit you
"try on" their face --- implicitly or explicitly imitating it --- so
that you share the other's embodied emotional experience of the moment.
Siegel (2007) proposes a possible connection of the social brain and the
resonance circuit with the intra-subjective process of mindfulness
meditation. It starts with intention. The resonance system lets you
predict, even map, the intended actions of others. It feeds the
information that lets fencers parry and riposte, and dancers anticipate
and respond to each other in flowing movements. The idea, then, is that
the resonance system also can be reflexive, can allow you to predict not
only others' but your own intentional states --- however concrete or
abstract --- and attune to those states in the present moment. Let's
start with the concrete, a meditation on awareness of the breath. You
notice the in-breath. Your resonance circuitry predicts that an out
breath is coming. It happens! And happens again. As you coincide
repeatedly with your own intention, breath by breath you begin to
resonate with yourself. This is a primal experience,

A (Tentative) Discourse of Intersubjectivity and Mindfulness

79

like infant and caregiver attuning in ways that help create secure
attachment, as we'll explore further in the next section. And this same
pattern is true for more abstract intentions, such as the one in a
meditation practice like choiceless awareness, notes Siegel (2007). In
this case, the intention is to be open to whatever comes. While we
cannot map the "whatever comes" with the resonance system, we can,
however, easily map the intention to be open. When our experience
coincides with the map of being open, intrasubjective resonance begins.
So, this capacity we're describing through which we resonate with
ourselves and others suggests a link from the individual meditator to
the group, from the experience of one passenger to that of a busload.
Adding just two more layers of ideas will help to build a model of group
mindfulness that mindfulness teachers may find useful in the moment in
the classroom. The first new layer of ideas involves mostly conscious,
explicit regulation of our internal experience, while the second new
layer involves mostly unconscious, implicit self-regulation. Both
reflect the evolutionary, phylogenetic principle that newer, more
complex structures of the nervous system can control older, less complex
ones. First, in the description of the intrasubjective resonance circuit
above, the prefrontal cortex (PFC), a newer and complex structure, is
involved in interpreting and attributing feelings. Its inclusion in the
circuit may be of great significance (Siegel, 2007, 2009). Mindfulness
practice seems to harness the capacity of the PFC --- particularly the
medial and ventrolateral areas --- to regulate the reactivity of the
limbic system, particularly the amygdala, an older, less complex
structure. For example, recent studies (Creswell, Baldwin, Way,
Eisenberger, & Lieberman, 2007; Lieberman, Eisenberger, Crockett, Tom,
Pfiefer, & Way, 2007) suggest that the mindfulness task of labeling
emotion activates these areas of the PFC in a way that inhibits activity
in the right amygdala, helping reduce negative affect and reactivity.
Such a "dampening down" of reactivity has long been remarked in research
on meditation (e.g., Davidson, R., Schwartz, G., and Rothman, L., 1976;
Schwartz, G., 1975; see McCown, 2004, for a review). Thus, mindfulness
practice offers a way of being in which limbic reactivity is reduced,
which expands the possibility of observing, approaching, and even
exploring in detail difficult emotional experiences, and being receptive
to what is happening in the moment with self and others. Further, this
is not just a state of mindfulness practitioners during practice. It
seems that this can become a trait, a capacity in our everyday walking
through the world. Mindfulness practice changes the brain, as studies
are showing. For instance, the brains of long-term mindfuness
practitioners, compared to controls, were found to have increased
thickness in cortical areas responsible for sensory, cognitive, and
emotional processing (Lazar, Kerr, Wasserman, Gray, Greve, Treadway, et
al., 2005). Mindfulness training, even of short duration such as the
8-week MBSR curriculum, has been shown to reduce both state and trait
levels of anxiety and negative affect, and to increase positive affect
(Davidson, Kabat-Zinn, Schumacher, Rosenkranz, Muller, Santorelli, et
al., 2003). Recently, MBSR has been associated with changes of brain
structures of particular interest: Reduced levels of perceived stress in
MBSR participants correlated positively with reduced gray matter in the
right amygdala, (Hölzel, Carmody, Evans, Hoge, Dusek,

80

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Morgan, et al., 2009), the area in which negative affect and reactivity
are inhibited through mindful awareness and labeling, according to the
Creswell et al., and Lieberman et al., studies cited above. The next
layer of information involves a subconscious system for detecting and
reacting to threat or safety, described by Stephen Porges (1995, 2004).
Porges's "polyvagal theory" of regulation of the autonomic nervous
system (ANS) has significant explanatory power for understanding the
mindfulness group. The theory is grounded in the evolution of the ANS in
vertebrates, in which three phylogenetic stages are expressed in mammals
as three subsystems. These three subsystems are linked to three
behavioral strategies that help us adapt to the full range of potential
environmental situations, from catastrophic and life-threatening, to
dangerous or challenging, to, at last, safe and caring. (For the
following description, see Porges, 1995, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2007, 2009.)
First is immobilization or feigned death --- "freezing" --- a reptilian
strategy associated with the subsystem of a primitive, unmylenated vagus
nerve that reacts to threat by significantly slowing the metabolism.
Second is mobilization --- "fight or flight" --- a strategy associated
with the sympathetic nervous system and the
hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, which react to threat by
tuning the metabolism for combat or active avoidance. Third is social
engagement --- calm and communication --- associated with the myelinated
vagus that responds to a sense of safety by slowing the heart,
inhibiting sympathetic nervous system reactivity, and dampening the HPA
axis response. In addition, this third subsystem also regulates the
muscles of the face and head for social engagement: Eyelid opening
allows eye contact, and the same neural pathway for that also helps tune
the inner ear to the range of the human voice; the muscles of the face
provide expressive potential; laryngeal and pharyngeal muscles offer
subtleties of sound and speech; and muscles for tilting the head allow
telling gestures. The social engagement subsystem may be particularly
useful as we consider the intersubjective resonance of the mindfulness
group. The polyvagal reaction to perceived safety is transformative. It
inhibits the defensive strategies of fight, flight, and freeze. It gives
tone to the muscles of face and head required for prosocial
communication. And it prompts release of the neuropeptide oxytocin (the
"love" hormone released during birthing, nursing, and pair bonding),
creating what Porges refers to as "immobilization without fear" (2004,
p. 21) --- an openness to approach and embrace. This transformation can
only happen when we perceive safety. So, how does that perception happen
implicitly, below our conscious experience? Porges (see 2003, 2004,
2009) suggests that we are continually scanning the environment for risk
and safety through "neuroception," which is so named to highlight that
it is associated with subcortical processes rather than conscious
perception. Neuroception of familiar or friendly faces, voices,
gestures, and postures can trigger the social engagement strategy, which
in turn promotes a sense of safety. Thus, a sense of safety and the
unconscious polyvagal response to it within a group is potentially
recursive and self-reinforcing. However, neuroception can also be
colored or compromised by intrasubjective visceral states. That is, when
fight, flight, or freeze strategies are

A (Tentative) Discourse of Intersubjectivity and Mindfulness

81

underway, it is more difficult to detect the prosocial signals that help
dampen reactivity and begin the social engagement strategy. Both
self-regulation and social support may be required to re-establish the
calm of the social engagement response. It seems that the neuroception
process and the resonance circuit may share neural structures,
particularly in the temporal cortex, involved in visual input to the
mirror neuron system for detecting movements, facial expressions, and
vocal features (Porges, 2003, 2009; Thompson, Thompson, & Reid, 2009).
Porges (2003) notes the connections between temporal cortex and amygdala
and the potential for top-down inhibition of fight, flight, and freeze
strategies at an automatic, implicit level of consciousness. The
Creswell, et al., (2007) and Lieberman, et al., (2007) studies, on the
other hand, describe how mindfulness, particularly the activity of
labeling emotions, relies on the prefrontal cortex and inhibits limbic
reactivity at an intentional, explicit level of consciousness. So far,
we've been describing intrasubjective resonance and self-regulation;
considering experience from an individualist perspective. Now, we can
turn to a shared perspective, to see how the group is affected through
mindfulness practice. We can focus on intersubjective resonance. The
"in-house philosopher" of mirror neuron theory, Vittorio Gallese (2003,
2006), proposes that the capacity of mirror neuron activity to produce
"like me" or "as if" experiences of the sensory, intentional, or
emotional state of the other depends upon the existence of a shared,
"wecentric" space. This space is created through a process of embodied
simulation that is automatically triggered by observing the other. We
have used this space and process since birth to understand our social
environment. Gallese describes it: "When we observe other acting
individuals, and face the full range of their expressive power (the way
they act, the emotions and feelings they display), a meaningful embodied
interpersonal link is automatically established" (2003, p. 519). Now,
let's talk about the companionable silence on the mindfulness group
"tour bus." We can even propose a model that should prove useful in
group situations in the MBIs generally (Fig. 3.3). So, let's go back to
the daylong retreat. Just consider the moment the bell rang to end the
meditation session. Certainly, across the 60 people in the room, there
were many different experiences. Some, perhaps a majority, were
intrasubjectively resonant, and were more disposed to approach, rather
than avoid, their experience in the moment. Others, perhaps, were
struggling in their meditations, or anxious about what was to come, or
dozing. As the group began to reconnect in the stillness and silence,
they encountered each other --- the full range of their expressive power
--- and were affected. For the many experiencing intrasubjective
resonance, their experience was met, matched, and reinforced. For some
who had struggled, the faces and postures of the surrounding resonant
folks provided an object for embodied simulation that automatically
shifted their experience. And for any in highly reactive fight, flight,
or freeze states, the signals of safety available to neuroception
saturated the room, providing an optimum environment for the social
engagement strategy. In short, we could say, with Gallese, that the
group created a shared, meaningful, we-centric space --- as the invited
comments arising from the silence wrote a kind of poem:

82

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

"I'm noticing I don't want this to end." "The energy is full... good...
balanced." "I'm feeling awake, but there's no pressure, no anxiety about
what's next." The actions that created this poem could be described as
an intersubjective resonance circuit. The intrasubjective resonance
circuit is situated in each participant's mirror neuron system, limbic
system, and insula; it is easily locatable. The intersubjective
resonance circuit, in contrast, is harder to pinpoint. Certainly, on a
neurophysiological level, it comprises the same structures as the
former; yet its location is not discrete. Rather, it is distributed
among participants and throughout the shared space. On the most concrete
level, its components include the thick layers of nonverbal and verbal
communication of each participant --- facial expression, eye contact,
posture, breath rate, gesture, vocal tone, prosody, silence, scent, even
social signifiers. Less concrete, of course, are components such as the
sensations, affects, and intelligible understandings conveyed (and
contained) by the group. The intersubjective resonance circuit pulses
with this energy and information, as participants share and simulate the
embodied experience of the moment, both unconsciously and consciously,
through neuroception and perception. Figure 3.3 is now workable for
teaching. As a prescriptive model, the starting point on the diagram is
anywhere. For example, to develop a workable environment, the teacher
can begin class with a mindfulness practice session. This may shift many
of the participants towards intrasubjective resonance (A), resulting in
affect supporting receptivity and approach towards the experience of the
present moment (B1). Then, at the end of the practice session, the full
expressivity of the participants is available for automatic simulation,
and intersubjective resonance may be possible (C). Here's a second
scenario and use of the model. A contentious moment between two
participants during a class session could begin to disrupt the
intersubjective resonance (C), as neuroception detects reduced safety
and the affect of other participants shifts towards reactivity and
withdrawal (D2). A call by the teacher for the contentious pair and the
entire group to "drop in" for a few minutes of mindfulness practice can
bring participants back to their own moment-to-moment experience,
potentially creating intrasubjective resonance (A), inhibiting
reactivity, and making receptivity and approach more likely in a group
of participants (B1). When group relations are reestablished (i.e., the
bell rings), the expressions, attitudes and intentions of the resonant
participants are available to all the members, so that neuroception of
safety and embodied simulation of affect may restore intersubjective
resonance and a more workable group environment (C). As a third and
final example, in an intersubjectively resonant group (C), one
participant could have an intrasubjective experience, such as a sudden
recollection of a traumatic incident, in which her affect moves towards
reactivity and withdrawal (D2). The teacher could bring that person's
attention back to the intersubjective resonance/empathy of the group
(C), saying, "Look around the room at who is here with you," thus making
the empathic faces and body postures available for neuroception of
safety, with a potential inhibition of fight, flight and freeze
reactivity, and a possibility for the social engagement strategy to
allow the participant to approach intersubjective resonance again.

Conceptualizing Mutually Expan­ded States of Consciousness

83

Working with Intra- and Intersubjective Resonance INTRA subjective
resonance

A Affective State:

receptive approach 1 or reactive/withdrawal 2

Affective State:

D

B

receptive approach 1 or reactive/withdrawal 2

C INTER subjective resonance

Fig. 3.3 This model suggests how mindfulness practice may create
intrasubjctive resonance (A), which may shift participants' affective
states towards receptivity and a willingness to approach even aversive
experiences in the moment (B1). The fully embodied affective state of
each participant, with its facial expressions, body postures, and other
verbal and nonverbal information is then available to the whole group
for neuroception of safety and embodied simulation. This may bring group
members into intersubjective resonance (C) which is sustained by the
ongoing neuroception and simulation of partcipants' affective states
(D1), depending on their capacity for self-regulation and
intrasubjective resonance (A). The model also prescribes how the teacher
may use the components of intra- and intersubjective resonance to
intervene and help maintain a workable group environment.

Conceptualizing Mutually Expan­ded States of Consciousness The dimension
of change must be examined within the intra and intersubjective
resonance aspects of the group. One perspective comes through a model of
dyadically expanded states of consciousness (Tronick and Members of the
Boston Change Process Study Group, 1998). Deve­loped in the context of
human development research, this model can be applied as well to many
forms of interpersonally mediated learning. It is based in systems
theory, seeing each individual as a self-organizing system moving
towards greater complexity and coherence by taking in and incorporating
novel information to make new meaning. There is a further understanding
that such intrapersonal states of consciousness are limited in their
capacity to make meaning. By connecting with another self-organizing
system, that capacity can be increase. So, when a dyadic state of
consciousness is formed --- say, between an infant and caregiver --- the
interplay expands each person's sense of the world and its possibilities
(Tronick, 2007).

84

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Much of the new information that is available to each member of the dyad
is "implicit, unconscious, and out of awareness" (Tronick, 2007,
p. 505). Here's a deceptively simple illustration from Tronick's work
with infants and caregivers: Gestural communication is a complex action
somewhat beyond the non-self-sitting young infant's ability because the
infant is not yet able to control his posture to "free" his arms for
communicative purposes. However, the caregiver, by giving the infant
postural support in response to the infant's communicative expressions
of frustration scaffolds the infant's ability to use gestural
communication. The scaffolding "controls" the infant's head and frees
the infant to control her arms and hands. Through this process, of
providing the regulatory input the now-sitting infant's brain
organization takes on a new and different organization with greater
coherence and complexity, which is much beyond the infant's endogenous
capacities to organize. (Tronick, et al., 1998, p. 295)

In the infant and mother dyad, then, the infant's gestures are "an
emergent property of the dyadic system" (p. 296). The action could not
take place without the mutual expansion of the states of consciousness
of both. This same process allows a dyad to mutually regulate affective
states --- providing a perspective on the encounter of the one with the
other (described in the side bar Transformation in the "silent land"),
so the "breaking of the seven iron bands" can be seen as an emergent
property of the dyad sitting on the "common seat." Going back to our
"tour bus," we can begin to consider the sense of peace available after
the bell rings as an emergent property of the group. Dyadic expansion of
states of consciousness extends relatively easily to adult
relationships, such as that between client and therapist. Tronick (2003,
2007) suggests that such dyads differ

Transformation in the "Silent Land" The effect we can have upon one
another, considered neurobiologically, is mysterious and powerful --- a
dialog in the "silent land" of nonverbal communication and knowing that
allows transformation or, perhaps, is transformation itself. The
following description of what appears to be a similar process to that in
Fig. 3.3, but in a dyad, brings an additional sense of transformation or
expansion of consciousness, It comes from Martin Buber's 1929 essay,
"Dialog" (in Buber, 1947). Imagine two men sitting beside one another in
any kind of solitude in the world. They do not speak with one another,
they do not look at one another, not once have they turned to one
another. They are not in one another's confidence, the one knows nothing
of the other's career, early that morning they got to know one another
in the course of their travels. In this moment neither is thinking of
the other; we do not need to know what their thoughts are. The one is
sitting on the common seat, obviously after his usual manner, calm,
hospitably disposed to everything that may come. His being seems to say
it is too little to be ready, one must also be really there. So, the one
is intrasubjectively resonant, mindful, fully present in the moment, and
is physically disposed in a way that communicates an ease of well-being,
nonreactivity, and an openness to approach himself or the other. The
other, whose attitude does not betray him, is a man who holds himself in
reserve, withholds himself. But if we know about him we know that a
childhood's spell is laid on him, that his withholding of himself is
something other than an attitude, behind all attitude is entrenched the
impenetrable inability to communicate himself. And the other is in a
reactive/withdrawal state; indeed it seems that this is a trait, a way
of being for the other. He is withdrawn, yet he is in the presence of a
resonating being. And now --- let us imagine that this is one of the
hours which succeed in bursting asunder the seven iron bands about our
heart --- imperceptibly the spell is lifted. But even now the man

Integrating the Theory of Living Human Systems

85

from the infant --- caregiver type mainly does not speak a word, does
not stir a finger. Yet in that they can access an increased he does
something. The lifting of the spell has repertoire of "age-possible"
meanings happened to him --- no matter from where --- and meaning-making
tools and prowithout his doing. But this is what he does now; he
releases in himself a reserve over which only cesses. These include the
sophisticated he himself has power. Unreservedly communicalanguage and
symbolic systems of the tion streams from him, and the silence bears it
to culture in which the dyad exists; yet his neighbour. they also
include all the richness of the more primal nonverbal realms that carry
Implicit in this moment of the story is the sense of so much information
about conscious an exchange; the other has come to know a new way of
going on in the world, and it is not coincidental and unconscious
motivation, intention, that the one is present. and action. The
interplay is a co-creation, rather than a co-construction; that Indeed
it was intended for him, and he receives is, there is no blueprint or
rules for the it unreservedly as he receives all genuine destiny making
of meaning, and the meaning is that meets him. He will be able to tell
no one, unique to the dyad (Tronick, 2003, not even himself, what he has
experienced. What does he now "know" of the other? No more 2007), and
Stern (2004) argues that it knowing is needed. For where unreserve has
always occurs in the present moment. ruled, even wordlessly, between
men, the word Further, the co-creation of meaning is a of dialogue has
happened sacramentally. "messy" process: states of consciousness expand
and new meaning is creBoth the one and the other have come to a new,
nonated bit by bit through a series of cognitive knowing. Both have been
changed, and the change would not have been possible for either in
failures and repairs, and through repetiisolation. tions with inevitable
small variations. Looking at infant --- caregiver dyads, Tronick (2003)
suggests, "\[O\]ut of the recurrence of reparations the infant and
another person come to share the implicit knowledge that 'we can move
into a mutual positive state even when we have been in a mutual negative
state' or 'we can transform negative into positive affect'" (p. 478).
This co-created, messy, unique, arising-in-the-moment, reiterative
process maps with a powerful congruence to the mindfulness group's
toggling back and forth between receptivity and reactivity as intra- and
intersubjective resonances are cultivated through mindfulness practice
or destabilized by intra- or interpersonal ­conflict. It seems as if both
the group and its individual members, through something very like the
dyadically expanded states of consciousness model, come to an implicit
knowledge that "we can transform negative into positive affect." What is
missing in this description, however, is a way of re-conceiving the
dyadic expansion of consciousness in group dynamics terms.

Integrating the Theory of Living Human Systems Agazarian's (1997) theory
of living human systems provides the basic insights that allow a view of
group expansion of states of consciousness. The theory focuses on the
hierarchy and isomorphy of the different systems that make up

86

3 Defining Mindfulness for the Moment

Fig. 3.4 A system hierarchy view of a mindfulness-based group increases
the intelligibility of the processes shown in Fig. 3.3. Consider the
second vignette in the discussion of Fig. 3.3. The two contentious
members, when seen as a subgroup, are influencing both the individual
members and the group as a whole, destabilizing members' intrasubjective
resonance, and simultaneously weakening the intersubjective resonance of
the group as a whole, through shifts in affect, disposition, and
nonverbal communication. The call by the teacher to "drop in" to
mindfulness practice potentially affects a significantly large number of
members who are resonating intrasubjectively; the bell rings and they
connect with each other, beginning to resonate intersubjectively. They
are then a subgroup that is positioned to influence simultaneously the
intra subjective and intersubjective resonance of other members and the
group as a whole.

the group. The hierarchical view states that a system acts as context
for the one below it and lies within the context of the one above it. A
simple graphic (Fig. 3.4) demonstrates these positions. The middle
system in the hierarchy then becomes the logical focus when intervening
in the entire nested system. It's easily seen that the middle system is
contiguous with both the lower and higher system and can therefore
affect each of them simultaneously (Agazarian, 1997; Gantt and
Agazarian, 2005). Agazarian's (1997) very valuable tool of functional
subgrouping is applied here in the "silent land" of nonverbal or
preverbal experience; in Chapter 5, it will be suggested as a way of
shaping verbal interventions. To introduce the concept quickly, there is
a basic tendency of the human mind --- and human groups --- to
dichotomize, to choose sides and create conflict between two views. By
exploring only one subgroup's position at a time, exploring similarities
before exploring differences, functional subgrouping subverts this
tendency (Ladden, 2007). Here's an intervention using subgrouping in a
way appropriate to this discussion: a member of the group speaks of a
sadness arising within her during the meditation. The teacher can ask
"How many of you have been sitting with sadness?"

Integrating the Theory of Living Human Systems

--- gesturing for a show of hands. Hands go up, and a subgroup
identifies itself; they come into direct and peripheral visual contact
(and other nonverbal modes of contact) with each other, and connections
that generate interpersonal resonance, analogous to dyadically expanded
states of consciousness, are created. The subgroup co-creates its own
meaning nonverbally, which simultaneously ­influences the individual
members and the group as a whole. For the teacher, in the moment, in the
flow of the class or group, the models of resonance circuits and system
hierarchy offer simple, mutually informing ways to organize experience
and respond to dynamics of the environment of the group as a whole. As
we look into the pedagogy of mindfulness in Parts 2 and 3, these various
discourses will be salient, along with others --- our attempt is not to
be exclusive or exhaustive, but to use what works. The process is one of
acknowledged reduction and oversimplification. Trying to find and hold
up for examination the motions, gestures, and felt senses of how
teaching and learning (or better yet, just call it learning) happen.
Theory doesn't come helpfully into the classroom as theory, it simply
arises as a move, an attempt, a drawing out, an elaboration of what is
there in the moment of arising --- a moment of genuine encounter.

87

Passengers in the Bus share a Common Seat Van Gennep (1909, in Turner,
1969) first defined rites of passage, the rituals that attend the
changes of status in society. Van Gennep had transitions of social
status, particularly political or religious offices and positions, in
mind, but Turner expanded this to include more existential states such
as illness (Beels, 2007). Rites of passage comprise three phases, in
which the subjects, or passengers, first separate from their fixed
social position, then enter a threshold, or liminal, period in which
identity is ambiguous, and at the end of the period are reincorporated
in the society with a new identity. This liminal period and the
collective experiences of the passengers during that period are helpful
in thinking about the mindfulness-based group environment. Many people
come into mindfulness-based groups as the result of a crisis --- a
difficult life transition, an illness, a loss --- for which they do not
feel they have sufficient internal resources or even compensatory social
support. They are suffering, and are met with the promise of
transformation if they will engage with the curriculum. They become
passengers, taking their seat in a group where the main shared
characteristic is the willingness (however tentative!) to examine one's
own experience. The group is liminal, as Turner (1969) describes it.
Members have no special roles or positions to distinguish them from
their fellows; in fact, much of a group's early work is in exploring the
similarities of their suffering. As Turner notes (p. 95), they "tend to
develop an intense comradeship and egalitarianism." This comradeship is
characteristic of what Turner (1969) calls comradeship, in which the
group exists in a "'moment in and out of time,' and in and out of the
social structure" (p. 96). As Beels (2001, p. 123), adapting this
concept to thinking about psychotherapy, explains, "In communitas, the
structures and functions of the daily community are suspended in favor
of ritual recognition that some members... have not yet come into their
powers, are sick and in need of healing, or are not yet ready to
function in the next stage of life."

Part II

Authenticity, Authority, and Friendship

Chapter 4

The Person of the Teacher

It's a very old story, told all around the world. A stranger comes to a
little community that's been under great stress, where food is scarce,
and where people have drawn away from each other and are looking out for
themselves. The stranger manages to borrow a cooking pot and starts
making soup. He begins with a "magic" ingredient, a stone, maybe a
button, or even a nail. The community members become interested in what
he's doing, and each secretly comes for a look at the pot. The stranger
stirs and tastes. "Ah, it's coming along nicely," he says. "But it would
be really wonderful if it had just a little something extra, like a
potato, maybe...," he says to one visitor in just the way she needs to
hear it. She goes off inspired to find something to offer. "...like a
carrot," he says in his just-right way to another. Later, "... a
cabbage," and then "...some beans." And soon there's a shy parade of
community folks bringing ingredients and standing around a pot that's
now aswim with good things --- enough for everyone. They share a meal.
There's even a little music. Someone sings; another finds his fiddle;
there's dancing into the night. And the stranger has already gone,
picking up a new "magic" stone on his way to the next community.
Although this story is usually called "stone soup" or maybe "button
borscht," nothing in the story happens because of the "magic"
ingredient. It happens because of the stranger's presence --- more, his
ability to be present to everyone. That is the marvel and mystery
attending co-creation. The stranger simply coaxes out what is already in
the individuals and community. The stranger does not require much to do
his work: a pot, a fire, a stone; faith, knowledge, and caring: faith
that the people of the community always have what is needed; knowledge
of how the world (meaning people) works; and caring in a way that
supports and inspires others. So, in teaching mindfulness as a
professional, you are the stranger. The work ultimately depends on you,
on who you are as a person. You enter the little community of
participants with nothing, not even a pot. You meet them just as they
are, just as you are. Your faith is exposed, as is your knowledge, and
your caring, because to teach mindfulness is to practice it, and to
practice means to bring all that you are to every moment. And all that
you are is all that is needed; the real you really is sufficient. This
definition of the teacher is the most committing of those current in the
Mindfulness-Based Interventions (MBIs). It is what drives
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) and Mindfulness-Based
Cognitive Therapy (MBCT) training to D. McCown et al., Teaching
Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians and Educators, DOI
10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_4, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

91

92

4 The Person of the Teacher

focus so strongly on the teacher's own commitment to the practice and
life of mindfulness. As Jon Kabat-Zinn (1999) characterizes it, "The
attitude that the teacher brings into the room...ultimately influences
absolutely everything in the world. Once you make the commitment, as
Kabir (Bly, 1971) put it, 'To stand firm in that which you are,' to hold
the central axis of your being human, the entire universe is different."
This chapter begins with this most committing definition for two
reasons: first, because it is most congruent with the co-creation of
mindfulness, which is at the core of the pedagogical concepts presented
in this book; second, because it can be helpful to aspire to a vision
--- like that of Kabir or Kabat-Zinn. This chapter, then, is the most
important in the book. It is also the shortest and simplest --- not
because there is so little material, but because there is so much. This
chapter is about you: not because you need to be fixed or improved, but
because your only option in becoming a teacher of mindfulness is to
become more of who you are. This is not so much a chapter for reading as
for exploring moment by moment. You'll learn far more from your
responses to the practices and suggestions found here than you could
from reading a book --- this one or any one. Work through. Savor. Come
back again. And again. Authenticity, Authority, and Friendship Not
because it is right or true but because it is useful, we have identified
a three-part scheme for talking about the person of the teacher. This
allows us to point to ways of exploring who you are or may be as a
professional teaching mindfulness, to offer a few broad insights and
some practices that we have found helpful in developing ourselves and
other teachers. To put this scheme in the context of the teacher as the
stranger, authenticity is where the faith arises, the faith that knows
that everyone can turn towards whatever is arising --- good, bad, or
ugly --- and discover something within himself/herself. It is the
practice dimension of teaching. It is a very pragmatic way of knowing
that the practice of mindfulness will reveal what is necessary for each
participant and the group. Authority is the knowledge of how the world
works that gives the stranger the confidence to borrow a pot and start
cooking. It is what you know; it is your success in the world. Finally,
friendship is caring; it is the just-right way of meeting each person.

Authenticity: What You Know While self-disclosure in the MBIs is not
about telling your "story," it is very much about being the person whose
story you've lived. For that reason, a good place to start in getting to
know who you are in this dimension of authenticity is with how you came
to the wish to teach mindfulness as a professional. It may be helpful to
you to be able to trace, and to describe the journey that brought you to
who you are now. Or, to stick with the soup analogy, it may be useful to
be able to share the unique ingredients in the recipe that is you.

Authenticity: What You Know

93

This journey or recipe may include psychological work that you have
done. It may include your spiritual life, whether within a particular
tradition, or more in Don Cupitt's scope of your "life" as the religious
object. Certainly it includes your mindfulness and meditation practice,
in all contexts, as it has manifested throughout your life: and
especially as you may be practicing now. You are reading this book. That
is a fact of the moment. Take some time now, if you would, to explore
what that fact means to you, using the practice that follows.

Practice 1: A Meditative Inquiry on Your Authenticity Sitting in a
comfortable position. Bringing your attention to your body. Feeling the
support beneath you. Noticing your breath wherever you feel it most
vividly in the moment. Simply following your breath moment to moment.
And when you find your mind settling, beginning mindful inquiry by
dropping this question into the silence... "What brings you to this
book?" And noticing what answer or answers come to you. Sitting in
silence and listening. And when you are ready asking the question
again... "What brings you to this book" Sitting in silence and
continuing to listen. Repeating the question and allowing answers to
reveal themselves to you from a deeper and deeper place within... "What
brings you to this book?" Were You on an Ancient Path to This Moment? It
is surprising how often those who are drawn to the healing potential of
mindfulness have stories that are evocative of the journeys of healers
among indigenous peoples. Did your reflection suggest any of the eight
traditional pathways to the healer's role defined by Landy (1977)? 1.
Inheritance --- did a relative play a part? 2. Selection by others ---
was it suggested by those who know you in a close way; other healers,
elders? 3. Self-selection --- being so drawn to it that you would
apprentice yourself to learn what another knows? 4. Undergoing a
profound emotional experience --- a feeling of awe and a sense of true
calling? 5. Self-dedication to a healing cult --- this sounds a bit
intense, but how about the contemporary version of having recovered from
an illness with a desire to help others with that illness?

94

4 The Person of the Teacher

6.  Miraculous self-recovery --- getting a "new lease on life" and
    wishing to use it for helping others?
7.  Genetic, congenital, or acquired physical disability --- or any
    sense of difference from others?
8.  Exceptional personal traits --- gifts that cry out to be used? If
    you made connections to this list, what does that mean to you? Do
    you feel more, or less, interested in teaching mindfulness as a
    professional? Who are the Teachers Within You? As you sat with your
    journey, your soup recipe, perhaps you became aware of people who
    had powerful influence on you at one point or another in your life.
    These we might call teachers. They may actually have had that role,
    or they may have engaged you in some other way --- a relative,
    friend, or colleague who embodied some quality or qualities that
    have great appeal. It may be that such teachers are from a different
    generation or century --- this can include authors, artists, figures
    from history (or even fiction) that have left a lasting impression.
    Because you aspire to be a teacher that participants will allow to
    live inside of them, it is helpful to know who lives in you. This
    sounds dramatic, yet you can test its truth. Do the teachers within
    you respond when you need them? Are you ever comforted by recalling
    what someone important to you said? Have you ever told someone
    "...and then I heard your voice telling me..." Spend some time
    investigating these questions. Learn about your teachers, who they
    are, how they came to be within you, and how they may help you
    become more of who you are.

Practice 2: Teachers Within Sitting in a comfortable position. Taking a
few full breaths. Bringing to mind/heart a teacher who has inspired you.
What qualities does this teacher embody that inspire you? What truth
(about yourself) has this teacher helped to reveal? When you think of
this teacher what feelings are evoked inside you? Then allowing the
image and felt sense of this teacher to fade. Continue with other
teachers, or take a few minutes after each to write about what you
discovered. That was history. The question is, who are your mindfulness
teachers now? As we've suggested, mindfulness is a co-creation. You
learn it with others --- at least one other. That teacher is with you as
you practice; there's a voice in which you hear those first instructions
that keeps coming back to you. It may be a spoken voice or a written
one; it is a voice nonetheless.

Authenticity: What You Know

95

With whom are you studying? If your major contact is through books and
recordings, how deeply have you explored? Who does (did) your favorite
teacher admire? Find, read, listen. Broaden your exposure. You'll be
teaching many different types of people, and not all of them will
respond to the same kinds of language and imagery. Get to know how other
teachers teach --- even ones that you don't think will appeal to you ---
you may make some surprising connections. Given the challenges of
embodied teaching that a professional teaching mindfulness faces in the
dyad or group, we believe that a teacher needs to have an ongoing
one-to-one relationship with someone who can hold her accountable for
practice and can assist her when questions arise. This need not be some
highly accomplished, enlightened being in an Asian practice lineage. In
fact, it may be more helpful if this person is much like yourself:
perhaps a local teacher in the MBIs; perhaps a member of a local
Buddhist organization who offers to work with others; perhaps a
spiritual director from your own religious tradition --- or from a
different one! A useful resource for locating such a person anywhere in
the United States and around the world is the Seek and Find Guide of
Spiritual Directors International, which you can access online at
http://www.sdiworld.org/. Practice, Practice, Practice Commitment to
regular formal mindfulness meditation practice is defined at minimum as
practicing with the frequency and duration expected of participants
(KabatZinn, 2003). This means six days a week, 45 min a day in the case
of the Center for Mindfulness (CFM) program; frequency remains the same,
but duration may differ in other programs. If you are just developing a
practice, as you commit to such a regimen, you will find a way to "build
it in" to your schedule rather than "fit it in." With the best
intentions in the world, the "fit in" model does not work with
consistency. Many who have ongoing practices have found that practicing
first thing in the morning ensures that it happens: nothing else can
come between you and the practice. What is your practice? This may be
another useful question. If you are teaching MBSR or one of the MBIs
that uses its basic structure, you'll be teaching body scan, sitting
meditation, Hatha Yoga or some other form of movement, walking
meditation, loving kindness meditation, and mountain or lake meditation.
If you have not done so, you should spend significant time --- perhaps
90 days --- with each of these as your daily practice. It is essential
in teaching that you understand any practice from the inside out before
attempting to guide others in it or work with their direct experience.

Practice 3: Keeping a Practice Journal The practice of keeping a
meditation journal can be invaluable in bringing increased awareness to
what happens when we meditate and to tracking our growth. Aspects of our
meditative experience that may go unnoticed or be forgotten can come to
light by writing in a journal after we meditate.

96

4 The Person of the Teacher

It is best to have a journal designated specifically for the purpose of
writing about your meditative experiences. It is also best to write your
reflections as soon after meditating as you can. As you reflect, write
about body sensations, feelings, and thoughts that you experienced
during meditation. Were there predominant feelings, thoughts? What
discoveries, surprises, insights, and challenges did you have during
meditation? Are there any new insights arising as you write? What do you
notice after writing? Reviewing your journal entries can help you gain
insight on themes and patterns that are emerging and allow you to see
your areas of strength and areas that need further development or
cultivation. Prolonged periods of practice can provide developing
teachers with opportunities for greater insight into the mind --- body
complex and into the practices themselves. Ideally, then, you might
undertake a regular pattern of silent retreats of five days or more,
say, one or two per year. This is required of teachers working in the
CFM MBSR program (Santorelli, 2001), and of candidates for training
beyond the foundational level through the Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care and Society (2007). Retreats are not extensions of
daily practice, not just "more of the same." There is a qualitative as
well as a quantitative difference between what is revealed by formally
cultivating mindfulness for, say, one hour, and seamless formal and
informal practice for one's waking hours over, say, ten consecutive
days. The arising and dissolution of sensations, emotions, and thought
in an hour might be considered metaphorically as a photograph of a
natural scene, while the metaphor for a 10-day retreat might be a
time-lapse movie of the same scene as seasons change: both are dense
with potential for experience and insight, yet the movie reveals and
opens for exploration dimensions only hinted at in the photo. A useful
way to begin to understand the power and value of longer term intensive
practice is to engage in a self-retreat at home for a day or perhaps a
weekend. This can be an introduction and is also an easy method to keep
you in touch with this dimension of practice between longer retreats. A
listing of retreat centers offering the silent, teacher-led Vipassana
style retreats that are preferred by teachers in the MBIs can be found
in the Appendix. As many of the retreats are led by teachers, this is
also a good way to find new teachers and hear new approaches to language
and practice.

Practice 4: A Self-Retreat Choose a day or weekend when you can be on
your own without any interruption. Inform your family and friends that
you will not be available, that you are taking time for self-reflection
and self-nurturing. Sylvia Boorstein (1996), in her book, Don't Just Do
Something, Sit There, says retreat practice starts before the retreat.
It begins with the decision to practice, with the intention to be
mindful.

Authority: What You Have Learned

97

Plan in advance and prepare what you will need for your retreat, whether
you are doing a self-retreat at home or away from home (a cottage, a
retreat center, a natural setting). What food you will have? What
clothes you will wear? What ­meditation supplies you will be using
(cushion, chair, yoga mat, shawl, blanket)? Create your daily schedule
before going on retreat and keep your schedule with you, along with a
clock and timer. It is best to start with the intention to keep as close
to the formal schedule as possible. Start your retreat by turning off
your phone, computer, TV, radio. Slow down, breathe, relax... Creating a
Retreat Schedule. This is one possibility for a day's schedule, based on
the type of schedule used in Vipassana style retreat centers: 6:30 am
7:15 8:00 8:45 9:30 10:15 11:00 11:45 12:00 pm 2:00 2:45 3:30 4:15 5:00
6:00 7:00 7:45 8:30

Wake, wash, and dress mindfully, and sit until breakfast Prepare and eat
breakfast; clean up Walk Sit Mindful Movement-yoga, tai chi, qigong Sit
Walk Sit until lunch Prepare and eat lunch; clean up; rest Sit Walk Sit
Walk Prepare and eat dinner; clean up Listen to a recording of a talk by
a teacher who inspires you; read something by a favorite teacher Walk
Sit Tea, retire, or continue to sit

The schedule could also be designed in MBI style, to include body scans,
Hatha Yoga or other body-based practices, and even expressive practices
such as writing, drawing, or painting.

Authority: What You Have Learned The term authority is meant to evoke
the Latin auctoritas, suggesting power derived from legal authorship,
rather than power granted by some outside agency. The indication of
authority is that you know what you know so well that you could be the
author of it. In other words, you have lived it and loved it, conferring
both ­intellectual and moral authority. This authority may be
demonstrated in an MBI curriculum or a particular way of working with
others using mindfulness practices. It is a competence that comes from
learning

98

4 The Person of the Teacher

deeply and well, unlike authenticity, which comes from knowing deeply
and well. The most pristine example of such authority is the confidence
that a clinician has with a curriculum of an MBI that she has developed
on her own. She moves smoothly within it, trusting it, trusting herself
as it unfolds in the session and through its duration. Authority also
includes the professional training you have that is useful in
understanding "how the world works," as the stranger might say. Perhaps
your training is in medicine, or occupational therapy, or psychology, or
education. There are profundities within your particular professional
discourse that you have learned as truths. Many of them are useful in
helping people become more themselves; it is work you know how to do and
you are good at. Don't leave it behind. How can you incorporate it in
your undertaking of teaching mindfulness? There may be other truths from
your authority that are not so helpful, that draw people away from their
own experience of the moment to some place where they need to be fixed
or changed --- by you. It may be that such learning is authoritative,
because it has historically given you the confidence to move towards or
work with particular people. It may also be that such learning is worth
questioning, because it no longer fits your more mindful way of working.
Your authenticity --- your own mindfulness practice --- may be showing
you that people have what they need already inside them, that they just
need the space to become more of what they are. At this point, it is
time to take stock. To see when what you know is more important than
what you've learned.

Practice 5: Learning and Unlearning This is a practice that explores the
sometimes one-sided nature of our thinking and learning. It is adapted
from Jack Kornfield's (1993), The Wise Heart. Contemplate an area in
your life where you hold strong beliefs --- perhaps your professional
life or your spiritual life; maybe beliefs about your role in a
relationship or at work; or beliefs about the future, the past. As you
sit quietly, bring to mind the key thoughts/stories you tell yourself
about yourself, another, a situation, an institution... "I am
\_\_\_\_\_\_." They are\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." It is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." After you have clearly identified these
beliefs, begin to inquire closely. Are these beliefs completely true?
Are they true at all times? Are they one-sided? What if some of the
opposite is true? What is your experience if you stay open to
possibility, if you let go of the thoughts and beliefs? As much as you
are able, let go of the thoughts/stories, and rest in an open awareness
of not knowing. How does that feel in the body, in the mind? How does
this affect your relationship to self... and other?

Friendship: Offering All That You Are This is a term gleaned from the
contemporary Buddhist theologian, Stephen Batchelor (1997). His
description of friendship in the world of Buddhist practice and study
fits the mindfulness teacher's role with a participant:

Friendship: Offering All That You Are

99

We are participatory beings who inhabit a participatory reality, seeking
relationships that enhance our sense of what it means to be alive...
\[A\] true friend is more than just someone with whom we share common
values and who accepts us for what we are. Such a friend is someone whom
we can trust to refine our understanding of what it means to live, who
can guide us when we're lost and help us find our way along a path, who
can assuage our anguish \[Batchelor's term for what is usually
translated as "suffering"\] through the reassurance of his or her
presence.

This same non-hierarchical, non-pathologizing, deeply humane sensibility
is found in the other spiritual traditions as they approach friendship.
Consider the basic position assumed in Christian spiritual direction. As
described by Aelred of Rievaulx, a twelfth century Cistercian abbot, in
his Spiritual Friendship (in Neufelder and Coelho, 1982): What
happiness, what confidence, what joy to have a person to whom you dare
speak on terms of equality as to another self. You can also without
shame make known whatever advances you have made in your spiritual life.
You can entrust all the secrets of your heart to him and before him you
can lay out all your plans. What, therefore, is more pleasant than to
unite your spirit to that of another person and of two to form one. No
bragging is to be feared after this and no suspicion need be feared. No
correction of one by the other will cause pain; no praise on the part of
one will bring a charge of excessive flattery from the other...

So friendship begins with the intention of meeting people "where they
are," of coming to any encounter without an agenda or intention to fix
or improve the other, and with a willingness to allow relationships and
situations to unfold in a fresh way. What are You Bringing to the
Meeting? As we have spoken of self-disclosure, the teacher has no
choice, but is exposed completely in each moment of being. There is,
however, a choice of what is disclosed through talk and trading stories.
It may be that your personal experience could be valuable to
participants. The discernment is about what do you share, and when? If
the answer would help the other in the sense of friendship we've
described, the only question is, then, "Is it still too raw, or can I
speak from it helpfully?" Thus, knowing how it is with you in your own
areas of growth and challenge is not a sometime thing for a teacher;
it's a necessary discipline. Knowing what's too raw to speak of can keep
you out of difficulties. And tracking that rawness over time can help
with your own capacity for self-acceptance and forgiveness.

Practice 6: What's Raw in Me? Write journal responses to this question.
A technique offered by writer Natalie Goldberg involves setting aside a
specific length of time to write (setting a timer for 10 min), picking
up a pen, and keeping your hand moving on the paper for the duration of
the time. In this case, begin the practice by writing the question
"What's raw in me?" or writing "What's raw in me is...," and then
continue to write without

100

4 The Person of the Teacher

taking your pen off the paper. If the writing slows down or stops,
simply rewrite the question or statement again, "What's raw in me?" or
"What's raw in me is...," and continue writing your response. Sharing
Direct Experience with the Other In teaching in any population, the
teacher is asked to meet participants' suffering: to meet them with
friendship where they are. This can feel daunting, especially when we
feel that the suffering is outside our experience. In working with those
in extreme or chronic pain and emotional suffering, the teacher needs a
place to work from --- a sense that everything can be worked with
mindfully. The teacher needs to trust the practice and the participant
to have just what is needed. This tall order is closer to being filled
when you have done significant experimentation with your own physical
and emotional pain. Following are two practices that help you allow your
own experience and see just how trustworthy you and mindfulness practice
really are.

Practice 7: Being with Physical Discomfort Scanning your body with a
gentle awareness. Notice any area or areas of holding or discomfort in
your body. Turning your attention toward an area of discomfort; allowing
your mind to rest in this region of the body. Noticing sensations as
they arise. Are the sensations subtle or strong? Is there tightness or
pressure or heat? Do the sensations stay the same or do they change?
Noticing the nuances of sensation. If the mind wanders to thought,
noticing if there are any thoughts or stories associated with this
discomfort: "I don't like this," "I hate this," "This is killing me..."
As much as possible letting thoughts come and go, not attaching to
thoughts, rather allowing sensations in the body to be the primary focus
of attention. Noticing if there is a tendency to want the sensations to
be different, if you are struggling in the moment. As much as you are
able, bringing a receptive presence to what is arising moment to moment.

Practice 8: Being with Difficulty Sitting in a comfortable position.
Bringing your attention to your body. Feeling the support beneath you.
Noticing your breath wherever you fell it most vividly. Simply following
your breath moment to moment. And when you are ready, calling to mind a
situation that you are struggling with. It may be a conflict in a
relationship, or financial concerns, or difficulty at work. After you
have called this situation to mind, bring your attention to your body
and notice what you are feeling. Notice what body sensations are
arising, what mood states are arising. Is there tightness or pressure in
the body?

Friendship: Offering All That You Are

101

Is there a word that describes your experience? Afraid, sad, restless?
Simply name what is arising --- tightness, heaviness, anger, sadness...
Noting or naming with a whisper what is arising moment to moment. Not
straining to find the "right" word, just noting what is most prominent.
After naming your experience, gently inquire while paying attention to
sensations in the body: "Does this word or these words describe what I
am feeling right now? If not, is there another word or words? Continue
to mentally note what unfolds in your experience moment to moment. At
times you may get lost in thoughts. When you notice this, simply note
"thinking," or "planning," or "worrying..." and bring your attention
back to your body. Continue to note what you are sensing in your body.
Naming what is true moment to moment (adapted from Tara Brach's (2003)
meditation, "Naming what is true in difficulty.")

It All Amounts to Spiritual Maturity This sense of the teacher as the
stranger, this looking into the depths of your own authenticity,
authority, and friendship, is a way of describing the teacher of
mindfulness. This is not the same as your identity as a professional,
but it can become part of it. The key is the development of some level
of spiritual maturity --- not some idealized, "enlightened" position,
but a down-to-earth possibility. A useful definition, perhaps, comes
from Fowler's (1981) elaboration of six "stages of faith": Stage 5 of
the 6 is characterized by dialogical knowing, in which knower and known
enter an I --- Thou relationship. This is much of what you're exploring
in this chapter, through mindfulness and self-reflection. Fowler makes
the important point nicely: "What the mystics call 'detachment'
characterizes Stage 5's willingness to let reality speak its word,
regardless of the impact of that word on the security or self-esteem of
the knower" (p. 185). In the MBIs, detachment might be rendered as
"non-attachment," to emphasize that there is no sense of dissociation or
distance, just clarity and perspective. The value of such mature
spirituality for a teacher working with her participants is clear in
Fowler's (p.198) statement that, "...this stage is ready to spend and be
spent for the cause of conserving and cultivating the possibility of
others' generating identity and meaning."

Chapter 5

The Skills of the Teacher

In teaching mindfulness as a professional, the teacher works from her or
his own unique authenticity, authority, and friendship. That means, of
course, that all individual teachers are different, with singular ways
of integrating and embodying mindfulness. In fact, for this purpose,
integrating and embodying are the same thing. Teachers know what they
know, and can do what they do, based on the fruits of their practice and
on the skills they have developed along the paths of their own
professional and personal development. As a result, the skills each
teacher possesses may be a mélange of ideas, which is not so much
integrated theoretically in the thinking, but, rather, more directly in
the body of the teacher. Even at the Center for Mindfulness at the
University of Massachusetts, the programs of teacher training comprise
such a mélange. Pragmatic and eclectic, these trainings make use of a
wide range of insights and practices from medicine, psychotherapy,
education, anthropology--sociology, and world wisdom traditions. Again,
the integration of all of this substance is not in theory but in the
body of each teacher. Yet, at the same time, we also believe that there
are general skills that teachers share; that is, we believe each teacher
uses comparable skills to work with participants in her own inimitable
way. We have discerned a scheme for parsing and elaborating the skills
of teaching mindfulness as a professional that is helpful for us in our
own development as teachers, in working with other new teachers and
those aspiring to teach, and --- most important --- in continuously
improving the experiences of the participants in our programs.

We have identified four skill sets that seem to be shared among teachers
in the MBIs 1. Stewardship of the group; 2. Homiletics, or the delivery
of didactic material; 3. Guidance of formal practices and informal group
experiences; 4. Inquiry into participants' direct experience.

D. McCown et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians
and Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_5, © Springer
Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

103

104

5 The Skills of the Teacher

The four skill sets are interrelated. For example, stewardship of the
group involves a broad set of skills that, as will become apparent, may
be seen to include the other three. Further, the development of voice
and body for communication most closely associated with the skills of
homiletics are also significant for guidance and inquiry, while the
forms of language used in guidance influence all other verbal
communication, and the dialogical understandings developed in the group
through inquiry inform homiletics and guidance. Of course, all four are
dependent completely upon the teacher's authenticity, authority and
friendship --- her or his capacity to remain present and to respond
thoughtfully and compassionately to whatever is arising in the moment.

Stewardship of the Group Working with mindfulness is not group therapy.
It is not psychoeducation. And it is not classroom teaching. All the
"group-work skills" can be seen, rather, as rooted in the co-creation of
mindfulness among teacher and participants. From this perspective, the
distinctive features of the mindfulness-based group and its demands on
the teacher become evident. First, because it is a co-creation in which
the teacher may be a catalyst, but in which every participant
contributes, a nonhierarchical, non-pathologizing ethos develops.
Everyone involved, teacher and participant alike, shares the sufferings
and joys of the human condition. Second, all share the intention,
explicit or implicit, to explore his or her own direct experience. Such
explorations have the potential of revealing one's authenticity in the
moment to the group. Third, every participant has the opportunity to be
supported by the group in his or her exploration, and to offer support
as well. Finally, all are contributors to the maintenance of the
mindfulness, the inter-subjective resonance, of the group. Stewards of
the Group's Three Treasures Our response to these features is to define
the teacher's overarching group-work skill with the term stewardship.
The word itself, in its derivation from Old English words suggesting a
guardian of the meeting hall, captures the most basic sense of the
teacher's duties in the group --- that is, holding the space in which
participants can work. It also highlights the ordinariness, the
humility, and the service that are implied in such a position. Further,
current connotations of the term suggest diligent care of treasures or
powers of great value held in trust for others, as in environmental
stewardship. In a way, then, the teacher holds the treasures of the
group in trust for the participants as they grow into the ability to
care for those treasures by themselves --- that is, as they firmly
establish mindfulness and inter-subjective resonance. These three
treasures reflect the distinctive features of mindfulness-based groups.

Stewardship of the Group

105

The first is freedom. This is the permission for the participant to
become who she or he is, to come more fully into her or his experience.
Participants are continuously offered the possibility of surrender to
how they are in the moment --- not to how they think they should be or
how the teacher or any teaching point may suggest. The teacher's role in
this, while the group's capacity to hold each other in freedom grows, is
in the nonverbal expression of authenticity and friendship, as well as
the more verbal expressions represented in the other major skill sets
described in this chapter. The second treasure is belonging. This is the
ongoing opportunity for the participant more and more to understand and
feel his or her influence on the life of the group in the moment, and to
experience both the offer of care and the demand for restraint inherent
in being a participant. This feature of the group is a participant's
natural or inevitable accountability to others. Through the teacher's
skill in keeping the tensions of belonging active in the life of the
group, participants find ways to integrate freedom and belonging in
themselves --- a self-regulation that is integral to the co-created
mindfulness of the group. The third treasure is resonance. This is the
co-created inter-subjective resonance of the group from moment to
moment. This gift of the group touches and helps to optimize the freedom
and belonging of each of the participants. The teacher ensures this as
the group's capacity increases --- and beyond --- by gently intervening
in ways that generate both rifts and repairs, thus deepening resonance.
These three treasures of freedom, belonging, and resonance are
interdependent: a shift in the quality of one in a participant or the
group will almost inevitably result in concurrent shifts in the others.
For example, in an inquiry dialog with the teacher, if anxiety increases
for a participant while exploring his present moment experience, his
capacity for freedom may deteriorate and sense of belonging diminish.
Through his withdrawal and through emotional contagion, the group's
inter-subjective resonance may also decline. Intervention by the teacher
or group to restore the participant's sense of freedom or belonging,
can, in turn, reestablish balance among the three treasures and effect
deeper resonance in which to continue the work. This will be described
in further detail later in this section.

Group-Work Skills and "Unlearning" There are suggestions in the
literature that prior training in leading groups is valuable for one
teaching mindfulness as a professional. Certainly, this statement is
true, in that the core skill sets defined in this chapter are
incorporated in many other types of group-work; but they are shaped by a
significantly different context --- co-created mindfulness. We suggest,
therefore, that prospective teachers place skills developed in other
group contexts under scrutiny, and adopt a sense of "unknowing" that may
lead to the "unlearning" that the Melbourne Academic Interest Group
(2006) identifies in its review of the MBIs: "\[P\]reviously learned
group-work skills are likely to require modification, and indeed some
unlearning may be necessary for the mindfulness model of practice"
(p. 292).

106

5 The Skills of the Teacher

Roundness: Shaping the Group From the Start Participants come into a
circle to sit together at the beginning of each session (Fig. 5.1).
Across cultures and around the world, the circle is a symbol of
completion, fullness, perfection. Certainly, it has layer upon layer of
meaning, from the Zen enso, suggesting the totality of the universe and
enlightenment; to the ouroboros, the serpent biting (or devouring) its
tail of the Western occult sciences (and of Kundalini Yoga), suggesting
the endless round of life and the reconciliation of opposites; to the
mandala, the Eastern tool for spiritual exploration, which C. G. Jung
explored as a vehicle for individuation. Indigenous peoples, who sit in
circles as communities, have a marvelous grasp of the circle's ubiquity
and symbolic power, as suggested in these observations by Black Elk
(Neihardt, 1961): You have noticed that everything an Indian does is in
a circle, and that is because the Power of the World always works in
circles, and everything tries to be round.... The sky is round, and I
have heard that the earth is round like a ball, and so are all the
stars. The wind, in its greatest power, whirls. Birds make their nests
in circles, for theirs is the same religion as ours. The sun comes forth
and goes down again in a circle. The moon does the same, and both are
round. Even the seasons form a great circle for their changing, and
always come back again to where they were. The life of a man is a circle
from childhood to childhood, and so it is in everything where power
moves. (p. 198).

Fig. 5.1 This illustration shows the relationship of freedom, belonging,
and resonance. As revealed in the meeting of arrow points, each one
touches and potentially influences the other two. As one is built up,
all may be built up, and as one diminishes, all may diminish. The
teacher's stewardship activities are shown as taking place on the
"outside" of the group space, because they are protective of the
co-created group space that is formed and sustained by the
interrelationship of the three treasures.

Stewardship of the Group

107

Gaston Bachelard, in The Poetics of Space (1964), is struck by the
consistent intuition in great thinkers that "being is round." He
attempts to consider roundness without filters of philosophy or culture
--- as a pure phenomenological experience. He notes, "...images of full
roundness help us to collect ourselves, permit us to confer an initial
constitution on ourselves, and to confirm our being intimately, inside.
For when it is experienced intimately from the inside, devoid of all
exterior features, being cannot be otherwise than round" (p. 234).
Making a circle also sets a boundary. It creates order within from
chaos. It divides outside and inside. It excludes and includes. It can
alienate and ignore or hold and nurture. And so, we ask participants to
"come into" a circle, a phrase and action that emphasizes inclusion,
holding, and nurturing, as well as the symbolism of fulfillment. For
instance, after a long session of Hatha yoga practice, participants were
spread out through the room and chairs and cushions were distributed and
disrupted. The teacher asked that everyone "come into" a circle for
dialog. With pushing and pulling and jockeying around, a shape took form
--- not like one marked by a compass, but like one co-created in the
moment to accommodate a need. One participant noted, "Well, this isn't
much of a circle." No teacher could ask for a better straight line. The
reply was, "On the contrary, as long as everyone's inside, it's a
perfect circle." In this sense, then, what is important is the inside of
the circle. That is where participants find themselves. That is where
the group comes together. So, stewardship begins with tending the
circle. The teacher's actions as guardian of the meeting hall, as
servant-leader, are often very concrete and domestic. When you teach
mindfulness as a professional, chances are you are going to get your
hands dirty and do some heavy lifting to get the environment right for
participants: setting or adjusting the chairs in a circle in a way that
will work for the group; ensuring the same number of chairs as
participants, to enhance the sense and symbol of fulfillment; making
sure that empty chairs are removed when participants are absent. And
accommodating both the chairs and the circle to those who use
wheelchairs or who are challenged physically to come into a close
circle. The teacher also cares for the site of the circle, doing what is
possible to reduce discomfort and distraction. Adjusting lights and
temperature, and doing what you can to prevent noisy interruption of the
group --- by custodial workers or members of the next class, for
example. There is, however, no need to ask for quiet, as the ordinary
(and even extraordinary) sounds and events in and outside the space are
part of the fabric of practice, guidance, and inquiry, as will be
discussed. This is not a perfect world and stewardship does not attempt
to make one. It makes instead a place where participants can feel
reasonably safe, secure, supported, and connected. The circle is an
embodied expression of timeless symbolism in the present moment. There
is a fullness and completion that is potentially available to
participants who glance around the circle. There is an undermining of
hierarchy and status and an affirmation of equality; think of King
Arthur's Round Table. There is available, as well, a suggestion of being
fellow passengers in a rite of passage, a waiting together for whatever
comes next, as described in Chapter 3. The teacher can make

108

5 The Skills of the Teacher

as much or as little of this suggestion explicit in starting the group
as fits her or his style and aids in teaching. There are, of course,
natural limits to the use of circles. A circle of 10--30 participants
supplies all its own logistical needs --- participants can all see and
hear each other easily. From 30 to 50 participants, in our experience,
the circle still works, provided the teacher and group maintain
attentiveness to the required voice levels. Beyond 50, our preferences
are to set one circle within another when using chairs, or to have a
circle of chairs and a group seated on the floor within the circle. This
does, however, begin to erode the nonhierarchical nature of the group
and focuses more attention on the teacher. The use of such larger groups
is, therefore, best restricted to applications where delivery of
didactic information is a significant proportion of the session --- such
as introductions, orientations, and short professional trainings.
Responsibility: Turning Towards Each Other In the first session,
particularly, the nonhierarchical nature of the circle is hidden beneath
what we might call the MacDonald effect. In a much told and much varied
folk story from Scotland, the chief of the MacDonald clan arrives late
at a gathering and sits in an open seat. He is then invited to come to
the head of the table. In response, he proclaims, "Where the MacDonald
sits is the head of the table." So participants may inevitably see the
teacher's seat as the head of the circle, and rest their attention and
expectation there. Certainly this effect is useful and flattering in the
early moments of the session. Yet, as sessions move on, and mindfulness
and intra-subjective resonance are co-created, a continual focus on the
teacher becomes counterproductive. It keeps the teacher's status
elevated, suggesting this is where to look for answers. Diffusing the
focus through the group suggests that the answers lie within the
participants. It is also true that if participants are too much oriented
to the teacher's seat, when eyes open after (or during!) mindfulness
practice, the resonance of the group is more deeply and directly
influenced by mirror neuron responses to the teacher's nonverbal
disposition than any other factors. Again, this is perhaps of some value
in early sessions, but it is best to work to spread out this
"responsibility" for group resonance to all participants. As they turn
towards each other, the potential of mindfulness and inter-subjective
resonance comes to belong less to the teacher (or to the more
extroverted participants) and more to the entire group, helping to
protect each participant's freedom and belonging. The teacher can turn
participants towards each other directly and indirectly. The direct mode
is most applicable in the initial group dialogs. The teacher can simply
ask that participants speak to the whole circle, not just to the
teacher. The teacher can reinforce this indirectly in the early sessions
--- and throughout all sessions, as needed --- with nonverbal cues. The
teacher can acknowledge but then avoid sustained eye contact with the
participant who is speaking directly rather than to the group. And the
teacher can allow her eyes to continually rove around the circle;
embodying the broader focus that is useful in keeping the group
together.

Stewardship of the Group

109

The teacher will also help the participants become more comfortable with
the shared experience by using dyads and small groups as methods of
dialogic exploration whenever possible. Each teacher will develop her
own style and rhythm of such usages, yet there are some basic moves. We
often ask that participants speak to a dyad partner --- a different one
each time --- for a preliminary dialog on the experience of each
mindfulness practice introduced, before bringing the larger group
together to continue the dialog. This approach has a number of benefits
besides simply "mixing up" the participants, helping them to get to know
each other and make personal connections. It also allows participants to
bring their nonverbal experience into words in a preliminary way before
exploring in the larger group, making that dialog perhaps richer.
Further, it provides a platform for those who are reticent to talk in
the larger group to have the benefits of bringing their experience into
words. Rifts and Repairs: Working with Reactivity and Aggression The
stewardship of the circle is stewardship of the co-created mindfulness,
the intersubjective resonance of the group. The teacher's skills in this
arena are to build it and help the group stay within it to do their work
--- inner and shared. The resonance is not fragile, yet it can easily be
tested, and may diminish considerably under pressure. Such pressures may
come from the environment, through dramatic distractions, or from within
the group itself, where expansive emotion or conflict may draw attention
and undermine resonance. In working with full or potential rifts in the
group resonance, the teacher's tool of stewardship is mindfulness
itself. Relying on techniques or tools from outside sends a signal to
the group that mindfulness practice is only useful to a point.
Therefore, the teacher's "only recourse" is simple: to trust the
practice and to use the group. In the event of an outside distraction,
the teacher can call participants' attention to the distraction,
reinforcing the essential move of "turning towards" aversive experience.
If the distraction is continuing --- say, a series of fire engines
passing with sirens in the street --- the teacher can (in good voice)
ask the group to "drop in" to practice and to notice what is arising for
them in the moment: then, by making space in which to watch the arising.
When the distraction has passed, the group can be engaged in dialog
around the experience. In effect, this is "normalizing" the experience
by making it simply a part of mindfulness practice. In working with
large emotions arising for an individual in inquiry, or independent of
outside stimulus, there is the possibility of many in the group being
caught up in emotional contagion and being unable to maintain the
resonance that sustains everyone's freedom and belonging. The teacher
must, at this point, hold the group, acknowledging what is arising in
the moment not just for the individual but for the entire group, and
embodying nonjudgment towards the individual and confidence in the
practice. The teacher has a number of directions in which she can move
--- all of which emphasize the workability of the situation and
mindfulness. First, she can use the basic physiology of the breath to
effect a shift from the stress reaction into the parasympathetic
response, by instructing the individual, and those in the

110

5 The Skills of the Teacher

group who wish to, to take several deep breaths and release them with a
relaxing sigh (see sidebar). With such a reduction in reactivity, it
Three practices for working with reactivity may then be possible to move
to explore In using these three practices during a group sesthe
experience in the body, which places sion, even if the reactivity
resides in one participant, the central "turning towards" motion in all
participants are invited into the practice. This a venue that is less
aversive, and possimay help sustain or potentiate a deeper inter-subbly
more interesting than directly jective resonance, with potential effects
on the participant with whom the teacher is working. encountering the
emotions or associated Practice 1: Relaxing Sighs. Inhaling through your
thoughts. Working within the body, a nose and exhaling through your
mouth, making a dialogic exploration invokes several quiet, relaxing
sigh as you exhale. Taking long, slow, factors that help to potentiate
intra- and gentle breaths that raise and lower your abdomen as
inter-subjective resonance and restore you inhale and exhale. Focusing
on the sound and feelthe co-created mindfulness of the group. ing of the
breath. As the teacher inquires with the indiThis practice is useful
when stress reactivity vidual, the movement from aversion to begins ---
or when it is anticipated. It is also possicuriosity, reflecting the
movement from ble to use cues throughout the day to take three to
withdrawal to approach affect associsix relaxing sighs, such as red
lights while driving, ated with mindfulness, can be set in telephone
sounds, waiting for elevators, or waiting in line, which helps maintain
lowered reactivity. motion. Further, the other participants, Practice 2:
The Soles of the Feet. In a stressful some of whom may be practicing
with situation or anticipating a stressful situation, this their own
emotions and responding to short practice helps one to come into the
present what is happening in the moment for moment in the body, and
thereby into a space in themselves as well, are making that which it is
possible to make considered choices. same shift, creating an
inter-subjective This practice was freely adapted from Singh et al.
resonance that supports further turning (2003). towards and further
exploration. The The steps teacher must also check in from time to time
with the other participants, during 1. If you are sitting, make yourself
comfortable, such work. This, again, helps both the with the soles of
both feet on the floor. If you are individual and the group, as the
indistanding, stand in a natural posture, allowing the weight of the
arms to pull the shoulders down, vidual benefits from comments by the
and bending the knees slightly. If you are walkothers and the others
have a chance to ing, slow your pace and, again, allow the arms to
connect with the (we hope!) renewing help relax the shoulders. resonance
of the group. 2. Allow your breath to flow naturally. And allow This
resonance is illustrated in an yourself to feel the emotions of the
moment, exchange in a mindfulness-based stress being aware of whatever
thoughts and body reduction (MBSR) class (see below), which sensations
are arising, without restricting or was stimulated by the teacher simply
attempting to change them. Simply observe. describing a dyad practice in
which partici3. Then move your attention to the soles of your pants
would each narrate their present feet. Feel your heels on the floor or
inside your moment experience to another --- for a shoes; feel the
curves of the arches, the balls of the feet, and the toes --- perhaps
moving the minute or two. Note the choices made and toes to make them
more present in sensation. directions pursued by the teacher, to repair
4. After a moment or two, notice again the quality the rift through
mindfulness and to protect of thoughts and body sensations. the
treasures of the group.

Stewardship of the Group

The rifts and repairs in the fabric of the inter-subjective resonance
help to knit the group more tightly. As noted in Chapter 3, this
circumstance is much like the "dyadically expanded states of
consciousness" that Tronick (2003, 2007) describes in infant ---
caregiver dyads and client --- therapist dyads. This situation
represents the messy process of the co-creation of meaning. As Tronick
(2003) suggests, "\[O\]ut of the recurrence of reparations the infant
and another person come to share the implicit know­ ledge that 'we can
move into a mutual positive state even when we have been in a mutual
negative state' or 'we can transform negative into positive affect'"
(p. 478). This experience of expansion and new meaning is shared not
only with the teacher and one individual, but, potentially, equally
among participants.

Attending to resonance

111

5.  When you feel as if you can respond and not react, remember that you
    can choose to disengage, or choose to respond with clarity and
    creativity. Special considerations in teaching this practice
6.  Everyone feels stress and strong emotions. The object of this
    practice is not to stamp them out but to work with them creatively.
7.  In context, the feelings of the moment may hold valuable information
    that can be used for a positive solution or helpful response.
8.  This practice can be rehearsed to gain more confidence in its use by
    playing scenarios from the past (or the future!) in imagination and
    working with the emotions and body sensations that are generated
    just by thought. Practice 3: The Three-Minute Breathing Space. In
    stress or anticipating stress, or simply at regular intervals
    through the day, this practice, freely adapted from
    Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy (Segal et al., 2002), can be of
    use. Minute 1: Awareness. Taking a pause. If you care to, closing
    your eyes. Bringing your attention to your body: noticing bodily
    sensations (e.g., heaviness, lightness, temperature, breath rate,
    heart rate, etc.); then attending to thoughts: is your mind calm? Or
    are thoughts racing? What's the quality of thought? (e.g., dense,
    light, fleeting, sticky, etc.); and attending to mood states: how do
    you feel in the moment? (e.g., peaceful, anxious, joyful, sad, etc.)
    Acknowledge and register your experience, even if it is unwanted.
    Minute 2: Gathering. Then, gently bring your attention to your
    breathing, to each in-breath and to each out-breath as they follow,
    one after the other. When your attention is drawn away, noticing
    that, and gently bringing it back to the breath. Minute 3:
    Expanding. Expanding the field of your awareness beyond the breath,
    back to the sensations in the body, then to thoughts, and then to
    mood state. Checking in to how it is with you now.

Participant: I'm confused, I'm anxious... Teacher: Is anything else
arising? A nonjudgmental, matter-of-fact, and curious response, giving
freedom to explore. P: Embarrassment... feeling exposed... T: Feeling
exposed just thinking about doing this practice --- a practice about
speaking about what's true for you in the moment. Acknowledging the
actuality of the participant's situation. P: Yes... Feeling sad right
now (participant is crying)... I'm feeling confused about why I'm crying
so much. T: (Opens to the group) Can the rest of you notice what is
arising for you in the moment? And is it possible to hold your own
place, your own truth? Protecting the freedom and belonging of the other
participants. Allowing them to have experiences that are the same or
very different from the one that is being inquired into.

112

5 The Skills of the Teacher

T: (To participant, after a pause) What's happening for you now? Genuine
curiosity. P: I'm trying to get control. T: How does that feel? With
curiosity: potentiating approach emotion, turning towards experience. P:
Feels like a fight. I'm trying to hold everything back. T: How does that
feel in the body? Making the exploration easier, more possible, by
bringing it out of the abstract and into body sensation. P: I'm so tight
I can barely breathe. T: In this moment, can you let yourself be with
what is here, put down the fight a bit --- the fight to hold everything
back? Offering an exploration. Offering a small step --- "a bit" ---
that may be more possible. T: (After a long pause as participant
explores.) So, checking in now... what are you noticing? P: I'm calming
down. T: How is that in the body? Maintaining the body focus to explore
the shift taking place with continuity of sensation and expression for
both the participant and others. P: I can breathe better... and I'm not
as tense. T: Anything else? As at the start, a nonjudgmental,
matter-of-fact, and curious response, giving freedom to explore. P: I'm
sad about how much I worry about what others think... I've done so many
things in my life based on what others may think... (Pausing) T: And
now, what's happening? Responding to nonverbal cues of further reduction
in reactivity. P: I'm letting go of some of my fear about being judged.
I'm more calm and open. I'm starting to accept what is. T: Interesting
that the very thing you were afraid of, voicing your moment to moment
experience to another person, you just did with the whole group... I
honor your courage... Looking around the circle to check in with others
and nonverbally prompt them to meet the participant's eyes or respond in
some way, reinforcing the reestablished inter-subjective resonance.

Stewardship of the Group

113

Reducing Reactivity: Models for Group Dialog The core model for group
dialog in the MBIs is based not on speaking, but rather on listening.
Again, this emphasizes the stewardship and service attributes of the
teacher --- and of all participants. From the start, they can be invited
to listen mindfully to the one who is speaking, watching the state of
reactivity within themselves --- particularly urges to comment,
contradict, "one-up" the other, or "fix" the other with advice or
consolation. They are urged to listen first, and speak as much as
possible from their own direct experience. The teacher will explain, and
participants will come to understand, that this listening, watching, and
authentic speaking provides the ideal dialogic environment for
exploration. This is also, however, a difficult task. Depending upon the
type of group and its unique membership, participants may need help in
maintaining such a nonjudgmental, permissive stance. We have found that
the use of a very simple structure that can be remembered (or prompted!)
in the moment can be extremely helpful. We have identified, distilled,
and successfully use two such models in our work: (1) subgrouping as
used in Systems Centered Therapy (SCT) (Agazarian, 1999); (2) council
circle, an adaptation of the models used in indigenous communities, as
described, for example, by Zimmerman and Coyle (1996). Both models are
complex. There is a committing path of training for SCT, which has a
highly elaborated theoretical base, and a number of trainings in the Way
of Council as well. Our distilled usage here is meant solely for the
context of an MBI group in which participants may benefit from more
structure to help them sit with their own reactivity. For pedagogical
purposes, we have borrowed the minimum of language and theory from these
other models, preferring overwhelmingly to reiterate and reinforce the
language and practice of mindfulness as captured in the practice and
exploration in which it is co-created for the group. What is most
important is that both these models provide a more explicit focus than
the "ideal" model, and both allow the teacher to "remind" the
participants of the objective "rules," that all must follow. This
maintains the nonhierarchical status of the teacher, and reduces the
sense of aggression from any necessary interventions. Subgrouping The
borrowing made from SCT for helping with reactivity has proven both
simple and effective. It is based on the theory of human systems premise
that as system, a group can only take in a certain level of difference
at a time; that too much contradiction or opposition will cause it to
lose energy or resonance. This is true, as well, of resonance as we
define it. Therefore, it is helpful to the group to explore
similarities, to link one participant's experience of the moment with
another's, so that their large samenesses and small differences are
appreciated and integrated in the process. The participants exploring
their similarities form a subgroup, which resonates together and affects
both the plenary group and individuals, as described in Chapter 3.
Participants who are noticing differences are asked to hold those
differences for a time. Then, when the links to similarities have been
played out, a difference may be introduced, and the

114

5 The Skills of the Teacher

subgrouping around those new similarities may begin. This way, all
positions may be explored, while reactivity is contained; the three
treasures of freedom, belonging, and resonance are held gently and
protected as much as possible. The directions to the group can be quite
simple, and simply need to be reinforced if they are breached. While SCT
supplies the discipline of subgrouping, the rest of the instructions are
linked directly to mindfulness practice. The three-point instructions to
the group might sound like this, beginning with mindfulness practice: 1.
As we begin a dialog together, let's work as mindfully as we can,
speaking from what is true in the moment, and, as much as possible,
communicating your direct experience as you feel the body. 2. When
someone brings in their experience, see if it is possible for you to
connect with what is said. If you are having a similar experience in the
moment, you may choose to share your experience too. 3. If you find that
your experience is different than the one being explored, simply notice
that, and hold your truth while the others explore. Be assured that we
will explore different experiences in turn. Council Circle Again, this
is a minimal borrowing, in which the purpose is to keep the group
resonant and workable, and to reinforce the pedagogical intention around
mindfulness rather than around technique. To that end, council circle
"intentions" can be introduced quickly, summarily, and then reviewed and
reinforced on the fly, during practice, with language that is congruent
with the co-creation of mindfulness. The control mechanism for council
circle is the talking piece, which is passed from person to person in
the circle. It is passed around the circle, and the person who holds it
holds all attention. He speaks, the others listen. It is also
traditional that the person with the talking piece may "offer silence"
to the group; there is never pressure to speak. We emphasize this point
to protect participant's freedom. The piece itself can be just about
anything; however, our preference is for the teacher's bell. The four
"intentions" of council circle are simple and clear in the few words it
takes to name them (Zimmerman and Coyle, 1996). They can then be
described in greater detail, using the language of mindfulness teaching.
They are: 1. Speaking from the heart: That is, speaking the truth of
your present-moment experience. This is embodied talk about what you are
noticing in the triangle of awareness --- body sensations, thinking, and
emotion. This is not speculating or trying to "figure out" what is
happening, this is reporting mindfully how it is for you now. 2.
Listening from the heart: This means being present for what is spoken by
the other; listening not just with ears and thinking, but with your
whole being. Allowing what is said to "sound" within you. Noticing any
reactions and responses in body, thought, and emotion. Not to judge
(although you probably will!) but simply to know, 3. Being of "lean
expression": Of course, there's common sense in this of making sure that
everyone gets a turn to speak, and that the session can move along. Yet
there is also the sense of approaching the experience you're reporting
as new ---

Homiletics: Talking with the Group

115

bringing beginner's mind to it. So the discipline is simply to seek what
is true for you, without the story or analysis that might stretch it
out. 4. \[Trusting\] spontaneity: This follows directly from the other
three intentions. Perhaps the most important relationship is to
listening. Although you may find yourself drawn to rehearse what you are
going to say --- especially as the talking piece gets close to you! ---
if you keep returning your attention to the speaker and listen from the
heart, your turn will come and you will be in a place to speak from the
heart about your direct experience of the moment. What you need to say
(or not say) will be there --- that is the trust. Neither SCT nor
council circle must be invoked for all dialogs within the group. As the
teacher develops a sense of the group and its needs, decisions can be
made to introduce one or the other, or some other model of the teacher's
choice, for particular purposes and in particular sessions only.

For More Information About SCT and the Way of Council • For descriptions
and schedules for training in Systems Centered Theory, visit the Systems
Centered Training and Research Institute:
http://www.systemscentered.com. • For descriptions and schedules for
training in the Way of Council, visit the Ojai Foundation:
http://www.ojaifoundation.org.

Homiletics: Talking with the Group We have chosen to call the skill set
associated with delivering important information to participants'
homiletics. Just as with stewardship, the choice is based on the power
of the word's derivation and connotations to convey principles of the
pedagogy of mindfulness. The intent is to see beyond the specialized
liturgical use of the word --- which does set up a certain expectation
of speaking of profound truths. The Greek root and related terms, such
as homiletikos, which means "of conversation, affable," suggest dialog
within a group that has assembled for that purpose. So, the teacher's
skills in homiletics are not those of a lecturer, but those of one who
engages and responds to those assembled together. At the heart of the
pedagogy of mindfulness is co-creation. This co-creation highlights the
preference for drawing as much as possible of the material to be used in
making teaching points to the group out of the group itself. As
Santorelli (2001) describes it from the influential MBSR perspective:
"Importantly, rather than 'lecturing' to program participants, the
attention and skill of the teacher should be directed towards listening
to the rich, information laden insights and examples provided by program
participants and then, in turn, to use as much as possible these
participantgenerated experiences as a starting point for 'weaving' the
more didactic material into the structure and fabric of each class."
Thus, participant experiences, as they use their creative faculties to
bring them into their own language, become "texts" in which teacher and
participants can in this conversation of homiletics find meaning.

116

5 The Skills of the Teacher

The use of poetic texts, and stories, and children's books has been
remarked upon by those who have closely observed homiletics within the
context of MBSR (e.g., Baer and Krietemeyer, 2003; Segal, et al., 2002).
In fact, such material circulates like currency through the community of
teachers. These texts are often a medium of choice for introducing or
reinforcing important teaching points. For example, in an early session,
a teacher may choose to help to define mindfulness by pointing to the
habitual ways of perceiving the world that might be seen as
mindlessness, and the dramatic shift of focus in mindfulness. This can
become much more clear by telling or reading a story, such as this very
short one from children's television icon Fred Rogers (2004, p. 187):
When I was a boy and I would see scary things in the news, my mother
would say to me, "Look for the helpers. You will always find people who
are helping." To this day, especially in times of "disaster," I remember
my mother's words, and I am always comforted by realizing that there are
still so many helpers --- so many caring people in this world.

The person of the narrator, the intimacy of the mother --- child scene,
the content of the story and its social and historical resonances, and
its radical shift of focus, all contribute to an experience --- and a
knowing --- that engages participants as whole persons. When the teacher
possesses these two types of "texts" --- participant experiences and
poems or writings that act like a poem --- the potential for generating
a homily is available. What the teacher says, then, will arise from her
authenticity and authority, moderated by friendship. The authenticity is
in the immediate recognition and connection with the participant's
experience; the teacher has been there, known it, and may have worked
through or may be working through it herself. She has sat with her own
loss, her own pain, her own anger, and can speak from those truths. What
she offers will be shaped by friendship: it will not be coming from the
place of "I know more and I can fix you"; rather it will be a gentle
invitation to turn towards experience. Any reassurance will not come
from, "It will be all right"; rather it will be the reassurance of her
presence --- and the resonant presence of the others in the group. The
authority is in the deep understanding of the matter at hand; the
teacher knows her curriculum and its dimensions and layers intimately,
as if she had created it from whole cloth --- which indeed she may have
done. Such knowing informs her total experience of the world. As she
encounters a poem, a song, a joke, she may find it shining in a way that
pulls her --- as a practitioner, as a teacher. She becomes a collector
of shiny things, for purposes she understands and purposes that are less
clear. Yet, in the moment, the opportunity may arise to use such a text
in a homily --- pithy and from a unique mastery of her own material.
Such usages are very much shaped by friendship. Use of these "shiny
things" is not a stunt, not meant to show the teacher's erudition;
rather it is highly specific and designed to meet participants where
they are. It is meant to help catalyze an event for further exploration,
or distill it so intensely that it becomes part of the participant's own
authority. For example, in workshops or courses for business and
professional people, there are two very shiny lines from the first of
Wendell Berry's Sabbath Poems (1998) that

Homiletics: Talking with the Group

117

become part of the co-construction of mindfulness in the group. They are
relished, rolled on the tongue, and carried off into life by many. They
are the last two of the first stanza; perhaps the effect is there for
you, too: I go among trees and sit still. All my stirring becomes quiet
around me like circles on water. My tasks lie in their places where I
left them, asleep like cattle.

Three Kinds of Homiletic Tasks Throughout a course or workshop, the
teacher responds by speaking from one or another of these two kinds of
texts, depending on the task she is facing. The first task is actually
the least common but the largest in scope. Within the curricula of the
MBIs, there are modules that require a teacher to provide informational
content that cannot be drawn easily from the group --- say, the
principles of stress physiology. Such homiletic tasks require
significant authority. The details of the stress reaction are in a sense
a major text in MBSR, as are the details of depressive relapse in
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT). The teacher must master
these details in order that she or he may work in the free-est of
conversational styles. New and developing teachers should see this
requirement as aspirational rather than an immediate demand. One very
helpful way of moving towards the ultimately free ways of working
through engagement is to first develop brief, clear, and memorable
presentations that engage the triangle of awareness --- sensation,
thought, and emotion, and delivering them to the group as interactively
as possible. It may be helpful at this early stage to use very basic
speaker support --- such as a prepared flipchart or, if the space is
technologically equipped, a simple, concise computer slide presentation.
As the teacher practices and refines the presentation, the material
becomes more and more her or his own --- it thus becomes authoritative.
This authority is much less about memorization and developing turns of
phrase, and much more about becoming comfortable with content and
principles. Then, with such "broken in" knowledge and material, the
teacher may choose to work in freer and freer ways. The second task is
more common, happening at least once in every session. It is, however,
no less challenging to the teacher, as it requires organization and
presentation of material not always available within the group. This
task is the introduction of a new practice, or an introduction meant to
expand participants' understandings of an established practice. The
teacher must approach the practice with beginner's mind, to discern what
participants most need to know in order to make their experience
valuable for them, not simply in session but over time. The information
to be delivered may best be offered in conversation, yet, this means the
teacher must have all teaching points at her or his command at every
moment

118

5 The Skills of the Teacher

--- to respond to participant comments and questions, but also to come
back to what has been forgotten or overlooked. Here again, this
undertaking requires significant time and effort. The new or developing
teacher can make a start by offering brief, well-organized, prepared
talks touching on the most important points. Such a talk can be
supported by sparse notes that can be read from a distance --- in the
lap, on the floor. An optimum format is a single sheet of paper or index
card that merely provides keyword prompts. Use of such a system ensures
organization and completeness, while ensuring as well a fresh,
improvised quality of language. Repeated use of such a system will allow
the teacher to get free of the support --- the key words or concepts are
easily available for use in more conversational style. How this might
work for a teacher is demonstrated in this short talk below, aimed to
introduce the practice of sitting meditation at the most concrete level.
The keywords in bold type would be the total support for the teacher.
Note how the entire structure is captured in the three words that
generate the first paragraph.

An introduction to sitting meditation Place, time, and attitude. As you
begin a personal practice of mindfulness meditation, there are three
essential factors that can support it... place... time... and attitude.
Working together, these three can help establish and maintain a regular
connection with the practice --- and with yourself... Place:
Comfortable, just yours, furnished for support. Choosing a comfortable
place where you will not be interrupted by other people, the telephone,
or even pets. A space that can be just yours for the time of your
practice; a place furnished in a way that makes you comfortable,
including a straight backed chair or cushions on the floor that will
support you sitting still ... Time: Built in, not fit in. For being, not
doing. Finding a regular time... a time that can be "built into" rather
than "fit into" the day... perhaps it can even be put on your
calendar... yet it's a different kind of time... not a time to take on a
role or act in a particular way... rather it's a time set aside for not
doing, for simply being... Attitude: Commitment and kindness. Motivation
and patience. Serious and gentle. Assuming an attitude that balances
deep commitment to the practice with a deep kindness toward yourself...
that balances motivation and patience... put another way, be serious
about showing up, and be gentle when you get there... Remember
nonjudgment! Remembering that mindfulness is paying attention on
purpose, in the present moment, and without judgment... Working with the
poetic type of text also provides many benefits for new and developing
teachers in these introductory homiletic tasks. Just as the deliberate
organization of material in the talk above assists the teacher over time
in making it part of her

Homiletics: Talking with the Group

119

authority and allowing greater capacity for improvisation, so the use of
poetic texts offers a platform for internalization, perhaps even
memorization of the text, to enhance spontaneity and conversational
talk. And there is a further benefit in that the page on which the text
is printed can hold the keywords for your talk. The short example talk
in italics below might be used in an early session to help participants
connect more gently and solidly to the breath in practice. The practice
of awareness of the breath is actually very subtle and tender. You are
connecting to something both simple and profound. It is a force that
touches all who live --- and all who have lived and all who will live.
The poet Rilke captures this force in one of his Sonnets to Orpheus:
Breathing: you invisible poem! Complete interchange of our own essence
with world-space. You counterweight in which I rhythmically happen.
Single wave-motion whose gradual sea I am: you, most inclusive of all
our possible seas --- space has grown warm. How many regions in space
have already been inside me. There are winds that seem like my wandering
son. Do you recognize me, air, full of places I once absorbed? You who
were the smooth bark, roundness, and leaf of my words. (Rilke/Mitchell,
1923/1985)

So, as you practice, is it possible just to allow that connection to the
breath? Without struggle, without need to change or improve the
experience... Can the breath simply take you and hold you? Can you just
rhythmically happen? Of course, the teacher may also offer the text with
no direction or commentary. She can rely on the teaching potential of
the text and her own intuition in its choice to touch participants,
trusting in their freedom to derive what benefit they can from it. The
third homiletic task is the most common, arising many times during a
session. This task is the most clearly conversational, and the most
challenging of the tasks. As participants bring their experience into
language, the

Being heard: The Development and Care of the Teacher's Voice The voice
is one of the teacher's most important tools. Control of volume, tone,
and articulation make a difference in homiletics, guidance, and inquiry,
whether speaking to ten participants or fifty around the circle. In many
different circumstances, much would be required of the new teacher to
develop vocal capacity. In the MBIs, however, teachers have a head
start. The platform for the voice is the breath. Attending to breath,
being intimate with breath, is central to the teacher's practice of
mindfulness. In vocal training (e.g., Linklater, 1976; Rodenburg, 2000),
being centered in the body and allowing the breath to flow easily is a
key to working with the voice; gaining flexibility, volume, and
resonance. The many exercises include lying on the back on the floor and
observing the breath, or learning to sit and stand with easy alignment
of the spine with gravity, so that the breath is unimpeded. Perhaps that
sounds familiar? The teacher's body-centered practices are also highly
congruent with the physical exercises of vocal training. The standing
yoga stretches of MBSR are of a piece with an actor's warm up. In fact,
the rolling up and rolling down of the spine --- bending from the waist,
hanging down, and coming again to vertical --- by itself makes a good
warm up before speaking to a large group. All the body-centered
disciplines --- Hatha Yoga, Tai Chi, Qi Gong, etc. --- in their joining
of breath to movement help develop the breath as platform for the voice.
What is often missing in the mindfulness practices, of course, is
production of sound. It is, however, possible to add just one simple
sound to the

120

5 The Skills of the Teacher

teacher may choose to respond by work you may already be doing ---
humming --- drawing out a teaching point that may and through that to
find gains in vocal ability. In be directed to the group. Thus, a genthe
sensory awareness tradition, a Western minderal talk arises from a
specific encounfulness practice, humming is recommended as a way of
experimenting with the breath (Speads, ter. This is significantly
dependent on 1992). Humming on the out breath: letting the the teacher's
authenticity, her capacity breath out through the nostrils, with lips
closed, to recognize what is important and and vibrating the vocal folds
(vocal cords) in a generalizable in a participant's experisteady mmmmmmm
sound. No forcing, no pressence, and to make something from it ing, just
allowing the breath to take its course that has appeal and potential
impact and the hum to end with the breath. Then checkfor the other
participants. In this task, ing in to see its effect on the breaths that
follow. there is no possibility of sketching, As breathing settles
again, add another hum. organizing, writing down key words; Gently,
reflectively, working with sound. When no possibility of learning for
later. The this way of working becomes more comfortable, teacher simply
responds from her vowel sounds can me added: mmmaaa, mmmeee, mmmooo,
mmmuuu, and the like. Pitch can be authenticity, with a friendship that
shifted as well, to explore further. Carola Speads makes her want to
share some point or notes (1992, p. 96), "Teachers, actors, singers,
insight with the entire group. and musicians have greatly profited from
these The example below is a straightforexperiments. Your ordinary
speaking voice will ward demonstration of the shift from markedly
improve. Voices tend to become fuller, an individual conversation to
general more resonant, carry better, and are often considinformation and
direct engagement erably deeper in pitch." with the entire group. It
comes from the second session of an MBSR course, at the completion of a
sitting meditation. In session two, participants are beginning to grasp
the power of turning towards, and are also sensing the profound shift
that nonjudging and beginner's mind can bring to experience.

A talk arises from an encounter Participant: I hated every minute of
sitting there. Well, not every minute, because when you said to not
react immediately to discomfort, my foot was just starting to fall
asleep. So I didn't move. And it actually feels really good when your
foot starts to go to sleep. It's very warm and nice. Teacher: Wow. You
just turned right towards what was happening. And you found out
something you would never have learned any other way than by observing
mindfully... (Broadly) This takes us right back to the definition of
mindfulness as paying attention, on purpose, in the present moment,
without judgment... So much can come out of our willingness to just be
with what is happening now. Things may be very different than what we
anticipate or what they seem when we've named them and "dealt with" them
--- that is, dismissed them. Tom might have said, "Oh, I know what this
feeling is, and where it's going." He could have missed that nice warm
feeling in his foot. Maybe it could interest you to use

Guidance: Not Performance but Connection

121

this as a metaphor for your informal practice this week. How often do
you think you know what's happening or what's about to happen? If you
do, what are you missing out on? Could you leave just a little space
open this week to see what your experience might really be?

Guidance: Not Performance but Connection Teachers guide meditations
"live" in the room where participants often have their eyes closed, and
via audio recordings supplied to participants for home practice. This
suggests just how much the skill of guidance is dependent on
communication in the verbal realm. Effective meditation guidance
requires control of four ­interdependent dimensions: languaging,
allowing, orienting, and embodying. Languaging This is concerned with
the impact that word choice and syntactic structures can have on
participants' experiences of mindfulness practice. There are several
ways of considering this, and each generates a certain style. In MBSR,
teachers are trained through the Center for Mindfulness to guide
meditation. Kabat-Zinn (2004) has analyzed the use of language in
guidance and developed a particular style meant to support mindfulness
teaching and to get around resistances --- particularly to authority ---
that many participants may have. He identifies four problems that can be
introduced through verbal and nonverbal communication, and that can
"generate resistance" in participants, or "create more waves in the
thought structure": (1) striving, as in "if you did this long enough,
you'd be better"; (2) idealizing, as in "I know how to do this and I'm
going to teach you"; (3) fixing, as in the implication that something is
wrong with you that ­meditation is addressing; and (4) dualism, as in
language that suggests that there is an observed and an observer. As to
what kind of language to use, specifically, Kabat-Zinn notes that nobody
likes a command --- that the teacher should instead make suggestions.
For example, rather than say "Breathe in," which can lead to a
"who-are-you-to-tell-me-what-to-do" reaction, one could say, "When
you're ready, breathing in..." The use of the present participle rather
than the imperative minimizes the teacher--participant hierarchy,
eliminates the subject-object distinction, emphasizes the present-moment
experience, and possibly elicits inquiry into just who or what is
breathing. The teacher can also create space for exploration and
reflection by using the definitive article rather than a possessive
pronoun, saying, for example, "lifting the right leg" rather than
"lifting your right leg." Kabat-Zinn (2004) advises that such rules
should not be held too tightly, however, as too much use of the present
participle can become distracting, while too much distancing through the
definitive article may result in a he's-not-talking-to-me reaction.
Following is the beginning of an awareness of breath meditation using
the MBSR style of languaging. Noting specifically the use of the present
participle, the definitive article, and the balance struck.

122

5 The Skills of the Teacher

An introduction to sitting meditation Beginning by taking a seat...
bringing the body to an upright and dignified posture in a chair or on a
cushion on the floor... Aware of the weight distributed in a stable
base... on the feet and the thighs and buttocks if you're sitting on a
chair... or on the buttocks on a cushion and legs, knees, and feet on
the floor... Allowing the torso to rest on this base, without effort...
not straining against gravity... aligned with gravity... letting the
earth hold you... Perhaps rocking back and forth and side to side
slightly to find that point of comfort, that sense of being centered...
Feeling the sense of the body sitting, noticing perhaps pressure, or
temperature, the sensation of air moving, or clothes against the skin...
noticing the feeling of the hands, wherever they rest on your thighs or
in your lap... aware of the face, relaxing tension, allowing the jaw to
drop down in an easy way, the teeth apart, the lips closed... Bringing
the attention to breathing... to the breath entering the body and
leaving the body... aware of sensations at the nostrils, in the sinuses,
the mouth and throat... maybe noticing the motions of the chest,
expansion and contraction... or the rising and falling of the abdomen...
you may be aware as well of other, subtle sensations in other parts of
the body... Wherever the sensation of the breath is most vivid for you
in the body, focusing your attention there... Another approach to
languaging that supports or impels mindfulness is heard in sensory
awareness (e.g., Littlewood and Roche, 2004). There are two essential
elements to it: permissiveness and questioning. That is, there is a
radical freedom granted to explore and find whatever might be available
in the realm of sensory experience. Nothing is certain; anything might
be discovered. The other feature is a questioning that is not meant to
find answers but to spur attention, to catalyze curiosity. A question
­during walking such as "Can you feel the floor beneath you?" does not so
much pull participants into their heads as take them closer to their
feet. A question such as "How is the breath responding to this moment?"
has as many answers as hearers, and often results in a deepening of
attention. There are precise physical sensations associated with the
breath... can you be curious about how the breath actually feels in this
moment?... not some thought or idea about breathing, but the experience
of the breath itself... Maybe it's possible to be aware of the breath
from the very beginning of an inbreath to the shift, the change, the
pause as it turns around and becomes an outbreath... and can you follow
from the very beginning of the out-breath to the moment it turns around
to become an in-breath again?... Just sensing the breath in its simple
cycle... can you give up the need to control it, change it, or even
think about it?... just let in-breath follow out-breath follow
in-breath... the breath breathing the body, breathing itself... a
process worthy of our trust... and of our attention... (Long pause)

Guidance: Not Performance but Connection

123

Certainly, these styles can be used together, to provide greater variety
and to fit the specific needs of the practice in the moment. That blend
might look something like this continuation of the same meditation.

Is it possible to connect with your attention right now? Perhaps it's on
the breath, or it may have wandered off following some chain of thought,
some story, some emotion, or some other sensation elsewhere in the
body... If it has wandered off, knowing that this is quite normal... So
with a sense of kindness towards yourself, gently, yet firmly, turning
your attention back towards the breath... towards the inbreath or
out-breath as it is in this moment... Maybe allowing the breath to be
the center of your attention, and letting thoughts, emotions, other
sensations be at the outside of your awareness... on the margins...
(Long pause) Where is your attention now? If it's wandered, gently
bringing it back to the breath...

Allowing Of central concern in the pedagogy of mindfulness is ensuring
that each participant feels free to have his or her own experience, not
some "required" experience specified by the teacher or the group.
Allowing is critical, because it encompasses a paradox for the teacher:
when one can bring detail and specificity moment by moment into the
guidance, participants connect well with the practice, yet each person
will be having a unique experience. Teachers find balance by offering a
range of choices, and by couching suggestions in tentative phrases. For
instance, in guiding a body scan, the teacher may ask participants to
focus on the forehead by saying, "Noticing any tightness or softness in
the muscles...perhaps there's tingling, or maybe the sensation of the
air moving in the room is available to you... or maybe there's no
sensation available at all --- and that's OK; that's simply your
experience in this moment...." Such a construction offers permission for
whatever arises, encouragement for exploration beyond habitual
responses, and unconditional acceptance of any outcome. Orienting Here,
again, the teacher faces a paradox. Mindfulness practice makes all of
one's experience available as it arises moment by moment, which suggests
that the search for organizing concepts or narrative runs counter to
practice. Participants are urged to "drop the story" and return the
attention to what is arising in the moment. And yet, as they are guided
in mindfulness practices, particularly in the early classes,
participants need to sense coherence and direction to feel enough safety
and security to go on with a practice that is so very different from the
ways they typically experience themselves and the world.

124

5 The Skills of the Teacher

Preferred practices: Teachers and participants are not look-alikes In
thinking about allowing, it is important to remember that not all
participants will connect to the same practices. Indeed, some will have
great difficulty connecting at all. More important still is to remember
that teachers have different preferences and needs from their
participant groups. Some preliminary work done in this area (McCown et
al., 2007), with cohorts of 25 MBSR teachers and 100 participants,
suggests that the differences could be significant to pedagogy, if
teachers are not aware of them. Teachers may tend particularly to
underestimate the attraction of the body scan, or overestimate the
appeal of yoga for participants (Fig. 5.2). In the figure, "Love" refers
to loving kindness meditation, and "Mtn" refers to mountain meditation.
100

Practice Ratings: Teachers vs. Participants

90 80 70 60 Teachers Participants

50 40 30 20 10 0

Yoga

Scan

Sitting

Love

Mtn

Fig. 5.2 Preferred practices: teachers and participants are not
look-alikes.

This means the teacher needs to use some form of organizing principle
for the guidance to be acceptable. Some practices have an inherent
narrative shape. For example, the body scan journeys through sensations
of the body sequentially, from head to foot or vice versa. Mindful
movement practices such as Hatha Yoga or Qi Gong have inherent
structures, both in the individual postures, and in potential
sequencing. Sitting meditations may have a "narrative arc," as in an
expanding awareness meditation that sequentially opens to experience in
the domains of breath, body sensation, sound, thought, and emotion,
leading to choiceless awareness of what arises in the present moment in
any domain. Other meditations may have no inherent organizing principle,
such as a single focus on awareness of breathing, or the practice of
choiceless awareness. Guiding such meditations requires an approach to
language that has coherence and integrity. It is an essential skill for
a teacher to be able to create purely verbal constructions that provide
a secure base from which participants may explore. There are three basic
strategies that can create this kind of coherence and safety, and that
can be used to help integrate guidance of any type of practice. First is
a simple refrain, a recurring construction that suggests some stability
in the flow of experience. For example, in a choiceless awareness
meditation, the repeated question "Where is your attention in this
moment?" will bring participants back to their direct experience.

Guidance: Not Performance but Connection

125

Second is the ongoing elaboration or blossoming of a concept. The
teacher may introduce a useful principle for practice and then, as the
meditation continues, expand its definition and describe different times
and reasons for bringing it into one's practice. For example, in an
awareness of breath meditation, the teacher could introduce the
principle of kindness towards oneself, and then elaborate the practice
of cultivating a loving response towards one's own distractions
throughout the guidance --- working with coming back gently, without
struggle or self-blame, when the mind wanders from the breath. Third is
the incorporation of moment-to-moment events in the environment into the
flow of the guidance. For example, in the large city, large institution
context in which the authors teach, street-level tumult such as sirens
or jackhammers, hallway happenings from rumbling carts to whispered
conversations, even the undependability of heating and air conditioning
can be noted and offered to the group --- "What's happening within you
as that siren sounds nearer and nearer?" These basic strategies can be
combined creatively to improve guidance for any specific ­practice, for
any specific group. Embodying This is the most critical dimension of
guidance: the connection of the teacher to her own practice while
speaking. Guiding a meditation is not an empty performance; the teacher
herself is engaged with the practice from moment to moment as she
speaks. The verbal constructions she creates are thereby rooted in her
experience. Her strategies of orienting are not abstract, but arise from
experience; the blossoming of a term or concept is a description of the
teacher's own observations, both immediate and remembered. She
incorporates what arises in the shared environment, using herself as a
sensing instrument, yet allowing for the infinite range of potential
subjective experiences of the participants. The ­importance of embodying
to effective guidance cannot be overstressed. In training and
development of new teachers, it is quite easy to perceive whether a
teacher is "dropped in" to the practice she is guiding; the listener
will have a felt sense of authenticity when the connection is there.
Word choice, tone of voice, and confidence of expression, all reflect
authenticity when the teacher is embodying the practice, and all help to
shape participants' experiences. Recorded Guidance Audio recordings of
mindfulness practices are significantly different from the practices led
in session. Much more depends on the languaging, and there is no
influence of context and inter-subjective resonance (except what each
participant may carry with them in their co-created mindfulness). This
means that recordings need to be scripted (in a sense), reviewed, and
revised before they are completed and produced. Languaging must be
distilled and clear. Because each practice will be heard many times, the
information may be "thicker" than in a session guidance, so that
participants may hear things that seem new to them at different times.

126

5 The Skills of the Teacher

Allowing is intensified, too, as the practice will be repeated many
times. It must be clear that the participant is free to have whatever
experience is arising, this day, this moment. Options for orienting are
reduced, in that connecting to the present moment in the environment is
not possible. Further, there is a sense in which the recording, heard
many times, actually becomes the narrative arc, by default. This is
important to take into account, and to ensure the greatest level of
allowing language, to help participants stay fresh. Embodiment is of
utmost importance, because context is reduced. The nonverbal dimensions
of the teacher's vocal delivery must carry the context, co-creation of
mindfulness, and the sense of inter-subjective resonance. All are more
likely to be perceived by the participant when the teacher is actually
doing the practice --- rather than recording a script. So, the script
must be tight and planned Scripts for Recording: Time and Rhythm
through, as can be seen in the sample A big challenge in preparing
scripts for recording scripts in Chapter 8. Once scripting is is to get
the timing right. If you're targeting a complete, it must be let go of
in the 45-minute or a 20-minute length, how can you be moment of
recording to follow what is sure you'll hit it, especially as much, if
not most, of alive in the moment. Note that the teacher the recording is
silent? Like scoring music, for our actually does the practices as they
are own use, we developed a punctuation and notation system, based on
the breath, that creates a sense of recorded. The body scan may be
recorded structure and timing. A breath is measured as the from a lying
down posture, while microfull cycle of in and out breath when the
teacher is phone placement for body-centered "dropped in" to the
practice he is guiding. So the practice like Hatha Yoga or Qi Gong
notation looks like this: may require the teacher to connect to the
practice in imagination more than in (...) = one breath Paragraph break
= two breaths actual motion --- although motion can be (pause) = three
breaths helpful in maintaining connection. (long pause) = six breaths
For the recording process, a professional studio would provide the
highest Anything longer can be noted in combinations or possible
quality. However, with a minimultiples of these. In this usage, each
breath has a mal investment in equipment and softtime value of about 10
seconds, which makes a pause 30 seconds and a long pause one minute.
ware, good-quality recordings may be Knowing this, it is possible to
estimate the made in any quiet space. What's required length of a script
and to adjust timing without havis a computer with a sound-recording ing
to perform and time the entire script a number program (it can be simple
and inexpenof times. As noted already, the fresher the reading sive;
only one track is necessary), a goodcan be, the better. Bob Dylan often
sang his lyrics for quality vocal microphone (visit a music the first
time at the recording session, which gave store and be prepared to spend
from \$100 the phrasing an uncertain but energetic quality, and to
\$300), a microphone stand (preferably preferred to use the first take.
one that allows many different adjustments of angle), and a ­microphone
preamplifier and computer interface. CDs can be duplicated
professionally from such recordings. It is useful to ask the duplication
company to balance sound levels from practice to practice. This is
easily done, provided recordings are made on a single track.

Inquiring: Curiosity About Participants' Experiences

127

Inquiring: Curiosity About Participants' Experiences Much of the
transformative effect of the MBIs may be potentiated by dialogic
encounters with participants in the group. Santorelli (2001) states: "It
is recommended that a significant amount of time in each class be
dedicated to an exploration of the participants' experience of the
formal and informal mindfulness practices and other weekly home
assignments." This is an extremely important and dynamic element in
participants' experiences in the MBIs that has not been adequately
addressed as part of the process in empirical research. Such dialog
between participant and teacher in the group space can assist especially
in potentiating the teaching intentions of "cultivating observation" and
"moving towards acceptance" as described in Chapters 6 and 7.
Teacher-participant dialog is an "inquiry" into the participant's
subjective experience --- his or her pre-semantic knowing in the moment
--- with an intention to make more conscious meanings that are then
available for further investigation. The skill of the teacher in such an
undertaking is directly tied to stewardship of the three treasures. The
teacher needs to ensure the participant's freedom, by simply being
available and genuinely interested in the participant's experience. She
needs to protect the participant's sense of belonging by making sure he
sees that he is not "on the hot seat" but rather is helping others do
their own exploration. And she needs to be attentive to the
inter-subjective resonance of the group, maintaining it to support the
inquiry process. Inquiry, from the teacher's perspective, is a meeting
of two subjectivities in which neither assumes an expert position and
both are able to work from a "not knowing" position to explore the
fullness of possibilities for meaning. To be most helpful in inquiry
with participants, a teacher works from (1) a philosophical approach to
inquiry that supports a "not knowing" position, (2) an awareness of the
cultural and individual resistances to inquiry that may be present, (3)
a willingness to abandon language and return to experience and tacit
knowing when dialog ceases to generate meaning, and (4) a capacity to
remain open to the outcome of any exchange with a participant or the
group. Philosophical Approaches Batchelor's (1997) attempt to re-imagine
the Buddhist teacher for the contemporary West in terms of "friendship"
provides a telling parallel to the role of the adult educator as
described by Mezirow (2000). Both Buddhist thought and the discipline of
transformative education have been major influences on the philosophy of
MBSR pedagogy. Batchelor, from the student's perspective, imagines
teachers this way (1997, pp. 50--51): These friends are teachers in the
sense that they are skilled in the art of learning from every situation.
We do not seek perfection in these friends but rather heartfelt
acceptance of human imperfection. Nor omniscience but an ironic
admission of ignorance.... For true friends seek not to coerce us, even
gently and reasonably, into believing what we are unsure

128

5 The Skills of the Teacher

of. These friends are like midwives, who draw forth what is waiting to
be born. Their task is not to make themselves indispensable but
redundant.

Mezirow (2000, pp. 26--27), speaking from the teacher's perspective,
uses the term "discourse" in much the same way we are using "inquiry"
here: Discourse is the process in which we have an active dialogue with
others to better understand the meaning of an experience.... Fostering
discourse, with a determined effort to free participation from
distortions by power and influence, is a long established priority of
adult educators. The generally accepted model of adult education
involves a transfer of authority from the educator to the learners; the
successful educator works herself out of a job as educator and becomes a
collaborative learner.

Both assert the importance of a nonhierarchical relationship, the
necessity of a shared stance of not-knowing, the power of the action of
"drawing out" the tacit knowing of the participant, and the measurement
of the teacher's success as found, ultimately, in the diminishment of
her status.

Cultural and Individual Resistances Given the dominant "banking" model
of education, in which students are waiting for teachers to deposit
knowledge into them, the initial encounters of inquiry may frustrate
participants. There is security in the teacher as expert; there is fear
in being one's own authority. Overcoming the attendant resistance to
inquiry becomes an informal mindfulness practice for participants: they
must become aware of, and transform, the lifetime habits of the banking
model --- working at staying open to their own insights. The teacher's
role in this is to bring compassionate curiosity and nonjudgment to the
encounter, particularly a capacity to withstand the urges to "fix" or
give advice and instead to stand with the participant in a space where
meaning may unfold. As is so often true, what is required of the teacher
is an embodiment of mindfulness. The teacher's authentic presence
reciprocally supports participants' capacities to not know, to not fix,
and to stand with/in their own experiences, which may lead to insights.

Language and Experience It is often the case that an inquiry dialog can
help a participant bring their presemantic experience of formal or
informal mindfulness practice increasingly into consciousness through
language. The teacher's genuine curiosity and unassuming presence (that
is, being present with no assumptions) may be expressed in very simple
questions about an experience, such as "What was it like for you?" This
may generate a tentative response. Further open-ended exploration ---
"Can you say more about that?" or "Is there more that you've noticed?"
--- requires reflection and an engagement with language that helps the
participant towards greater understanding. For example, a participant
described his experience

Inquiring: Curiosity About Participants' Experiences

with the body scan by saying, "I feel more connected somehow." The
question from the teacher, "More connected to what?", provided the
impetus and the space for deeper recognition: "More connected to myself
and my family and other people," and then a long pause, followed by,
"But mostly to myself. That's what's really different." In one way,
perhaps that's simply a new shade of meaning; in another way, though, it
is a profound recognition of a gulf of experience never before bridged.
During such an exchange, the other participants in the group are both
witnesses to one person's changing perspective and participants in their
own reflections and recognitions. Inquiry is shared work supported by
inter-subjective resonance. Often an inquiry dialog can lead to
confusion rather than clarity. At such a point the teacher may suggest
that the participant move back into a formal mindfulness practice for
further presemantic exploration of sensation, thought, and emotion. Such
re-visiting often opens again to greater emotional intensity and dialog
about direct experience. Therefore, teachers proceed cautiously with the
participant and the rest of the group, asking if the participant would
like to work more in this way, and inviting the group both to witness
the inquiry and participate in their own "inner" dialog if that seems
potentially useful for them. The toggling back and forth between
pre-semantic experience and open dialog with the teacher can clarify an
experience and its meaning. What is required of the teacher in such
encounters is simply stewardship, manifested as a willingness to go only
where the participant is willing to go, and a sensitivity to the needs
of both the participant and the rest of the group.

129

Catalyzing curiosity to deepen an inquiry Curiosity is the key to
inquiry. At one level, it more deeply engages the participant with her
or his direct experience. At another, it actually helps to shift
reactivity --- moving away from the withdrawal mode of fear or the
stress reaction, and into the approach emotions in which much more
experience is available for exploration. Although the teacher and
participant are free to move in any direction at any time, the teacher
does have two directions that can be quite useful in the inquiry
process. First is to refer the participant directly to the embodied
experience of the moment. This referral makes a significant amount of
data available for the exploration and in itself deepens the inquiry.
Whether the inquiry is about physical pain, uncomfortable thoughts, or
difficult emotions, the direction to explore body sensation is often a
counter movement to what the participant is hoping for --- inquiry is a
turning-towards. The question the teacher asks is something like, "Would
you be willing to work with this in the body?", which preserves the
participant's freedom. As this type of exploration often rubs against
the grain of a participant's desired experience, the teacher can help to
further catalyze curiosity and make approach easier by asking specific
questions that require turning towards the experience and looking again.
Thus, a direct question about a pain --- "What is it like for you?" ---
may yield general information as the participant looks and turns away.
"How would you describe it --- is it sharp, dull, hot, pulsing?"
requires further encounter and yields more data for inquiry. Such
questioning can be used to keep the participant turned in the direction
of his experience --- "Does it have a color?" "A shape?" "Is it always
the same?" --- each exploration and answer brings more data to the
inquiry, shaping and reshaping it. The intention is not resolution, not
relief, but knowledge --- of what the experience is like in the moment,
and, most important, knowledge that the participant can turn towards his
experience and be with and in it. The teacher might note: "So it was
hard to go there, hard to look at your pain at first, and yet, look how
long you were able to explore it without moving away."

130

5 The Skills of the Teacher

Openness to outcome Inquiry is an invitation to the innate wisdom of the
other to show itself, to be known in experience and language. When this
spirit of invitation is embodied by the teacher, and supported in the
group, it also may become a way of being for the participant (and many
in the group). Valuable dialog may take place, yet the value is not
simply in the particular insight or construction of experience in
language. The value is in loosening the grip of habits of thought,
patterns of reaction, and rigid self-concepts. The potential of inquiry
is a new capacity for freedom that is well described in Carse's (1986)
metaphor of finite and infinite games. Finite games have specific rules,
so that we know what the game is and how to win by defeating others.
Infinite games have ever-changing rules, so that we can continue play
indefinitely without zero-sum outcomes. At its best, inquiry takes the
teacher, participant, and class into the realm of continual play, which
can result in epiphanies that may be ongoing, or in planting seeds that
may grow in later classes (or years), or in simply going nowhere while
maintaining play. No one fails, everyone benefits. Further, the teacher
has no fixed role in the infinite version of the inquiry game.
Particularly as participants come to own their co-created mindfulness
and resonance, it may be possible for them to inquire on their own,
either in "internal" dialog, or with one another. The following
transcript of an inquiry dialog comes from the sixth session of an MBSR
course, so the participants have developed a capacity to work
individually in internal and/or external dialog. The class has some
experience in holding its resonance to support the participant who is
engaged in inquiry. This moment comes during the check-in after the
opening meditation practice. Participant: I have had this pain in my jaw
for eight or nine years now. My pain doesn't go away. I feel like I
can't stand it. I cannot say just let it be there, be kind to it. It
requires so much patience. I don't know if I can do it. I doubt that I
can be mindful. Teacher: Are you noticing pain as you sit here?
Referring the participant to the experience of the present moment,
moving away from the eight or nine years of story. P: Yes. It's not too
bad but it is there, it's constantly there and it gets worse and becomes
unbearable. Even when I try not to clench my muscles, somehow they
clench. It hurts a lot. More data has become available; still entwined
in the story of the years. T: So what's arising now is pain in your jaw
that is not too bad in this moment, and doubt that you can be with this
mindfully. Doubting that you have patience to be with the pain. But you
have managed somehow with this for years.

Inquiring: Curiosity About Participants' Experiences

131

Pointing to present moment experience first, then acknowledging the
story of "managing" the pain. P: A miserable managing... T: Are you
willing to go within and notice what is happening in this moment, to
work with this a bit right now, turn toward what is here, and explore
mindfully? Making the invitation; tending to the participant's freedom.
P: Yes... T: (to class) I invite each of you, if you care to, to be
present with Hope as she explores her experience... to include in your
awareness whatever is arising for you moment to moment. Extending the
invitation: stewardship of the group's three treasures --- freedom,
belonging, and resonance. T: (to Hope) What do you notice now as you
check into your body --- sensations in the body? Turning towards the
experience. P: My jaw hurts. The general information of a tentative
"peek" at the experience. T: Can you describe the sensation? Asking for
more specificity; catalyzing curiosity. P: It's like a warm penetrating
circle. There are times when it gets so unbearable. Moving from looking
closely to pulling away into the story. T: There are times when it gets
unbearable but right now are the sensations unbearable? Directing back
to the moment, the body. P: I think the longevity of this situation is
so unbearable I can't help feeling aggravated by it. I can't stand it. I
try to notice, not to judge, but it doesn't matter... It's always there.
Staying with the story; staying away from the bodily experience. T: So
you have certain thoughts about this pain: "It is unbearable," "I can't
stand it," "It's always there"...(pausing) Feeling the area of the jaw
now, in this moment what do you notice? Acknowledging the story, the
thoughts, then redirecting to the body. P: It's warm... I feel like it
may grow (hands tightening, face tightening)

132

5 The Skills of the Teacher

T: So the sensation is warm and the thought is that it may grow --- a
thought about the future, the possibility that the pain may worsen...
Acknowledging the turning towards and the shift into story. P: I'm
scared... T: So you are noticing that you are scared... (long pause)...
Where do you feel fear in the body in the moment? Acknowledging the fear
and being present with the participant before redirecting to the
experience in the body. P: In my shoulders, they are squeezed... I feel
tension, the pain may grow bigger... Moving onto the body for
information, then away. T: So you are feeling tension in the shoulders,
feeling squeezed and you are thinking about the future, worrying that
the pain may get worse... See if you can bring your attention directly
into the body, being with sensations... Acknowledging; pointing out the
difference between feeling and thought. Protecting freedom (see if you
can) while directing attention into the body. P: My shoulders are tight.
Data without a story. T: Anything else? Gently working with the
curiosity in the moment. P: My face is tight... The pain in my jaw is
more intense. T: What has happened to the warm spot? Genuine curiosity.
P: It is sharper, a sharp pain, more intense... T: Can you stay with it?
Tending freedom; encouraging. P: I am wondering if my posture makes it
worse. Moving into thought and story once again. T: Tension may
contribute to your pain. It's very natural to want to know what makes
pain better or worse. For now can you stay with body sensations?
Acknowledging the interest, yet encouraging the turning towards. P: The
pain moved down, it's moving and shifting. T: So it does not stay the
same? It's not static? It changes... Is it possible for you to make
space for this pain to move and shift? Offering an expanded area for
exploration. P: NO!

Inquiring: Curiosity About Participants' Experiences

133

T: What does that "NO" feel like in the body? Acknowledging; tending
freedom; offering continued exploration. P: (Crossing hands over chest,
making fists, crouching inward) Contracted and tight... T: What is
happening in your jaw as you contract? Genuine curiosity; a return to
the exploration. P: The pain is getting worse. I want to say bad words
about it --- F words... T: Are you noticing any emotions in the moment?
Genuine curiosity. P: I felt sad before, but now I feel like I repress
my emotions. T: How does it feel in the body when you repress, stuff
your emotions? (Turning to class, asking rhetorically) How does it feel
for you when you stuff emotions? Tending to resonance; keeping curiosity
going. P: I feel more tension, feel like I am getting squeezed. T: In
this moment are you feeling pain in your jaw? Returning to the
exploration. P: Yes. It's there. I Don't Like It!! T: You don't like it.
And right now the pain is here. What happens when I say that this is the
way it is in this moment? Offering the "truth" of the moment. P: I say,
"That's not right!" (Clenching hands and face, squeezing legs together)
T: But the actuality of this moment, Hope, is that this is the way it
is. P: I feel resistance to that. T: I can understand that and I see
people nodding --- they understand too. Acknowledging; tending belonging
and resonance. P: I feel like arguing with it, with you. T: I can
understand that you have resistance and emotions that make you want to
fight with the pain and to argue with me. But where does that put you in
the body, Hope? Pointing to the "truth" of the moment. P: More pain...
T: I am inviting you to make a choice in this moment, to allow yourself
to be with the actuality of what is. Opening even one percent more to
what is here... the pain, the tightness, including the resistance, which
is here as well. (pausing, noting what is happening nonverbally with
Hope and the other participants, then, turning to all) Whatever is here
for you, it is the actuality of your moment. Noticing if you are
resisting the moment, and how that feels, or opening to what is, and how
that feels... (long pause, then, to Hope) What is happening?

134

5 The Skills of the Teacher

P: I feel less tension in my shoulders, not feeling squeezed. I am aware
of the pain in my jaw and I see that there is a tendency for me to rush
there, to say, "It's still there." T: So you are able to notice your
tendency to rush to the area of pain, and also to notice what you are
telling yourself about the pain? Acknowledging; allowing her to hear her
own statement. P: Yes. (slight smile, body more relaxed, more open
posture...long pause) T: It takes a lot of courage to turn toward pain,
to open to what is not wanted. And I see a lot of heads nodding. Do you
see this Hope? Your classmates are acknowledging your courage... T: (to
group) Let's just sit now... (after a couple of minutes, to group) What
quality or qualities are you noticing in the moment? Tending belonging
and resonance. P2: Strength... P3: Compassion... P4: Encouragement...
P5: Sense of understanding... T: How does that feel in the body?
Demonstrating preference for embodied knowing. P5: Peaceful... P6: Not
acknowledging what is happening can hurt more than acknowledging it.

Part III

Towards an "Empty" Curriculum

Chapter 6

Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

In learning to teach mindfulness as a professional, the questions about
what gets taught and when are of equal weight with the questions of how
the teaching happens. Within the mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs),
particularly those that explicitly include meditation practices, many of
the answers to what and when (as well as how) have been based on the
template curriculum of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR). As
described in Chapter 1, many of the MBIs, such as mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy (MBCT), mindfulness-based art therapy (MBAT),
mindfulness-based relationship enhancement (MBRE), and mindfulnessbased
relapse prevention (MBRP), assume the basic MBSR curriculum of formal
mindfulness practices as an armature for specific didactic material and
specially elaborated meditations and experiential explorations for their
own target populations. In this way, the pedagogy of mindfulness unfolds
relatively consistently from intervention to intervention. The measured
success and exciting possibilities of the MBIs, we believe, are
attributable in no small part to the MBSR armature --- a metastructure
of the what and when of teaching mindfulness. This metastructure was
developed and refined through more than 30 years of reflective teaching.
It has been shaped by a range of influences. The long-established
approaches in the wisdom traditions worldwide form a background, with
the Buddhist tradition contributing the key model in the four ennobling
truths and four foundations of mindfulness (see Table 6.1, and Chapter 3
for detailed discussion). This organizing impulse has been reinforced
and amplified through the findings of empirical research, study of
participant responses, and the personal intuition, fearless
experimentation, and powerful authenticity and authority of Jon
Kabat-Zinn, Saki Santorelli, and the senior teaching staff at the
University of Massachusetts medical school (UMASS) Center for
Mindfulness (CFM). As MBSR has moved outward into the world from its
origin, refinement of the curriculum and pedagogy has become an ongoing
collaborative activity, not only at the CFM but also among the community
of teachers in the MBIs, as they conduct classes around the world. Those
in the community of teachers have been using their own authenticity and
authority to shape responses to what is arising moment by moment in
unique circumstances. Such exploration, critique, and innovation have

D. McCown et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians
and Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_6, © Springer
Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

137

Foundations of Mindfulness (see detailed description in Chapter 3)

• Mindfulness of body

• Mindfulness of feelings

• Mindfulness of mind states

• Mindfulness of mental contents

Four Ennobling Truths (see detailed description in Chapter 3)

• Fully understanding suffering

• Letting go of craving

• Realizing liberation

• Cultivating the path

• Discovering embodiment • Cultivating observation

3&4: Alternate the body scan with standing or floor yoga practice (plus
sitting meditation with focus on breath) 5&6: Alternate sitting w/
choiceless awareness with yoga; add walking meditation 7&8: Choose the
practices you prefer

• Moving toward acceptance • Growing compassion

• Cultivating observation • Moving toward acceptance

• Experiencing new possibilities • Discovering embodiment

1&2: Body scan meditation (plus sitting meditation with focus on breath)

1: There's more right than wrong with you 2: Perception and creative
responding 3: Pleasure and power of presence (pleasant events) 4: Shadow
of stress (unpleasant events) 5: Finding space for responding 6: Working
with difficult situations 7: Cultivating kindness 8: A new beginning

Spectrum of Teaching Intentions (listed by intensity of focus in class)

MBSR Curriculum: Formal home practice assignments by week

MBSR Curriculum: Themes and content by week

Table 6.1 Towards an "Empty" curriculum: Influences and expressions
through eight weeks of MBSR

138 6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

The MBSR Curriculum

139

been encouraged from the start as part of MBSR teacher training. From
the beginning, Kabat-Zinn (1996) has presented an openness to change,
which is stated explicitly in the training materials used by the CFM: We
emphasize that there are many different ways to structure and deliver
mindfulnessbased stress reduction programs. The optimal form of its
delivery will depend critically on local factors and on the level of
experience and understanding of the people undertaking the teaching.
Rather than "clone" or "franchise" one cookie cutter approach,
mindfulness ultimately requires effective use of the present moment as
the core indicator of the appropriateness of particular choices.

Interestingly, despite the license granted to the community, the changes
and elaborations that have taken place have been focused more on the how
of the pedagogy rather than the what and when of the curriculum. There
are many possible explanations for this reticence to change: perhaps a
personal admiration for this paradigmbreaking work; maybe a reverence
for the Buddhist underpinnings; maybe a scientific conservatism among
clinicians that responds to MBSR's empirical success with "if it ain't
broke, don't fix it"; there may also be a practical reserve in wanting
to maintain continuity for the sake of continued elaboration of the
evidence base. It seems most likely, however, that the metastructure has
remained unchanged for decades simply because it has an extremely
powerful intuitive logic --- it feels right to the teachers --- many of
whom have been able to compare the years-long development of their
personal practice of mindfulness with the 8-week MBSR experience. In
short, it has an undeniable integrity. Although the metastructure of
MBSR in no way can be considered proven as the optimum approach to
teaching mindfulness, it is certainly widely accepted, and the empirical
measures of its success are impressive. Therefore, it would seem to be a
useful exercise for teachers steeped in the curriculum to reflectively
and critically examine the MBSR metastructure. Such an undertaking
promises to make explicit the intentions that the teacher holds for
participants' development of mindfulness across the duration of the
curriculum. Because these intentions are implicit in the what and when
of mindfulness experience and practice, it will be useful to review the
curriculum and practices session by session.

The MBSR Curriculum The template MBSR program (Kabat-Zinn, 1990) is an
8-week, nine-session course that is educational, experiential, and
patient centered. Participants attend 2½ h sessions once a week for
eight weeks, with a full-day (7-hours) class between the sixth and
seventh sessions. Class time each week is divided among formal
meditation practice, presentations by the teacher of certain didactic
material, small and large group discussions, and inquiry during group
time with individuals into their presentmoment experiences. The core
formal mindfulness practices taught include a body scan, sitting
meditation with concentrative focus on the breath, mindful Hatha yoga,
sitting meditation that expands the focus of attention, to choiceless
awareness.

140

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

Additional meditations introduced or ­reinforced at the full-day session
include walking meditation, a loving kindness meditation, and mountain
meditation. The template program undergoes a transformation based on
local population, setting, and teacher factors. For example, the
frequency and duration of classes may be altered significantly. Several
studies report varied course lengths, of 4--10 weeks (Jain et al, 2007;
Rosenzweig et al., 2003; Speca et al., 2000), and shorter class
durations, ranging from 1½ to 2 hours (Astin, 1997; Jain et al, 2007;
Roth and Calle-Mesa, 2006; Rosenzweig et al., 2003). The changes
required to adapt to such timings are made primarily in the amount and
kind of didactic material presented, and in the opportunity for group
discussions and inquiry, rather than in the presentation and practice of
the core meditations. In the examples of programs listed here, the core
practices were all presented --- and in the template order. The outline
below describes themes, learning focuses, and specific practices
typically introduced in each class session of an MBSR course based on
the template program. The themes and practices are reinforced and built
upon in each succeeding week.

MBSR Template Course Program Session One: Theme: There is more right
with you than wrong with you. Learning focus: Problems can be worked
with, and the MBSR program offers the opportunity to do this in a
supportive environment. Present-moment awareness of body sensations,
thoughts, and emotions is the foundation of this work, because it is
only in the present that one can learn, grow, and change. This includes
formal didactic presentation on "What is mindfulness?" Practices
Introduced: Awareness of breath, body scan. Session Two: Theme:
Perception and creative responding. Learning focus: How you see things,
or don't see them, will determine how you will respond to them. It is
not the events themselves but rather how you handle them that influences
the effects on your body and mind. Practice reinforced: Body scan.
Practice introduced: Sitting meditation (focus on awareness of breath).
Session Three: Theme: The pleasure and power of being present. Learning
focus: We miss many of our pleasant moments, perhaps by focusing only on
the unpleasant ones, such as crisis or pain. Yet it is possible to have
pleasant moments even when you are experiencing crisis or pain.
Developing deeper understanding and present moment contact with the
triangle of awareness: body sensation, thought, and emotion.

The MBSR Curriculum

141

Practices Introduced: Mindful yoga (floor yoga). Practices reinforced:
Body scan, sitting (breath awareness). Session Four: Theme: The shadow
of stress. Learning focus: Cultivating mindfulness can reduce the
negative physiological and psychological effects of stress reactivity,
as well as help develop more effective ways of responding positively and
proactively to stressful situations and experiences. Includes formal
didactic presentation on stress physiology. Practices introduced:
Mindful yoga (standing postures), sitting meditation (expanding focus
from awareness of breath to body sensations and sound). Practices
reinforced: Body scan, sitting (breath awareness). Session Five: Theme:
Finding the space for making choices. Learning focus: Connect
mindfulness with perception, appraisal, and choice in the critical
moment. Particular attention is paid to observing thoughts as events,
and distinguishing events from content --- "You are not your thoughts."
Practice introduced: Sitting meditation (expanding awareness to whatever
arises in the present moment --- "choiceless awareness"). Practices
reinforced: Yoga. Session Six: Theme: Working with difficult situations.
Learning focus: How to maintain your center, recognize habitual patterns
of relating, and discern skillful options in stressful interpersonal
exchanges. Includes formal didactic presentation and experiential
activities to demonstrate communication possibilities in both the verbal
and nonverbal realms. Practice introduced: Walking meditation. Practice
reinforced: Sitting (choiceless awareness). All-day Session: Theme:
"Dive in!" Learning focus: Deepen mindful awareness of experience by
formally ­cultivating mindfulness over an extended period of time,
fostering the possibility of greater ­self-knowledge and insight into the
impermanence of pleasant and unpleasant body--mind states. Practices:
The full range of practices from prior sessions are reinforced, and two
new practices are introduced --- mountain meditation and loving kindness
meditation Session Seven: Theme: Cultivating kindness towards self and
others. Learning focus: Attitudes and practices to help develop a
disposition of generosity in formal meditation so that it may arise more
readily in our day-to-day life. Continued work with interpersonal
communication. Practices reinforced: Sitting (choiceless awareness),
loving kindness. Session Eight: Theme: "The eighth week is the rest of
your life."

142

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

Learning focus: How do you keep up the momentum and discipline you've
developed over the past seven weeks of mindfulness practice? Presents a
range of resources, such as books, recordings, advanced programs, and
other opportunities for practice in the community, to support continued
practice. Meditation practice and opportunities for sharing with the
group close the session and the course. Practices reinforced: Body scan,
mountain meditation, sitting (choiceless awareness), loving kindness.

A Spectrum of Teaching Intentions Reflections on our encounters with the
themes, learning objectives, and practices of the MBSR curriculum
through study, teaching, and research have helped to distil a way of
describing the metastructure of MBSR as an interrelated set of teaching
intentions. These are different from learning objectives, in that they
are meant to be held lightly by the teacher, rather than pressed upon
the participants. In this way, the pedagogy of the emergent moment can
reflect the integrity of the curriculum's metastructure, while the
teacher remains open to outcome. The curriculum becomes a potential
space in which contingent content can be co-created --- teacher,
participant, and class are free to respond to the impulse and intention
of the present moment. The description of an "empty curriculum"
presented here seems, in this moment, both useful for practice and
generative of critique and innovation. It is presented in a "temporary
truth" approach to theorizing, which assumes a mindful ­stance ---
maintaining a present-moment focus, avoiding the reification of
concepts, and contemplating impermanence. Although the diagram below
(Fig. 6.1) confines each teaching intention to an independent bar, the
graphic should be imagined instead as a spectrum --- for two important
reasons. First, consider a rainbow. It is one continuous gradation of
hues, only a few of which are available to the human eye. The seven
colors we see are a social construction, an overlay of language agreed
upon and defined in community. They do not correspond to some inevitable
essence or "truth" about the rainbow. In our Western view of the
spectrum of colors, the designation "red" is agreed upon in narrower or
broader ways, and helps us talk about, say, apples and computer
graphics. In the same way, then, the teaching intentions overlay five
categories on the total experience of learning mindfulness within the
MBIs. Designating "discovering embodiment" as one intention is simply
meant to help teachers and participants in exploring and reporting on
experiences in which the centrality of the body is called to the
foreground of attention. The second reason for seeing the set of
intentions as a spectrum is their interrelatedness. Experiences in
learning mindfulness are often beyond the limits of language; events and
insights emerge from and dissolve into the mystery of not knowing. This
suggests it will be best to hold

A Spectrum of Teaching Intentions

143

the defined intentions lightly --- to be open to the infinite shadings
as one intention blends with another, and as unforeseen possibilities
show themselves in each new moment of experience or reflection. Finally,
it's necessary to remember that this rainbow of intentions appears in
context --- in a sky of relationship and resonance. A Spectrum of
Teaching Intentions Derived from MBSR Experiencing New Possibilities

Discovering Embodiment

Cultivating Observation

Moving Towards Acceptance

Growing Compassion

Week 1

Week 8

Fig. 6.1 Both the vertical and horizontal structures of the spectrum of
teaching intentions reflect the theoretical underpinnings of the MBSR
metastructure. The vertical structure places the unfolding of the course
for participants between the experience of new possibilities and the
growth of compassion. This suggests the interdependence and simultaneity
of the three axioms of mindfulness in the IAA model (intention,
attention, and attitude) proposed by Shapiro et al. (2006). The
horizontal structure suggests the incremental and experiential nature of
the course, in which knowledge is not added to participants, but rather,
reflecting the meaning of the Greek root of the verb to educate, is
"drawn out" of each participant --- gently, in delicate shades that
reflect the individual's unique experience in the moment.

Paradox The More You Practice, the More You, Well, Practice In the MBIs
that include formal meditation, home practice is considered an integral
part of the course. The ideal of compliance to home practice is
emphasized to participants when they register, and is actively
encouraged by teachers throughout the course. In the CFM's template MBSR
program, participants are asked to commit to formal practice, supported
by audio recordings that guide the meditations, for about 45 minutes a
day. However, what is asked for and what is received can be different.
The average practice time reported by participants in the CFM program,
depending upon the specific practice, rarely approaches the requested
time, ranging from an average of 16--20 minutes per day for sitting
meditation and mindful movement, to 31--35 minutes per day for the

144

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

body scan practice (Carmody and Baer, 2008). In other MBSR programs,
shorter durations of formal home practice have been required, ranging
from 15 to 35 minutes (Chang et al., 2004; Reibel et al., 2001; Jain, et
al, 2007; Rosenzweig, et al., 2003; Roth and CalleMesa, 2006), while
providing health outcomes consistent with those of the CFM program.
There is no consensus in the research on the relationship between home
practice duration or frequency and participant outcomes. Some reports
show no significant correlations between formal home practice time and
outcomes (Astin, 1997; Carmody et al., 2008; Davidson et al., 2003),
while others find correlations between practice time and specific health
outcomes (Speca et al., 2000; Carmody and Baer, 2008). Whether or not
researchers find consensus on this question may actually have little
relevance to the practice or pedagogy of mindfulness. The question comes
from an entirely foreign dimension. Science since Galileo has limited
itself to that which is measurable (Whitehead, 2008), and mindfulness
researchers are currently working in that paradigm. While clock-time and
calendar-time are convenient ways to map the horizontal dimension of
having, they yield no useful information about the vertical dimension of
being (Batchelor, 1983; Fromm, 1976; Marcel, 1949). So, having a
mindfulness practice is reducible to how many days, months, years you've
practiced; how often each week or day you practice; and for how many
minutes you practice. Yet, being mindful is irreducible. You are only
fully present in the vertical dimension, where spiritual and esthetic
experience is found, and where clock time cannot measure the moments.
Surely this is what our practice aims for and where our pedagogy points.
Authentic moments of mindfulness, however and whenever encountered, can
be the catalyst for the changes researchers measure over time. The
punctuation of the anxious, horizontal having of a life by a vertical
moment of being --- whether a single moment or an ongoing series --- is
a powerful discontinuity. It seems appropriate to let a poet speak to
the experience and its effects. Rilke describes the inevitability and
charge of such a moment of being in this esthetic encounter with an
Archaic Torso of Apollo (Rilke, 1908/ Mitchell, 1995): We cannot know
his legendary head with eyes like ripening fruit. And yet his torso is
still suffused with brilliance from inside, like a lamp, in which his
gaze, now turned to low, gleams in all its power. Otherwise the curved
breast could not dazzle you so, nor could a smile run through the placid
hips and thighs to that dark center where procreation flared. Otherwise
this stone would seem defaced beneath the translucent cascade of the
shoulders and would not glisten like a wild beast's fur: would not, from
all the borders of itself, burst like a star: for here there is no place
that does not see you. You must change your life. We know this much:
participants who have a six-day-a-week, 45-minutes-a-day meditation
practice, and participants who simply are mindful at some moment, both
access the vertical dimension. And both can change their lives.

Defining the Teaching Intentions within the Context of the MBIs

145

Defining the Teaching Intentions within the Context of the MBIs
Experiencing New Possibilities From the first moment of encounter with
the curriculum, participants' expectations are subverted. Their habitual
worldviews are slightly destabilized. For example, being part of a
heterogeneous group that includes people experiencing suffering of very
different kinds and levels sends a message that is amplified by the
statement often quoted in MBSR: "...as long as you are breathing, there
is more right with you than there is wrong, no matter how ill or
hopeless you may feel" (Kabat-Zinn, 1990, p. 2). Many participants who
have come to closely identify themselves with their conditions are faced
with a situation in which their condition is suddenly less interesting
--- to everyone. This may be frightening or freeing. It is almost
certainly new. This sense that taken-for-granted frames of reference are
available for reflection and reconsideration runs throughout the entire
course. Also, this teaching intention emphasizes the liminal
characteristics of the group, thereby contributing to the development of
communitas (Turner, 1969) and catalyzing resonance. Discovering
Embodiment Our contemporary culture in the West privileges the cognitive
domain over the domains of affect and embodiment. Direct experience, in
Hamlet's phrase, is "sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought." In
contrast, beginning with the first class, participants in MBSR are
invited to experience whatever body sensations are arising, without
judgment. Initial guidance of the body scan practice, and inquiry into
participants' responses to that practice, help participants to disembed
their immediate experience from their stories about the experience, and
to separate anticipation or opinion from the present-moment happening.
Early emphasis on embodiment helps make more available the interoceptive
sensations that catalyze and deepen resonance with others. Across the
entire eight weeks, inquiry into experience returns persistently and
patiently to the body, steering participants away from the privileged
cognitive domain, and leading them from the known to the not-yet-known.
In exploring experience, the holistic relationship of the triangle of
awareness is instrumental. For example, when a participant is feeling
strong emotion, the teacher can invite her to drop the "story" --- the
thoughts supporting it --- and simply be with/in the body sensations of
the moment without judgment. Such an exploration of, say, anger, may
lead to a discovery that the bodily sensations by themselves are
energetic and even pleasurable, which in turn may gently prompt a
reframing. Cultivating Observation This is the realization of the
metamechanism of reperceiving described in the intention, attention, and
attitude (IAA) mindfulness model of Shapiro, et al. (2006). Participants
very often come to the point where they discover the capacity to detect
their own inner experiences. This realization may begin to dawn as early
as week two,

146

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

when the initial challenge of the MBSR approach has settled. Not
coincidentally, this is also the week when sitting meditation is first
introduced. In the formal practice of both the body scan and sitting
meditation in class 2, guidance assists participants in working with
rather than against the "wandering mind." As they notice when and where
the mind has wandered, participants begin to discover the observing
consciousness that does the noticing, and can use this capacity to open
themselves to meet their moment-to-moment experience, or even choose to
reframe it. Moving Towards Acceptance This is the actualization of the
attitude of mindfulness, the third of the IAA axioms of Shapiro, et
al.'s model (2006). It is a subtle sense of caring that has its roots in
nonjudgment, and that flowers into "an affectionate, compassionate
quality...a sense of openhearted, friendly presence and interest"
(Kabat-Zinn, 2003, p. 145, quoted in Shapiro et al., 2006). Moving
towards acceptance is not merely a function of the reduced reactivity of
the individual participant, it also is supported by the authentic
presence of the teacher and the co-created mindfulness of the group,
which can hold the individual in a way that maintains the stance of
lowered reactivity in the face of aversive sensations, thoughts, and
emotions in the moment. Growing Compassion Over the duration of the
8-week MBSR course, compassion reveals itself, at first implicitly and
mostly directed towards the self, and later, explicitly and extended
towards the other as well as the self. Compassion is implicit in the
nonjudging attitude with which formal and informal mindfulness practices
are introduced and explored in the early weeks of the course. Later, an
explicit practice of loving kindness is introduced --- often during a
full-day session when participants have cultivated mindfulness for
several hours and the group has built intra- and interpersonal resonance
that allows and supports approach to such tender, vulnerable emotions.
This practice of offering wishes for happiness, safety, well-being, and
ease helps many participants link their personal practice to the
relational dimension. They discover the potential impact of their
individual transformations on their families, social circles, and
workplaces; their awareness of political, social, and environmental
situations; and on their religious and spiritual lives. Compassion
becomes a powerful force for them.

Applying the Teaching Intentions to Shape Curricula and Guide Responses
Thinking through the spectrum may be useful to the professional teaching
mindfulness in four different ways. (1) Adjusting standard content:
Limitations may impinge, of time and/or space, as well as of culture,
cognitive capacity, or other participant

Example 1: Adjusting Standard Content

147

characteristics, requiring a shift in content that must be shaped
through the teacher's authority and reference to the salient intentions.
(2) Guiding inquiry: Professionals can use this simple scheme in the
emergent pedagogical moment to locate a direction for inquiry with class
participants. (3) Improvising one-on-one teaching: In educational or
therapeutic dyads, the intentions can be a flexible tool to engage with
a clients' unique, ongoing concerns, allowing the teacher to meet the
client where she is at any given moment by selecting from available
curricular content or improvising with the material arising in the
session to fashion unique content. (4) Creating unique content: New MBIs
can be generated as the empty curriculum can be filled with concrete
content to leverage the practice of mindfulness in working with new
populations. The intentions are also valuable in the creation of
curricula that follow on from one of the foundational mindfulness-based
interventions --- so-called "graduate courses" in which past
participants can refresh their skills and explore new practices and
applications. The remainder of this chapter offers examples of how the
spectrum of teaching intentions can be used in each of the four ways
described above. The examples are presented as illustrations of ways of
thinking, and are not meant as concrete answers or programs. They are
simply expressions of the authenticity, authority, and friendship of the
authors to specific situations and within certain relationships. In
teaching mindfulness as a professional, each teacher's response will be
in the moment, for the moment, and will arise more from who she is than
from any knowledge she has. In short, these examples are for inspiration
not imitation. Following on, Chapter 7 discusses the philosophical and
pedagogical understanding of each intention. Each discussion links the
intention to the theoretical and practical concerns of teaching
mindfulness as a professional, as presented in Parts I and II. Further,
each discussion offers examples of the typical content of the MBSR
curriculum, as well as of contingent curricula that may prove useful ---
annotated scripts are provided for the core MBSR practices that are most
associated with each intention, and there are scripts for practices for
each intention that may help illuminate how it may be expressed in
particular settings or with specific populations. In addition, vignettes
of individual and group inquiry are offered to illustrate how inquiry
can be used to point participants towards the particular intention.

Example 1: Adjusting Standard Content We were asked to provide a "field
test" of mindfulness for an editor of Prevention magazine (Foley, 2006;
Reibel and McCown, 2007). The editor wanted to report on a one-time
training for a small group of participants with a range of different
reasons for investigating mindfulness practice. Conditions reported by
group members included anxiety, depression, sleep problems, chronic
pain, heart disease, asthma, gastrointestinal disorders, arthritis, and
fibromyalgia --- with all members reporting multiple conditions. We did
not believe that a single session could provide all that we hoped group
members could experience and come to understand. So we proposed a more

148

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

intense alternative --- the 8-week MBSR program. Our proposal made sense
and was of interest, but the project had significant constraints of
geography, participant time, and project finances. Participants were to
be drawn from four different Mid-Atlantic States; we had to meet the
publication deadline; and the budget required a creative solution to
deliver what we believed to be essential opportunities for learning. Our
strategy for adaptation started from the teaching intentions. We
designed a course that was launched in a way that allowed heavy initial
emphasis on the three intentions of experiencing new possibilities,
discovering embodiment, and growing compassion, while building a
platform from which the other two intentions of cultivating observation
and moving towards acceptance could be explored and expanded over time.

Mapping Out Three Lesson Module 1. A full-day introductory workshop:
Participants came together for 7 h and were given what amounted to an
MBSR mini-course. They were introduced to the full range of practices:
body scan, sitting meditation with awareness of breath, yoga stretching,
sitting meditation opening to choiceless awareness, walking meditation,
and loving kindness meditation. In addition, they received what we
believe to be the basic didactic presentations: a definition of
mindfulness, an exploration of stress physiology, and experiences of the
limits of perception. 2. Six weeks of practice and support: Participants
followed a schedule of formal and informal practices and readings from
Full Catastrophe Living for each week. At each week's end, the group
assembled by teleconference. Time on the phone was spent practicing
together, processing participants' experiences, and reviewing insights
occasioned by the homework. The group also maintained connection with
each other and with the teachers between calls through group and
individual emails. 3. A half-day silent retreat: Participants traveled
and gathered again to renew the sense of interconnection, review the
formal meditations, gain a taste of extended practice, learn about
resources for continued support, and come to closure.

The Full-day Introductory Workshop Underlying the workshop's design was
the effort to create personal connections and intersubjective resonance
in the group, for two reasons. First, this was important so that during
home practice during succeeding weeks, each participant, although
meditating alone, could draw on their remembered and internalized
support of the teachers and the group. Second, it was critical so that
intersubjective resonance could be more easily restored in the sparse
interpersonal environment of the weekly teleconferences, where the only
cues to another's presence are the content of verbal communication and
paralinguistic vocal information.

Example 1: Adjusting Standard Content

149

These considerations shaped the presentation of each experience (see
sidebar). Given the short amount of face-to-face time available in the
overall course design, concentrated exposure to just one teacher would
have increased the potential for internalization by participants.
However, due to teachers' commitments and schedules, two teachers were
necessary. To best facilitate and maintain connections with the
teachers, the practices and experiences were led by one or the other,
based on the plan for the six weekly teleconferences. Teachers taught
the practices for which they would be leading the teleconferences, and
CDs of their recording of the practice were provided to the participants
for home practice. To facilitate connections among group members during
the workshop, opportunities were created for one-to-one sharing.
Significant time was spent on introductions. Then, of course, the
mindfulness practices catalyzed the possibility of intersubjective
resonance in the group. Further, in the quiet after each practice,
participants met and spoke first in dyads or triads --- with different
partners each time --- before opening to group processing. The three
intentions of new possibilities, Design of the full-day
introducembodiment, and compassion also shaped tory workshop. the
design. The three shifted in dominance 9:30 Introduction module from
moment to moment, yet continually -- Self-introduction of teachers
supported and informed each other. -- Experience: Meditation
repeatDiscovering new possibilities domiing the question, "What brings
nated in the introduction and definition you here?" modules. In the
introduction experience, the -- Self-introduction of participants,
question "What brings you here?" was in answer to the question dropped
into the meditation again and again. 9:50 What is MBSR? For many,
different answers arose each time, -- Fill out precourse research
introducing the uncertainty and potential for forms change inherent in
mindfulness practices. In 10:20 Definition module the definitions
module, participants found -- Stress definition, and segue to: their
assumptions challenged: stress is more -- Practice: Relaxing sighs
subjective and controllable than it seems, -- Mindfulness definition,
and and raisins are very different when encounsegue to: tered one on
one. -- Experience: Mindfully eating a Embodiment bore the most weight
for raisin the day. From practice to practice, the -- Practice: Body
scan emphasis of guidance and initial inquiry -- Dialog about practice,
first in was on body sensation. The order of the dyads, then as group
practices built on what was experienced: 11:30 Practice: Yoga (flowing
directly from the interoception of the body scan to into the next
practice) proprioception of the yoga sequence of 11:50 Practice: Sitting
meditation with standing and floor postures, and flowing awareness of
breath right into the introduction of sitting medita12:15 Dialog about
both practices, first in tion with awareness of the breath, where the
dyads (different partner), then as freedom and sensitivity from the
prior pracgroup tices could precipitate a more intimate con12:30 Lunch

150

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

nection with the gross and subtle motions -- Eating and resting in
silence, and influences of the breath on the body. It together is also
possible that this emphasis on aware1:15 Practice: Walking meditation
ness of sensations in the body --- particu-- Dialog about practice,
first in larly while resonating intra-subjectively dyads (another
different part--- helped to intensify the experience of ner), then as
group resonating intersubjectively, and thereby 1:50 Perception
experiments created stronger connections in the group. -- DVD
presentation of experiCompassion by participants for themments selves
and each other was a potential right -- Dialog about experience; first
in from the introductions. The repeated "What triads, then triads
reporting in brings you here?" question probed personal to large group
motivations, and the sharing of personal 2:10 Experience: Narrating
one's momentstories of suffering and hope made empathic by-moment
experience in dyads feelings more likely and more available. -- Group
discussion of experience The definition of mindfulness, of course, 2:30
Practice: Sitting meditation opencontains the attitude of nonjudgment in
ing to choiceless awareness which compassion is implicit, while the
-- Dialog about practice; first in presentation of the definition made
it dyads (another different partexplicit, noting that practicing
mindfulness ner), then as group cuts across the grain of our default
desires 3:20 Practice: Seated yoga for permanence and certainty, so it
requires 3:35 Description of and dialog about a little bit of effort and
whole lot of gentlelogistics for the six weeks of ness and kindness
towards ourselves. Again, teleconferences the potential for discovery of
an unforeseen 3:50 Practice: Loving kindness meditalevel of
intersubjective resonance in the praction tices and the subsequent
dyads, groups, and 4:00 Mindful good byes teacher-participant exchanges
made cultivation of compassion more likely and possible. Ending the
workshop with loving kindness practice brought the intention of
compassion and its dual motions towards self and others into the
foreground at last. For the editor, the experience of the day was an
encounter with all the "judgments, fantasies, to-do lists, hopes,
regrets, crazy stuff out of left field" (Foley, 2006, p. 159). Her
take-away illustrates the new possibilities intention at work: "If that
kind of chatter went on in my brain all the time, no wonder I often
found myself struggling to put one word in front of the other.... And it
hit me. This was why I needed to be in the present moment. The perpetual
mental struggle to reconcile the past and control the future was futile,
not to mention exhausting" (p. 159). The Six Weeks of Practice The six
weeks of home practice supported by once-a-week, one-hour
teleconferences continued the progressive foregrounding of the
intentions (see sidebar). The design

Example 1: Adjusting Standard Content

151

assumed that the majority of the teaching emphasis could now be placed
on the intentions that are bracketed by discovering new possibilities
and growing compassion. The experiences of teachers and participants of
the teleconferences were rich; voices did, indeed, help to recall the
embodied presence of the individuals we had come to know at the
workshop. The silences on the telephone seemed natural, companionable,
and resonant. And the entire conference felt supportive and refreshing.
Week one reinforced the exploration of embodiment, through exclusive
daily formal practice of the body scan and informal practice of mindful
eating. The first teleconference practice, reversing the body scan
direction, highlighted how quickly habits arise, and what it is like to
have a Schedule: home practice and fresh experience --- reinforcing the
teaching teleconferences. intention of discovering new possibilities.
Week one Formal practice: Body scan Week two, through the addition of
sitting Informal practice: Mindful eating meditation (awareness of
breath, AOB) and Teleconference practice: Body scan, the seeking and
recording of pleasant events reversing direction --- foot-to-head
verarising during each day began also to point sus head-to-foot towards
"cultivating observation." Week Week two Formal practice: Alternate
three, with a focus on recognizing and body scan and sitting meditation
(AOB) reporting on unpleasant events, helped to Informal practice:
Pleasant events bring the intention of moving towards calendar
acceptance to the fore. This was made more Teleconference practice:
Sitting meditaexplicit in the teleconference practice at the tion (AOB)
end of the week to which participants were Week three Formal Practice:
Alternate invited, during a body scan, to bring attenbody scan and yoga
tion to a place in the body that was calling Informal Practice:
Unpleasant events out in some way --- often interpreted as calendar some
form of discomfort. Participants were Teleconference practice: Body
scan, dwellasked to turn towards the discomfort, to ing in a region of
the body that "calls out" "make more space" or "soften" that area, so to
you they could observe with a caring curiosity Week four Formal
Practice: Alternate sitwhatever sensations were arising from ting (AOB)
and yoga moment to moment. In inquiry with the Informal Practice:
Mindful Shower teacher, participants came to see that Teleconference
practice: Sitting (choiceless through curiosity and acceptance their
awareness) experience changed over time --- in differWeek five Formal
Practice: Alternate ent and unpredictable ways. Weeks four yoga and
sitting (choiceless awareness) and five allowed deeper exploration of
Informal Practice: Mindful walking this. The focus of practice moved to
sitting Teleconference practice: Loving kindness meditation with
choiceless awareness, meditation amplifying and tying together the
intentions of Week six Formal Practice: Sitting (choiceembodiment,
observation, and acceptance. less awareness) The week-5 teleconference
practice of lovInformal Practice: Mindful listening ing kindness
meditation brought compas-

152

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

sion from the background to the foreground, and began to move it towards
others. The editor summed up weeks three to five by highlighting the
shift underway in her approach to moment-to-moment experience: "I was
beginning to think that I'd been wrong to dread being 'in the moment'
--- that the struggle to avoid pain is what actually prolongs it.
Meditation doesn't change what happens to you, but it helps change your
response" (Foley, 2006, p. 160). Week six, by spotlighting sitting with
choiceless awareness, offered encounters with the full spectrum of
teaching intentions, and led into the closing half-day workshop. The
Half-day Silent Retreat Participants met face to face for the second
time on a warm and bright day that allowed the option to hold the
retreat outside in a quiet, park-like setting. By design, the full
spectrum of teaching intentions came into play. Compassion flowed
immediately as participants, several of whom had weathered health crises
or family tragedies during the course, came together. The setting, the
discipline of silence and refraining from eye-contact, the unbroken flow
of one practice into another, all encouraged discovering new
possibilities in practice and in the way participants carried
themselves. Teachers led the formal practices (see sidebar) with an
emphasis on embodiment --- inviting participants to come closer and
closer to their sensory, proprioceptive, and interoceptive experience of
the moment. The embodied being-together after the weeks of voices as the
only contact helped to heighten awareness of feelings of intra- and
intersubjective resonance. With such feelings as background, observation
and acceptance were eased. Further, according to teachers' observations
and participants' reports, the practices often brought participants to a
deeper sense of stillness, quiet, and well-being. We broke the silence
in a Council Circle (Zimmerman and Coyle, 1996), offering a resonant
space for individual reflection to grow gently to dialog. The experience
closed with food and socializing. The editor describes the outcomes of
the Half-day "Closing Retreat" total course: "Over time, my daily
medita1:00 Arrivals and greetings tions helped me regard what was
happening 1:10 Sitting meditation in any moment with curiosity and
kindness, 1:30 Yoga without the mindless chatter and instant 1:50 Body
scan evaluation that used to whip me into a 2:10 Walking meditation
frenzy.... Most of my classmates had simi2:25 Mountain meditation lar
life-changing experiences" (Foley, 2006, 2:40 Group process, council
circle format p.160). A look at the outcome data shows (How have you
benefited? What are your that there is little hyperbole in that
statement. intentions to move forward?) Of the nine participants who
began the pro3:20 Loving kindness meditation gram, eight completed.
Their experience of 3:30 -- 4:00 Fill out post-course research change is
reflected in the outcomes of the forms; goodbyes 18-question Brief
Symptoms Inventory (BSI-18)

Example 1: Adjusting Standard Content

153

(Derogatis, 2000), which provides an overall measure of psychological
functioning, called the global severity index (GSI), and subscales
measuring depression, anxiety, and somatization (Fig. 6.2). Pre- to
post-intervention differences were significant for the group for GSI,
depression, and anxiety, though not for somatization. The GSI was
reduced by 52%, depression score by 70%, and anxiety score by 55%. Quite
a small sample, of course; yet, comparison with the typical outcomes of
these variables in standard MBSR courses for medical patients (e.g.,
Reibel, 2001) reveal comparable if not greater changes. Changes in
Psychological Distress in Participants in a Telephone-Adapted
Mindfulness Program Pre

Post

18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Depression

Anxiety

Somatization

GSI

BSI Subscales

Fig. 6.2 Participants showed significant improvements pre- to
post-intervention on three of four measures. Depression symptoms
improved 70% (p\<0.05). Anxiety symptoms improved 55% (p\<0.01).
Somatization showed no significant change. And the global severity
index, the measure of overall psychological distress, improved 52%
(p\<0.001) (Reibel and McCown, 2007).

A Very Short Course An introductory workshop is an often-requested
format for presenting the MBIs. The spectrum of intentions can be useful
in shaping such presentations, providing structure and ensuring that the
teacher presents the work authentically in its breadth, if not in depth.

154

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

MBSR for workplace populations is a frequently requested topic. Time for
such presentations is often from one to three hours. Our experience
(McCown and Reibel, 2008) suggests that it is extremely difficult to
work with less than 90 minutes, and that negotiating for additional time
past that mark is rewarding in the greater spaciousness allowed in
experiential explorations with the group. The empty curriculum suggests
a default agenda (see sidebar) that can be shared and promoted for
"sales" purposes, yet can be fine-tuned or even entirely improvised as
teacher--participant dialog suggests interesting directions. All of the
activities and meditation practices mentioned in the following
description are described in detail in Chapter 7. A short workshop can
start with experiencing new possibilities --- bypassing the expected
introductions and walk-through of the agenda. A smaller group with
spacious time could begin with an activity during which the teacher asks
participants to pause several times to check into internal experiences
of body sensation, thought, and mood state. For example, the "trading
pinkies" activity, in which rubber balls are exchanged from hand to hand
as the group walks at random in the room, can be used to generate some
of the feelings encountered in the workplace environment as exchanges
are made faster and faster, or formally, or casually, or secretly. A
larger group with less time might be brought to new ­possibilities
through a short ­exploration of a common experience in the moment. Such
an exploration is easily ­improvised on the basis of the teacher's
immediate circumstances, as in a guided experience of sitting in the
particular room, in a particular kind of chair. A simple practice such
as "the soles of the feet," in which a kind curiosity is brought to that
area, may also be useful. Introductions and A 1.5- to 3-hour
Introductory BSR other formalities can then take place inside workshop:
A default agenda a dialog based on the shared experience, 1. Beginning
with an experience which provides a multitude of segues into -- Group
dialog and introductions the rest of the workshop and shades into all
follow the other intentions. 2. Presentation on stress physiology A
didactic module on stress physiology -- Learning the relaxing sigh for
selfcan help participants discover embodiment, regulation although
potentially in a cognitive way. Yet, 3. Presentation on "What is mindful­
when followed by a demonstration of the ness?" "relaxing sigh" which can
help participants -- Experiencing mindfulness for yourself to shift from
their sympathetic nervous sys4. Break tem's fight-or-flight stress
reaction to the -- Practicing mindful stretching parasympathetic
rest-and-repair response, 5. Exploring the present moment the points are
brought home to the felt -- Mindfulness dyads sense. Although the
relaxing sigh is not a -- Sitting meditation mindfulness practice per
se, it does increase 6. Dialog and questions participants' understanding
of the body-- -- Next steps? mind connection. Further, it suggests that
7. Close with "unconditional friendliness" knowing what's happening with
you in the meditation

Example 2: Using the Intentions to Guide Inquiry

155

moment, and finding the space in which to make choices may be the start
of a new way of being. New possibilities, embodiment, and observation
are all in play even before mindfulness is defined. When the definition
is presented, the cognitive ­understanding should be grounded in
experience --- such as an eating meditation or a body scan, for example.
The definition and the guidance of the experience will necessarily
return again and again to nonjudgmental awareness and kind curiosity,
which helps to foreground the intentions of acceptance and compassion
--- particularly selfcompassion. Now all intentions are in play. In a
longer workshop, a break might allow participants to leave the room and
return to begin an activity of mindful stretching --- bringing them back
into the body and the moment after any distractions. In a shorter
workshop, the activity of stretching can be the break itself. The
practice can engage the intentions of embodiment, and participants can
come to realize that when they observe their condition in the moment,
they have a choice of acceptance, or, if possible and desired, change.
The shifts in experience that mindful stretching can prompt lead all the
way through the spectrum --- from new possibilities onward. Observation
comes to the foreground in exploring the present moment through sitting
meditation. The use of "mindfulness dyads" can help many participants
grasp the practice of choiceless awareness, of being with/in the
experience of each moment as it arises. Each member of the dyad narrates
his or her present moment experience to the other, who simply listens
mindfully. In processing this, time can be spent exploring not only the
capacity for observing but also the experiences of listening mindfully
and being deeply heard --- usually identified as rare in the workplace
setting. The mindfulness dyads, of course, provide a smooth segue into
sitting meditation practice --- which can begin with the embodiment
focus of sensation and breath, before expanding to choiceless awareness.
In a longer workshop, this module may be followed by instruction in the
3-minutes breathing space as a take-away practice; in a shorter
workshop, the 3-minutes breathing space may form the centerpiece of the
experience. The workshop comes to its logical end with group dialog on
next steps, often including invitations to participate in an 8-week MBSR
program. A formal sense of closure --- and a foregrounding of the
intention of growing ­compassion --- comes with the teacher leading a
short loving kindness practice. For nonprofit, social service-oriented
workplaces, the term loving kindness tends to be well received; in other
organizations, a term such as "unconditional friendliness" is often less
threatening, and helps participants settle into the practice.

Example 2: Using the Intentions to Guide Inquiry Even a one-question
inquiry is determined by a multitude of influences within the context of
a typical MBSR course. The timing within the eight weeks, the practice
or exercise from which the opportunity arises, the present-moment

156

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

­disposition of --- and the history of inquiry with --- the participant,
the state of group resonance, and the teacher's tacit understanding of
the nonverbal communications of the participant and the group are among
the salient factors. The work of weighing all of this information may
require a split second or a long pause. In any case, reference to the
spectrum of intentions can be defining or confirming --- in other words,
quite useful. The inquiry by the teacher in the following exchange was
shaped substantially by context, and was confirmed by reference to the
intentions. The class is in session 5. The bell has just rung to end a
30-minutes practice of sitting meditation in which the focus of
attention has been expanded step by step to choiceless awareness. The
group has been quiet and still during practice and now appears to the
teacher to be intersubjectively resonant and reticent to break the
silence. The teacher allows the silence to continue comfortably, and
finally, gently, breaks it. Teacher: Any discoveries as we moved from
breath to body, to sound, thinking, emotions, and then to whatever was
arising?" The question makes an opening. It brings specific language
into the group by naming the experiences of the practice. And it focuses
participants on discovery --- surprise, novelty, new possibilities. A
participant speaks at last. Participant: My leg has been hurting me all
morning... the pain had been so intense before we started meditating.
But when we were practicing I began to feel the air against my face...
and then I started hearing sounds in the room... and then I was aware
that the pain was still there --- but it didn't grab my attention so
much. This participant has spoken of her pain in several other class
sessions. She has been engaged at the outset by the teacher's statement
that not an end to pain, but a different relationship to pain is a
possible outcome of the course. At this point, the body scan and yoga
practice and the class dialogs about them have helped her to clearly
sense and articulate her embodied experience. The teacher realizes that
pursuing inquiry from the intention of embodiment --- about what she
perceived moment by moment --- will not take her much further in that.
The participant's statement that the pain "didn't grab my attention so
much" is different, fresh, an insight. She's noticed some distance from
her pain that is not simply a distraction. This is intriguing for her,
yet not necessarily comforting, so for the teacher to inquire from the
intention of acceptance would be premature. The teacher's choice, then,
is bracketed and confirmed --- to inquire from the intention of
cultivating observation. The question is directed to the participant and
the rest of the group, as well. Teacher: Is the awareness of pain also
in pain? The first response from the participant and group is silence.
The question has dropped right into the ripening experience of many in
the group. The momentum of the curriculum has been gathering in this
direction. The participant responds, loudly, enthusiastically, speaking
for many: Participant: NO! It just knows... It knows! Here is alignment
of curriculum, teacher intention, and participant experience, that
prompted in the group further discoveries and enriching dialog.

Example 3: Improvising One-On-One Teaching

157

Example 3: Improvising One-On-One Teaching The group effects of the MBIs
are powerful, and it is recommended that whenever possible, patients or
clients should be referred to groups. However, there are two basic
conditions in which one-on-one teaching is a valuable solution: (1) for
convenience --- participants may not have the structured time that
allows regular class attendance, or may have a condition or way of being
that precludes group participation; (2) for inclusion with other dyadic
work --- a structured approach to learning mindfulness may be helpful in
counseling, psychotherapy, occupational therapy, performance coaching,
and spiritual direction, to name just some applications. It's helpful to
remember in such situations that the dyadic relationship can offer many
of the advantages of the group, and several unique advantages as well.
Mindfulness in a dyad is a very focused co-creation. Instruction and
exploration of the practices can be influenced in the moment by feedback
from the participant: verbally, as the teacher can ask questions and
receive a spoken answer during practice; and nonverbally as the near
space and opportunity for lengthy observation can reveal valuable
information. Interpersonal resonance is available for support and
exploration, although it may be less stable than in a group, and more
dependent on the teacher to catalyze it and sustain it. Shared dialog
arising from practice experience is available, provided the teacher is
also authentic about how the practice is for her in the moment. What's
more, opportunities may arise more regularly than in a group to work
mindfully in the moment with specific content that is meaningful to the
participant. When convenience is the dominant force in bringing the
teacher--participant dyad together, the spectrum of intentions plays its
typical role of generating a structure and allowing responsiveness
within it. The typical MBSR course content, for example, can be offered
through eight one-hour sessions --- making certain that there is
sufficient time between sessions to experience the home practice. It may
be that the participant contracts formally for an eight-session course.
Or it may be that teacher and participant negotiate the time commitment
depending on the client's particular needs --- in the event that it is
helpful to dedicate occasional sessions for working mindfully with
personal issues as they arise or for learning beyond the typical
curriculum about specific topic areas that capture interest. For
example, a participant may wish to spend extra sessions working
mindfully with the symptoms of a chronic illness, or a participant may
wish to gain an expanded knowledge of mindful communication within their
personal relationships or workplace. Whatever the needs, the spectrum of
intentions may be useful in planning sessions and assessing progress. In
teaching mindfulness as a professional, such planning and assessment is
not about expecting a particular outcome, but rather about ensuring that
each intention comes to the foreground and allows for the participant's
authentic response. When the teaching of mindfulness is to be included
with other dyadic work, from counseling to spiritual direction, the
planning and assessment applications of the spectrum come into play. In
such situations, the teacher has two basic approaches. She can choose to
interrupt the other work for a time, setting aside a block of

158

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

­sessions to introduce and explore a range of mindfulness practices,
perhaps even using the curriculum of an MBI. Or she can choose to
integrate --- or titrate, so to speak --- mindfulness practice into the
process of sessions as it seems appropriate. The first approach is
discontinuous, and requires a certain amount of persuasion on the part
of the teacher and a willing commitment on the part of the participant.
The major benefit is that it sets formal and informal mindfulness
practice up as an existing resource that the teacher--participant dyad
can call on as needed in their ongoing work. The second approach is more
subtle, calling for less persuasion and less participant commitment,
although the result over time may be the same as the first approach. The
teacher can suggest using mindfulness practice --- formal or informal
--- to encounter some experience that is arising in the moment, in
session. Such a move would bring to the foreground the intention of
experiencing new possibilities, and, using the spectrum, it would seem
best balanced if the practice also emphasized embodiment. Once
mindfulness practice is introduced with some success, the dyad can
continue to move through the intentions as opportunity and need present
themselves. For example, a woman came into psychotherapy to better cope
with neurological problems resulting from chronic Lyme disease,
including joint pain and feelings of depersonalization and
derealization. Due to the latter, she was reticent to engage in
meditative practices. She found that simple body-based practices such as
the soles of the feet and the body scan were stabilizing and grounding.
Using just those practices, and bringing in the full spectrum of
intentions, over time she was able to come to a sense of acceptance ---
"...that's not who I am, it's just how I feel." In spiritual direction
or other dyadic work that explores spiritual practices, the spectrum can
be used as a guide for assessment and prescription. A man in spiritual
direction exhibited openness, embodiment, the capacity to observe, and a
deep compassion for others. Self-compassion and acceptance, however,
were significantly less developed. This became clear to him as he was
directed to note his attitude and response each time his attention
strayed from the breath in a focused sitting meditation. Working with
his own reactions in formal meditation, and making loving kindness
meditation a regular practice for a period of eight weeks, he began to
notice a change in the way he carried himself throughout the day.

Example 4: Creating Unique Content There are myriad reasons for
designing new mindfulness-based courses, for example, to reach
underserved populations, to target particular issues or sets of issues,
or to help participants who have "graduated" from MBIs to continue to
explore the practice of mindfulness. In any of these cases, the spectrum
of teaching intentions can be used directly as an armature to develop a
curriculum that is congruent with the unfolding of an MBSR course, or
the spectrum can be used indirectly as a collection of essential
theoretical elements that support the pedagogy and learning of
mindfulness, although the emphasis and order may differ because of
specific content. The following ­example has been chosen because it
illustrates a broad range of

Example 4: Creating Unique Content

159

development challenges, and because, as a short course, its components
are limited and concise. The course Meeting Aggression was designed as a
"graduate" course, to be offered to participants who completed an MBSR
course, or who are experienced in mindfulness meditation from some other
training. Structure and content were chosen to appeal to men, as men are
significantly underrepresented in MBI classes, at roughly 25% (e.g.,
Baer, 2003; Coelho et al. 2007; McCown et al., 2007). The appeal of the
curriculum included an emphasis on physical practices, with the
martialarts-derived practice of Taijichuan (simplified) as a
centerpiece, and incorporating readings, films, and discussions
featuring the image of the mindful warrior. The language used in
promotion paints the picture: In our daily lives it can feel as if we
continually meet with aggression --- from within and without. This
four-week course will explore the habitual physical postures,
intellectual positions, and emotional attitudes we assume in such
encounters. Are they truly helpful? Or are there more skillful ways to
work with aggressive energy? We'll use a range of mindful physical
practices from Taijichuan to playground games to see what the body-mind
reveals to us. We'll deepen our practice of mindfulness meditation to
encounter and understand our own aggressive positions and attitudes. And
we'll engage in small and large group dialogues to develop both clarity
and compassion. A CD of new practices, plus readings from across the
contemplative traditions will support personal explorations between
classes.

The 4-week structure (see sidebar) derives from the flow of the spectrum
of teaching intentions, in which the intentions build upon each other.
Practices, readings, and activities, each bring into the foreground two
intentions, which overlap and reinforce the potential learning
experiences week to week, culminating in a week-4 review of practices
that touches the first four intentions --- before the fifth, compassion,
is made explicit in a closing that encourages further practice in the
times to follow. Class 1 focuses on experiencing new possibilities and
discovering embodiment. The course begins with the activity "chaos and
systems," in which each participant is in a circle and each is given a
playground ball. Just seeing and holding the ball can be explored for
the memories and ideas of aggression towards the self and others that it
prompts. As the activity begins, instructions are simple and amusing,
bringing the group together lightheartedly. Further on, the instructions
move the group to discipline and systemize their actions to accomplish a
task, and then to accomplish it faster and faster with greater and
greater precision. As participants assume roles and authority, a range
of experiences of aggression towards self and other begin to arise and
become available for mindful exploration directed by the teacher towards
the body --- "What are you feeling right now?" Eventually, the
exploration is pursued verbally in group dialog and inquiry, and many
come to see that the group moved from the ease of being simply present
with each other in fun to the anxiety and aggression of doing or the
sake of achievement. Also, individuals come to see the strategies, often
habitual, that they used to protect their weaknesses --- or to exploit
them. The insights and material that become available can be referred to
throughout the rest of the course. The course theme of meeting
aggression is highlighted through the introduction of the 10-posture
Taijichuan sequence and its layers of seeming contradictions --- as a
martial art whose moves contain defense and attack simultaneously, as a
mindful movement practice of grace and beauty built on a

160

potential for violence. The teacher demonstrates each of the postures,
as a volunteer "opponent" experiences in slow motion the powerful forces
involved: new possibilities in an embodiment practice, intensified by
the sense of contained energy. The practice of Being Present is a
lying-down meditation that explores through small movements --- such as
lifting an arm without breaking contact with the floor --- the
possibilities of aggression towards your own experience. Guidance frames
as a form of aggression any sense of wanting your experience to be a
certain way rather than simply allowing it to be as it is. Surprises may
come from small resistances at the tissue level. (The practice is
described and guided in Chapter 7, as are the other practices in this
curriculum.) Finally, the weekly reading assignments are subverted
through the introduction of a contemplative reading practice. Rather
than aggressively reading to have knowledge and gain "truth,"
participants learn a method that is a being with, not a doing of the
text --- an embodied, not a cognitive encounter. Class 2 shifts the
major focus to discovering embodiment and cultivating observation.
Taijichuan practice expands with more postures in the sequence, and the
being present practice is reviewed and elaborated. The new practice of
Being Open is a 10-minute standing meditation, which for many is a
physical challenge. There is much to notice as you hold the body still
and vertical for a prolonged period; the challenge then becomes to
respect rather than become aggressive towards the moment-by-moment
experience --- to "look again" at it, which is what the root of the word
respect means. Participants are encouraged to remain open, to observe,
and to respond with what is needed, without aggression. This is
dramatized in a scene from the film Gettysburg (Esparza et al., 1993)
that sets up the group dialog and the contemplative reading for the
week.

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

Meeting Aggression: A "graduate course"

Class 1: Being and Doing

"All men seek peace first of all with themselves." ... Thomas Merton
Practices in class: -- Ten-posture Tai Chi Chuan (learn 1--3) --
Introduce Being Present -- Introduce the practice of contemplative
reading Reading for the week: -- Thomas Merton (1955): "Being and Doing"
Class 2: The Warrior

"The principle that guides the Warrior is showing up and choosing to be
present." ... Angeles Arrien Practices in class: -- Ten-posture Tai Chi
Chuan (1--3 & learn 4--6) -- Review Being Present -- Introduce Being
Open Film clip and dialog on theme: -- Gettysburg --- choosing to be
present Reading for the week: -- Angeles Arrien (1993): "The Way of the
Warrior" Class 3: The Sage Commander

"Because the sage commander has settled into being who he is, he is no
longer constantly comparing himself to others." ... The Denma
Translation Group Practices in class: -- Ten-posture Taijichuan (1--6 &
learn 7--10) -- Review Being Open -- Introduce Being for Others Film
clip and dialog on theme: -- To Kill a Mockingbird--not comparing self
to others Reading for the week: -- The Denma Translation Group (2002):
Commentary on "The Sage Commander"

Example 4: Creating Unique Content

Mindfulness at Gettysburg

161

Class 4: Hearing the Call of the Other

"The Other does more than suffer, the

Colonel Joshua Chamberlain, in charge of Other calls out in his
suffering... the the 20th Maine Regiment, is brought a Other calls out
to you." group of 120 deserters and told that he can ... Stephen
Batchelor shoot any who refuse to march or fight. Practices in class:
Rather than treating them as the other offi-- Review ten-posture
Taijichuan (1--10) cers had, he shows them respect --- looking -- Review
Being Present again --- and treats them with care and def-- Review Being
Open erence. By appealing to their common Closure: humanity, Chamberlain
wins their confi-- Council circle on theme of hearing the dence and
cooperation; in fact, almost to a call of the other man, the soldiers
take up arms again to fight -- Review Being for Others practice beside
him. Had they not, it is doubtful that -- Goodbyes the 20th Maine could
have repelled the Reading for the coming week: Confederate attackers at
Little Round Top, -- Stephen Batchelor (2004): "Hearing which was
essential to the Union Army victhe Call of the Other" tory at
Gettysburg. Many participants clearly see and feel the power that
Chamberlain's embodied presence and attitude of respect has on the men
--- both before and during the battle. Class 3 moves to a focus on
observing and accepting. Taijichuan practice completes the entire
10-posture sequence, maintaining the importance of embodiment, and
keeping the balance of being and doing, aggression, and non-aggression
available for dialog. The being-open practice reviews the idea of
observation with discernment --- respect. For many during the past week,
the practice has raised challenges about when and how to respond to
discomfort by moving or sitting, and when to work with acceptance.
Inquiry and dialog about this can set up the introduction of the new
practice of Being for Others, which explores the capacity to be open to
suffering --- emphasizing the intention of acceptance, of simply being
with/ in an experience as it is. This contemplation asks participants to
imagine four different scenes of suffering. First, participants imagine
a small child that they do not know who has been hurt in some way ---
nothing grave. Then they imagine themselves as children, hurting, but
not too badly, and explore the possibilities for remaining open: then
attempting to turn towards and be open to their own suffering in the
moment. Finally, they choose someone for whom they wish to practice. The
­practice with each scene is to model for the person in the scene a way
of being with/ in one's experience of the moment, of turning towards and
opening to the way it is; each scene ends as the participant imagines
placing a hand on the shoulder of the sufferer, with the statement, "I
wish you were not suffering."

162

6 Organizing the Intentions of Teaching

To Kill a Mockingbird The film clips from To Kill a Mockingbird (Pakula
and Muligan, 1962) that lead to group dialog show attorney Atticus Finch
(Gregory Peck) accepting the request to defend the falsely accused
African American Tom Robinson although he knows the pain it will bring
to himself and his family; and then his faultless, but futile,
performance in the courtroom, where he turns and faces with truth the
hatred and prejudice of his fellow townspeople. Finch's capacity to
accept --- to be with/in each moment as required --- does not involve
capitulation, and does not negate the futility of his effort, nor any of
the pain or consequences for himself, his family and friends, the
defendant and his family, or the local African American community. Yet,
through his way of being, there is the potential for transformation.
Participants continue to pursue this theme in the contemplative reading
of the week, a commentary on Sun Tzu's Art of War (Denma Translation
Group, 2002), that explicates the core principle of taking whole: "True
victory is victory over aggression, a victory that respects the enemy's
basic humanity and thus renders further conflict unnecessary." This is
the also the victory that St. Joan of Arc was seeking in her ultimate
efforts to turn the tide of battle and history with England and France
in the fourteenth century: respect and acceptance, creating a segue for
the intention of growing compassion. Class 4 is designed as a retreat
--- the first hour flows in silence from one practice to another,
reinforcing the intentions of embodiment, observing, and acceptance. As
the group comes together for dialog, the reading from Art of War
provides plenty of fodder, suggesting that the practices the group has
been doing may help participants meet aggression differently. The
practices have predominantly focused on work with aggression coming from
inside. Now the issue is about how to meet aggression coming from
outside. And the intention of growing compassion rises to the surface at
last. In the presence and openness that brought Joshua Chamberlain "true
victory" at Gettysburg, and in the openness and acceptance that brought
Atticus Finch "true victory" in the courtroom and town of Maycomb,
Alabama, compassion is showing. The dialog explores how to bring
compassion into the very real situations participants are facing. The
dialog closes with the practice of being for others; at the end,
everyone stands, and, given permission, pair by pair, they place a hand
on the other's shoulder and with eyes open wish them well. With the
memory of so many faces, the final weekly reading assignment brings
particular poignancy, introducing the idea that the other's face calls
out to us, making a compassionate response imperative.

Chapter 7

Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching﻿

In teaching mindfulness as a professional, using your authenticity,
authority, and friendship, each session is fresh and different, like a
new wave breaking on the shore. Each progress through a course is
unique. Participants and teacher find other ways of saying,
demonstrating, learning, understanding --- together. Participants and
teacher are never the same, course to course, or even session to
session, again like the river flowing past the shore. Never the same
people again, as they are changing in each moment. There will never be
these same sufferings, these same questions, these same jokes or joys
--- each a challenge to the teacher and the others. And so, there will
never be these same responses. Holding this. Exploring that. Sitting
with the terrible, the unanswerable, the riotous, and the oh-so-sweet.
It is because of this fluid nature of teaching that the curriculum must
be empty. Not so that it can be filled, but that it may be fulfilled.
That is the challenge of this chapter: to offer ways of thinking,
organizing, creating, and simply responding that lead to fulfillment. No
laws, no rules, no step-by-step instructions can make that happen. Only
the teacher and participants, co-creating their experience in the
present, can do it. So this chapter, and this book, cannot be a recipe
book to follow, to make the same casserole over and over again.
(Amazingly, there are cookbooks for both practitioners and clients that
purport to offer recipes for integrative experience -- but not this
one.) It can't be a coloring book, to make the sheep, say, blue, this
time. It can't even be "Mad Libs," to generate infinite variations on
the same story. Rather, our presentation of the spectrum of teaching
intentions here is as a series of elemental motions or gestures that
mark the presence of an intention --- and its effects. Like watermarks
on a riverbank or tide lines on the shore, the following presentations
of each teaching intention are tracings of something at once more
majestic, delicate, harrowing, and beautiful than could be prescribed or
predicted. They are one way, our attempt, to capture the central motion
of each intention. Our strategy is to keep descriptions gestural, broad,
abstract, so that they can more easily be applied in the co-creation of
mindfulness and the curriculum among particular teachers and
participants. Each intention is offered through (we hope) a simple
description, as well as through other descriptive methods that may help
to make it available for reflection and use.

D. McCown et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide for Clinicians
and Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_7, © Springer
Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

163

164

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

There are also graphic treatments that attempt to literally trace the
motions. There are verbatim excerpts from inquiries with groups or
individual participants that demonstrate how the abstracted motion of an
isolated intention can be both near to and far from the actual messy
moment of co-creation. And there are stories, poems, and insights from
the deeply practiced community of mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR) teachers that expand the range of vibrations, hues, tones, and
frequencies in which the intentions can be identified or applied. There
are also considerations for curriculum development. Finally, in Chapter
8, there are scripts for basic practices that reflect the spectrum of
teaching intentions, and in the Appendix there are listings of resources
that can help teachers and potential teachers in expanding the possibi­
lities of their ever-changing authenticity, authority, and freedom.

Experiencing New Possibilities This intention is often the first to be
recognized by participants. Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) are
unlike almost any of the other classes, groups, or individual
therapeutic approaches that participants have experienced. The
differences can immediately subvert expectations or challenge familiar
concepts in a way that engenders an openness to different perspectives
and other ways of being. There is a range of these destabilizing
factors, which can be ordered in three categories that, we hope, help
make the dimensions of this intention a bit more clear. The first,
reordered relationships, reflects the liminality of the
mindfulness-based group; there are no certain roles or identities for
participants or even, ultimately, the teacher. The second, radical
redefinitions, refers to the "content" of the sessions; context,
experiences, and languaging all undergo significant shifts of meaning
and emphasis. The third, transformative orientations, suggests the ways
in which mindfulness comes to find its co-constructed definition within
the group; the teacher often catalyzes important discoveries in this
process. Reordered Relationships In the first session, participants are
asked to take a second look at their presumed medical and social
identities. Particularly in the heterogeneous make up of MBSR groups, a
participant's diagnosis ultimately is not sufficient or even useful as a
self-definition. The teacher's implicit or explicit statement that, "as
long as you're breathing there's more right with you than wrong with
you," opens what may be for many a new negotiation of identity. This
negotiation can also be evoked in the participant's social identity, as
socioeconomic status and educational attainment are revealed to be of
little use in meeting the challenges of the curriculum. This intensifies
the sense of liminality of the group, which is coming together for
purposes of transformation, suggesting development of communitas.
Participants may become aware of and open to a more egalitarian,
democratic perspective because of two basic characteristics of the work
of exploring mindfulness in practice. First, there are no gradients of
the ability to be mindful;

Experiencing New Possibilities

everyone in the class can become more aware of and open to their own
experience. This equal capacity certainly runs counter to the
expectations of Western society, in which a group quickly stratifies by
grades or levels. Suddenly, however, differences are not an important
way of thinking about people. In fact, any possibility of competition is
trumped by the larger vision of the course --- it is not about
improvement or change, rather it is about becoming more of what one
already is. Everyone is therefore working towards the same goal ---
which is unique for each. Second, as the work of exploring one's
experience in the moment begins, words fail --- for everyone. It quickly
becomes evident that verbal language, which is the main communicative
instrument in almost all classes, is a tool that is hard to control. It
bucks and slips in the authentic teacher's hand as much as in anyone
else's; it is nearly always inadequate to convey the full weight of felt
meaning (e.g., Gendlin, 1962). Relationships are indeed reordered ---
and everyone's in the same boat. Radical Redefinitions

165

MBSR perspectives on experiencing new possibilities The immediate
subverting of expectations and destabilizing of familiar concepts can be
seen from a number of different perspectives that are more or less
acknowledged as influences on the development of the MBSR curriculum and
pedagogy (Santorelli, 2004). The Buddhist perspective is succinctly
presented by Daniel Goleman: "In mindfulness, the meditator methodically
faces the bare facts of his experience, seeing each event as though
occurring for the first time" (1988, p.20). This is made explicit as
"beginner's mind," one of the attitudinal foundations of MBSR. As
Kabat-Zinn (1990, p. 35) explains, "Too often we let our thinking and
our beliefs about what we 'know' prevent us from seeing things as they
really are." Another acknowledged perspective is that of transformative
learning, defined by its originator Jack Mezirow (2000, pp. 7--8), as
one by which "...we transform our taken-for-granted frames of reference
(meaning-perspectives, habits of mind, mind-sets) to make them more
inclusive, discriminating, open, emotionally capable of change, and
reflective so that they may generate beliefs and opinions that will
prove more true or justified to guide action." A perspective that is
highly useful though less pointedly acknowledged is the concept of
reframing, most distinctly defined in the family therapy literature by
Watzlawick et al. (1974), p. 95), as meaning "to change the conceptual
and/or emotional setting or viewpoint in relation to which a situation
is experienced and to place it in another frame which fits the 'facts'
of the same concrete situation equally well or even better, and thereby
changes its entire meaning."

The course itself is in need of redefinition right from the start.
Participants come into the first session with particular expectations,
which are shifted or challenged quite early on. In MBSR classes, the
central challenge is in the participant's understanding of the term
stress reduction. They come in believing that they will be learning to
turn off their roiling, racing minds and relax, only to hear that
they're actually being asked to turn towards that roiling and racing ---
and to welcome it! Their expectations may be met with other reversals as
well. A teacher might state: "You may think you signed up for a
once-a-week class supported by homework assignments, but it's helpful to
see it as six days of homework supported by a once-a-week class."

166

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

The course also can be redefined through its activities --- and their
order. For example, the first session may begin by dropping participants
right into the middle of things. With little preamble, without group
introductions, the teacher can begin with an experience --- a
contemplative practice, a game, a story --- that provides opportunity
for discovery and reflection. Participants must hold their questions of
who's who and what's what in abeyance. They must live for a time with
not knowing, which is still another opportunity for discovery and
reflection. A participant in a college class wrote in his journal: "I
was expecting the class to go around in a circle and tell our names and
a little about ourselves. As I sat getting myself prepared for what I
was going to say, our instructor had us get into groups with a ball. The
exercise was excellent. I wasn't nervous anymore and I became
comfortable with the students in the class. After the exercise I didn't
know what to expect out of the class, but I knew it was gonna be very
different than any other class I've taken." On a more global level, many
of the class activities, particularly the formal meditation practices,
are beyond the bounds of most participants' everyday experiences. Being
asked to lie on the floor for the first body scan suggests that just
about anything could happen in the classroom. Yet, all of this is
presented as simple and ordinary, nothing special. That is certainly a
redefinition. Transformative Orientations As the group and teacher begin
the co-creation of a definition and experience of mindfulness, spaces
often begin to open up for experiencing new possibilities. Those spaces
are generated in any number of ways. Very often, they come from one of
four orientations. The first is orientation towards nonjudgment. We say
"towards" because it is such a difficult attitude to hold; it can be a
stumbling block in defining mindfulness. Nonjudgment may not be one's
immediate reaction with/in an experience. It is likely, rather, that
nonjudgment is a response that is negotiated, more or less smoothly, in
the moment. The teacher meets participants with this kind of
nonjudgment, negotiated through inner dialog --- or even through rifts
and repairs in the group dialog. Participants then begin to understand
nonjudgment through their direct experience. And as they understand it,
they may come to see the ways in which acceptance and compassion can
arise from it. Second is orientation in the present moment. This is
often manifested in the ongoing co-creation of mindfulness as a
privileging of immediate experience. Participants are asked to question
their sustained narratives as ways of defining who they are, and instead
to look closely at how they are as valuable and valid information. They
are thus taking up a perspective that is opposed to the ingrained
practices of Western culture and, particularly, of much contemporary
discourse in the humanities and the professions, which posits the
narrative perspective as normative for psychological and moral
well-being. The emerging resistance to the dominance of narrative (e.g.,
Abbott, 2007; Strawson, 2004) supports the value of an episodic or lyric
perspective on self-understanding, as is implicit in the MBIs, and
reflected in the striking use of lyric poetry as a teaching vehicle.

Experiencing New Possibilities

167

Third is orientation in impermanence. Participants become sensitive to
the constant flow of experience; what one treasures and what one fears
can both be seen as continually slipping away. Participants find
themselves in an environment in which change is the constant, in which
it is expected that their condition will not be solid and intractable,
but rather will be different moment to moment. Fourth is an orientation
of embodiment. This, of course, is a "rainbow gradient overlap" of the
next in the spectrum of teaching intentions. Discovering embodiment will
be discussed in detail in the next section. It is enough to say here
that as participants find that the default question in exploring their
experiences is not What do you think, but What do you feel in the body,
they realize they may find answers they never believed possible.
Curricular Considerations When these orientations are skillfully
titrated for the sensitivities of the particular population, the
participants will likely neither shut down when their fixed
understandings and identities are challenged, nor be lulled into a sense
of safety and familiarity that inhibits serious exploration. For
example, in a college class, participants have the physical and
emotional resources to be pitched without preamble into an experience
that may feel like pointless chaos, as in the exercise with playground
balls (Practice 1). Or in a patient class in which physical illness and
limitations of aging are evident, participants can be guided towards new
possibilities through a formal contemplation that confronts them with a
question that is repeated again and again (Practice 2). In the first
class of the Center for Mindfulness (CFM) template MBSR curriculum,
experiencing new possibilities is explicitly offered in two directed
exercises (Santorelli and Kabat-Zinn, 2003). First is the mindful eating
of a raisin. Through a guided encounter with one raisin at a time,
participants are nudged into "not knowing" and an encounter with the
present moment. By exploring the raisin with all the senses, new
information challenges familiar ways of perceiving. As one example, when
asked to "listen to" the raisin, an unconsidered dimension opens up;
participants react with humor and real curiosity. Through such a
contemplative approach to an ordinary undertaking, participants find
they have challenged their understandings and habitual patterns. A
participant in a recent class noted, "I've been eating raisins since I
can remember, because I like sweet things and raisins are sweet. Now, I
don't think I really like them. They are sweet, but I noticed the
texture of the skin and the pulp...I don't find that particularly
pleasant." The second exercise is the nine-dot problem, often given as
homework after the first class. Try it yourself; the answer is given
below. To struggle with the problem, and then to see the "out of the
box" solution, can suggest the power of experiencing new possibilities.
Coincidentally, Wátzlawick et al. (1974) discussed the nine dots in
their work, and the continuing effect of seeing the solution: "Once
somebody has explained to us the solution of the nine-dot problem, it is
almost impossible to revert to our previous helplessness and especially
our original hopelessness about the possibility of a solution" (p. 99).
It is this reduction in helplessness and hopelessness that the
"experiencing new possibilities" outcome emphasizes. Throughout the
eight weeks, and into post-course

168

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

life, we, as teachers, trust that new possibilities tremble at the edge
of participants' experience, and that from week to week the potential
for reframing experience moves from a guided offering by the teacher to
a personal capacity within the participant.

The Nine Dots: A Puzzle •

•

•

•

•

•

• • • Instructions: Without lifting the pencil from the paper, draw four
lines so that all of the dots are connected with a line passing through
them.

Discovering Embodiment This Western culture in which participants (and
teachers!) are embedded creates distance from embodied experience in
many ways --- perhaps three general views can help define this
distancing and suggest how the intention of discovering embodiment can
be actualized in a mindfulness-based curriculum. First, contemporary
culture encourages a life lived routinely "in the head," to the virtual
exclusion of the body. We privilege cognitive understanding at the
expense of the tacit, and language-based knowing at the expense of the
inexpressible. This is evident, for example, in the unequal position of
the crafts and trades in our educational systems. Even the MBIs have
been critiqued for cognitive bias, for conflating thoughts and body
sensations, seeing both as cognitive events (Drummond, 2006). As well,
consider the overwhelming dominance of the visual and auditory media.
Television, radio, the Internet, the graphic environment, and other
technologies present to us a description or vision of life, not a direct
experience. We spend hours every day in a simulated reality that points
toward our heads --- the location of eyes and ears, screens and
headphones. Experience is "mediated" by technologies, developed under a
cultural imperative of individualism, that help isolate us from others,
and from our own bodies. It is perhaps easier to stay "in the head" than
to sense into the changes in posture, breathing, heart rate, muscle
tension, and energy flow that may be brought about by that cop show or
even that cell phone call home. Second, and flowing from our privileging
of the visual, is the tendency to conceive of the body as object rather
than as subject, as something to be seen from outside rather than as the
locus of perceptions of actual lived experience. The question

Discovering Embodiment

169

"Does this suit make me look fat?" is seemingly far more captivating
than "What am I feeling as I prepare for this meeting?" Third, and
flowing from body as object, is the focus on the body as a goal or
achievement. Wanting to look a certain way, perhaps to be in accord with
cultural norms, we subdue the body to the will in drastic and subtle
ways. Whether in choosing to be shaped to fit boundaries of beauty by
surgical procedures, or in adopting a diet discipline and exercise
regimen to achieve a proposed ideal of health, something is left out:
the body's own voice and wisdom. All in all, it is possible that
participants in the MBIs may have heard very little from their bodies
--- aside from the pain, discomfort, and other symptoms they are
attempting to turn away from. They literally may be disconnected from
enormous portions of their experience --- and life. The intention of
discovering embodiment helps to make this important link, both to the
experience of movement in the outer world, proprioception, and the
happenings in the inner world, interoception. By connecting with gravity
and the breath, as emblematic of proprioception and interoception,
participants can make a beginning of embodiment. Navigating Towards
Embodiment As we've shown in the previous intention, participants are
almost immediately invited to "be with" or "be in" whatever experience
is arising in the domain of body sensation, without judgment. The
experience of the body scan, the first practice introduced in many MBIs,
is a useful example. The teacher's guidance attempts to bring
participants to an unmediated experience of their bodies. The guidance
provides permission for any experience to be present; we begin, say, at
the top of the head, calling the participant's attention there, and
offering language that names a range of experiences, from variations in
temperature, to tingling, itching, pressure, to "nothing at all" ---
with an emphasis that "nothing at all" is a possible, acceptable
experience. Further, participants are helped to parse immediate
experience from stories about experience, to separate anticipation or
opinion from the present-moment happening. Discoveries are very often
pre-semantic, later processed in language as, "I feel more connected to
myself," or "I know that my back hurts, but I didn't know what that
actually feels like until now." Discoveries also may reflect the
intersubjective dimension of the mindfulness co-created in the group, as
in, "I don't quite understand it, but when I'm here with the group, I
feel like my practice is better --- I go deeper." The discoveries
brought about through embodiment multiply and deepen over time, as
participants learn to navigate the territory of body sensations. To
accomplish this, participants may need assistance in locating and
approaching such experiences. Teachers can be helpful by finding and
creating opportunities within the curriculum to emphasize implicitly and
explicitly the essential navigational tools: gravity and the breath.
These two can be seen as generating the cardinal points on a compass
that assists participants in working beneficially with direct experience
in the moment (see Fig. 7.1).

170

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

The Nine Dots: An Answer

Solution: The "box" shape of the dots suggests that the solution is
found inside the confines or boundaries of the dots. It is only through
the discovery that the lines can be drawn "outside the box" that
solutions become possibilities.

Inquiry: "Results" of a body scan Working with participants in a first
session, immediately after a body scan, many sitting on the floor,
turned towards each other. A few questions can point both to new
possibilities and embodiment. Teacher: What are you feeling right now?
An open question dropped into the silence. Expecting brief answers, and
getting them. Participant 1: Relaxed... P2: At peace... P3: Sleepy... I
didn't know how tired I was until now. T: It's good to take the time to
find these things out... to see how it really is, not how we need it to
be, or want it to be... Encouraging exploration; acknowledging new
possibilities. T: How about anxiety... frustration...? Anybody? It's not
necessarily all smooth sailing through the body scan... Acknowledging
the range of possible experiences. Giving permission. P4: I couldn't be
still. I kept having to move, and then peeking around to see what
everyone else was doing --- to see if I was doing it right... if I was
OK... T: You are very OK... (pause) So you noticed that your body felt
uncomfortable? Reassuring. Nonjudging. Choosing a direction for inquiry
that might touch on permissiveness.

Discovering Embodiment

171

P4: Oh, yeah! (laughing) T: And you were aware of moving and sneaking a
look around? P4: Sure... T: Then I'd say you were doing the practice
very precisely, just right. Look at all the things you found out...
Further reassurance. Reframing the experience as about learning and
knowing. P4: I never thought of it that way. T: (Directed to everyone)
This is a very simple practice, just moving through the body and
noticing what is there in the present moment. There's no need to add
anything more. And when you find yourself judging and reacting, that's
right there in the body in the moment, you can simply notice that too...
Everything fits in the practice, everything belongs... Speaking to the
judgments each speaker has implied, without directing comment to anyone.
P5: But I actually didn't feel anything in my legs... T: Did you notice
judging that? P5: Well, it just seems wrong... T: In this practice,
there is no right or wrong... there is just present moment awareness,
and yours was that you weren't feeling anything in your legs... the next
present moment could be different. Now a choice point; a reason to
return to the practice, to refocus on the body. T: Maybe you could check
it out right now... In the present moment, what's your experience of
your legs? P5: No, it is... it's different. I can feel them against the
floor, their weight... my feet are cold... there's a kind of tingling...
OK, yeah, I feel and sometimes I don't.

Exploring With Gravity Gravity is such an all-pervading force that it is
rarely considered or explored under its own name. Rather, it is commonly
experienced in its relationship to bodily aliveness (Selver and Brooks,
2007). The body moves against or with it, with differing levels of
energy expenditure, differing amounts of up negotiating with the
constancy of down. It is unrelenting. It is inescapable. And it is, in
many ways, comforting. Coming to standing from sitting, for example,
requires widely varying amounts of up energy, from the burst of exertion
as you start to rise, to the smaller negotiations as the knees and
pelvis come into the more vertical plane, to the infinitely tiny
adjustments that bring you into ease of standing --- a relationship in
which gravity is doing the vast majority of the work in holding you
vertical. This relationship and the negotiations around it can be
transposed into every posture you assume. Sitting, standing, lying,
walking, in each there is an open

172

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

invitation to feel out your yieldings and resistances as the earth draws
you towards itself. The relationship can not only be transposed, but
also translated --- as the objects that you handle relate to gravity
through you. Lifting, holding, carrying, placing, in any activity with
whatever is given in the moment --- book, tea cup, tire iron, stone ---
there is much to be learned. In lifting, what is the right amount of up
for the tea cup, and how do you know? In placing, what is required to
control the down of the cup to the saucer so that it comes to rest
without being dropped or pressed? In all the formal mindfulness
practices with participants, then, they can be asked to explore the
body's relationship with the constancy of gravity. As they work with its
unrelenting nature and their own energies --- sometimes triumphantly,
sometimes fruitlessly --- they can explore struggle, comfort, surrender,
refreshment. They can use gravity's "down" and their own "up" to orient
themselves, to discover themselves as an embodied presence in this
present space. On a finer level, they can use down and up, their own
giving and resistance to gravity, to help disAll the points of the
compass. cern, explore, and even comfort a The relationships to gravity
and the breath bring particular event in the body. This out the cardinal
points on the compass with which reflects the rainbow gradient
relationparticipants can navigate direct experience, but ship to
cultivating observation. there are an infinite number of other points on
the In informal mindfulness practices, compass rose as well. Every
sense, every form of participants can attend to this orientknowing,
contributes to what is revealed in everying relationship --- say, in the
shower, day language as "finding yourself."The poem below, on the bus
seat, carrying a package, or by David Wagoner (1976), is used in many
MBI washing the dishes. They can also use classes and contexts to
describe this process. It is a it to discern and work with embodied
version of a teaching story from the Native events. Such attention has
the capacity Americans of the Pacific Northwest, where to vento bring
them right here. ture off the path in the old growth forests could be
Exploring With the Breath The breath is equally as pervasive as gravity,
but in another mode. It is constant in its inconstancy, flowing
steadily, providing a sense of in and out --- the other two cardinal
points on the compass. The breath's motion, its cycle, is usually
soothingly repetitive, and the supply of air almost always seems vastly
greater than the demand. When you turn the attention to the breath, it
can create a sense of well-being, a sense of unimpeded flow from moment
to moment.

a disorienting experience. Think of these lines as instructions. Lost
Stand still. The trees ahead and bushes beside you Are not lost.
Wherever you are is called Here, And you must treat it as a powerful
stranger, Must ask permission to know it and be known. The forest
breathes. Listen. It answers, I have made this place around you. If you
leave it, you may come back again, saying Here. No two trees are the
same to Raven. No two branches are the same to Wren. If what a tree or a
bush does is lost on you, You are surely lost. Stand still. The forest
knows Where you are. You must let it find you.

Discovering Embodiment

173

The cycle of in- and out-breaths creates and keeps a kind of time,
marking out the "vertical" time of now. Daniel Stern (2004) in
attempting to define the present moment, notes its relationship to
perceptions, verbal and nonverbal behaviors, relational understandings,
and mental operations, attributing an average duration to all these of
from three to five seconds. For example, most spoken phrases last about
three seconds, five at the outside; a musical phrase is likewise three
to four seconds, and a greater than three-second stop suggests an
ending; baby talk and nonverbal communications in the mother-infant dyad
have been measured at between two and five seconds and turn-taking in
adult conversation takes two to three seconds. The breath cycle of in
and out takes about three seconds, as well --- a present moment. In all
the formal meditation practices, participants can use the breath to
explore embodiment. When they bring the body to stillness and quiet,
they may find it possible to sense the influence of the breath in
surprising places and ways. In a body scan, perhaps the effects of the
breath can be felt in the arms and hands, the pelvis, and the feet. A
growing sense of the breath being available everywhere allows it to be
used in exploration of constant and transient sensations, from pain to
pleasure, from head to toe. Through this familiarity, participants can
develop an ability to

Fig. 7.1 A compass for navigating direct experience. This simple
instrument can be combined with the triangle of awareness to help
participants locate and approach direct experience. Using gravity to
center the body in space, to come to a disposition of stillness and
constancy. Allowing the breath to center the body in time, in the
fluidity and impermanence of the present moment. Located at these
coordinates, the participant has a certain physical and psychological
freedom to look closely at the flow of sensations, thoughts, and
emotions arising now.

174

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

"direct" the breath like an instrument to find, touch, surround, and
even soothe a particular area. Again reflecting the next intention. In
informal practice, participants can bring attention to the response of
the breath to brushing teeth, sitting in a boring meeting, mopping the
floor, petting the cat, or lying down to go to sleep. Or, pointedly, to
explore and work with specific sensations. In any case, participants can
be using the breath to have the experience right now. Curricular
Considerations Gravity and breath, up and down, in and out, meet in the
here and now. The teacher can leverage curricular opportunities, or
create them, for participants to develop more intimate relationships
with gravity and the breath. Through such standard offerings in the MBSR
curriculum as the body scan (Practice 3) and mindful Hatha yoga
(Practice 4), particularly in the repeated exposure through audio
recordings used for home practice, many facets of these relationships
emerge over time. The sense of embodiment can be discovered and
deepened, creating the conditions for the cultivation of observation as
that rainbow gradient begins to show.

Inquiry: In the middle of a mindful stretch At the opening of Session 3
of an MBSR course. After several standing stretches, introducing a
spinal twist --- hands on hips, turning the body from the waist, while
keeping the hips in the original plane, to look beside and behind.
Asking participants to hold the posture and check in to body sensations.
Then asking them to relax the muscles that don't need to be used. T:
What are you noticing right now? Anybody? It might be anything...
Choosing the moment to ask by noting the perceptible shifts in
expressions and postures. Giving plenty of space and time for responses.
P1: Easier... P2: Not so tiring... P3: I didn't know I was holding so
tight... P4: I can actually turn a little more now... P5: My breath is
calmer, slower... T: So you're doing just what the situation requires,
no more, no less... that's mindful practice... And it's the same with
thought and emotion... Is worry "just the right amount of effort?"
Offering the new embodied knowing as larger, workable in all the
"tensions" participants may experience. P3: Oh my god, no! (General
laughter)

Cultivating Observation

175

Cultivating Observation So much happens with new possibilities and
embodiment in early sessions that this intention, the third and pivotal
one of the five, is often not held explicitly by the teacher or
uncovered intuitively by participants until later. In the flow of the
curriculum, participants begin to settle in to home practice and to
appreciate the new possibilities that their participation brings. At
some point, they begin to tune in to their capacity to notice discrete
events --- sensations, thoughts, emotions. The attention in the body
scan or sitting meditation drifts away, perhaps, into a thought, and
they see that it Rumi reflects on the unity of has happened. They often
then assume the awareness. default position of "I am having this
thought," With all this explanation of stepping back, in which the "I"
is identified with the observing, and seeing thoughts and sensathought.
This position of self as subject is tions as "not me," it is helpful to
be reminded natural, logical, and extremely limiting. The by the
mystical literature that we are not ingrained and well-worn ways of
experiencdivided but whole. Across traditions, around ing that support
this self-as-subject help to the world, there is insistence on the unity
of maintain its limits. The thoughts or events awareness. In poetry,
song, or art, this is not identified with this "I" are judged through an
abstract idea, it is a felt meaning. Rumi's prediction, memory, and
desire. This cold meditation in verse (Barks and Moyne, hospital chair,
this dim lighting, this dull 1997) makes the truth of it available in
ways ache, these recurring thoughts of death, this that literally "make
sense." pulse of fear, this is my world. My little world. There is a
sense of constriction, We are the mirror as well as the face in it.
almost a claustrophobic quality to the expeWe are tasting the taste this
minute rience, as graphically suggested in Fig. 7.2. of eternity. We are
pain It is such suffering, more often than not, that and what cures
pain, both. We are etches the limits of the little world of "I" in the
sweet cold water and the jar ways that show it clearly. that pours. The
pivot of this intention comes when "I" see the "I" that is suffering,
and know that the identification of that "I" with the thought, pain, or
emotion is not true. Participants make those statements, such as "I am
not this thought," "I am not this pain," I am not this fear." The event
is dis-embedded and becomes observable. The second observing "I" is a
step away from the first, suggesting an expanded space in which events
can be reflected upon. What's more, if this second "I" can see the
first, the way is opened for a third to see the second seeing the first
--- and on back and back, like the ever-receding images created when two
mirrors face each other. These observing "I"s, then, are neither solid
nor central. Nor are they separate. Each is simply a temporary, albeit
useful, platform for observation within a unity of awareness. Now the
­constricted "I" is part of a much larger context, and has room for
expansion, as suggested in Figs. 7.2 and 7.3.

176

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

Fig. 7.2 The little "I" observing an event, say, a thought or pain,
identifies directly with it: "This is my pain." Judgment based on
prediction, memory, and desire intensifies identification, and, in the
case of pain, constricts in suffering, as the narrowness of the band
suggests. Pleasant and neutral events also have this structure, yet the
felt quality of the "pinch" is often less evident --- at least for a
time.

Fig. 7.3 A second "I" observing the first is a larger context for the
event and the little "I." It is a context in which awareness expands
around the little "I" allowing exploration and offering space in which
constriction can find relief. (Note that the graphic convention of the
circle makes a boundary where none is implied; awareness is boundless).

Curricular Considerations The challenges in holding this intention in
teaching, particularly after class 1, are to leverage or create
opportunities for participants to recognize and cultivate this capacity
for expanded observation. Within the template MBSR curriculum,
participants may first recognize it while formally practicing or
inquiring into experiences of the body scan, Hatha yoga, or awareness of
breath practice. This suggests how the intention of cultivating
observation shifts and gradates from discovering embodiment in the
spectrum of intentions, as participants come to understand that the
illimitable

Cultivating Observation

177

expanse of awareness and the life of the body coincide. Constriction and
expansion have felt meanings for which gravity and breath provide a
vocabulary --- heaviness and lightness, effort and ease, depth and
­shallowness, suspension and flow. Once observing awareness is available,
it is most explicitly cultivated in the template curriculum through the
formal expanding awareness practice (Practice 5). The practice allows
exploration into discrete domains at first, from breath, to body
sensation, to sound, into thought, and then emotion. Then it shifts to
choice-less awareness, in which the capacity for observation is
cultivated in attending to virtually any event to which the attention is
drawn in the ongoing expanse of awareness. A standing meditation such as
the one on "being open" (Practice 6) can offer further unexplored
perspectives, especially as it works directly with the visual domain and
the proprioceptive sense. Opportunities for inquiry with the group and
individual participants are extremely important in cultivating
observation for two reasons: first, to be able to point to the vastness
of awareness, its infinite capacity for expansion; second, to ensure
that awareness is understood as a unity, that the observing "I"s are not
reified (made into "things") but understood as fluid. If the big inquiry
questions about discovering embodiment are "What" questions --- "What
are you noticing?" --- the central questions in cultivating observation
are "Who" questions --- "Who is noticing?" or "Whose thought is it?"
This intention and the next, moving towards acceptance, are intimately
related, difficult to disconnect within the rainbow gradient. They are
connected in the same way as discovery and exploration --- there is an
ever-recurring simultaneity of true richness.

Inquiry: "Now I see" After an expanding awareness practice, opening up
to the movement --- the pivots of observation that come early and later,
unbidden and worked through. T: What did you discover in this practice?
Open, permissive, allowing for anything. P1: I was actually worried
about worrying today... Before the meditation, I was worried that I
wouldn't be able to meditate, because I was having so many thoughts
about something that happened at home before I came to class. I am such
a worrier... But during the meditation when you said "Just notice the
process of thinking and let thoughts be," I realized that thoughts were
there, but --- so what! I didn't attempt to push them away, to get rid
of them. I realized that they were just going to be there, and I didn't
pass judgment on them. I'm going to have worrisome thoughts, but if I
don't focus on them or fight with them, they just come and go... and
it's OK for them to be there. To me that's really, really a light bulb
moment. Unbidden, within the expanding awareness practice with its
intention to cultivate the observing capacity, the pivot happens. Space
opens in awareness for whatever is there to be there, be seen and
acknowledged, and to shift in its own time. Later in the same
discussion, a participant notices the hard time she's giving herself,
the difficulty of clearly observing what's present.

178

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

P: I have a lot of trouble identifying what I'm feeling. I know there is
a feeling there, and it even feels familiar, but I don't know what it
is. And I am struggling to figure out what's happening, what the feeling
is. And then I start asking myself how is this meditation really going
to help me. T: What would you call that
"how-is-this-meditation-going-to-help-me?" Offering help with the
identification process. Using what's present in the moment. P: (After
silence) I guess it's a thought. T: It is a thought... and it is also a
thought that is leaning into the future. So when you notice this thought
arising you can label it with a whisper, "thinking." and come back to
your breath or whatever you have chosen to focus on. Also, when you are
noticing that you are struggling to try and figure out what's happening
you can label that "trying to figure out" or "struggling." Suggesting
labeling as a strategy for clarifying and reducing reactivity towards
what may feel like a jumble of events. T: How do think your body feels
when --- ... Actually, rather than thinking about this, would you like
to explore with a direct experience right now? (Looking around the group
in nonverbal invitation to others to undertake their own exploration)
Making (and remaking) a choice to move back into practice, to return to
the body for help in clarifying experience. Note that as other
participants are working along, this return to practice will effect
intersubjective resonance, providing a more expansive environment for
this inquiry dialog. P: OK... T: So, now, taking a moment to check into
your body and mind and see what is here now... P: (Settling into chair
in meditation posture; long silence) It's a familiar feeling, like I'm
efforting, like I have to figure something out. T: What does that feel
like in the body? Locating the feeling within the space of the body,
where it can be observed. P: I'm tense... so tight... It's anxiety. T:
When you notice thoughts that tell you that you have to figure something
out, label them as thoughts and come back to your breath... Responding
to the effort, the need-to-know of "It's anxiety." Making the thought
process observable. T: (After a long silence) What are you noticing?
Choosing to ask when cued by shifts in posture and breathing. P: I'm
relaxing. This is wonderful. I hadn't really realized what I was doing,
trying so hard to figure everything out in my head. And how that makes
me so tight and anxious. Now I see. This is wonderful.

Moving Towards Acceptance

Moving Towards Acceptance If the intention of cultivating observation is
the pivot on which the curriculum swings, this intention of moving
towards acceptance is the swing itself, using all the momentum available
in the teacher and participants. It is the "turning towards the
symptoms" at the historical root of the MBIs. It is the being with/in of
experience that is the central invitation to participants. It is the
transformation through which participants find that they are "big
enough" and "have enough space" within them --- within awareness --- to
hold whatever is arising in the moment. It is not surprising, then, that
moving towards acceptance is the bulk of the work of the
mindfulness-based group or dyad. It is quite common that more time is
devoted to this than to any other single intention. This intention is in
many ways the most full and important, while, in curricular terms, it is
the most "empty" and imperceptible. Inquiry into participant experience
is the primary perceptible activity, bringing an exploratory,
unpredictable, and improvised quality to sessions, particularly the
later ones. Exploring in the Space Outside The environment of
mindfulness and the intersubjective resonance co-created by the teacher
and participants is the context that allows participants to inquire,
explore, and move towards acceptance. The ideal environment for each
session reflects an ongoing diminishment of judgment and reduced roles
for prediction, memory, and desire in defining peoples' stories. This
often prompts participants to say things like "I feel safe here," and
"This class is a refuge for me each week," and "I never thought I'd be
saying this out loud... ." The environment then is an outer expression
of the space of awareness that is the context for

179

Beauty, gratitude, and an awareness filled with fear. As sessions
proceed, the practice of mindfulness shows itself to participants to be
very different from the coping strategy or "way out" of undesirable
situations that they may have been wishing for or imagining. As they
come to explore the boundlessness of awareness and the movement towards
acceptance, they may come to understand that it is not about change, but
about freedom --- the freedom to simply be with/in the experience of the
moment without coping or escaping. The psychiatrist, spiritual director,
and lover of wilderness, Gerald May (2006), recounts a story from a solo
camping trip that makes the potential of acceptance obvious. He is deep
in bear country, deep in the night. He has secured his camp, put food
and other bear attractors in the car. Still, he feels insecure ---
fearful, in fact. A night of nerves and fitful sleep, and then, a bear:
The bear is right next to me, its side brushing the tent canvas, its
growl deep, resonant, slow. This is no dream and I am terrified and yet
I feel a strange calmness over everything, so difficult to describe.
It's like some kind of fierce embrace...

For the first time in my life, I am experiencing pure fear. I am
completely present in it, in a place beyond all coping because there is
nothing to do. I have never before experienced such clean, unadulterated
purity of emotion. This fear is naked. It consists, in these slowly
passing moments, of my heart pounding, my breath rushing yet fully
silent, my body ready for anything, my mind absolutely empty, open,
waiting. I am fear. It is beautiful. (pp. 31--32) Fear is running free
in the space of awareness, and can be seen for precisely what it is ---
the

180

­cultivating observation. It is an intersubjective version of the
fullness of the circle representing awareness in Fig. 7.2 in the last
section. Although direct inquiry with the teacher is the most
perceptible form of exploration in each session, it would be unwise to
privilege it as the main vehicle for moving towards acceptance. Given
the environment of intersubjective and intrasubjective resonance,
participants who seem to be simply watching the inquiry into another's
experience may actually be doing deeper work. They may be working along
and accepting and changing in ways they may never report. They may even
be keying in to different facets of the spoken inquiry, as becomes clear
in the two selections below from participant reflections from the same
class. The first participant was helped to turn towards, locate, and
open space for a pain in the lower back through inquiry that catalyzed
curiosity with questions about what the sensations felt like, including
if they had a size, shape, color, and with suggestions for the use of
gravity and the breath. The second was one of several who spoke up after
working along. Participant 1: In class on one particular Tuesday, after
the meditation, my back was hurting. You had me close my eyes and focus
on the pain and its location. You asked what the sensations of pain felt
like --- did they have a size, a shape, even a color. At first, I was
not getting it. All of a sudden, the shape was oblong and the color was
blue. Concentrating on the area, the pain slowly subsided. It was
amazing. Even more amazing was that others in the group did it too and
had a similar reaction to it. Participant 2: After the scan when we got
up, you asked us a few questions about the body scan. June spoke on how
she couldn't get comfortable because her back was in extreme pain. My
back was hurting too. You had us do a breathing exercise to focus
directly on our back. The pain began to move, it felt like waves in my
back. It was weird. I actually saw the pain as a color. It was blue. I
was totally amused. It was really cool to actually focus my breathing
into my pain and it went away.

Of course, participants are also exploring and inquiring entirely on
their own, as the

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

embodied experience --- and how it is --- beautiful. The outcome, when
the bear leaves and May ventures out of the tent, is exhilaration at the
brilliance of the starry night and an overwhelming sense of gratitude:
The real gift of that night was that I had been unable to do anything
about my fear of the bear. Lying there in the tent, I could not run
away; I could not make the bear go away; I could not reassure myself
that things were going to be all right; I could not trick my mind into
thinking about something else. There was nothing to be done, and that
was the gift. I could only be there in the real situation, being real,
being pure fear. (p. 34) For those of us teaching mindfulness as
professionals, May's reflection on his experience points to just how
profoundly different from much contemporary practice in the helping
professions our work really is: In my psychiatric practice, how many
times did I help patients cope with their feelings, tame the power of
their emotions? I no longer believe that was helpful. Even when I
assisted people in uncovering long-buried emotions, I seldom encouraged
them to savor the life-juice of the feelings themselves... Instead, for
the most part, I helped them cope. I have come to hate that word,
because to cope with something you have to separate yourself from it...
Wild, untamed emotions are full of life spirit... They don't need to be
acted out, but neither do they need to be tamed... They are part of our
inner wilderness; they can be just what they are. Our work is not about
separation from experience, but rather about discovering, exploring, and
tending to unity.

Moving Towards Acceptance

181

intersubjective context supports or even catalyzes inner exploration.
This unseen activity is a part of the co-created curriculum too, whether
or not it ever receives outward expression --- or acknowledgment.
Exploring in the Space Inside There is a movement from macrocosm to
microcosm, from the space in which the teacher and participants
interact, to the space of awareness perceived in an embodied way by a
participant. It is a space that opens to exploration: as observation is
cultivated, the space becomes more vast. Thus, to explore awareness is
to move towards acceptance. Participants are given the suggestion and
the opportunity to observe their troubling event --- thought or pain,
perhaps --- within a context that can expand until the view is more
tolerable. This is described graphically in Figs. 7.4 and 7.5, which can
be seen as continuous with the graphics of cultivating observation.
There are two traditional metaphors that define the expanding action of
moving towards acceptance in ways available to the senses. The first
considers the event as a wild animal, say, a horse, in a small
enclosure. From up close to the fence, the bucking, rearing, galloping
are threatening --- uncontrollable. Yet if the fences are set back
further and further until the horse is in a large meadow, there is a
sense of control. In fact, the once threatening actions and energy
reveal a rare grace and beauty. The second metaphor takes the event as a
handful of salt. Added to a glass of water, the taste is overwhelming.
Tossed into the reservoir, it's undetectable. It's just tiny bit of a
natural nutrient.

Fig. 7.4 Moving towards acceptance means expanding awareness. The motion
of this intention is a sweeping opening of the constriction of the
little "I" defined by the limiting factors of judgment, prediction,
memory, and desire. As the constriction moves into a larger and larger
space of awareness, acceptance moves through possibility to actuality.

182

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

Fig. 7.5 Expanding awareness allows greater ease. With the sweeping open
of constriction, the space of awareness becomes a wide meadow in which
the wild horse of the event --- thought, sensation, and emotion --- is
free to run. In that boundless space its energy, grace, and beauty
become clear. Likewise, to use our other metaphor, when the limiting
factors are dispersed as a handful of salt in a reservoir, they lose
their bitterness. Moving towards acceptance is an expansion of awareness
that brings participants greater ease.

Curricular Considerations The challenge, then, is to find opportunities
in each session --- and beyond --- for participants to bring events into
larger and larger contexts. As this intention becomes more salient,
curricular material is almost of necessity less structured and planned,
more arbitrary and contingent on participants' and teachers'
presentmoment experiences. Just as the teacher and participants are
drawn more and more to co-create mindfulness and intersubjective
resonance in the earlier sessions, they are drawn as well to co-create
more and more of the curriculum in the later ones. Material is generated
both from the participants' experiences and from the teacher's
authenticity, authority, and friendship. Formal practices in session can
be used to generate opportunities to move towards acceptance. In a body
scan, participants can be invited to be with an area of the body or that
is "calling out to them" --- language that suggests "unpleasant events"
yet leaves room for exploring the pleasant as well. Their curiosity can
be catalyzed and they can be guided to explore and to open the awareness
around the target area --- to step back, to make space, to soften. The
same can be done with an expanding awareness practice. Or practices can
be designed explicitly to move participants towards acceptance (see
Practices 7 and 8). Such practices often result in engaged and resonant
inquiry, during which it is often helpful to return to the embodied
experience of formal practice again and again. Moving towards acceptance
in informal practice simply becomes life lived with a larger awareness.
Participants are invited by their own curiosity and encouraged by

Moving Towards Acceptance

183

their own experiences to identify what in their ongoing experience is
asking for acceptance and then moving towards it. Health, work, career,
relationships, moment by moment, events come into awareness --- which
can constrict or open in response.

Inquiry: Constricting and expanding around fear This inquiry did not
come out of a practice, but rather before one. It is the sixth session
of an MBSR course; participants have spent a week working with the
expanding awareness practice. The teacher describes a practice designed
to help with understanding choice-less awareness, in which participants
narrate in a whisper the flow of their present moment experience to a
partner. One participant is visibly upset, and is engaged nonverbally by
the teacher. P: I have a lot of fear... I want to run out of the room...
I feel vulnerable. T: That's what you notice now... a lot of fear and
vulnerability... Are you able to be with this on your own right now,
just voicing it, or is there something that would be helpful in
addition? Acknowledging. Allowing things to be as they are. Trusting
that the participant knows what is needed. P: I'm not sure.
Vulnerability has come up pretty strong. T: Where do you feel this
vulnerability in the body? Bringing an abstract feeling into view in the
body. Giving it limits and definition. P: My stomach and my back... my
back is in pain. T: If you bring your attention to your stomach or back,
what does it feel like? Making space, distance required to see and
answer. P: I don't really want to say this, but it feels like I am going
to throw up. T: Why wouldn't you want to say this? Genuine curiosity and
nonjudging. P: I don't want to make other people uncomfortable. T: So,
you don't want to make others uncomfortable, but this is your truth in
the moment. (Silence) In this moment, you feel nauseous. As much as you
are able, stay with the sensations in your body... Pointing to the
validity of present moment experience. Returning again to embodied
experience as observable. T: (After silence) What are you noticing now?
Permissive, curious. Cued by nonverbal shifts. P: I'm sad. T: Something
has shifted and you are experiencing emotion, sadness.

184

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

Acknowledgement. Staying with the experience. P: (After silence) I'm
noticing that I am picking my finger nails, trying to distract myself I
think... I'm going in and out of feeling. T: So you are going in and out
of feeling. Is the nausea still here? Acknowledging. Returning to
observation in the body, a gentle insistence. P: No, that's gone. I'm
just sad. (Long silence) My mind says I can't cope. T: Do you have
thoughts/beliefs that tell you that sadness and coping don't go hand in
hand? Locating, observing thought. P: Yes, I've always had to be strong
and I can't fall apart. T: Is there another belief that if you allow
sadness, you will fall apart and not be able to function? P: Yes... T:
Allowing ourselves to feel sadness doesn't mean we are not strong, and
falling apart does not mean we will not function --- falling apart can
be a step in regrouping, coming together in a new way, perhaps even
stronger and wiser than before. Offering an opportunity for a shift.
Note the use of the plural, drawing in the other participants. Working
within intersubjective resonance all this while. T: (After silence) What
are you noticing in the body now? Gently insistent, returning to the
workable space of the body. P: I feel like crying... I am more
comfortable though... It's OK. There is more space. T: Do you have a
sense of wanting to run out of the room like before? Bringing
perspective. P: No, but my thoughts are about me being weak... I have
lots of judgments about myself, and that's so sad... (Crying quietly;
silence) I'm not perfect... (said softly, sincerely). There is space now
for observing, identifying, parsing experience. T: That sounds more like
a kind acknowledgement of being human than a judgment? Genuinely
curious. P: Maybe a little judgment, but I'm really feeling more
kindness right now. T: (After silence) How does that feel? A prompt to
move from the abstract to the observable.

Moving Towards Acceptance

185

P: My mind is peaceful. I feel soft, kind of tender. My body is not
hurting... My body is not hurting. I'm just noticing my breath. T: Let's
all do that... noticing our breath for a few moments... Turning the
group's attention to individual experience. Offering time and space just
to be together, with no one at the center.

Growing Compassion As the bottom gradient band on the spectrum of
teaching intentions, growing compassion can be seen as an underscore, an
added emphasis to the four intentions above it. All are held with an
intention Do explicit practices to cultivate of growing compassion. It
is a constant, intecompassion belong in the MBIs? grated into the
curriculum both implicitly and Whether or how compassion-related
pracexplicitly. It is evident in the actions and tices should be
integrated into a course interactions of teacher and participants from
devoted to development of mindfulness the first session to the last. But
it does not skills has long been a subject of debate in have the same
qualities from first to last. the MBSR community. Kabat-Zinn (2005)
There is a shift that coincides with the pivot notes that for
pedagogical and practical of cultivating observation and the subsequent
reasons, he was reluctant to include such transformation of moving
towards acceppractices, as they are implicitly embodied tance. To fully
understand this shift, and to in all of the practices and teaching, and
as make use of it in fulfilling a mindfulnessthey may confuse
participants just learning based curriculum, it is best to understand
the mindfulness practice by interjecting a sense definition of
compassion and its two compleof doing, by "...invoking particular
feelings mentary motions as they are proposed here. It and thoughts and
generating desirable is also best to keep in mind that this
presentastates of mind and heart" (p. 286). However, tion of compassion
is designed as simple and he justifies limited introduction of
loving"empty" to optimize flexibility and facility of kindness practice
because, "on a deeper use in the moment of teaching.

Definition Compassion here is not precisely identified with karuna, the
"wish to take away the suffering of others" as described in the four
Brahma Viharas of Buddhism in Chapter 3, although that wish informs it.
Nor is it exactly the emotion-heavy definition from the dictionary, with
its cognates of sympathy, sorrow, commiseration, and pity, and its Latin
root meaning "suffering with another," although these inform it
(Webster's,

level, the instructions only appear to be making something happen.
Underneath, I have come to feel that they are revealing feelings we
actually already have, but which are so buried that they need continual
invitation and some exceptional sustaining to touch" (p. 286). Other
MBSR teachers have not found such pedagogical dissonance, or teach in
venues that virtually require introduction of compassion practices early
on, and thus have developed curriculum adaptations that include
loving-kindness and other

186

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

1961). And, again, it is informed by, though not compassion-oriented
practices from the identical with the Buddhist-influenced psychoearliest
weeks of the course. They also logical concept of self-compassion (Neff,
2003), routinely include such practices as with its three basic
components: "(1) extending ongoing home practice for participants,
kindness and understanding to oneself rather supported by audio
recordings. To than harsh self-criticism and judgment; (2) seedefuse any
dissonance of doing versus ing one's experiences as part of the larger
being, practices can be guided with recurhuman experience rather than as
separating and ring injunctions such as "noticing how it is isolating;
and (3) holding one's painful thoughts with you right now, in the body,
emotions, and feelings in balanced awareness rather than and thoughts,"
and "knowing that you can over-identifying with them" (p. 224). offer
loving-kindness \[for example\] with Compassion in the context of the
"empty curall that you are in this moment --- riculum" is meant, rather,
as a larger, more whether you're feeling loving-kindness, or
encompassing, and less emotionally charged anger, or sadness, or any
other way of term reflecting its relationship to the other four being."
From such a perspective, particiintentions and the co-created
relationship of pants can simultaneously allow their own teacher and
participants. experience and hold a compassionate Protestant theologian
Tillich (1957, 1963) intention. speaks of love in a way that can be
recruited to assist in a definition of compassion for mindfulness
pedagogy. Tillich states that "Love is the drive towards the reunion of
the separated" (1963, p. 134). He sees the driving power towards reunion
as essential, the nature of life itself. Aligning with this drive, then,
could be seen to be compassionate --- suffering with the separated, and
wishing and doing whatever is possible to bring about unification and
reduce suffering. Transposed into the mindfulness curriculum, this is
seen most clearly as a participant is able to observe the little "I"
constricted around an event in a larger context, and to accept that
event and thereby realize the unity of awareness. Such an action often
has the result of reducing the participant's suffering and expanding her
capacity to be with/in her experience. Her growing capacity to be
with/in whatever is arising also makes her more available, more present,
to others in the group --- and in the world. Simply through her greater
capacity to be present, to turn towards rather than away from her own or
another's suffering, she is being compassionate. Two Motions At the
start of the first session, participants are often suffering from
separation from part of themselves; they are constricted in their
relationship to the experience of their lives --- reflected in
discomfort in the body, in thoughts, in emotions. They may attempt to
work with this separation and the discomfort it brings through
compassion --- moving it in one direction or another. Some will find,
particularly in the early sessions, that they need the compassion of
others, particularly of the teacher. They draw compassion towards them
with a kind of centripetal force that moves it inward to help relieve
their constriction. Others

Moving Towards Acceptance

187

Fig. 7.6 Centripetal and centrifugal compassion in early sessions. When
awareness is constricted around an event, a participant may find a
certain amount of relief by drawing compassion towards herself --- often
from the teacher. It is also possible that a participant cannot accept
compassion into his constricted little "I", and that relief is found
instead in offering compassion to others --- often approached as
"fixing" the other. As suggested by the thin dotted lines, such
experiences of centripetal or centrifugal compassion in this constricted
context are relatively weak, intermittent, and barely "touch the
surface" of suffering.

will find that they have difficulty accepting the compassion of others,
and that they find some relief from their constriction in a centrifugal
motion as they feel others drawing compassion outward from them. Of
course, any combination and degree of the two is possible, including no
engagement with compassion at all. The Shift Centripetal and centrifugal
motions of compassion continue session to session, yet there is a
significant change in the quality associated with each motion over time.
In the early sessions, the centripetal motion has a focused, needy
quality. It draws most significantly on the teacher, whose being in many
cases reflects a relatively more open and unified awareness, with a less
judgmental view and a more permissive approach. The teacher is thus more
present for others than most other participants. At this same time, the
centrifugal motion has an

188

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

anxious quality about it. The need to find relief from separation, from
constriction, may manifest in the drive to tell personal stories, to
offer advice, in short, to "fix" others. From this perspective, the
teacher's more expanded awareness and greater capacity for holding may
be frustrating, as it does not fit the classic frame of helping. As
sessions go on, and participants are able to observe their constricted
little "I" and to open around it, the quality of compassion does indeed
change. With an expansion of awareness, a diminishment of the limiting
factors, and a motion towards acceptance, participants may be reunified
with their own experience. With this shift comes a notable change in the
quality of centripetal compassion. Because there is less constriction,
there is a greater capacity to receive, and to receive from participants
as well as the teacher. What is new is that because awareness has
expanded and there has been some reunification of the separated, it is
also more possible for participants to draw in compassion from
themselves. There is also a corresponding change in the quality of
centrifugal compassion, as the constricted little "I" expands, and the
other can be seen as less distant, less different, and less threatening.
There is a reduced need to prop up the little "I" with stories, to
demonstrate competence by giving advice, or to "fix" others. At the same
time, the presence and authenticity generated by the reunion of the
separated --- the participant's less reactive relationship with her own
experience --- transforms whatever may be offered into something more
valuable and nourishing for the other. Participants who are more
unified, whose awareness is expanded, also find compassion drawn from
them by others. A professional example comes from the reflections of a
participant in a graduate-level mindfulness program in which the final
session was a silent three hours of practice --- a mini-retreat: I had a
really cool experience at work. In fact, it was the day after the
mini-retreat. That next day, three patients revealed amazing and highly
emotional stories to me in the process of their testing. One woman from
another country began crying when we spoke of her past in the country
she came from. She missed her country; her family is struggling to
adjust here... Another woman revealed a story of her disabled sister and
her mother's metastatic cancer... Another patient stopped by to show off
her baby. She herself has some health problems but looked radiant. She
said -- oh by the way -- she just separated from her husband... Now,
patients often share personal stories during their time with me, but on
that day the number and depth of emotions they shared was striking. I
had to wonder if I was more open and more present after the
mini-retreat, such that they were more comfortable expressing themselves
to me. Or, was it just coincidence?

This participant felt the pull of the centripetal force of compassion,
and, although she does not describe her own responses, there is a sense
that one who would notice this experience would respond centrifugally
with care. Of course, the two motions of compassion and this significant
shift can be framed and spoken about in many different ways. For
example, a description based on intra- and intersubjective resonance, as
they develop from session to session and influence the group and
individual participants, would be another way to account for the same
motions and shifts.

Moving Towards Acceptance

189

Fig. 7.7 Changed quality of centripetal and centrifugal compassion in
later sessions. When awareness is expanded so the participant has some
freedom to observe her experience, compassion takes on a different
quality. Centripetal compassion is drawn less insistently, and can be
accepted more fully and consistently. Centrifugal compassion is offered
more gently, from a deeper understanding of the common human condition.
As the graphics suggest, such compassion is more affecting, stable, and
connected to experience in the moment.

Curricular Considerations Compassion, particularly its centripetal
motion, is implicit in the formal and informal mindfulness practices,
and in the didactic material introduced in the early sessions of the
MBSR template. That is, the teacher's early role makes it salient,
particularly through nonjudgment, permissiveness, and authentic empathy.
The centrifugal motion in those early weeks is most likely discovered in
teacher--­ participant inquiry, group dialog, and participants' budding
intragroup relationships. As curricular focus shifts to the intentions
of cultivating observing and moving towards acceptance, the shift begins
to take place for many participants, so inquiry and languaging of
practice guidance can shift along to explore the possibilities of
greater centripetal compassion from within the participant herself and
more centrifugal compassion for others in the class and in participant's
lives. In the template MBSR curriculum of the CFM, an explicit practice
of loving-kindness is introduced somewhere between weeks five and seven,
often during the all-day session. This practice of offering wishes for
happiness, safety, well-being, and ease is usually designed to broach
the subject of centripetal compassion very permissively, so participants

190

7 Fulfilling the Intentions of Teaching

may explore with reduced reactivity. A version of a loving-kindness
practice that we use (Practice 9) presents permissively an opportunity
to offer intentions of loving-kindness for oneself and for others from
whatever emotional space one is in; the practice is not to change one's
feelings but to acknowledge them and offer intentions through them and
with them --- to be completely accepting of one's own experience. The
loving-kindness practice is often a link that helps many participants
connect their personal practice to the relationships in their domestic
and work lives. Further, they discover the potential impact of their
individual transformation on family, social circle, workplace, and
political, social, and environmental awareness, as well as on their
spirituality. Outside the template MBSR program, many MBSR teachers
integrate explicit compassion practice in much earlier sessions. The
shift to an expanded awareness and movement towards acceptance may or
may not happen earlier for participants, yet this addition would seem to
offer additional relief from the constriction of the little "I". It is
also common --- and popular with participants --- for graduate courses
to be devoted to compassion practices. A compassion practice that works
deliberately with the relationship of expanded awareness --- the
capacity to remain open --- to catalyze acceptance is included in
Chapter 8 as well (Practice 10).

Inquiry: Some motions and movements of compassion In the sixth session
of a foundation MBSR course, the group is heterogeneous, with helping
professionals mixed in with patients. This fact adds poignancy to the
dialog. P: If you were to ask me how I am this morning, I would have
said I'm feeling good, even happy. But when you asked us to sit and
check in, I noticed how bad I feel. There is something I am angry about,
and every time I sat to meditate this weekend there were lots of
feelings that were unpleasant. It was really hard to meditate. What was
up was how much was uncomfortable --- lots of sadness, and underneath
that, fear, and underneath that, despair. That's what's coming up. Anger
is the one I struggle with the most. It's really hard to sit with for
me. There was a lot of it. I had the awareness of how inward it goes. I
was angry at some of the choices I made. Someone was not returning my
phone calls and what emerged was feelings of helplessness. But the more
I sat with it the more angry I got at myself. It's hard to admit but
there is really a lot of self hatred that came up with the helplessness.
It's funny that I was reading about mindful communication this week. I
would fucking communicate mindfully with this person, if they would
fucking call me. And I would even do it fucking compassionately.
(Laughter in class.) But I made four calls and didn't get a reply. The
more rage I felt, the more I felt it going inward, toward myself. T:
There's lots of emotions arising for you. P: Yeah, yeah... It's Awful!
T: It's hard to be with all this...

Moving Towards Acceptance

191

Acknowledgement. Compassion both drawn centripetally and sent
centrifugally. P: (Sighing, crying; then, after silence) I'm a therapist
and I work with people who self-injure. My God, I really get it now ---
why someone does that. It's embarrassing to say it, for the first time
ever, I really get why someone would cut themselves. I don't want to do
it... Recognition of authentic compassion. T: You can feel that level of
pain? Recognition of authentic compassion. P: (Crying) Yes, wanting to
release it (the pain) myself because there is no other release. (Crying,
then) Just saying it out loud, I'm feeling better. T: That was the very
question I was going to ask --- how are you in this moment? P: I was
embarrassed, but it's all really true. It's the truth and I feel better.
(Crying stopped) I feel calm... T: (Silence, looking around the group)
Let's take a moment to check in. Anna has been sharing really
authentically. Noticing what is coming up for you right now. Seeing if
you can simply notice without needing to change anything or do anything.
Making space for observation. T: (After silence) What are you noticing ?
What's arising ? Pop-corning out a word or two. Offering permission. An
opportunity to express, to connect, to acknowledge centripetal and
centrifugal compasion. Group: Compassion... Empathy... Truth...
Tension... Sadness... Being human... Connection... T: Anna, how are you
right now? What are you noticing? P: Relief... Gratitude... I'm tired
and a bit weary... And in this moment, I'm OK.

Chapter 8

Practice Scripts and Descriptions

This chapter presents scripts for a range of practices, including the
core practices of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), and
practices that approach the teaching intentions from different
perspectives. They are specific embodiments of the "emptied" motions or
gestures of the teaching intentions, drawn from our own authenticity,
authority, and friendship. If Chapter 7 characterized the water marks or
tide lines of the intentions, perhaps the practices in this chapter are
objects found at those lines --- a piece of driftwood, a pretty shell, a
polished piece of broken glass. They are that concrete, and that unique.
Perhaps their usefulness is found in the way that driftwood might be
used by an artist: taken home, looked at reflectively, and then
abstracted into a new creation. Take these for inspiration, not
imitation. Feel the gestures called out in the margins, don't follow
them.

Practices for Experiencing New Possibilities Practice 1: Playing
Attention Approximate Timing: 15--20 minutes This activity can provide a
common experience that translates easily into a group dialog about
mindfulness. There are countless variations possible from the basic
gestures of the one-to-one encounters and the attempts at grouprelating.
This practice is guided as a meditation --- one that gets pretty wild.
The description given here is actually just a sample of what can be
done. The "object" for the teacher is to improvise instructions that
toggle the participants' expectations and experiences between order and
chaos, joy and frustration, or whatever else arises in the group or
suggests itself to the teacher. Use of inviting language is important,
as is the use of bells or some other method of attracting attention in
class? chaos. D. McCown et al., Teaching Mindfulness: A Practical Guide
for Clinicians and Educators, DOI 10.1007/978-0-387-09484-7_8, ©
Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

193

194

Disrupting the circle of chairs before it has been used, declaring the
rule of impermanence. And bringing participants into embodied contact
with something possibly pleasurable, and certainly not predicted.
Acknowledging the enormous range of possible experiences, and
introducing the triangle of awareness.

Facilitating a flow of varied mind--body states.

Moving participants' attention from outer activity to inner. Exploring
again the triangle of awareness.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Begin by clearing as large a space as possible in the room, perhaps
moving all the chairs out to the perimeter. Then handing each
participant a playground ball --- anything from a heavy rubber "four
square" game ball to a light vinyl beach ball, to a "pinky" or
"Spaldeen," depending on the teacher's own childhood memories, available
resources, or the size of the budget. Guidance at this point is
something like: "Noticing what having one of these in your hands does to
your experience of your body, your thinking, and your emotions. Maybe
this is part of your history...of triumph...or sadness...or
embarrassment... Just being aware of how it is." Then setting the
essential ground rules: "This won't necessarily be a quiet experiment,
but please try not to talk. Limiting yourself to nonverbal
communication. Following the instructions as best you understand them.
I'll ring a bell from time to time. When you hear it, simply stop where
you are... bringing your attention to what is happening within you...
perhaps closing your eyes if that helps and feels comfortable in the
moment. When the bell rings again, continuing what you were doing.
Commencing the action by asking participants to walk at random through
the room, explaining that, when they make eye contact, they should
exchange their ball with the other person's, hand to hand, and then move
on. When participants have found a rhythm, modify the instructions every
minute or two, by asking them to make the exchange in different ways.
For example, "Making the exchange... from a distance ...from up close...
in a formal way... in a casual way... in a fancy way... over a tall
fence... under the fence... without anyone seeing... one-handed...
behind the back..." Remember, this is an improvisation, so key into what
is happening in the group, shifting instructions to amplify or oppose
ongoing action, speed, mood, or whatever draws your attention and
curiosity. At any time during these shiftings, when participants are in
states that you deem interesting to investigate, ring a bell to stop,
and have them turn attention to what is happening in the moment: "Coming
to quiet and turning your attention to the energy in the room; what is
it like right now?... And, if it feels comfortable, closing the eyes and
tuning in to the body; how is it with you?... Noticing breathing...
possibly the heart rate... aware of thinking --- not so much the
content, but the speed, density, and ­quality of thoughts... and
attending to emotion --- how do you feel right now?"

Practices for Experiencing New Possibilities

Reordering relationships.

May point up the contrast between flowing, embodied experience and
experience dominated by thought and judgment. Inquiring particularly
around reordered relationships, radical redefinitions, and
transformative orientations.

195

Ring the bell again and have the participants return to their activity.
On one of these returns, perhaps changing the instruction to something
like "Making the exchange precisely," to give them an opportunity to
experience the potential of greater clarity after pausing and turning
inward. As the activity begins to become routine --- or, better, before
--- ask participants to come together as groups of 6 to 10, depending on
the overall count. Perhaps you can improvise an interesting way for this
to happen, or maybe you just step in and make an arbitrary division. Ask
each group to come into a circle, and have all but one person put down
their ball. Begin by asking them to throw the ball to someone in the
circle. Whoever receives the ball will say their first name and throw
the ball to someone else. As a rhythm develops, you will move from group
to group, handing another person a ball from the ground, so that more
balls come into play. Ask the group to see how many balls they can get
into play. This can become quite chaotic --- and fun. Ring the bell at a
chaotic moment. You'll know when. And check in as before; moving from
outer to inner experience, using the triangle of awareness. Then,
beginning again, ask them to also try to say the name of the person to
whom they're throwing. Add more balls as it goes on. Ring the bell, come
to quiet, and check in. Then shift again, asking them to use speech and
to figure out a pattern through which they can get all the balls into
circulation --- but they can't simply pass them to the person next to
them. As they negotiate, ring the bell, come to quiet, and check in to
experience in body, thoughts, and emotion. Shift one last time, away
from the dominance of thought and judgment. Allow them to pass to the
person next to them, so the balls simply flow around the circle. When
all are in circulation, ask for variations, such as more speed, greater
precision, complete silliness --- amplify or oppose whatever draws your
attention in the groups. Ring the bell, come to quiet, and check in.
Then bring the circle of chairs back together and spend some time in
dialog about what people noticed about individual and group experience.

Practice 2: Well Meditation (from the teaching of Saki Santorelli, EdD)
Approximate Timing: 10 minutes This is a guided contemplation that does
not require an introduction to mindfulness. As such, it is useful as an
opening experience for initial sessions. The

196

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

material that becomes available to participants through the repeated
asking of a question often touches deep human longings and concerns. In
the sharing after the ­contemplation, relationships are often reordered,
as common themes are revealed. There is a sense that the shared human
condition is in the foreground, and age, gender, race, diagnosis,
professional identity, move to the background.

Giving the permissive option to use imagery or not.

Repeating the question.

Repeating the question. Potential for radical redefinitions, answers
different than they originally "thought." Preparing for introductions
and sharing of answers --- "as much as you care to."

Sitting in a comfortable position. Bringing your attention to your
body... Feeling the support beneath you... Noticing your breath wherever
you feel it most vividly in the moment, with the air flowing in and out
the nostrils... or with the rising and falling of the chest or
abdomen... Simply following your breath moment to moment." If imagery is
helpful to you, you may want to imagine a deep well... And imagining a
pebble beside the well. ... picking up the pebble, feeling it in your
hand.... The pebble carries with it a question ... and when you are
ready, dropping the pebble into the water with the question that it
carries... "What brings you here?"... And noticing what answer or
answers splash up." Just sitting in silence and listening... "What
brings you here to be sitting in this class?"... Sitting in silence.
"And now, as the pebble drops deeper into the water, notice if any other
answers reveal themselves from a deeper place within in response to this
question, What brings you here?" "And when you're ready, bringing your
attention back to the breath...simply noticing the in-breath and the
outbreath... and feeling the body sitting here.... And when you're
ready, allowing your eyes to open..."

Practices for Discovering Embodiment Practice 3: Body Scan Approximate
Timing: Introduction, 3 minutes; Practice, 25 minutes This is a
recording script for this core practice of the MBSR curriculum and of
many interventions that make use of the MBSR armature for teaching.
Within a research paradigm utilizing MBSR as the intervention, the
preferred version of this practice begins

Practices for Discovering Embodiment

197

with the feet and moves upwards to the top of the head. This version
begins at the top of the head. However, the practice can be started and
finished anywhere, and there are many ways of moving through the body,
such as section by section, or first one side then the other, or
following a circle or ring around the body that progresses gradually up
or down. All are useful at ­particular moments in teaching, depending
upon intention. The intention of this version is to effectively initiate
and support "discovering embodiment." Introduction

A radical redefinition, suggesting a preference for embodiment over
cognitive, verbal processes.

Reinforcing nonjudgment. Offering options.

This is a recording of a mindful body scan, designed for you to use
regularly to help you assume an active and powerful role in your own
health and well-being. It is best to listen to this recording --- and to
do what it says --- while in a comfortable place where you can feel
safe, secure, and free from interruption... Looking at this practice
time as an opportunity to be both by yourself and fully with yourself...
an opportunity to nourish yourself, to open to and experience the
potential of strength and healing within yourself. Our culture asks us
to live so much in our thoughts, in our heads, that we may sometimes
forget that the whole body feels and knows... that there is a wisdom
beyond words... we may have built-in habits that ignore, minimize, or
completely shut down the possibility of feeling our own aliveness...
Now, the body scan is an opportunity to connect a little more to the
body --- this marvelous sensing instrument that can bring you closer to
yourself, to the world, and to others... this practice is a time for
gentle exploration of each present moment. The opportunity to explore
bodily experience can be very helpful... you can begin to notice what
feels good, what you withdraw from, when you tense up, and when you can
give yourself space... this is a time for simply being your experience
... being just as you are... without criticizing, judging, wishing, or
trying to change the experience in any way... While many people prefer
to do the body scan lying on their back on the floor, the body scan can
be done in any position, lying or sitting... on the floor, on a bed, or
on a chair... what really matters is your presence in the moment....
what really matters is that you are choosing to show up for what's
happening now.

198

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Body Scan Practice

Exploring the breath and its soothing potential.

Offering a safe haven.

How far can you feel the breath?

Exploring with light and breath.

Lying on your back, with your arms and hands at your sides and legs
outstretched ... or with the knees bent and the soles of the feet on the
floor, if that is more comfortable ... or sitting in a chair in a
relaxed posture... making a choice to allow yourself to be exactly as
you are in this moment... Coming gently to notice the breath... it's
such a constant feature of life that it's easy to ignore... so taking
time with it now... ­actually feeling the sensations as the breath enters
the body and leaves the body of its own accord... allowing it to move
through its cycle of in-breath and outbreath without controlling... if
it feels right to you, attending to the belly, the lower abdomen,
noticing that it may be rising and falling with the cycle of the
breath... if you care to, placing your hands on your belly... feeling
the movement of the breath, the rhythm, the waves of the breath...
simply riding the waves of your breath from moment to moment. As you
listen to this body scan, if at any time sensations in the body become
too uncomfortable, or emotions arise that are too difficult, knowing
that it is always possible to return to the breath as a safe place, a
haven, a retreat for you to rest in, until you are ready to venture
again into the body scan... wherever this recording is in its progress.
If you've placed your hands on your belly, taking them off now, and
moving your attention to the top of your head... noticing that
sensations may arise when you bring attention to a particular
part...maybe tingling, maybe pressure, maybe a feeling of the breath or
the pulse affecting this area... or perhaps there's no sensation ---
that's OK, that's simply your experience of this moment. And when you're
ready, moving your attention to your forehead... observing any
sensations...perhaps furrows of tension, or tingling, or a sense of
relaxation... allowing yourself to feel whatever you feel. Now moving
your attention from the forehead to the eyes and eyelids... noticing how
you're holding them... how much or how little pressure does it take to
keep them closed? Experiencing the eyes from the inside, from behind the
eyelids... are the eyeballs moving or still? Is there darkness? light?
color? How does the breath affect this area?

Practices for Discovering Embodiment

Moving attention from inside to outside the body.

Suggesting interoception of "echoes" of the movement of the jaw.

Moving away from concepts, towards direct experience.

The breath for navigation.

199

When it feels right, beginning to pay attention to the cheeks... sensing
the bones, the muscles, the skin of the cheeks... noticing the play of
air, sensations of coolness or warmth... noting perhaps that some
sensations stay for a while, while others pass quickly... and that
intensity may change one way or the other as you bring attention to
them... ...and attending now to the nose, from the bridge to the edges
of the nostrils... perhaps feeling the breath in the nostrils as it
enters and leaves... noticing temperature, moisture, sensations on the
upper lip, perhaps... Moving the attention to the jaw... being aware of
tightness or softness... allowing the lower jaw to drop down slightly,
and noticing any changes in sensations in the muscles of the face and
neck, or in other parts of the body which that small movement may
create... and expanding your focus of attention to include the mouth and
lips... inside the mouth, the tongue against the teeth, against the roof
of the mouth... if you care to, breathing in through the nose and out
through the lips... allowing the air to play on its way out... observing
the sensations of dampness, dryness, warmth, or coolness... And
expanding the attention to encompass the entire face... not a picture of
your face in your mind, but really feeling the sensations in the area
that we call the face.... What's there for you? ...aware of any thoughts
and emotions as well... and if thoughts or emotions arise allowing them
simply to come into awareness and pass, like clouds in the sky...
Shifting the attention to your neck... noticing how it is right now in
the big muscles in the back of the neck, from the base of the skull to
the shoulders... the throat... aware perhaps of the play of air or touch
of clothing... being present in this experience... Moving now to the
shoulders, checking into their condition in this moment, any tightness
or softness, recognizing that this is the condition now... accepting it,
knowing that it does not need to be some other way... and knowing also
that conditions change... noticing if there is a sense of the breath in
the shoulders... how much of the body does breathing affect? Allowing
the attention to travel to the upper and mid back... sensing the
muscles, tight or loose... aware perhaps of sensations of the weight of
the body here... pressure against the floor or chair back, feelings of
the texture of clothing...noting how the breath moves in this area...

200

Gravity for navigation, and for presence in unpleasant or pleasant
moments.

Moving away from concepts and language.

Gravity and breath.

Exploring interoceptive possibilities.

Making possibilities of interoception explicit.

Gravity and the breath to stay oriented in a potentially uncomfortable
physical and psychological experience.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Bringing attention to the lower back, to the sense of contact or lack of
contact with the floor or chair, the sense of yielding to gravity or
resisting, any tightness or softness... noticing any tendency to move
away from or towards any sensations or thoughts, feelings, judgments
that may arise... remembering that this is simply how it is in the lower
back at this moment... And experiencing the whole back now, from the
shoulders to the base of the spine... aware of the subtle and not so
subtle motions of the back as you breathe... dwelling in the sensations
of the back, not watching from your head... just knowing what the back
knows.... Shifting to the arms... to the upper arms and forearms...
aware of the pull of gravity, the weight of the arms... feeling the
muscles and joints, the touch and texture of clothing... and expanding
the attention to include the wrists and hands... sensations of warmth,
or coolness, tingling, moisture, or dryness... how does the breath
affect the arms and hands? Is it possible to feel the pulse here? Just
being with what's here now... And moving, as you're ready, to the
chest... aware of the lungs and heart in this space... maybe sensing
inside, as the lungs fill and empty... perhaps noticing the heartbeat,
the rhythm of the heart and the breath together... being present to
these sensations of life... and feeling the surface, the touch of
clothing, any sense of movement... Now extending attention into the
abdomen, the belly, feeling inside first... this place where we have our
gut feelings --- there really are nerves here that sense and know ---
feeling into the motion of the diaphragm, the sense of the breath in the
belly... When it seems right, moving attention to the pelvic region,
from hip to hip... aware of the effects of gravity, the weight of the
lower body ... the buttocks pressed into the floor or chair, sensation
in the hip joints... the groin, the genitals... the lower abdomen...
tuning in to the sense of the breath, of the pulse here.. how far do
they reach? And noticing thoughts and feelings that may arise... aware
of judgments, and, as it's possible for you, letting them go... Shifting
the focus into the upper legs --- the thighs... aware of gravity's work,
the pressing against the floor or chair, the feel of clothing against
the skin, and moving in...

Practices for Discovering Embodiment

Aliveness.

Comfort of gravity and the breath.

201

the quality of the muscles, tight or loose...is it possible to feel the
bone running through? ... and extending the attention now to the lower
legs, the calves and shins... noticing points of contact or lack of
contact with the floor or chair, aware of gravity, aware as well that
the legs are alive --- how does the breath affect them? How about the
pulse --- is there a sense of the blood flowing? When you're ready,
exploring onward... to the feet... feeling where they are, the floor,
perhaps a sense of temperature... warmth or coolness... a sense of the
breath and heartbeat perhaps? Now expanding the attention to include the
entire body from the soles of the feet to the top of the head... being
present to the totality of the experience of sitting or lying here in
this moment... perhaps feeling the breath --- how it has been a constant
companion, how it brings the whole body together...as does the pulse,
the heart beat.... feeling the sense of gravity, the sense of being held
gently, closely, without fail... dwelling in what the body feels... in
what it knows... In the last moments of this body scan, congratulating
yourself for spending the time and energy to nourish yourself this
way... for continuing to make choices to live a more healthy, satisfying
life... and knowing that you can carry this awareness of your body's
deep wisdom beyond this practice session and into each moment of the
day, wherever you may find yourself.

Practice 4: Floor Yoga (Script for Recording) Approximate Timings:
Introduction, 2 minutes; Practice, 25 minutes A recording script for the
mindful Hatha yoga presented in the MBSR curriculum. While many movement
practices are easily presented as mindfulness practice, Hatha yoga is,
in our experience, easily accessible for fulfilling the intention of
discovering embodiment. Participants make connections to their bodies
quickly and in many cases joyfully. Central to the presentation of the
practice is the permissiveness with which it is presented. It is offered
for the purpose of exploring the body in motion, without expectations of
meeting some objective standard or improving one's "performance" or
abilities, as participants may first assume from their cursory exposure
to Hatha yoga in the popular culture.

202

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Introduction Activating the schema of the triangle of awareness.

Permissiveness.

Offering alternatives.

This program of gentle yoga stretching is an invitation to enter more
deeply into the life of the body... to experience the mind and body as
one, as a unity... to bring them together, as the meaning of the word
yoga --- to yoke or join --- suggests. And as with all mindfulness
practices, this yoga is about paying attention, moment to moment, to the
sensations, thoughts, and feelings that arise in your awareness... The
movements in this program are designed to be done on the floor, where a
yoga mat or a blanket may make you comfortable... If you are unable to
get down on the floor, you may wish to use a bed --- preferably one with
a firm mattress... As you go through this program, entering into the
experience of the body as deeply as you can, and without judging... this
is not about performing, about doing the movements in some ideal way for
some critical audience... Rather, it's about doing them to help connect
more closely to, and better understand, the body... So, not forcing any
movement, rather, relaxing into it... not taking on any part of the
program that seems inappropriate for you, instead, using your knowledge
of your own body and its limits to guide you and to override the
instructions, adapting the movements in a way that works for you... or
skipping them entirely and perhaps imagining yourself doing the
movements, feeling them in stillness, which is a valuable practice in
itself... Floor Yoga Practice Let's begin in rest pose...lying on the
back... allowing as much of the body to contact the ground as you are
able, from head to heels... If you have any problems with the lower
back, bending the knees instead, and placing the soles of the feet on
the ground as if standing... aligning the shoulders, hips, and feet, so
that the spine is straight... if you care to, gently lifting the head,
tucking the chin in slightly and setting the head back down...noticing
the sense of a straight spine from the base of the head all the way down
to the pelvis... legs a bit apart, feet falling slightly outward... arms
lying alongside the body, and if it's comfortable, turning the hands to
face palm up...

Practices for Discovering Embodiment

Orienting with gravity and breath.

Refocusing on embodiment. Exploring relationship with gravity and
breath.

203

Noticing how the ground accepts you, how gravity works so you don't have
to... and bringing your attention to the sensations of the breath in the
body... aware of sensations of rising and falling, expanding and
contracting, on in-breath and out-breath... and with each breath,
allowing the ground to receive more of your weight... working less,
trusting and accepting more... Breathing in and out... and when you're
ready, breathing in, lifting the arms gently and allowing them to travel
in an arc upwards to vertical --- noticing the sensations as they move
through the air --- and then allowing them to descend to rest on the
floor outstretched above the head... ...pointing your fingers towards
the wall behind you and, at the same time, pressing the heels in the
opposite direction... stretching the entire body... relaxing the stretch
and breathing out, allowing your arms to travel back through the arc ---
slowly; aware of the sensations of movement --- without anticipating
their return to the floor; allowing an element of freshness of
experience as they come to rest again at your side... and as you lie
still now noticing how you feel in your body after having completed one
mindful stretch... Once again, breathing in and allowing the arms to
travel through an arc... feeling the changes in effort as gravity pulls
and assists... until the arms come to rest on the floor above the
head... and pointing the fingers in one direction and the heels in
another, feeling the stretch wherever it can be noticed in the body...
noticing any thoughts or feelings that may enter awareness, and as much
as possible, allowing them to simply come and go like clouds in the
sky...keeping attention centered on the sensations of the body... Now
releasing the right side of the body from the stretch while maintaining
it in the left side... noticing the stretch in the left side... and
noticing the sensations in the right side as well... And releasing the
left side and stretching the right side, noticing the sensations in both
the right and left... then, breathing out, allowing the arms to return
through their arc to rest by your side... Aware of how you feel, lying
in rest pose again... aware of thoughts and emotions, and as much as
possible letting them go as you focus on bodily sensations right now...
in this moment... Moving the arms out from the sides to rest
outstretched as a "T"... and if the knees are not already bent, bending

204

Discerning essential from added effort.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

the knees and bringing the soles of the feet to rest on the floor ...
aware of the sensations in the body in this position, aware of
breathing... and on an out-breath contracting the lower abdomen and
moving the lower back down towards the ground, lifting the tailbone
slightly and making as much contact with the back to the ground as is
comfortable... feeling this stretch... and on the in-breath, then,
relaxing the abdominal muscles and pressing the tailbone down to raise
the lower back, noticing the sensations associated with this arch... On
an out-breath, again contracting the abdomen and lifting the tailbone...
and on the in-breath releasing the abdomen and pressing the tailbone
down... and in your own time, following your breath, rocking the
pelvis... noticing thoughts and feelings arising and allowing them to
pass as clouds in the sky as you focus on the sensations in the body...
Pausing... aware now of stillness and sensation... ... Then drawing the
knees up towards the chest and embracing them with the arms...
interlacing the fingers, perhaps... breathing like this... and on an
out-breath, seeing if you can draw the knees a bit closer to the
chest... finding the limit where you are comfortable, and not passing it
... then beginning with small movements, rocking gently from side to
side, massaging the back... how much effort does it take to get
started?... When does gravity take hold and begin to pull the body too
far? ....aware of the sensations in the back... and if it's comfortable
for you, bringing the head towards the knees; again not passing your
limit of comfort... learning to accept the limitations of the moment,
and knowing that limits change one way and another from moment to moment
and over longer periods of time... lowering the head to the ground...
and coming to stillness... Then letting go of the right leg and
extending it along the ground, while continuing to hold the left knee to
the chest... stretching the right heel towards the wall and at the same
time drawing the left leg closer... ... noticing how much of the body is
involved in this stretch... investigating the face perhaps... is there
tension generated there? And investigating the need for that tension...
how does the stretch in the right leg feel without it? Is it possible to
work with just the legs and arms in this posture? ...then releasing the
left leg and allowing it to stretch out along the floor, while
simultaneously bringing the right leg up towards the chest and embracing
it with the arms...

Practices for Discovering Embodiment

Exploring the relationship to gravity; framing experience with
sensations of breath and pulse.

205

extending, stretching the left leg... what tension and looseness is
required? And, when you're ready, releasing the right leg, placing it
back next to the left.... Aware of the sensations in the resting body...
In your own time now, rolling over onto your belly and coming to hands
and knees, with the back parallel to the ceiling --- like a table...
...then moving the knees outward a bit and the feet inwards, perhaps
with the big toes touching... and lowering your buttocks back and down
into this open triangle... the head and trunk moving downwards as you do
this, and the arms can be outstretched with the forehead touching the
ground between, or if it is more comfortable, you can fold the hands on
top of the other, and rest the forehead there...this is child's pose, a
rest pose for when we are working in this orientation on the ground...
adjusting your body for comfort and rest... breathing into this pose and
experiencing the sensations in the body in this moment... Pressing down
with the hands and raising the buttocks to return to hands and knees,
like a table... as you breathe in, arching the back so the abdomen moves
towards the ground, and lifting the head up, looking up and out in front
of you... breathing in and out in this cow pose... and on an out-breath
contracting the abdomen and moving into cat pose, by arching the back
towards the ceiling and drawing the head down in between the arms...And
moving back into cow pose, relaxing the abdomen and arching the back, so
the abdomen moves toward the ground, and bringing the head up to look
outward... And when you are ready, moving back into cat pose, abdomen
contracted, back arching toward the ceiling, and head to chest. Moving
back and forth now, at your own pace, between cat and cow, following
your breathing... If you need to rest at any point, in this or the next
set of movements, feel free return to child's pose... ...Coming back to
a table position, aware of sensations --- the breath and the heartbeat,
perhaps... how far can you feel them in the body?... Now, while focusing
your visual attention on a point ahead of you to steady yourself,
releasing the weight from the right knee and extending the right leg out
behind you, holding it out parallel to the ground, with the toe pointing
back... then, shifting weight to the right hand, lifting the left arm to
shoulder height, parallel with the ground, pointing it forward, the
fingers pointing forward, and balancing... noticing what is required to
achieve this... what tiny motions? what shifts and adjustments? Feeling
free to touch down as often as needed to remain steady ---

206

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

relatively! (said with humor) --- and now drawing the arm and leg in
under you to resume the table pose... ...now shifting weight to the
right knee and lifting and stretching the left leg back while at the
same time weighting the left hand and stretching out the right arm...
stretching... holding... adjusting... aware of the whole body's
involvement at this moment... now drawing the arm and leg back and
coming to stillness...noticing the breath and perhaps the heartbeat in
this moment, perhaps a sense of warmth from exertion... Then coming down
to the ground and resting on your belly... aware of your relationship
with gravity and the breath... aware of sensations, thoughts, feelings
in this moment... letting thoughts and feelings go by without following,
without attaching to them... And in your own time, rolling over onto
your back... Bending the knees and bringing the soles of the feet to the
floor as if standing, with the feet close together... bringing the arms
out in a "T" position... and letting both knees very slowly fall over to
the right... letting gravity work... keeping the shoulders on the
ground, and turning the head look out to the left... looking out over
the left arm and hand... sensing this spinal twist throughout the
body... how far does your awareness extend?... and bringing the knees
slowly back to center... and allowing them to fall slowly to the left,
while turning the head to face right, to look out over the right arm and
hand... at your own pace, doing a few of these spinal twists... aware of
the sensations along the back, and throughout the body... and bringing
the knees to center and to stillness... and on an out-breath, extending
the legs along the ground... Assuming rest pose... and resting now, at
the end of this session... if it feels right, acknowledging the effort,
the care, and the caring-for-yourself that you bring to this practice...

Practices for Cultivating Observation Practice 5: Expanding Awareness
Approximate Timing: Introduction, 2 minutes; Practice, 30 minutes This
is a recording script for this core practice of MBSR. This is perhaps
the practice that allows the fullest expression of the spectrum of
teaching intentions. As the central practice for most professionals
teaching mindfulness, ­guidance of

Practices for Cultivating Observation

207

it may very well go through the most constant change and refinement ---
as the teacher discovers or is drawn to investigate the innumerable
facets of the practice. Introduction Acknowledging the inevitability of
judgment. Possibilities of transcending the little "I".

Encouraging willingness to be present to whatever arises.

In your formal practice of sitting meditation, you are taking a seat
right in the middle of your life. You are intentionally bringing
yourself into a direct and intimate relationship with the present moment
and what is arising in it for you --- as much as possible without
judging. In this recording, you have the opportunity to expand your
attention to explore body sensations, sounds, thoughts, emotions, and,
when you are ready, to open to all of these --- to the full range of
events within and without as they move and change, appear and disappear
in awareness. You are taking time to become more familiar--- moment by
moment --- with who you are, beyond all the wanting and having and
doing... In a sense, this practice is a perfect expression of your own
unique presence in the world... So it is helpful to come to this
practice with a sense of kindness and care for yourself ... and to bring
a dignity and nobility that befits your special status to the time,
place, and posture of your sitting practice... Setting aside a regular
time, when you won't be interrupted... In a quiet and comfortable place
that can nurture your practice... And sitting, whether on a chair or
cushion, with an attitude of confidence and stability --- not leaning
into or moving away from anything, simply present with and open to what
is happening now... Expanding Awareness Practice

Orienting with gravity.

Orienting with the breath.

Sitting in an upright position with your back straight and yet relaxed.
Dignified... Embodying confidence... Feeling the floor or chair or
cushion beneath you, supporting you. Feeling gravity holding you, the
earth receiving you. Finding a point of balance where gravity is holding
you comfortably upright, without strain. Allowing the body to become
still... And bringing your attention now to the sense of the body
breathing, the breath entering and leaving the body...

208

Emphasizing impermanence.

Emphasizing impermanence.

Options and permission to explore experience. Recalling impermanence.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Bringing curiosity and freshness to this moment... and noticing where
you feel the sensation of breath most vividly now... and centering your
attention there... Simply breathing in and out... noticing that there is
a beginning, middle, and end of an in-breath and a beginning, middle,
and end of an out-breath... (long pause). Watching the entirety of an
in-breath from the beginning to the end. Noticing the moment, the space,
or pause, when it shifts to become an out breath... and then noticing
the out-breath from its beginning to its shift as it becomes an
in-breath... (long pause). Realizing that no matter how many times the
attention leaves the breath, awareness of that does arise, and there is
an opportunity to choose and to bring the attention back... to this
in-breath and or this out-breath, now... (long pause). Allowing the
breath to be at the center of your attention and allowing any thoughts
to come and go like clouds in the sky... (long pause). If the attention
has wandered from the breath, gently but firmly escorting it back,
making the breath the center, the focus of attention again... (long
pause). And now, when you are ready, expanding your attention beyond the
breath to include also the entire body, sitting... Becoming aware of
sensation in the body... Perhaps sensations of contact with the chair or
cushion... Perhaps the touch of clothes on your body, or how your hands
feel in the moment. Sensations of temperature. Being present with any
sensations as they arise... Noticing how sensations sometimes stay for
just a short while, and how other times they linger... Noticing how they
change in intensity, shift, and pass away as new sensations arise...
like the breath, they have a beginning, middle, and end... (long pause).
Staying in touch with sensations in the body as you sit... If the
attention wanders, noticing and making a choice to bring it back with
care and kindness to the awareness of the body and the breath... (long
pause). If sensations arise in the body that are very intense, making it
difficult to focus on the body or the breath, there are two ways to be
with this. You may choose to change your posture mindfully, attending to
the sensations of movement as you shift... Or you may choose to direct
attention right into the intensity of the sensation itself...

Practices for Cultivating Observation

Observing sound.

Recalling impermanence. Encouraging spacious observation.

Observing thought.

Recalling impermanence. Defining foreground and background to help
expand the space of awareness. Expanding awareness to observe body
sensations.

Observing emotion. Often more accessible when framed as mood state.

209

Exploring it with a gentle curiosity... Noticing nuances of sensation...
perhaps thoughts and judgments... Perhaps resistance or bracing... and,
as much as possible, stepping back to observe, to open space in
awareness, perhaps to soften... and attending to duration --- noticing
that sensations change, that they have beginning, middle, and end...
(Long pause). Now, allowing your attention to shift from the breath and
the body to the sense of hearing... Not seeking sound, rather receiving
whatever is available... from within the body and from the environment
near and far... becoming particularly aware of hearing... Noticing how
the awareness receives sounds without effort... (long pause). Being
aware of how sounds have a beginning, middle, and end... How some are
very short and some are long... How they are varied and textured... How
there is space between sounds... Noticing how the mind labels sounds,
has opinions about sounds, likes and dislikes certain sounds... Noticing
any desire to move away from some sounds and towards others... as much
as possible making space in which sounds can be experienced as they
are... (long pause). And when you are ready, allowing attention to shift
from hearing, and letting it expand this time into thinking --- the
realm of thought... seeing thoughts not as distractions but rather
bringing your awareness to the thinking process itself... Noticing how
thoughts arise, stay briefly, or for a more extended period, and then
dissolve... beginning, middle, end... So, not getting lost in the
content of the thoughts... allowing thought to be in the foreground of
awareness with sound, body sensations, and breath in the background...
(long pause). Noticing thoughts... they may be about anything --- about
sleep, obligations, the past, the future... If you get carried away in
the current of thinking, coming back to observing thoughts as separate
elements that come and go... Thoughts moving through an open and
spacious mind... (long pause). Noticing also that emotions arise in the
body and mind... Perhaps frustration, or restlessness, or peacefulness,
or sadness, or joy, or fear. Now bringing attention to emotion... to the
mood state... What is here for you right now?... Noticing where in the
body certain emotions seem to live... (long pause)...

210

Recalling impermanence. Encouraging an embodied observation that may
lead to insight into the relationship of thought and feeling. Offering
the permissive option to disengage from distressing exploration. Moving
into choiceless awareness.

Cultivating the capacity for observation. Returning to the orientation
of gravity and breath.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Exploring emotion... Noticing how what is here may be wanted, or
unwanted.... How there may be a tendency to cling to emotion judged as
pleasant... and to struggle with others judged negatively --- like
sadness or fear... (long pause). Noticing whatever emotions arise in the
moment... knowing that they have a beginning, middle, and end... perhaps
simply observing them in the body --- letting go of supporting thoughts
or stories... (long pause). If at any time emotions or sensations become
too uncomfortable, remember that you can always return to the breath...
finding a safe harbor focused there until you're ready to venture out
again... (long pause). Moving now, if you care to, into a choiceless
awareness... Not choosing to bring your attention to anything in
particular... Simply sitting here, fully aware of whatever is presenting
itself to you in each moment ... If sound arises, allowing sound to be
the center of attention... If body sensation arises, letting that be the
center of your attention... Until the next arising, which may be another
body sensation... or a thought about the body sensation... or an
emotion... (long pause). At one moment, the breath may predominate, and
then, perhaps, sound might be most prominent... Simply dwelling with an
open awareness, attending to whatever arises... (long pause). Observing
whatever presents itself to you in the moment... Being spacious with
whatever arises... (long pause). Sitting in stillness with whatever
comes and goes... (pause)... Being present with it all... (pause)...
Being here now... (pause)... Open to the totality of your experience...
(pause)... Being fully human... (long pause) Now returning the attention
to the body as you sit... Feeling the breath coming and going... Staying
fully present with body and breath... (long pause). And as this
meditation session comes to a close, realizing that by practicing
mindfulness you are intentionally deepening your ability to be fully
present in your daily life... If it feels right, perhaps congratulating
yourself for having taken this time and energy to nourish and care for
yourself... Remembering that practicing in this way helps create access
to a wider, deeper, more open way of being in your life, in which you
can see more clearly and make more conscious choices for health,
well-being and freedom...

Practices for Moving Towards Acceptance

211

Practices for Moving Towards Acceptance Practice 7: Being Present
Approximate Timing: Introduction -- 2 minutes; Practice -- 15 minutes A
recording script for a practice that supports the "graduate-level"
mindfulness course Meeting Aggression, described in Chapter 6. Although
the script specifically mentions aggression, the central motions or
gestures of the practice may be explored within any context, providing a
deliberately body-centered practice that makes the possibility refrain.
Further, with its allowing of motion, Being Present may have distinct
appeal to certain populations --- where connecting to movement may
strengthen the capacity for focus.

Introduction

Perhaps read nonacceptance and acceptance for nonaggression and
aggression.

To begin to work with aggression, we need to understand it from inside.
This meditation on being present is an opportunity for you to observe
the natural interplay of nonaggression and aggression toward your own
experience. To see how simply allowing yourself to be as you are in the
present moment reveals your true strength and character, and to see, as
well, how wanting your experience to be different in this moment exiles
you from the power of the present. In this meditation you may, very
likely, experience a full spectrum of nonaggression and aggression. Keep
in mind, though, that your experience is just that --- yours. It will be
different from others', and different in each session. This meditation
is a lying-down meditation that requires no special place, time,
objects, or conditions. It's simple, just you, and the floor, and your
senses. You can also feel free to adapt this practice to your own style
and circumstances --- try it at your desk, on the couch, or in bed. It
is possible to be present anywhere, anytime.

Being Present Practice Beginning by lying down on your back... allowing
your arms to lie along your sides, your legs to stretch out fully, or if
your back requires, bending the knees and putting the soles of the feet
on the floor...

212

Presence as acceptance of the fullness of the moment.

Orienting with gravity and breath. Permission.

Expanding awareness to allow acceptance. Permissive option to use an
image for understanding.

Accommodate --- from the Latin "to make fit.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Noticing if a sense of "doing" this meditation, a sense of working to be
present, is arising... realizing that we cannot have presence as our
goal, we cannot try to be present. Goals and striving carry us off...
into a fictional future, while just being connects us to the reality of
the present... Bringing your attention to the sensations of the body...
in the contact with the surface on which you are lying, in the contact
with other parts of your body... and in contact with the motions of the
breath... As much as possible, letting sensation and your natural
breathing guide you into simple presence... Maintaining gentle,
nonjudgmental awareness moment after moment.... Allowing whatever small
or large movements happen... spontaneously... to shift you from doing...
to being... At times, in this meditation, you may enter into a sense of
rest or quiet... Or it may be that your experience is of tension,
discomfort, frustration... leading to a wanting of change, a desire for
transformation... So... noticing when you are pulled out of the present
moment and into the wish for some "better" experience... There are roots
of aggression in this... this striving to hold on to a pleasant state
that is changing ... this fighting to change the experience you don't
want in the moment... Seeing if it's possible to simply be present in
this arising of aggression... Seeing if your presence, your being, is
large enough to accommodate it, to hold it without acting on it... just
letting be... Taking a larger view... Maybe an image helps to make this
idea clear; if not just let it go: A wild bull in a cage is frightened
and frightening, but if we open the cage into a wide pasture, moving the
fences way back, both the bull and our perception may change... (Pause).
Attending to the head and neck, where so much "doing" takes place...and
where the power of habit so often overrides the experience of the
present moment... How does the head really wish to be held by the floor
in this moment? So, lifting the back of the head just slightly, perhaps
the hair doesn't even clear the floor...Then allowing it to return
slowly, feeling out what is needed... How is it that the head and neck
feel present and alive... There is no right or wrong here, no success or
failure, there is just exploring being... noticing when judgment or
wanting arise, and, as much as possible, allowing

Practices for Moving Towards Acceptance

Accommodating trying.

Acknowledging the real and the alive. Acceptance as ongoing negotiation.

213

your presence to accommodate whatever you feel... (Pause). Sensing into
the arms and shoulders... are they at rest or are they working ---
holding themselves on the floor? Raising both arms from the floor,
again, slightly... Can you raise them without breaking contact with the
floor? And slowly allowing them to find rest.... Is there struggle or
striving? Knowing that rest is not that typical image of relaxation... a
collapse of the arms like when you let go of a puppet's strings...
Perhaps seeing rest as FULL presence...The arms are alive... they have
muscle tone... blood and energy flowing through them, a marvelous
capacity for sensation... So how is it that they can relate to the floor
without aggression? Noticing wanting them to be a certain way...
noticing trying, if that is what is arising... and making room for that
in the moment... present with all your experience.... (Pause). Bringing
the attention to the legs, however you are holding them... How can they
come into full presence? Lifting the right leg... perhaps a few
inches... perhaps it doesn't leave the floor.... Tuning-in to the sense
of lifting.... Noticing the aliveness, the freshness, and power of the
tension, in the moment.... And allowing the leg to come back to the
floor, into presence... expressed, perhaps, as rest.... Remembering that
rest is presence, not collapse... not the wilting of a plant, but the
fullness of a flower seeking the light... (Pause). Lifting the left
leg... sensing its aliveness, and maintaining contact with that
aliveness as it seeks presence, rest, on the floor... Being present in
ease... present in struggle... present to the interplay of nonaggression
and aggression... (Pause). Being present in bending the knees --- if
they're not already bent --- and bringing the soles of the feet to the
floor as if standing. Attending to the sensations of the lower back in
this moment... noticing thought and feeling, any wanting, any interplay
of nonaggression and aggression.... And lifting the pelvis slightly...
present in this movement.... Noticing how far throughout the body this
motion has an effect... present in all of it.... Then allowing the
pelvis to come down to the floor... the back to come into greater
contact... into presence... perhaps into the freshness and aliveness of
rest... (Long pause). Coming to a sense now of the entire body, lying
here, present in sensory experience, present as well in thoughts and
emotions...

214

Allowing, accommodating, accepting.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Remembering that presence is not striving to overcome tension or boredom
or fear or sleepiness, it is simply allowing tension or boredom or fear
or sleepiness to be your experience without wanting it to be different
in this moment... (Long pause) Are you present in your experience of
this moment?... Is this a moment of nonaggression... or aggression?
Allowing whatever is arising to be included in your field of being...
your presence... (Pause). As this formal meditation practice ends,
carrying a sense of presence, a sense of the power of just being into
the doing of you life... moment by moment...

Practice 8: Saying "Yes" Approximate Timing: 10 minutes This is adapted
from a practice used by the psychotherapist and Buddhist teacher Tara
Brach. Although the presentation here is as a short practice, the basic
gestures of sitting with No and Yes can be used in many teaching moments
--- to lead into a longer practice, perhaps of expanding awareness, or
to work directly with a particular issue during inquiry with a
participant.

Experiencing NO in the triangle of awareness.

Sitting in a comfortable position and bringing your attention to your
body... Feeling the support beneath you.... Noticing your breath
wherever you feel it most vividly in the moment.... Simply following
your breath, moment to moment... As you sit, noticing what is arising in
the triangle of awareness --- body sensations... feelings or mood
state... and thoughts... To experience first hand what happens when we
resist rather than accept our experience, begin by saying "NO" to
whatever is arising... If it is a sensation in the body, unpleasant or
pleasant, mentally directing a stream of "NO" toward the sensation and
noticing what happens to the sensation as you say "NO." If it is a
feeling of sadness, or fear, or joy, saying "NO" to the feelings. Let
the word "NO" carry the energy of negating, rejecting, pushing away what
you are experiencing. Noticing what this resistance feels like. How does
it feel in your body? What happens to breathing... heart rate... muscle
tension... as you are saying "NO" to your experience? What is life like
as you live moment to moment with the thoughts and feelings of "NO" ---
resisting what is?

Practices for Growing Compassion

Reorienting with gravity and breath.

Spaciousness, openness, acceptance. YES in the triangle of awareness.

215

Now opening your eyes if they are closed and taking a few full deep
breaths, and relaxing the body by softening muscles in your face,
perhaps letting your draw drop down slightly and allowing the shoulders
to drop a bit. When you are ready, following your breath once again.
Simply breathing in and out with awareness.... Noticing what is arising,
perhaps body sensations, or feelings or mood states, or thoughts. Simply
allowing whatever arises to be in awareness. If a body sensation is
arising, whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, directing a stream of the
word YES to the experience. Allowing the word YES to carry an openness
toward whatever is arising. Letting the sensations, feelings, thoughts
float in a larger field of yes. Yes to pleasant, yes to unpleasant, yes
to pain, and yes to wanting pain to go away. Saying yes to even
resistance if it arises. Noticing your experience as you say YES. How
does Yes feel in the body? Is there more spaciousness, openness in the
mind? What happens to pleasantness or unpleasantness when you say YES?
What happens to your heart as you say YES? What is life like as you open
to it moment by moment and say YES? Sitting for a few more minutes and
gently saying YES to your experience as it unfolds.... (Long pause)...
And when you are ready, opening your eyes.

Practices for Growing Compassion Practice 9: Loving Kindness Approximate
Timing: Introduction -- 2 minutes; Practice -- 15 minutes A recording
script. This practice is offered within the template MBSR curriculum,
although it is not emphasized or given as home practice, while in other
manifestations of the MBSR curriculum it is given a more core role. The
version presented here frames it as a mindfulness practice; knowing and
accepting what is arising in the triangle of awareness while holding the
intention of loving kindness.

Introduction The intention of loving kindness runs throughout our formal
mindfulness practices...This meditation calls our attention to it
specifically... in loving kindness meditation you are setting an
intention to nurture the quality of loving

216

Permission to change and adapt the practice.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

kindness that already exists within... while being with whatever is
present in the senses, thought, or emotions, without judgment ... By
practicing loving kindness meditation you are becoming more familiar
with this quality, so that it is easier to recognize when it arises
spontaneously in your practice, so that it is more available to you in
daily life. The practice of loving ­kindness meditation is --- just as is
mindfulness --- a life-long commitment... and an investment of time and
energy that delivers immeasurable value.... This meditation involves
repeating a set of phrases that point to the innate quality of loving
kindness... The phrases in this recording are some of many possible
phrases that can be used. If any part of the approach or of the four
central phrases do not suit you, please feel free to make any changes
that make it more friendly and appealing to you... The intention of the
practice is to cultivate loving kindness --- for yourself and for
others... Loving Kindness Practice

Orienting with gravity and breath.

Beginning with an other, as self-directed loving kindness is a challenge
for many participants.

Now turning toward the self, with permission to feel however you feel.

Taking your usual posture for meditation... feeling your body where it
makes contact with the support beneath you, and settling in... perhaps
centering yourself by making the breath the focus of your attention...
Feeling the breath moving and the body sitting... And when you are
ready, bringing to mind someone that it is easy to feel loving kindness
towards... someone from the past or present, perhaps a child, or a
pet... an easy, simple relationship may be best... Allowing yourself to
hold them in your awareness ... perhaps seeing them in your mind's eye
or perhaps feeling a sense of them in your heart... can you feel a sense
of loving kindness towards them? As you hold them in your awareness,
beginning to send wishes of loving kindness to them.... Silently
repeating these phrases ... May you be peaceful and happy May you be
safe from harm May you be as healthy and strong as you can be May you
live with ease of well-being... When you're ready, allowing the image or
felt sense of your chosen one to fade ... and seeing how it is for you
to

Practices for Growing Compassion

217

be the one who receives loving kindness... resting here in your own kind
regard, sending yourself these well wishes ... allowing yourself to take
in these phrases ... to say them silently for yourself ... May I be
peaceful and happy May I be safe from all inner and outer harm May I be
as healthy and strong as I can be May I live with ease of well-being...
Maybe it seems artificial and stilted to say such things to yourself,
for yourself... maybe you're not feeling loving kindness in this moment
--- and that's OK --- whatever you're feeling, you can hold the
intention of loving kindness... offering it from wherever you are...
however you are now.... So practicing once more... noticing how you may
be drawn towards this practice or drawn away from it... May I be
peaceful and happy May I be safe from harm May I be as healthy and
strong as I can be May I live with ease of well-being... And now
exploring the experience of moving loving kindness outward again,
bringing to your heart and mind someone to whom you would like to send
loving kindness ... and with the same intention you have been directing
towards yourself, offering these wishes... May you be peaceful and happy
May you be safe from harm May you be as healthy and strong as you can be
May you live with ease of well-being... (Long pause). Holding them in
your awareness and sending loving kindness with these phrases... or
phrases of your own... May you be peaceful and happy May you be safe
from harm May you be as healthy and strong as you can be May youlive
with ease of well-being... (Long pause). Reinforcing permissiveness.

Being mindful of the quality or qualities that are arising in the
moment, and letting go of judgment... You may or may not be feeling
loving kindness... and that's simply how it is right now --- remembering
that the heart has its seasons, and feelings cannot be forced... giving
yourself permission to be just as you are...

218

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

Just as you are, you can continue to hold the intention of loving
kindness ... so now, expanding your awareness to include
others....intending peace and well being for those you know well... And
those you know less well... Those you love... And those you love less...
And perhaps going a step further and intending peace and well being for
everyone... May everyone be peaceful and happy May everyone be safe from
harm May everybody be as healthy and strong as they can be May we all
live with ease of well-being... (Long pause). Aware of how it is with
you right now...noticing what is arising as you offer these wishes...
May everyone be peaceful and happy May everyone be safe from harm May
everybody be as healthy and strong as they can be May we all live with
ease of well-being... (Long pause). And when you're ready, bringing your
attention back to the breath moving in the body... Sensing the body
sitting here, breathing, in this moment... noticing thoughts and
feelings, and allowing yourself to be exactly as you are --- which in
and of itself is an act of loving kindness. Practice 10: Being for
Others Approximate Timing: Introduction -- 2 minutes; Practice -- 15
minutes A recording script from the Meeting Aggression course outlined
in Chapter 6. This is adapted from the practice of the Buddhist teacher
Charles Genoud. The approach is to work with presence, openness, and
acceptance as the motion of compassion. The practice is aligned with the
practice and pedagogy of mindfulness in its insistence on observing and
opening to whatever is arising during the practice.

Introduction Emphasizing safety and permission in working with
potentially distressing material.

This meditation on being for others brings the sense of presence and
openness into the interpersonal and ethical realm. It is a practice to
develop the capacity to be with suffering --- to offer our openness and
thereby our compassion --- our

Practices for Growing Compassion

219

feeling-along-with or feeling-for another. It is important to understand
this as practice --- we are working slowly and gently to build our
capacity. Noticing any tendency you may have to wish to work with deep
suffering or suffering that may be very challenging to you, then
stepping back and remembering that this is practice, and we start small,
start easy, and build up. Remembering also that we may have habits of
thought and feeling that see compassion as based on sacrifice. This is
not a notion that is useful in this practice --- sacrifice limits our
compassion to what we are willing to sacrifice. Rather, this practice
sees compassion as a willingness to face the other --- to remain open to
the other's suffering --- the only limit then to compassion is the limit
to openness. You may wish to use this as a main practice for a time, or
you may be moved to take a part of it and add it into your core practice
of sitting meditation. Practice Orienting with gravity and breath.

Offering an orientation --- three parts. A small child.

Noticing closing and opening.

Coming into sitting posture... Becoming aware of the body in this
moment... its relationship to gravity... Is it possible to allow gravity
to hold you up? Can you find that place of balance and comfort? Can you
allow the little adjustments the body requires, so you're not holding a
posture, just responding to sitting... (Long pause). And attending to
the breath... just allowing the mind to rest lightly on in-breath and
out-breath... If it flits away, no muss or fuss, just noticing and
coming back... (Long pause). And opening to presence... to what there is
in this moment... being with and in the full experience... not adding
anything, not taking anything away... (Long pause) There are three
objects of focus in this meditation: First, imagine a small child who is
unhappy --- perhaps you have a picture in your mind, perhaps it is a
felt sense --- not choosing suffering that is too deep or terrible, as
that may bring up a lot of fear or discomfort, and make the practice
difficult.... (Long pause). Seeing if it is possible to look into the
face of the child, and to be open to the sadness... if it feels right,
imagining putting your hand on the child's shoulder ... noticing if you
are remaining open or closing up... being gentle with

220

Participant herself as a child.

Participant herself, now.

8 Practice Scripts and Descriptions

yourself as you do this meditation... closing when you are closing,
opening when it is possible for you... learning what is possible,
learning what it is like to be there --- present and open --- for
another... (Long pause). Letting that image or sense fade... And coming
back to the breath and body in the present moment... (Long pause).
Imagining or sensing yourself as a child, in a moment of sadness or hurt
--- again, not choosing something too extreme, this is PRACTICE, not a
challenge... See or feel the face,... open to the sadness or hurt...
perhaps reaching out and placing your hand on the child's shoulder,
compassionately, tenderly ... (Long pause). Noticing when you are open,
when you are closing... being a model for the child... knowing that as
you open there is less suffering, and if the child can open there will
be less suffering as well... (Long pause). Working with this sense of
openness and its capacity to reduce suffering, to bring, in some way,
healing to the other... (Long pause). And letting the image fade and
coming back to the breath and the body in this moment... (Long pause).
If you're ready, feeling yourself NOW... Seeing if it's possible to open
to our own difficulties in this moment... Again, remembering to approach
this with gentleness --- this is practice for help and healing, not for
endurance or suffering --- not for sacrifice but for ease of
wellbeing.... (Long pause). Seeing when and how it is possible to be
open to yourself... imagining placing a hand on the shoulder of the you
that's before you... experiencing the healing power of openness... (Long
pause). And letting that image fade and coming back to the breath and
the body.... (Long pause). And as this meditation ends, knowing that you
can use this practice to build your capacity to open to others, and that
you can include others in your practice --- imagining them and being
open for them in their humanness, their suffering...

Appendix

Resources for Personal and Curriculum Development The following lists
offer potential resources for learning more for your own development as
a practitioner, for enhancing your teaching, and for formulating new
approaches and practices to refine, change, and create curricula anew.
Combined with this book's own bibliography, there is a wide range of
material given here to bring into your teaching. We hope you'll find
what draws you, taste things that may seem strange, and find what works
for you and the participants with whom you co-create.

Books on Clinical Applications of Mindfulness Baer, R. A. (Ed.). (2006).
Mindfulness-based treatment approaches: Clinician's guide to evidence
base and applications. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. Brach, T.
(2003). Radical acceptance: Embracing your life with the heart of a
Buddha. New York: Bantam Dell. Brantley, J. (2003). Calming your anxious
mind: How mindfulness and compassion can free you from anxiety, fear and
panic. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. Cole, J. D., & Lades-Gaskin, C.
(2007). Mindfulness-centered therapies: An integrative approach.
Seattle, WA: Silver Birch Press. Didonna, F. (2009). Clinical handbook
of mindfulness. New York: Springer. Fishman, B. M. (2002). Emotional
healing through mindfulness meditation. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.
Germer, C. K., Siegel, R. D., & Fulton, P. R. (Eds.). (2005).
Mindfulness and psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. Goleman, D.
(2003). Destructive emotions: A scientific dialogue with the Dalai Lama.
New York: Bantam Dell. Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M.
(Eds.). (2004). Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the
cognitive-behavioral tradition. New York: Guilford Press.

221

Index

A Acceptance and commitment therapy educational expectation, 16
relational frame theory (RFT), 10 Adams, John, 32, 36 Agazarian, Y.M.,
85--86, 113 Alpert, Richard, 46 American Buddhism, 50--54. See also
Buddhism Arnold, Edwin, 36 Arnold, Matthew, 36 Axioms of mindfulness
(IAA), 64, 66, 143, 145, 146 B Bachelard, Gaston, 107 Baer, R.A., 5, 29,
31, 63, 116, 144, 159 Baker, Richard, 54--55 Batchelor, S., 54, 67, 69,
70, 98, 99, 127, 144, 161 Behold the Spirit, 44 Berry, Wendell, 116
Boorstein, S., 17, 96 Brach, T., 17, 101, 214 Buber, Martin, 84 Buddhism
Anicca, Dukkha and Anatta (Pali language), 70 Buddha, brief life story,
67--98 definition and growth in America, 50--56 eightfold path, seventh
stage, 70, 72 ennobling truths (Batchelor, Stephen.), 68--70 foundations
(Thera, Nyanaponika.), 70--72 meditation, forms, 72 original text
resources and suttas/ sutras, 68 Pali translation, Sati, 70

quo religious and cultural power, 38 Theosophical Society, 37 western
discourse, 73--75 western psychology, 74--75 Bynner, Witter, 35 C Cage,
J., 40--41 Carse, J., 130 Carus, Paul, 37 Center for Mindfulness (CFM),
6, 19, 67, 95, 96, 137, 139, 143, 144, 167, 189 Chamberlain, Colonel
Joshua, 161, 162 Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, 55 Complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM), 4 Council circle, 113--115 Coyle, V., 113,
114, 152 Cultivating observation, 145--146, 151, 175--178, 206--210
Cupitt, D., 56--58, 62, 93 D Dalai Lama, 6, 11, 13, 52 Davidson, R., 13,
14, 29, 79, 144 De-automatization, 65 Deikman, A., 65 DeMartino, R., 41,
51 Dharmapala, Theravadin Anagarik, 37 Dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT) educational expectation, 16 multi-modal program and skills, 9
Dimidjian, S., 16, 20, 29 Discovering embodiment, 145, 168--174,
196--206 Downing, M., 54, 55 Dryden, W., 4, 38, 63

247

248 E Edwards, Tilden, 20 Elk, Black, 106 Embodiment discovering,
168--174 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 33--34, 42, 56 Ennobling truths, 68--70
Epstein, M., 11 Everett, Ruth Fuller, 43 Experiencing new possibilities,
145, 148, 154, 158, 159, 164--174 Explicit knowledge. See Tacit
knowledge F Fechner, Gustav, 74--75 Fechner's psychophysical law, 74
Feldman, C., 19 Fenollossa, Ernest, 35, 36 Floor yoga, teaching
practices, 201--206 Fowler, J., 101 Fromm, E., 40--42, 46, 51, 144 Full
Catastrophe Living, 4, 6, 148 G Guiding formal practices, teacher's
skills, 121--126 Growing compassion, 146, 148, 155, 162, 185--191,
215--220 Goldberg, Natalie, 99 H Hahn, Thich Nhat, 51 Hatha yoga, 15,
36, 43, 107, 139, 174, 176, 201 Hayes, S.C., 10, 28, 29, 31, 63 Hirai,
T., 65 Homiletics, teacher skills, 115--121 Humphries, Christmas, 43
Huxley, Aldous, 45, 46 I Imel, Z., 77 Inquiry, teachers's skills,
127--134 Integrative medicine (IM), 4 Intention, Attention, and Attitude
(IAA), 64, 66, 143, 145, 146 Intensions, teaching, See Teaching
intentions Intersubjectivity and mindfulness rites of passage, 87
Siegel, Daniel, 78, 79

Index "silent land", non-verbal communication, 84, 86--87 states of
consciousness, model, 85 J Jones, Sir William, 32 Jung, C.G.,11, 39, 43,
44, 49, 106 K Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 4, 6--8, 14, 15, 19, 21--23, 25, 64, 65,
70, 71, 79, 92, 95, 121, 137, 139, 145, 146, 165, 167, 185 Kasamatsu,
A., 65 Kornfield, J., 17, 19, 53--56, 70, 98 L Landy, D., 93 Langer, E.,
73--75 Leary, Timothy, 46 Linden, W., 65 Linehan, M.M., 9, 10, 16, 19,
20, 29, 32 Loori, John Daido, 51 Loving kindness meditation, 215--218
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 46 M Madame Blavatsky, 37 Martin, J.,
17, 65 May, G., 179 May's reflection, 180 McCown, D., 25--26, 65, 79,
124, 147, 153, 154, 159 Meditation scripts, See Scripts, meditation
Melbourne Academic Interest Group, 105 Merton, T., 25, 40, 160 Mezirow,
J., 127, 128, 165 Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT), 8--11, 16
Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs), 3, 5--7, 11, 15, 26--29, 61, 65,
95, 97, 98 Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) compassion, 146,
160 curriculum, 139--142 defining mindfulness, 64--72 educational
expectation, 16 efficacy, 4 formal mindfulness practices, 8 Kabat-Zinn,
Jon, 4 metastructure, 137

Index non-pathologizing statement, 7 practice duration, 143--144
Mindfulness, definition in Buddhism, 67--73 in MBSR/MBI, 64--67
intersubjectivity, mindfulness, 76--83 Western discourse mindlessness--
mindfulness, 73--75 Morita, Shoma, 38--39 Morita therapy, 39--40 Moving
towards acceptance, 146, 179--185, 211--215 Moyers, Bill, 4
Mushoju-shin, 39 N Neuroscience antibody rise, 14 anxiety reduction, 13
Davidson's, research, 13 mirror neurons, 12 Neuroplasticity, concept of,
13 O Olcott, Henry Steele, 37 P Pelletier, K., 65 Person of the teacher,
See Teacher, person of Polanyi, M., 31 Pound, Ezra, 35 Prebish, C.S.,
50, 51, 53, 54 Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 79 Psychodynamic and
psychotherapies attachment theory, 12 Buddhism, influence of, 11 mature
pedagogy, 12 spiritual traditions, 17 R Recording formal practices,
125--126 Reibel, D., 21, 25, 144, 147, 153, 154 Reperceiving and
observing self, 65, 66 Reynolds, D.K., 39 Rilke, Rainer Maria, 119, 144
Rinpoche, Kalu, 52 Rites of passage, 87 Rogers, F., 116 Rohr, R., 49
Rubin, Jeffrey, 11, 46

249 Rumi, 33, 49, 175 Roshi, Shunryu Suzuki, 50, 51, 54, 55 S Salzberg,
S., 19, 53 Santorelli, S., 15, 16, 19, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 79, 96, 115,
137, 165, 167, 195--196 Scripts meditation being for others, 218--220
being present, 211--214 body scan, 196--201 expanding awareness,
206--210 floor yoga, 201--206 intro to sitting meditation, 118 loving
kindness meditation, 215--218 meditation, 195--196 playing attention,
193--195 saying "Yes", 214--215 well meditation, 195--196 Seager, R.H.,
38, 52 Segal, Z., 8, 16, 29, 65, 111, 116 Shaku, Soyen, 37, 40, 42, 51
Shakyamuni Buddha, 20 Shapiro, S., 63--66, 143, 145, 146 Siegel, D., 12,
78, 79 Singh, N.N., 110 Speads, C., 120 Stern, D., 12, 85, 173 Stevens,
W., 35, 36 Stewardship, teacher's skills, 104--115 Still, A., 4, 38, 63
Strauss, C., 37 Strosahl, K.D., 10, 17, 28, 29 Subgrouping, 113--114
Surya Das, L., 53 Suzuki, D.T., 11, 37, 38, 40--44, 51, 56 Suzuki,
Master Shunryu, 45, 46, 50--53 System Centered Therapy (SCT), 113--115 T
Teacher, person of authenticity, 92--97 authority, 97--98 definition,
teacher, 91 friendship, 98--101 regular formal mindfulness meditation,
95--97 Teacher's skills brief idea, 103--104 guidance of formal
practices, 121--126 homiletics, 115--121 inquiry, 127--134

250 Teacher's skills (cont.) Santorelli's statement, 127 stewardship of
the group, 104--115 Teaching intentions cultivating observation, 143,
145--146, 175--178 discovering embodiment, 143, 145, 168--175
experiencing new possibilities, 143, 145, 164--168 growing compassion,
143, 146, 185--191 moving towards acceptance, 143, 146, 179--185
Teasdale, J., 19 Thera, Nyanaponika, 70, 71 Theravada Buddhist practice,
53 The Wisdom of Insecurity, 44 Thoreau, H.D., 33--35, 57, 58 Tibetan
Buddhism, America, 50--54 Tillich, P., 186 Triangle of awareness schema,
67 Tronick, E., 76, 83--85, 111 Trungpa, C.R., 52, 53, 55 Tulku,
Tarthang, 52 Turner, V.L., 87, 145 Tweed, T., 36--38 Tzu, Sun, 162

Index V Van Gennep, 87 Vanier, Jean, 49 Versluis, A., 32--34, 36 Voice,
teacher's, 119--120 W Wagoner, D., 172 Wallin, David, 12 Watts, Allan,
25, 41--48 Watzlawick, P., 165, 167 Weber, E.H., 74 Weil, Andrew, 6
Wilkins, Charles, 32, 34 Wuthnow, R., 57, 58 Y Yalom, I., 77 Z Zen boom,
40--42, 45, 46 Zimmerman, J., 113, 114, 152

222

Appendix

Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your
body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness: Fifteenth anniversary
edition. New York: Bantam Dell. McBee, L. (2008). Mindfulness-based
elder care: A CAM model for frail elders and their caregivers. New York:
Springer. Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007).
Dialectical behavior therapy with suicidal adolescents. New York:
Guilford Press. Orsillo, S. M., & Roemer, L. (Eds.). (2005). Acceptance
and mindfulness-based approaches to anxiety. New York: Springer.
Rosenbaum, E. (2005). Here for now: Living well with cancer through
mindfulness. Hardwick, MA: Satya House. Santorelli, S. (1999). Heal thy
self: Lessons on mindfulness in medicine. New York: Random House. Segal,
Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy for depression: A new approach to preventing relapse.
New York: Guilford Press. Siegel, D. J. (2007). The mindful brain:
Reflection and attunement in the cultivation of well-being. New York:
Norton. Williams, M., Teasdale, J., Segal, Z., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2007).
The mindful way through depression: Freeing yourself from chronic
unhappiness. New York: Guilford Press.

Research Articles An extensive bibliography including ongoing updates of
research articles can be found on the website of the Mindful Awareness
Research Center at UCLA
http://marc.ucla.edu/workfiles/pdfs/MARC_biblio_0808.pdf

Deepening Personal Practice -- and Guiding Others Boorstein, S. (1995).
It's easier than you think. San Francisco: Harper. Boorstein, S. (1996).
Don't just do something, sit there. New York: Harper. Boorstein, S.
(2002). Pay attention, for goodness sake. New York: Ballantine. Carroll,
M. (2004). Awake at work. Boston: Shambhala Publications. Chodron, P.
(1991). The wisdom of no escape and the path of loving kindness. Boston:
Shambhala Publications. Chodron, P. (2002). The places that scare you.
Boston: Shambhala Publications. Coleman, M. (2006). Awake in the wild:
Mindfulness in nature as a path to selfdiscovery. Novato, CA: New World
Library. Epstein, M. (1995). Thoughts without a thinker: Psychotherapy
from a Buddhist perspective. New York: Basic Books. Epstein, M. (2007).
Psychotherapy without the self: A Buddhist perspective. New Haven: Yale
University.

Mindfulness in World Spiritual Traditions

223

Goldstein, J. (1976). The experience of insight. Boston: Shambhala
Publications. Goldstein, J., & Kornfield J. (2001). Seeking the heart of
wisdom: The path of insight meditation. Boston, MA: Shambhala
Publications. Gunaratana, B. H. (2002). Mindfulness in plain English.
Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications. Hanh, T. N. (1976). The miracle of
mindfulness: A manual for meditation. Boston: Beacon. Hanh, T. N.
(1991). Peace is every step. New York: Bantam. Hanh, T. N. (1994). The
blooming of a lotus: Guided meditation exercises for healing and
transformation. Boston: Beacon. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever you go
there you are. New York: Hyperion. Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Coming to our
senses: Healing ourselves and the world through mindfulness. New York:
Hyperion. Kabat-Zinn, J., & Kabat-Zinn, M. (1997). Everyday blessings:
The inner work of mindful parenting. New York: Hyperion. Kornfield, J.
(1993). A path with heart. New York: Bantam Books. Kornfield, J. (2008).
A wise heart: A guide to the universal teachings of Buddhist psychology.
New York: Bantam. Langer, E. (1989). Mindfulness. Cambridge, MA: Perseus
Books. Levine, S. (1979). A gradual awakening. New York:
Anchor/Doubleday. Levine, S. (1991). Guided meditations, explorations
and healings. New York: Anchor/Doubleday. McLeod, K. (2001). Wake up to
your life. New York: HarperCollins. Nairn, R. (1999). Diamond mind: A
psychology of meditation. Boston: Shambhala Publications. Nepo, M.
(2000). The book of awakening. Berkeley, CA: Conari Press. Rosenberg, L.
(2004). Breath by breath. Boston: Shambhala Publications. Salzberg, S.
(1995). Lovingkindness: The revolutionary art of happiness. Boston:
Shambhala Publications. Weiss, A. (2005). Beginning mindfulness:
Learning the way of awareness. Novata, CA: New World Library. Welwood,
J. (2000). Toward a psychology of awakening: Buddhism, psychotherapy,
and the path of personal and spiritual transformation. Boston: Shambhala
Publications. Whitmayer, C. (1994). Mindfulness and meaningful work.
Berkeley: Parallax Press.

Mindfulness in World Spiritual Traditions Judaism Boorstein, S. (1997).
That's funny you don't look Buddhist: On being a faithful Jew and a
passionate Buddhist. New York: Harper Collins. Cooper, D. (1999). The
heart of stillness: A complete guide to learning the art of meditation.
Woodstock, VT: Skylight Paths.

224

Appendix

Cooper, D. (1999). Silence, simplicity and solitude: A complete guide to
spiritual retreat. Woodstock, VT: Skylight Paths. Cooper, D. (2000).
Three gates to meditation practice: A personal journey into Sufism,
Buddhism and Judaism. Woodstock, VT: Skylight Paths. Fischer, N. (2003).
The Buddhist path to truly growing up. New York: Harper Collins.
Fischer, N. (2003). Opening to you: Zen-inspired translations of the
psalms. New York: Penguin Putnam. Fischer, N. (2008). Sailing home:
Using the wisdom of Homer's odyssey to navigate life's perils and
pitfalls. New York: Simon and Shuster. Lew, A. (2005). Be still and get
going: A Jewish meditation practice for real life. New York: Time
Warner. Lew, A., & Jaffe, S. (2001). One god clapping: The spiritual
path of a Zen Rabbi. Woodstock, VT: Jewish Lights Publishing. Slater, J.
P. (2004). Mindful Jewish living: Compassionate practice. New York: Aviv
Press.

Sufism Barks, C., & Moyne, J. (1997). The essential Rumi. Edison, NJ:
Castle Books. Helminiski, K. (1992). Living presence: Sufi way to
mindfulness and the unfolding of the essential self. New York:
Tarcher/Putnam.

Christianity Bourgeault, C. (2001). Mystical hope: Trusting in the mercy
of god. Cambridge, MA: Cowley. Bourgeault, C. (2004). Centering prayer
and inner awakening. Cambridge, MA: Cowley. Dougherty, R. M. (1995).
Group spiritual direction: Community for discernment. Mahwah, NJ:
Paulist Press. Jones, A. (1982). Exploring spiritual direction. New
York: Seabury. Keating, T. (1999). The human condition: Contemplation
and transformation. New York: Paulist Press. Keating, T. (1999).
Invitation to love: The way of Christian contemplation. New York:
Continuum. May, G. (1982). Will and spirit: A contemplative psychology.
New York: HarperCollins. May, G. (2004). The dark night of the soul. New
York: HarperSanFrancisco. May, G. (2006). The wisdom of wilderness. New
York: HarperSanFrancisco. Merton, T. (1955). No man is an island. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Merton, T. (1960). Spiritual direction
and meditation. Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press.

Audiovisual Resources: CDs

225

Merton, T. (1962). New seeds of contemplation. Norfolk, CT: New
Directions. Merton, T. (1967). Mystics and Zen masters. New York:
Farrar, Strauss and Giroux. Merton, T. (1968). Zen and the birds of
appetite. New York: New Directions. Merton, T. (1969). Contemplative
prayer. New York: Herder and Herder. Pennington, M. B. (1980). Centering
prayer: Renewing an ancient Christian prayer tradition. New York: Image
Books. Rohr, R. (1999). Everything belongs: The gift of contemplative
prayer. New York: Crossroad.

Buddhism Analayo. (2003). Satipatthana: The direct path to realization.
Cambridge, UK: Windhorse. Batchelor, S. (1983). Alone with others: An
existential approach to Buddhism. New York: Grove Press. Batchelor, S.
(1994). The awakening of the West. Berkeley, CA: Parallax. Batchelor, S.
(1997). Buddhism without beliefs: A contemporary guide to awakening. New
York: Riverhead Books. Gethin, R. (1998). The foundations of Buddhism.
Oxford: New York. Narada, M. (1980). The Buddha and his teachings.
Singapore: Singapore Buddhist Meditation Centre. Nyanaponika, T. (1965).
The heart of Buddhist meditation. Boston: Weiser Books. Suzuki, S.
(1970). Zen mind, beginner's mind. New York: Weatherhill. Trungpa, C.
(1973). Cutting through spiritual materialism. Berkeley, CA: Shambhala.

Audiovisual Resources: CDs Jon Kabat-Zinn's Mindfulness Meditation
Practices www.mindfulnesstapes.com or contact the University of Mass.
Bookstore at 508856-3213. 1. Series 1: 45 min meditations including Body
Scan, Sitting Meditation, Floor Yoga & Standing Yoga. This Series is
designed to accompany the book Full Catastrophe Living. 4 CD set for
\$30.00; 2 tapes for \$20.00. 2. Series 2: 10, 20, 30 min meditations
including Mountain & Lake Meditations. This series is designed to
accompany the book Wherever You Go There You Are. 4 CD set for \$30.00;
2 tapes for \$35.00. 3. Series 3: 10--45 min meditations, Bodyscape,
Breathscape, Soundscape, Mindscape, Walking Meditation & Loving
Kindness. This series is designed to accompany the book Coming to Our
Senses. 4 CD set for \$30.00

226

Appendix

Saki Santorelli: Mindfulness Meditation Practice CDs/Tapes Five Tapes --
\$35.00/set + \$4.00 shipping & handling. 15--20 min meditations
including Loving Kindness for the Body, Opening Your Heart to Life,
Awareness of Breathing, Cultivating Compassion. These CDs/tapes are
designed to accompany the book Heal Thy Self. To order write to/make
check payable to: Guest-House Tapes P.O. Box 1050 Belchertown, MA. 01007

Bob Stahl: Mindful Healing CDs This Mindful Healing Series gives
practical, educational tools to access the deep inner resources of
healing. Specific CDs focus on back pain, chronic pain, neck and
shoulder pain, insomnia and sleep challenges, heart disease, high blood
pressure, opening to change, forgiveness and loving kindness, headaches
and migraines, anxiety and panic.
http://www.mindfulnessprograms.com/mindful-healing-series.html

Dharma Seed Tape Library Box 66 Wendel Depot, MA. 01308
www.dharmaseed.org Guided mindfulness meditation tapes/CDs and teacher's
presentations on fundamental principles of practice. To listen to tapes
online -- www.dharmastream.com

Sounds True Audio 735 Walnut Street Boulder. CO. 80302
www.Soundstrue.com A variety of guided meditation tapes/CDs and
presentations by meditation teachers. Also DVDs (Mindful Movements-
Thich Nhat Hanh)

Professional Training in MBSR

227

Parallax Press P.O. Box 7355 Berkeley, CA. 94707 1-800-863-5290
www.parallax.org Books and tapes of Thich Nhat Hanh

Pariyatti Doing Time, Doing Vipassana-Video- Documentary on dramatic
changes brought about when inmates at one of India's largest prison are
introduced to Vipassana. Changing form Inside-Video -- Documentary on
changes brought about in an American prison when inmates are introduced
to Vipassana. http://www.pariyatti.org/Bookstore

Professional Training in MBSR Oasis: An International Learning Center --
Center For Mindfulness Worcester, Massachusetts Comprehensive training
in teaching MBSR is available through the Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care, and Society at the University of Massachusetts.
The program includes two foundation courses, two advanced offerings, and
a review for certification. Foundation courses: • Mindfulness-based
stress reduction in mind--body medicine: A 7-day residential training
retreat • Practicum in mindfulness-based stress reduction: Living inside
participantpractitioner perspectives-10 week program Advanced offerings:
• Teacher development intensive: An advanced mindfulness-based stress
reduction teacher training/retreat- 9 days • Supervision in
mindfulness-based stress reduction • MBSR teacher certification review
For more information: http://www.umassmed.edu/cfm/oasis

228

Appendix

Other Training Opportunities in Medical Settings Jefferson-Myrna Brind
Center of Integrative Medicine -- Stress Reduction Program,
Philadelphia, PA Offers three programs for which the Oasis MBSR in
Mind--Body Medicine Retreat is a prerequisite. • Practicum in
mindfulness-based stress reduction (10 week program) • Internship in
teaching MBSR • Supervision in teaching MBSR For more information:
http://www.jeffersonhospital.org/cim

El Camino Hospital Mindfulness Stress Reduction Program, Mountain View,
CA Offers a 10 week practicum in mindfulness-based stress reduction that
is certified by the Center for Mindfulness at the University of
Massachusetts Medical School as partial fulfillment of requirements for
MBSR teacher certification. For more information:
http://www.mindfulnessprograms.com/teacher-training.html

Duke Integrative Medicine, Durham, NC Mindfulness Training for
Professionals The training involves two- 4 day sessions and includes the
full 8 week MBSR program and core skills for presenting and teaching
mindfulness. Note: completion of the training does not meet established
standards for teaching MBSR. For more information
http://www.dukeintegrativemedicine.org/educational/
mindfulness_training.aspx

Academic Education in Teaching Mindfulness-Based Interventions Centre
for Mindfulness Research and Practice, School of Psychology, Bangor
University, UK Offers a range of degree, diploma, and certificate
programs:

Academic Education in Teaching Mindfulness-Based Interventions

229

• MSc/MA in Mindfulness-Based Approaches ---- Postgraduate Diploma in
Mindfulness-Based Approaches ---- Postgraduate Certificate in
Mindfulness-Based Approaches • MSc/MA in Teaching Mindfulness-Based
Courses ---- Postgraduate Diploma in Teaching Mindfulness-Based Courses
• Postgraduate Certificate in Teaching Mindfulness-Based Courses •
Postgraduate Certificate in Advanced Mindfulness-Based Teaching Practice
For more information: http://www.bangor.ac.uk/imscar/mindfulness

Postgraduate Master of Studies in MBCT at Oxford University This new 2
year part-time course offers experienced clinicians from a range of
professional backgrounds a unique opportunity to develop in depth
specialist knowledge and skills in Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy
(MBCT). The course is offered by the Oxford Mindfulness Centre at the
Oxford University Department of Psychiatry, in collaboration with the
Oxford University Department for Continuing Education, and will lead to
an award of a Master of Studies by the University of Oxford. For more
information http://www.oxfordmindfulness.org

Institute for Mindfulness-Based Approaches (IMA) Bedburg, Germany
Professional Training Programs in MBSR and MBCT IMA has been offering
MBSR teacher-training programs since 2002. It introduced an MBCT
training program in 2007. The Institute's faculty includes some of
Europe's most senior mindfulness-based approaches teachers and
researchers, as well as guest teachers from the U.S.A. In addition to
offering trainings in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, the Institute
is responding to requests from the other European countries to introduce
its highly successful compact yet extensive training program. The
Professional Training Programs take place throughout a 12--14 month
period. During this period, participants meet seven times for 4-day
sessions each. For more information www.institute-for-mindfulness.eu

MBSR Institute Freiburg (Germany) The MBSR Institute Frieberg offers a
residential 29-day teacher training program over a one-year period for
healthcare and allied professionals who also have a solid

230

Appendix

foundation in mindfulness meditation. The program includes three major
components: 1) Development of teaching skills in MBSR, 2) in-depth
background knowledge of the psychological, philosophical and scientific
foundations of MBSR and mindfulness, and 3) personal experience and
self-exploration within the context of meditative practice and its
transmission to others. The overriding guiding vision is that learning
to teach MBSR be treated as a mindfulness practice in itself and that
attitudinal qualities cultivated by mindfulness be embodied in the
training program. The Director of the program is Ulrike Kesper-Grossman
M.A. and the Co-Director is Paul Grossman, Ph.D. For more information
www.mbsr-institut-freiburg.de

Professional Training in MBCT Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy: A
5-Day Professional Training for the Prevention of Depression Relapse
offered through Omega Institute www.eomega.org

Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy: A 5-Day Professional Training for
the Prevention of Depression Relapse offered through the University of
California, San Diego Zindel Segal, Steve Hickman
http://health.ucsd.edu/specialties/psych/mindfulness/training

Advanced Teaching and Study Programs in MBCT For more information
contact: Susan Woods www.slwoods.com Char Wilkins www.amindfulpath.com
Ferris Urbanowski www.ferrisurb.org

Training Programs in Mindfulness-Based Childbirth and Parenting Nancy
Bardacke Trainings for perinatal and mental health professionals,
birthing, postpartum and infant care professionals or anyone interested
in the health and well-being of pregnant and birthing families, infants,
children and parents.

ACT Training

231

11-Week Professional Development and Training Program in
Mindfulness-Based Childbirth and Parenting Mindful Birthing, Mindful
Living A 6-Day Retreat and Training for Perinatal Health Professionals
For more information www.mindfulbirthing.org

Mindfulness- Based Eating Awareness Training (MB-EAT) Jean Kristeller
and Char Wilkins A 5 day workshop/retreat has been offered to healthcare
professionals. The highly experiential training emphasizes the
foundational nature of mindfulness practice and the practical
application of it in helping people change their relationship to eating,
including working with overeating, binge eating and weight management in
general. For more information www.amindfulpath.com

Certificate Program in Mindfulness and Psychotherapy Institute for
Meditation and Psychotherapy and Barre Center for Buddhist Studies
Newton Center, Massachusetts This nine-month program, which consists of
a 5 day-long residential program, a 3 day-long residential meditation
retreat and weekly classes in the Boston area, comprehensively explores
the integration of mindfulness and psychotherapy. With the guidance of
approximately 20 faculty comprised of specialists in their areas,
participants examine the application of mindfulness to a wide range of
clinical populations and conditions, compare and contrast Western and
Buddhist perspectives on health and healing, and practice meditation
together. For more information: www.meditationandpsychotherapy.org

Training Programs in Teaching Mindfulness to Children Susan
Kaiser-Greenland www.innerkids.org

ACT Training Steven Hayes Association for Contextual Behavioral Science
www.contextualpsychology.org

232

Appendix

DBT Training Marsha Linehan Behavioral Tech Research Inc.
www.behavioraltech.org

Resources for Personal Retreats Insight Meditation Centers For a more
complete listing of insight Centers visit Insight Meditation Society's
link http://dharma.org/ims/mr_links.html

East Coast Connecticut Insight Meditation Community of New Haven New
Haven, Connecticut Phone: (203) 624-1998 www.newhavenweb.com/insight
Massachusetts Cambridge Insight Meditation Center 331 Broadway
Cambridge, MA 02139 Phone: (617) 441-9038 www.cimc.info Insight
Meditation Society 1230 Pleasant Street, Barre, MA 01005, Phone: (978)
355-4378 www.dharma.org New York New York Insight Meditation Center 28
West 27th Street, 10th Floor New York, NY 10001 Phone: (212) 213-4802
www.nyimc.org Philadelphia Philadelphia Meditation Center 8 East Eagle
Road Havertown, PA 19083 Phone: (610) 853-8200
www.philadelphiameditation.org

Resources for Personal Retreats

Washington, DC The Insight Meditation Community of Washington (IMCW)
P.O. Box 212 Garrett Park, MD, 20896 Phone: (202) 986-2922 www.imcw.org
Florida Gainesville Vipassana Center 5811 NW 31st Terrace Gainesville,
Florida 32653 Phone: (352) 337-9993 http://www.floridavipassana.org

West Coast California Insight LA -- Los Angeles 2633 Lincoln Blvd. #206
Santa Monica, CA 90405-2005 Phone: (310) 774-3325 www.insightla.org
Insight Meditation Center 108 Birch Street Redwood City, California
94062 Phone: (650) 599-3456 www.insightmeditationcenter.org San
Francisco Insight Meditation Community P.O. Box 475536 San Francisco, CA
94147-5536 Phone: (415) 994-5951 www.sfinsight.org Spirit Rock
Meditation Center PO Box 169, Woodacre, CA 94973 Phone: (415) 488-0164
www.spiritrock.org Washington Seattle Insight Meditation Society P.O.
Box 95817 Seattle, WA 98145-2817 Phone: (206) 366-2111
www.seattleinsight.org

233

234

Appendix

Mid-States Mid America Dharma 455 E. 80th Terrace Kansas City, MO 64131,
Phone: (314) 644-1926 www.midamericadharma.org

Hawaii Vipassana Metta on Maui PO Box 1188 Kula, HI 96790 Phone: (808)
573-3450 www.vipassanametta.org

Canada True North Insight 4137 Oxford Avenue, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
H4A 2Y5, Phone: (514) 4887484 http://www.truenorthinsight.org

England Gaia House West Ogwell, Newton Abbot Devon, TQ12 6EN +44(0)1626
333613 http://www.gaiahouse.co.uk

Ireland Insight Meditation Dublin Ballyback Co. Dublin, Ireland
http://www.insightmeditationdublin.com

Netherlands Stichting Inzichts Meditatie List of centers and groups:
http://www.simsara.nl/centra1.html#buiten

Switzerland Meditationszentrum Beatenberg Waldegg CH-3803 Beatenberg
Schweiz Phone. ++41 (0)33 841 21 31 info@karuna.ch

References

Chapter 1 Allen, N. B., Blashki, G., & Gullone, E. (2006).
Mindfulness-based psychotherapies: A review of conceptual foundations,
empirical evidence and practical considerations. Australian and New
Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 40(4), 285--294. Beutler, L. E., Malik,
M. L., Alimohamed, S., Harwood, T. M., Talebbi, H., Noble, S., et al.
(2004). Therapist variables. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and
Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 227--306).
New York: Wiley. Blow, A., Sprenkle, D., & Davis, S. (2007). Is who
delivers the treatment more important than the treatment itself? The
role of the therapist in common factors. Journal of Marital and Family
Therapy, 33(3), 298--317. Carmody, J., & Baer, R. A. (2008).
Relationships between mindfulness practice and levels of mindfulness,
medical and psychological symptoms and well-being in a mindfulness-based
stress reduction program. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 31, 23--33.
Carson, J. W., Carson, K. M., Gil, K. M., & Baucom, D. H. (2004).
Mindfulness-based relationship enhancement. Behavior Therapy, 35,
471--494. Cozolino, L. (2006). The neuroscience of human relationships.
New York: Norton. Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumaker, J.,
Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., Santorelli, S., et al. (2003). Alterations
in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 564--570. Dimidjian, S., & Linehan, M. M.
(2003). Defining an agenda for future research on the clinical
application of mindfulness practice. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 10(2), 166--171. Dryden, W., & Still, A. (2006). Historical
aspects of mindfulness and self-acceptance in psychotherapy. Journal of
Rational-Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 24(1), 3--28. Freud, S.
(1912). Recommendations to physicians practicing psycho-analysis. In J.
Strachey (Ed.). (1958). The standard edition of the complete
psychological works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XII (1911--1913). London:
Hogarth Press. Freud, S. (1930). Civilization and its discontents. In J.
Strachey (Ed.). (1961). The standard edition of the complete
psychological works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XXI (1927--1931). London:
Hogarth Press. Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 119, 593--609.
Goleman, D. (2003, February 4). Cajole your brain to lean to the left.
New York Times. Grepmair, L., Mitterlehener, F., Loew, T., Bachler, E.,
Rother, W., & Nickel, M. (2007). Promoting mindfulness in
psychotherapists in training influences the treatment results of their
patients: A randomized, double-blind, controlled study. Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics, 76, 332--338.

235

236

References

Hayes, S. C., & Strosahl, K. D. (Eds.). (2004). A practical guide to
acceptance and commitment therapy. New York: Springer. Hayes, S. C.,
Strosahl, K., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy.
New York: Guilford. Iacoboni, M. (2008). Mirroring people: The new
science of how we connect with others. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux. Jain, S., Shapiro, S., Swanick, S., Roesch, S., Mills, P., Bell,
I., et al. (2007). A randomized controlled trial of mindfulness
meditation versus relaxation training: Effects on distress, positive
states of mind, rumination, and distraction. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 3, 11--21. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1996). Mindfulness meditation: What
it is, what it isn't, and its role in health care and medicine. In Y.
Haruki, Y. Ishii, & M. Suzuki (Eds.), Comparative and psychological
study on meditation. Netherlands: Eburon. Kalb, C. (2003, November 10).
Faith & healing. Newsweek. Kristeller, J. L., & Hallett, C. B. (1999).
An exploratory study of a meditation-based intervention for binge eating
disorder. Journal of Health Psychology, 4, 357--363. Lebow, J. (2006).
Research for the psychotherapist: From science to practice. New York:
Routledge. Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M.
(1993b). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality
disorder. New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M. (2008). Keynote address.
6th Annual Conference: Integrating Mindfulness-Based Interventions into
Medicine, Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, April 10--12.
Lyons-Ruth, K., & BCPSG. (1998). Implicit relational knowing: Its role
in development and psychoanalytic treatment. Infant Mental Health
Journal, 19(3), 282--289. Martin, J. (1997). Mindfulness: A proposed
common factor. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 7(4), 291--312.
McCown, D., & Wiley, S. (2008). Emergent issues in MBSR research and
pedagogy: Integrity, fidelity, and how do we decide? 6th Annual
Conference: Integrating Mindfulness-Based Interventions into Medicine,
Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, April 10--12. Meckel, D. J., &
Moore, R. L. (1992). Self and liberation: The Jung/Buddhism dialogue.
New York: Paulist Press. Monti, D. A., Peterson, C., Kunkel, E. J.,
Hauck, W. W., Pequignot, E., Rhodes, L., et al. (2006). A randomized,
controlled trial of mindfulness-based art therapy (MBAT) for women with
cancer. Psychooncology, 15(5), 363--373. Rawlinson, A. (1997). The Book
of Enlightened Masters. Chicago: Open Court. Rizzolatti, G. (2008).
Mirrors in the brain: How our minds share actions and emotions. New
York: Oxford University Press. Robins, C., Schmidt, H., & Linehan, M.
(2004). Dialectical behavior therapy: Synthesizing radical acceptance
with skillful means. In S. C. Hayes, V. M. Follette, & M. M. Linehan
(Eds.), Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the cognitive behavioral
tradition (pp. 30--44). New York: Guilford. Salmon, P. G., Santorelli,
S. F., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (1998). Intervention elements promoting
adherence to mindfulness-based stress reduction programs in the clinical
behavioral medicine setting. In S. A. Shumaker, E. B. Schron, J. K.
Okene, & W. L. Bee (Eds.), Handbook of health behavior change (2nd ed.,
pp. 239--268). New York: Springer. Santorelli, S. (2001a).
Mindfulness-based stress reduction: Qualifications and recommended
guidelines for providers. Worcester, MA: Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care & Society. Santorelli, S. (2001b). Interview with
Saki Santorelli, Stress Reduction Clinic, Massachusetts Memorial Medical
Center. In L. Freedman (Ed.), Best practices in alternative and
complementary medicine. Frederick, MD: Aspen. Segal, Z. V., Williams, J.
M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
depression: A new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford.

References

237

Siegel, D. J. (1999). The developing mind: Toward a neurobiology of
interpersonal experience. New York: Guilford. Stein, J. (2003, August
4). Just say OM. Time. Stern, D. (2004). The present moment in
psychotherapy and everyday life. New York: Norton. Strosahl, K. D.,
Hayes, S. C., Wilson, K. G., & Gifford, E. V. (2004). An ACT primer:
Core therapy processes, intervention strategies, and therapist
competencies. In S. C. Hayes & K. D. Strosahl (Eds.), A practical guide
to acceptance and commitment therapy. New York: Springer. Wallin, D.
(2007). Attachment in psychotherapy. New York: Guilford. Wampold, B. E.
(2001). The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods, and findings.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Welch, S., Rizvi, S., & Dimidjian, S. (2006).
Mindfulness in dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) for borderline
personality disorder. In R. A. Baer (Ed.), Mindfulness-based treatment
approaches: Clinician's guide to evidence base and applications
(pp. 117--139). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press.

Chapter 2 Baer, R. (2006). Mindfulness-based treatment approaches:
Clinician's guide to evidence base and applications. Boston: Elsevier
Academic Press. Barks, C. (1995). The essential Rumi. San Francisco, CA:
Harper. Batchelor, S. (1994). The awakening of the west. Berkeley, CA:
Parallax. Bell, S. (2002). Scandals in emerging Western Buddhism. In C.
S. Prebish & M. Baumann (Eds.), Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. Benson, H. (1975). The
relaxation response. New York: Morrow. Bevis, W. W. (1988). Mind of
winter: Wallace Stevens, meditation, and literature. Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press. Brooks, V. W. (1936). The flowering of
New England, 1815--1865. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co. Brooks, V. W.
(1962). Fenollosa and his circle, with other essays in biography. New
York: Dutton. Cage, J. (1966). Silence: Lectures and writings.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Carrington, P. (1998/1975). The book of
meditation: The complete guide to modern meditation. Boston: Element.
(Rev. ed. of: Freedom in meditation. East Millstone, NJ: Pace
Educational Systems, 1975). Clark, T. (1980). The great Naropa poetry
wars. Santa Barbara, CA: Cadmus Editions. Coleman, W. (2001). The new
Buddhism: The western transformation of an ancient tradition. Oxford:
New York. Cupitt, D. (1999). The new religion of life in everyday
speech. London: SCM Press. Didonna, F. (2009). Clinical handbook of
mindfulness (p. 523). New York: Springer. Downing, M. (2001). Shoes
outside the door: Desire, devotion, and excess at San Francisco Zen
Center. Washington, DC: Counterpoint. Dryden, W., & Still, A. (2006).
Historical aspects of mindfulness and self-acceptance in psychotherapy.
Journal of Rational-Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 24(1), 3--28.
Duckworth, W. (1999). Talking music: Conversations with John Cage,
Philip Glass, Laurie Anderson, and five generations of American
experimental composers. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. Fields, R. (1991).
The changing of the guard: Western Buddhism in the eighties. Tricycle:
The Buddhist Review, 1(2), 43--49. Fromm, E., Suzuki, D.T., & DeMartino,
R. (1960/1970). Zen Buddhism & psychoanalysis. New York: Harper & Row.

238

References

Fronsdal, G. (2002). Virtues without rules: Ethics in the insight
meditation movement. In C. S. Prebish & M. Baumann (Eds.), Westward
dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press. Furlong, M. (1986). Genuine fake: A biography of Alan Watts.
London: Heinemann. Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M.
(2004). Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the cognitive-behavioral
tradition. New York: Guilford. Hayward, J. (2008). Warrior-king of
Shambhala: Remembering Chogyam Trungpa. Boston: Wisdom. Hodder, A. D.
(1993). "Ex Oriente Lux": Thoreau's ecstasies and the Hindu texts. The
Harvard Theological Review, 86(4), 403--438. Johnston, H. (1988). The
marketing social movement: A case study of the rapid growth of TM. In J.
T. Richardson (Ed.), Money and power in the new religions. Lewiston, NY:
The Edwin Mellen Press. Kantner, P. (1967). Won't you try/Saturday
afternoon \[Recorded by Jefferson Airplane\]. On After bathing at
Baxter's \[LP\]. New York: RCA Victor. Mahesh Yogi, M. (1968/1963).
Transcendental meditation. New York: New American Library. McMahan, D.
L. (2002). Repackaging Zen for the West. In C. S. Prebish & M. Baumann
(Eds.), Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press. Merton, T. (1968). Zen and the birds of appetite.
New York: New Directions. Metcalf, F. A. (2002). The encounter of
Buddhism and psychology. In C. S. Prebish & M. Baumann (Eds.), Westward
dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press. Morita, S. (1998; Japanese publication 1928). Morita therapy and
the true nature of anxiety based disorders (Shinkeishitsu); translated
by Akihisa Kondo; edited by Peg LeVine. Albany, NY: State University of
New York Press. Mott, M. (1984). The seven mountains of Thomas Merton.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Mukpo, D. J. (2006). Dragon thunder: My life
with Chogyam Trungpa. Boston: Shambhala. Nattier, J. (1998). Who is a
Buddhist? Charting the landscape of Buddhist America. In C. S. Prebish &
K. K. Tanaka (Eds.), The faces of Buddhism in America. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. Pennington, M. B. (1980). Centering
prayer: Renewing an ancient Christian prayer tradition. New York: Image
Books. Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit dimension. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday. Obadia, L. (2002). Buddha in the promised land: Outlines of
the Buddhist settlement in Israel. In C. S. Prebish & M. Baumann (Eds.),
Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia (pp. 177--190). Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. Prebish, C. S. (1999). Luminous passage:
The practice and study of Buddhism in America. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press. Prebish, C. S., & Baumann, M. (Eds.). (2002).
Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. Queen, C. S. (2002). Engaged Buddhism: Agnosticism,
interdependence, globalization. In C. S. Prebish & M. Baumann (Eds.),
Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. Reynolds, D. K. (1980). The quiet therapies: Japanese
pathways to personal growth. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Reynolds, D. K. (1993). Plunging through the clouds: Constructive living
currents. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. Rohr, R.
(1999). Everything belongs: The gift of contemplative prayer. New York:
Crossroad. Sanders, E. (1977). The Party: A chronological perspective on
a confrontation at a Buddhist seminary. Schwartz, T. (1995). What really
matters: Searching for wisdom in America. New York: Bantam. Seager, R.
H. (2002). American Buddhism in the making. In C. S. Prebish & M.
Baumann (Eds.), Westward dharma: Buddhism beyond Asia. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

References

239

Seeman, W., Nidich, S., & Banta, T. (1972). Influence of transcendental
meditation on a measure of self-actualization. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 19, 184--187. Stevens, W. (1971). The palm at the end of the
mind; selected poems and a play. New York: Knopf. Suzuki, D. T. (1957).
Mysticism: Christian and Buddhist. New York: Harper & Brothers. Suzuki,
S. (1970). Zen mind, beginner's mind. New York: Weatherhill. Trungpa, C.
(1973). Cutting through spiritual materialism. Berkeley, CA: Shambhala.
Tweed, T. (1992). The American encounter with Buddhism, 1844--1912:
Victorian culture and the limits of dissent. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press. Vanier, J. (2005). Befriending the stranger. Grand
Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans. Versluis, A. (1993). American
transcendentalism and Asian religions. New York: Oxford University
Press. Wallace, R. K. (1970). Physiological effects of transcendental
meditation. Science, 167, 1751--1754. Watts, A. (1951). The wisdom of
insecurity. New York: Pantheon. Watts, A. (1960). This is it: And other
essays on Zen and spiritual experience. New York: Pantheon. Watts, A.
(1961). Psychotherapy east and west. New York: Pantheon. Watts, A.
(1962). Joyous cosmology: Adventures in the chemistry of consciousness.
New York: Pantheon. Watts, A. (1972). In my own way, an autobiography.
New York: Vintage. Wuthnow, R. (1998). After heaven: Spirituality in
America since the 1950s. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Chapter 3 Adler, H. (1998). Vicissitudes of Fechnerian psychophysics in
America. In R. Rieber & K. Salinger (Eds.), Psychology:
Theoretical--historical perspectives. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Agazarian, Y. M. (1997). Systems centered
therapy for groups. New York: Guilford. Allen, N. B., Blashki, G., &
Gullone, E. (2006). Mindfulness-based psychotherapies: A review of
conceptual foundations, empirical evidence and practical considerations.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 40(4), 285--294.
Analayo. (2003). Satipatthana: The direct path to realization.
Cambridge, UK: Windhorse. Auden, W. H. (1970). A certain world: A
commonplace book. New York: Viking Press. Baer, R. (2003). Mindfulness
training as a clinical intervention: A conceptual and empirical review.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10(2), 125--148. Baer, R.,
Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., & Toney, L. (2006). Using
self-report assessment methods to explore facets of mindfulness.
Assessment, 13, 27--45. Bakhtin, M. (1984). Problems of Dostoevsky's
poetics. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. Batchelor, S.
(1997). Buddhism without beliefs: A contemporary guide to awakening. New
York: Riverhead Books. Batchelor, S. (2004). Handouts and personal notes
from retreat, The path to the deathless, held at Barre Center for
Buddhist Studies, September 12--17, Barre, VT. Beels, C. (2001). A
different story: The rise of narrative in psychotherapy. Phoenix: Zeig,
Tucker & Theisen. Beels, C. (2007). Psychotherapy as a rite of passage.
Family Process, 46(4), 421--436. Birrell, P. (2006). An ethic of
possibility: Relationship, risk and presence. Ethics & Behavior, 16(2),
95--115. Bishop, S. (2002). What do we really know about
mindfulness-based stress reduction? Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 71--84.

240

References

Bishop, S., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N., Carmody,
J., et al. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230--241. Block, S., &
Crouch, E. (1985). Therapeutic factors in group psychotherapy. New York:
Oxford University Press. Brody, L. R., & Park, S. H. (2004). Narratives,
mindfulness, and the implicit audience. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 11(2), 147--154. Brown, K., & Ryan, R. (2004). Perils and
promise in defining and measuring mindfulness: Observations from
experience. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 242--248.
Buber, M. (1947). Between man and man. New York: The Macmillan Company.
Burlingame, G., Fuhriman, A., & Johnson, J. (2002). Cohesion in group
psychotherapy. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that
work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to patients. New York:
Oxford University Press. Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M.-C.,
Mazziotta, J., & Lenzi, G. (2003). Neural mechanisms of empathy in
humans: A relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 5497--5502.
Claxton, G. (2006). Mindfulness, learning and the brain. Journal of
Rational-Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 23(4), 301--314.
Cozolino, L. (2006). The neuroscience of human relationships. New York:
Norton. Creswell, J. D., Way, B. M., Eisenberger, N. I., & Lieberman, M.
D. (2007). Neural correlates of dispositional mindfulness during affect
labeling. Psychosomatic Medicine, 69, 560--565. Cullen, M. (2008). On
mindfulness. In Dalai Lama & P. Ekman (2008). Emotional awareness:
Overcoming the obstacles to psychological balance and compassion. New
York: Henry Holt. Cupitt, D. (1999). The new religion of life in
everyday speech. London: SCM Press. Danto, A. C. (1993). The shape of
artistic pasts: East and west. In P. Cook (Ed.), Philosophical
imagination and cultural memory. Durham, NC: Duke University. Davidson,
R. (2000). Affective style, psychopathology, and resilience: Brain
mechanisms and plasticity. American Psychologist, 55, 1196--1214.
Davidson, R., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumacher, J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller,
D., & Santorelli, S. (2003). Alterations in brain and immune function
produced by mindfulness meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65(4),
564--570. Davidson, R., Schwartz, G., & Rothman, L. (1976). Attentional
style and the regulation of modespecific attention: An
electroencephalographic study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 8(6),
611--621. de Bary, W. (1969). The Buddhist tradition in India, China,
and Japan. New York: Modern Library. Deikman, A. (1966).
De-automatization and the mystic experience. Psychiatry, 29, 324--338.
Deikman, A. (1982). The observing self: Mysticism and psychotherapy.
Boston: Beacon Press. Dryden, W., & Still, A. (2006). Historical aspects
of mindfulness and self-acceptance in psychotherapy. Journal of
Rational-Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 24(1), 3--28. Foucault,
M. (1972). Archeology of knowledge. New York: Pantheon. Foucault, M.
(1981). The order of discourse. In R. Young & R. Young (Eds.), Untying
the text. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Gallese, V. (2003). The
manifold nature of interpersonal relations: The quest for a common
mechanism. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London,
358, 517--528. Gallese, V. (2006). Intentional attunement: A
neurophysiological perspective on social cognition and its disruption in
autism. Brain Research, 1079, 15--24. Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi,
L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996). Action recognition in the premotor cortex.
Brain, 119, 593--609. Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons
and the simulation theory of mindreading. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
2(12), 493--501. Gantt, E. (1994). Truth, freedom and responsibility in
the dialogues of psychotherapy. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology, 14(2), 146--158. Gantt, S., & Agazarian, Y. (2005). SCT in
action. New York: iUniverse. Gergen, K. (1999). An invitation to social
construction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

References

241

Gergen, K., & Hosking, D. (2006). If you meet social construction along
the road: A dialogue with Buddhism. In M. Kwee, K. Gergen, & F.
Koshikawa (Eds.), Horizons in Buddhist psychology. Chagrin Falls, OH:
Taos Institute Publications. Gethin, R. (1998). The foundations of
Buddhism. Oxford: New York. Goddard, D. (1938). A Buddhist bible.
Thetford, VT: Dwight Goddard. Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional
intelligence. New York: Bantam. Grossman, P. (2008). On measuring
mindfulness in psychosomatic and psychological research. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 64, 405--408. Hayes, A., & Feldman, G. (2004).
Clarifying the construct of mindfulness in the context of emotion
regulation and the process of change in therapy. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 11(3), 255--262. Hayes, S., & Shenk, C. (2004).
Operationalizing mindfulness without unnecessary attachments. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 249--254. Hayes, S. C., &
Wilson, K. G. (2003). Mindfulness: Method and process. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 10, 161--165. Hölzel, B. K., Carmody,
J., Evans, K. C., Hoge, E. A., Dusek, J. A., Morgan, L., et al. (2009).
Stress reduction correlates with structural changes in the amygdala.
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, Sep 23 \[Epub ahead of
print\]. Horvath, A., & Bedi, R. (2002). The alliance. In J. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions
and responsiveness to patients. New York: Oxford University Press. Imel,
Z., Baldwin, S., Bonus, K., & MacCoon, D. (2008). Beyond the individual:
Group effects in mindfulness-based stress reduction. Psychotherapy
Research, 18(6), 735--742. Isanon, A. (2001). Spirituality and the
autism spectrum. London: Jessica Kingsley. Ivanovski, B., & Malhi, G. S.
(2007). The psychological and neurophysiological concomitants of
mindfulness forms of meditation. Acta Neuropsychiatrica, 19, 76--91.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever you go, there you are. New York:
Hyperion. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1996). Mindfulness meditation: What it is,
what it isn't, and its role in health care and medicine. In Y. Haruki,
Y. Ishii, & M. Suzuki (Eds.), Comparative and psychological study on
meditation. Netherlands: Eburon. Kasamatsu, A., & Hirai, T. (1973). An
electroencephalographic study of the Zen meditation (Zazen). In D. H.
Shapiro & R. N. Walsh (Eds.), Meditation, classic and contemporary
perspectives. New York: Aldine. Ladden, L. (2007). Mindfulness
meditation and systems-centered practice. Systems-Centered News, 15(1),
8--11. Langer, E. J. (1989). Mindfulness. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Langer, E. J. (1997). Mindful learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Wasserman, R. H., Gray, J. R., Greve, D. N.,
Treadway, M. T., et al. (2005). Meditation experience is associated with
increased cortical thickness. Neuroreport, 16(17), 1893--1897.
Lieberman, M. D., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M.,
Pfeifer, J. H., & Way, B. M. (2007). Rutting feelings into words: Affect
labeling disrupts amygdala activity in response to affective stimuli.
Psychological Science, 18(5), 421--427. Linden, W. (1973). Practicing of
meditation by school children and their levels of field dependence, test
anxiety, and reading achievement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 41(1), 139--143. Martin, J. (1997). Mindfulness: A proposed
common factor. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 7(4), 291--312.
McCown, D. (2004). The problems of passionate chess: Helping business
strategists change the rules of the game through applied meditation. In
S. Gopalkrishnan (Ed.), Organizational wisdom: Proceedings of the
Eastern Academy of Management 41st annual meeting. Mills, S. (1997).
Discourse. New York: Routlege. Narada, M. (1980). The Buddha and his
teachings. Singapore: Singapore Buddhist Meditation Centre.

242

References

Nyanaponika, T. (1965). The heart of Buddhist meditation. Boston: Weiser
Books. Pelletier, K. (1974). Influence of transcendental meditation upon
autokinetic perception. In D. H. Shapiro & R. N. Walsh (Eds.),
Meditation, classic and contemporary perspectives. New York: Aldine.
Porges, S. W. (1995). Orienting in a defensive world: Mammalian
modifications of our evolutionary heritage. A polyvagal theory.
Psychophysiology, 32, 301--318. Porges, S. W. (2001). The polyvagal
theory: Phylogenetic substrates of a social nervous system.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 42, 123--146. Porges, S. W.
(2003). Social engagement and attachment: A phylogenetic perspective.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1008, 31--47. Porges, S. W.
(2004). Neuroception: A subconscious system for detecting threats and
safety. Zero to Three: Bulletin of the National Center for Infant
Clinical Programs, 24(5), 19--24. Porges, S. W. (2006). The polyvagal
perspective. Biological Psychology, 74, 116--143. Porges, S. W. (2009).
The polyvagal theory: New insights into adaptive reactions of the
autonomic nervous system. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine,
76(Supplement 2), S86--S90. Rogers, C. (1961). On becoming a person; a
therapist's view of psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Rothwell,
N. (2006). The different facets of mindfulness. Journal of
Rational-Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 24, 79--86. Safran, J.
D., & Segal, Z. (1990). Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New
York: Basic Books. Schwartz, G. (1975). Biofeedback, self-regulation,
and the patterning of physiological processes. American Scientist, 63,
314--324. Schwartz, S. (1986). Classic studies in psychology. Palo Alto,
CA: Mayfield. Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Astin, J., & Freedman, B.
(2006). Mechanisms of mindfulness. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
62(3), 373--386. Shapiro, D. H., & Walsh, R. N. (1984). Meditation,
classic and contemporary perspectives. New York: Aldine. Siegel, D.
(2007). The mindful brain. New York: W.W. Norton. Siegel, D. (2009).
Personal correspondence with D. McCown, November 25. Stern, D. (2004).
The present moment in psychotherapy and everyday life. New York: Norton.
Thompson, L., Thompson, M., & Reid, A. (2009). Functional neuroanatomy
and the rationale for using EEG biofeedback for clients with Asperger's
syndrome. Applied Psychophysiology & Biofeedback.
doi:10.1007/s10484-009-9095-0. Tronick, E. (2003). "Of course all
relationships are unique": How co-creative processes generate unique
mother-infant and patient-therapist relationships and change other
relationships. Psychological Inquiry, 23(3), 473--491. Tronick, E.
(2007). The neurobehavioral and social-emotional development of infants
and children. New York: W.W. Norton. Tronick, E., & Members of the
Boston Change Process Study Group. (1998). Dyadically expanded states of
consciousness and the process of therapeutic change. Infant Mental
Health Journal, 19(3), 290--299. Turner, V. L. (1969). The ritual
process. Chicago: Aldine. Watson, G. (1998). The resonance of emptiness:
A Buddhist inspiration for a contemporary psychotherapy. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidas. Yalom, I. (1985). The theory and practice of group
psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.

Chapter 4 Batchelor, S. (1997). Buddhism without beliefs. New York:
Riverhead Books. Boorstein, S. (1996). Don't just do something, sit
there: A mindfulness retreat with Sylvia Boorstein. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco.

References

243

Bly, R. (1971). Kabir: The fish in the sea is not thirsty, versions by
Robert Bly. San Francisco: Rainbow Bridge. Brach, T. (2003). Radical
acceptance: Embracing your life with the heart of a Buddha. New York:
Bantam. Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care & Society.
(2007). Oasis: An international learning center. Professional trainings
in mindfulness based stress reduction and other mindfulness-based
approaches and interventions. Worcester, MA: Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care & Society. Fowler, J. (1981). Stages of faith: The
psychology of human development and the quest for meaning. New York:
HarperCollins. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1999). Indra's net at work: The
mainstreaming of dharma practice in society. In G. Watson, S. Batchelor,
& G. Claxton (Eds.), The psychology of awakening: Buddhism, science and
our day-to-day lives. London: Rider. Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003).
Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past, present, and future.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10(2), 144--154. Kornfield,
J. (1993). A path with heart: A guide through the perils and promises of
spiritual life. New York: Bantam Books. Landy, D. (1977). Culture,
disease, and healing: Studies in medical anthropology. New York:
Macmillan. Neufelder, J., & Coelho, M. (1982). Writings on spiritual
direction by great Christian masters. New York: The Seabury Press.
Santorelli, S. (2001). Mindfulness-based stress reduction:
Qualifications and recommended guidelines for providers. Worcester, MA:
Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care & Society. unpaginated.

Chapter 5 Baer, R., & Krietemeyer, J. (2003). Overview of mindfulness-
and acceptance-based treatment approaches. In R. Baer (2006).
Mindfulness-based treatment approaches: Clinician's guide to evidence
base and applications (pp. 3--27). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic
Press. Batchelor, S. (1997). Buddhism without beliefs. New York:
Riverhead Books. Berry, W. (1998). A timbered choir: The Sabbath poems
1979-1997. New York: Counterpoint. Carse, J. (1986). Finite and infinite
games. New York: Ballantine Books. Homiletic. (2009). In Merriam-Webster
online dictionary. Retrieved January 18, 2009, from http://
www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/homiletic. Homily. (2009). In
Merriam-Webster online dictionary. Retrieved January 18, 2009, from
http:// www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/homily. Kabat-Zinn, J.
(2004). The uses of language and images in guiding meditation practices
in MBSR. Audio Recording from 2nd Annual Conference sponsored by the
Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care and Society at the
University of Massachusetts Medical School. March 26, 2004. Linklater,
K. (1976). Freeing the natural voice. New York: Drama Book Specialists.
Littlewood, W. C., & Roche, M. A. (2004). Waking up: The work of
Charlotte Selver. Bloomington, IN: Author House. McCown, D., Reibel, D.,
& Malcoun, E. (2007). Psychological type and participation in
mindfulness-based stress reduction programs. Presentation at 5th Annual
Conference: Integrating Mindfulness-Based Interventions into Medicine,
Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, March 29--April 1. Mezirow, J.
(2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core concepts of transformation
theory. In J. Mezirow et al. (Eds.), Learning as transformation. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Neihardt, J. G. (1961). Black Elk speaks: Being
the life story of a holy man of the Oglala Sioux. Lincoln, NB:
University of Nebraska Press.

244

References

Rodenburg, P. (2000). The actor speaks: Voice and the performer. New
York: St. Martin's. Santorelli, S. (2001). Mindfulness-based stress
reduction (MBSR): Standards of practice. Worcester, MA: Center for
Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care & Society, (unpaginated).
Santorelli, S. (2004). Three points to consider when teaching
mindfulness-based stress reduction. Personal notes provided by
Santorelli at Post-Conference Instructional Institute, 2nd Annual
Conference sponsored by the Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health
Care and Society, Worcester, MA. March 27, 2004. Segal, Z. V., Williams,
J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
for depression: A new approach to preventing relapse. New York: Guilford
Press. Singh, N. N., Wahler, R. G., Adkins, A. D., & Myers, R. E.
(2003). Soles of the feet: A mindfulness-based self-control intervention
for aggression by an individual with mild mental retardation and mental
illness. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 24, 158--169. Speads,
C. (1992). Ways to better breathing. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press.
Steward. (2009). In Merriam-Webster online dictionary. Retrieved January
10, 2009, from http:// www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/steward.
Stewardship. (2009). In Merriam-Webster online dictionary. Retrieved
January 9, 2009, from
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/stewardship. Tronick, E.
(2003). "Of course all relationships are unique": How co-creative
processes generate unique mother-infant and patient-therapist
relationships and change other relationships. Psychological Inquiry,
23(3), 473--491. Tronick, E. (2007). The neurobehavioral and
social-emotional development of infants and children. New York: W.W.
Norton. Zimmerman, J., & Coyle, V. (1996). The way of council. Las
Vegas, NV: Bramble Books.

Chapter 6 Arrien, A. (1993). The four-fold way. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco. Astin, J. (1997). Stress reduction through
mindfulness meditation: Effects on psychological symptomatology, sense
of control, and spiritual experience. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics,
66, 97--106. Baer, R. (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical
intervention: A conceptual and empirical review. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 10(2), 125--148. Batchelor, S. (1983). Alone with
others: An existential approach to Buddhism. New York: Grove Press.
Batchelor, S. (2004). Hearing the call of the other. Parabola, 29(4),
52--58. Carmody, J., & Baer, R. A. (2008). Relationships between
mindfulness practice and levels of mindfulness, medical and
psychological symptoms and well-being in a mindfulness-based stress
reduction program. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 31, 23--33. Carmody,
J., Reed, G., Kristeller, J., & Merriam, P. (2008). Mindfulness,
spirituality, and healthrelated symptoms. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 64, 393--403. Chang, V. Y., Palesh, O., Caldwell, R., Glasgow,
N., Abramson, M., Luskin, F., et al. (2004). The effects of a
mindfulness-based stress reduction program on stress, mindfulness
self-efficacy, and positive states of mind. Stress and Health: Journal
of the International Society for the Investigation of Stress, 20,
141--147. Coelho, H. F., Canter, P. H., & Edzard, E. (2007).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy: Evaluating current evidence and
informing future research. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 75, 1000--1005. Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumaker,
J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., Santorelli, S., et al. (2003).
Alterations in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness
meditation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 564--570.

References

245

Denma Translation Group. (2002). Sun Tzu, the art of war. Boston:
Shambhala. Derogatis, L. R. (2000). BSI-18: Administration, scoring, and
procedures manual. Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems. Esparza,
M., Katz, R. (Producers), & Maxwell, R. (Director). (1993). Gettysburg.
\[Film\]. New Line Cinema. Foley, D. (2006). Find calm in the chaos.
Prevention, 58(11), 158--161. Fromm, E. (1976). To have or to be? New
York: Harper & Row. Jain, S., Shapiro, S., Swanick, S., Roesch, S.,
Mills, P., Bell, I., et al. (2007). A randomized controlled trial of
mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: Effects on distress,
positive states of mind, rumination, and distraction. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 3, 11--21. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe
living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and
illness. New York: Delta. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1996). Mindfulness meditation:
What it is, what it isn't, and its role in health care and medicine. In
Y. Haruki, Y. Ishii, & M. Suzuki (Eds.), Comparative and psychological
study on meditation. Netherlands: Eburon. Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003).
Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past, present, and future.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10(2), 144--154. Marcel, G.
(1949). Being and having: An existentialist diary. Westminster: Dacre
Press. McCown, D., & Reibel, D. (2008). Bringing MBSR to the workplace:
One institution's experience in marketing, sales, and delivery. 6th
Annual Conference: Integrating Mindfulness-Based Interventions into
Medicine, Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, April 10--12. McCown,
D., Reibel, D., & Malcoun, E. (2007). Psychological type and
participation in mindfulness-based stress reduction programs. 5th Annual
Conference: Integrating MindfulnessBased Interventions into Medicine,
Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, March 29--April 1. Merton, T.
(1955). No man is an island. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Mitchell, S. (1995). Ahead of all parting: Selected poetry and prose of
Rainer Maria Rilke. New York: Modern Library. Pakula, A. (Producer), &
Muligan, R. (Director). (1962). To kill a mockingbird. \[Film\]. United
Artists. Reibel, D. K., Greeson, J. M., Brainard, G. C., & Rosenzweig,
S. (2001). Mindfulness-based stress reduction and health related quality
of life in a heterogeneous patient population. General Hospital
Psychiatry, 23, 183--192. Reibel, D., & McCown, D. (2007). Continuity
and change: Adapting the MBSR curriculum and delivery methods. 5th
Annual Conference: Integrating Mindfulness-Based Interventions into
Medicine, Health Care, and Society, Worcester, MA, March 29--April 1.
Rosenzweig, S., Reibel, D., Greeson, J., Brainard, G., & Hojat, M.
(2003). Mindfulness-based stress reduction lowers psychological distress
in medical students. Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 15(2), 88--92.
Roth, B., & Calle-Mesa, L. (2006). Mindfulness-based stress reduction
with Spanish- and English speaking inner-city medical patients. In R. A.
Baer (Ed.), Mindfulness-based treatment approaches: Clinician's guide to
evidence base and applications. Boston: Elsevier Academic Press.
Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Astin, J., & Freedman, B. (2006). Mechanisms
of mindfulness. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 62(3), 373--386. Speca,
M., Carlson, L. E., Goodey, E., & Angen, M. (2000). A randomized,
wait-list controlled clinical trial: The effect of a mindfulness
meditation-based stress reduction program on mood and symptoms of stress
in cancer outpatients. Psychosomatic Medicine, 62, 613--622. Turner, V.
(1969). The ritual process. Chicago: Aldine. Whitehead, C. (2008). You
do an empirical experiment and you get an empirical result. What can any
anthropologist tell me that could change that? Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 15(10-- 11), 7--41. Zimmerman, J., & Coyle, V. (1996). The way
of council. Las Vegas: Bramble Books.

246

References

Chapter 7 Abbott, A. (2007). Against narrative: A preface to lyrical
sociology. Sociological Theory, 25(1), 67--99. Barks, C., & Moyne, J.
(1997). The Essential Rumi. Edison, New Jersey: Castle Books.
Compassion. (n.d.). Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary. Retrieved
January 2, 2009, from http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/compassion.
Debord, G. (1994). The society of the spectacle. New York: Zone Books.
Drummond, M. S. (2006). Conceptualizing the efficacy of mindfulness of
body sensations in the mindfulness-based interventions. Constructivism
in the Human Sciences, 11(1), 2--29. Gendlin, E. T. (1962). Experiencing
and the creation of meaning; a philosophical and psychological approach
to the subjective. New York: Free Press of Glencoe. Goleman, D.
(1977/1988). The meditative mind: The varieties of meditative
experience. Los Angeles: J.P. Tarcher; New York: Distributed by
St. Martin's Press. Updated ed. of The varieties of the meditative
experience. Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the
wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New
York: Delta. Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Coming to our senses: Healing
ourselves and the world through mindfulness. New York: Hyperion. May, G.
(2006). The wisdom of wilderness. New York: HarperSanFrancisco. Mezirow,
J. (2000). Learning to think like an adult: Core concepts of
transformation theory. In J. Mezirow et al. (Eds.), Learning as
transformation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Neff, K. (2003). The
development and validation of a scale to measure self-compassion. Self
and Identity, 2, 223--250. Santorelli, S. (2004). Three points to
consider when teaching mindfulness-based stress reduction. Personal
notes provided by Santorelli at Post-Conference Instructional Institute,
2nd Annual Conference sponsored by the Center for Mindfulness in
Medicine, Health Care and Society, Worcester, MA. March 27, 2004.
Santorelli, S., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2003). MBSR curriculum guide and
supporting materials: Guidelines for presenting this work. Worcester,
MA: Center for Mindfulness in Medicine, Health Care & Society,
(unpaginated). Selver, C., & Brooks, C. V. W. (2007). Reclaiming
vitality and presence: Sensory awareness as a practice for life.
Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. Stern, D. (2004). The present moment in
psychotherapy and everyday life. New York: Norton. Strawson, G. (2004).
Against narrativity. Ratio (new series), I17(4), 428--452. Tillich, P.
(1957). Love, power and justice. London: Oxford University Press.
Tillich, P. (1963). Systematic theology, Vol. 3. Chicago: University of
Chicago. Wagoner, D. (1976). Collected poems (1956--1976). Bloomington:
Indiana University Press. Wátzlawick, P., Weakland, J. H., & Fisch, R.
(1974). Change; principles of problem formation and problem resolution.
New York: Norton.

Index

A Acceptance and commitment therapy educational expectation, 16
relational frame theory (RFT), 10 Adams, John, 32, 36 Agazarian, Y.M.,
85--86, 113 Alpert, Richard, 46 American Buddhism, 50--54. See also
Buddhism Arnold, Edwin, 36 Arnold, Matthew, 36 Axioms of mindfulness
(IAA), 64, 66, 143, 145, 146 B Bachelard, Gaston, 107 Baer, R.A., 5, 29,
31, 63, 116, 144, 159 Baker, Richard, 54--55 Batchelor, S., 54, 67, 69,
70, 98, 99, 127, 144, 161 Behold the Spirit, 44 Berry, Wendell, 116
Boorstein, S., 17, 96 Brach, T., 17, 101, 214 Buber, Martin, 84 Buddhism
Anicca, Dukkha and Anatta (Pali language), 70 Buddha, brief life story,
67--98 definition and growth in America, 50--56 eightfold path, seventh
stage, 70, 72 ennobling truths (Batchelor, Stephen.), 68--70 foundations
(Thera, Nyanaponika.), 70--72 meditation, forms, 72 original text
resources and suttas/ sutras, 68 Pali translation, Sati, 70

quo religious and cultural power, 38 Theosophical Society, 37 western
discourse, 73--75 western psychology, 74--75 Bynner, Witter, 35 C Cage,
J., 40--41 Carse, J., 130 Carus, Paul, 37 Center for Mindfulness (CFM),
6, 19, 67, 95, 96, 137, 139, 143, 144, 167, 189 Chamberlain, Colonel
Joshua, 161, 162 Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, 55 Complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM), 4 Council circle, 113--115 Coyle, V., 113,
114, 152 Cultivating observation, 145--146, 151, 175--178, 206--210
Cupitt, D., 56--58, 62, 93 D Dalai Lama, 6, 11, 13, 52 Davidson, R., 13,
14, 29, 79, 144 De-automatization, 65 Deikman, A., 65 DeMartino, R., 41,
51 Dharmapala, Theravadin Anagarik, 37 Dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT) educational expectation, 16 multi-modal program and skills, 9
Dimidjian, S., 16, 20, 29 Discovering embodiment, 145, 168--174,
196--206 Downing, M., 54, 55 Dryden, W., 4, 38, 63

247

248 E Edwards, Tilden, 20 Elk, Black, 106 Embodiment discovering,
168--174 Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 33--34, 42, 56 Ennobling truths, 68--70
Epstein, M., 11 Everett, Ruth Fuller, 43 Experiencing new possibilities,
145, 148, 154, 158, 159, 164--174 Explicit knowledge. See Tacit
knowledge F Fechner, Gustav, 74--75 Fechner's psychophysical law, 74
Feldman, C., 19 Fenollossa, Ernest, 35, 36 Floor yoga, teaching
practices, 201--206 Fowler, J., 101 Fromm, E., 40--42, 46, 51, 144 Full
Catastrophe Living, 4, 6, 148 G Guiding formal practices, teacher's
skills, 121--126 Growing compassion, 146, 148, 155, 162, 185--191,
215--220 Goldberg, Natalie, 99 H Hahn, Thich Nhat, 51 Hatha yoga, 15,
36, 43, 107, 139, 174, 176, 201 Hayes, S.C., 10, 28, 29, 31, 63 Hirai,
T., 65 Homiletics, teacher skills, 115--121 Humphries, Christmas, 43
Huxley, Aldous, 45, 46 I Imel, Z., 77 Inquiry, teachers's skills,
127--134 Integrative medicine (IM), 4 Intention, Attention, and Attitude
(IAA), 64, 66, 143, 145, 146 Intensions, teaching, See Teaching
intentions Intersubjectivity and mindfulness rites of passage, 87
Siegel, Daniel, 78, 79

Index "silent land", non-verbal communication, 84, 86--87 states of
consciousness, model, 85 J Jones, Sir William, 32 Jung, C.G.,11, 39, 43,
44, 49, 106 K Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 4, 6--8, 14, 15, 19, 21--23, 25, 64, 65,
70, 71, 79, 92, 95, 121, 137, 139, 145, 146, 165, 167, 185 Kasamatsu,
A., 65 Kornfield, J., 17, 19, 53--56, 70, 98 L Landy, D., 93 Langer, E.,
73--75 Leary, Timothy, 46 Linden, W., 65 Linehan, M.M., 9, 10, 16, 19,
20, 29, 32 Loori, John Daido, 51 Loving kindness meditation, 215--218
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 46 M Madame Blavatsky, 37 Martin, J.,
17, 65 May, G., 179 May's reflection, 180 McCown, D., 25--26, 65, 79,
124, 147, 153, 154, 159 Meditation scripts, See Scripts, meditation
Melbourne Academic Interest Group, 105 Merton, T., 25, 40, 160 Mezirow,
J., 127, 128, 165 Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT), 8--11, 16
Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs), 3, 5--7, 11, 15, 26--29, 61, 65,
95, 97, 98 Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) compassion, 146,
160 curriculum, 139--142 defining mindfulness, 64--72 educational
expectation, 16 efficacy, 4 formal mindfulness practices, 8 Kabat-Zinn,
Jon, 4 metastructure, 137

Index non-pathologizing statement, 7 practice duration, 143--144
Mindfulness, definition in Buddhism, 67--73 in MBSR/MBI, 64--67
intersubjectivity, mindfulness, 76--83 Western discourse mindlessness--
mindfulness, 73--75 Morita, Shoma, 38--39 Morita therapy, 39--40 Moving
towards acceptance, 146, 179--185, 211--215 Moyers, Bill, 4
Mushoju-shin, 39 N Neuroscience antibody rise, 14 anxiety reduction, 13
Davidson's, research, 13 mirror neurons, 12 Neuroplasticity, concept of,
13 O Olcott, Henry Steele, 37 P Pelletier, K., 65 Person of the teacher,
See Teacher, person of Polanyi, M., 31 Pound, Ezra, 35 Prebish, C.S.,
50, 51, 53, 54 Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 79 Psychodynamic and
psychotherapies attachment theory, 12 Buddhism, influence of, 11 mature
pedagogy, 12 spiritual traditions, 17 R Recording formal practices,
125--126 Reibel, D., 21, 25, 144, 147, 153, 154 Reperceiving and
observing self, 65, 66 Reynolds, D.K., 39 Rilke, Rainer Maria, 119, 144
Rinpoche, Kalu, 52 Rites of passage, 87 Rogers, F., 116 Rohr, R., 49
Rubin, Jeffrey, 11, 46

249 Rumi, 33, 49, 175 Roshi, Shunryu Suzuki, 50, 51, 54, 55 S Salzberg,
S., 19, 53 Santorelli, S., 15, 16, 19, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29, 79, 96, 115,
137, 165, 167, 195--196 Scripts meditation being for others, 218--220
being present, 211--214 body scan, 196--201 expanding awareness,
206--210 floor yoga, 201--206 intro to sitting meditation, 118 loving
kindness meditation, 215--218 meditation, 195--196 playing attention,
193--195 saying "Yes", 214--215 well meditation, 195--196 Seager, R.H.,
38, 52 Segal, Z., 8, 16, 29, 65, 111, 116 Shaku, Soyen, 37, 40, 42, 51
Shakyamuni Buddha, 20 Shapiro, S., 63--66, 143, 145, 146 Siegel, D., 12,
78, 79 Singh, N.N., 110 Speads, C., 120 Stern, D., 12, 85, 173 Stevens,
W., 35, 36 Stewardship, teacher's skills, 104--115 Still, A., 4, 38, 63
Strauss, C., 37 Strosahl, K.D., 10, 17, 28, 29 Subgrouping, 113--114
Surya Das, L., 53 Suzuki, D.T., 11, 37, 38, 40--44, 51, 56 Suzuki,
Master Shunryu, 45, 46, 50--53 System Centered Therapy (SCT), 113--115 T
Teacher, person of authenticity, 92--97 authority, 97--98 definition,
teacher, 91 friendship, 98--101 regular formal mindfulness meditation,
95--97 Teacher's skills brief idea, 103--104 guidance of formal
practices, 121--126 homiletics, 115--121 inquiry, 127--134

250 Teacher's skills (cont.) Santorelli's statement, 127 stewardship of
the group, 104--115 Teaching intentions cultivating observation, 143,
145--146, 175--178 discovering embodiment, 143, 145, 168--175
experiencing new possibilities, 143, 145, 164--168 growing compassion,
143, 146, 185--191 moving towards acceptance, 143, 146, 179--185
Teasdale, J., 19 Thera, Nyanaponika, 70, 71 Theravada Buddhist practice,
53 The Wisdom of Insecurity, 44 Thoreau, H.D., 33--35, 57, 58 Tibetan
Buddhism, America, 50--54 Tillich, P., 186 Triangle of awareness schema,
67 Tronick, E., 76, 83--85, 111 Trungpa, C.R., 52, 53, 55 Tulku,
Tarthang, 52 Turner, V.L., 87, 145 Tweed, T., 36--38 Tzu, Sun, 162

Index V Van Gennep, 87 Vanier, Jean, 49 Versluis, A., 32--34, 36 Voice,
teacher's, 119--120 W Wagoner, D., 172 Wallin, David, 12 Watts, Allan,
25, 41--48 Watzlawick, P., 165, 167 Weber, E.H., 74 Weil, Andrew, 6
Wilkins, Charles, 32, 34 Wuthnow, R., 57, 58 Y Yalom, I., 77 Z Zen boom,
40--42, 45, 46 Zimmerman, J., 113, 114, 152


