Dedication

This book is dedicated to the love of my life, my best friend, and the
first editor of everything I do---my wife, Thryth Hillary Navarro

Epigraph

If language was given to men to conceal their thoughts, then gesture's
purpose was to disclose them. --- JOHN NAPIER

Contents

Cover Title Page Dedication Epigraph Introduction The Head The Forehead
The Eyebrows The Eyes The Ears The Nose The Mouth The Lips The Cheeks
and Jaw The Chin The Face The Neck The Shoulders The Arms The Hands and
Fingers The Chest, Torso, and Belly The Hips, Buttocks, and Genitals The
Legs The Feet Conclusion Acknowledgments Bibliography

Index About the Author Also by Joe Navarro Copyright About the Publisher

Introduction

In 1971, at the age of seventeen, for reasons unknown to me then or now,
I began to keep a journal on human behavior. I catalogued all sorts of
"nonverbals"---what is more generally called body language. At first it
was the quirky things people did: why did they roll their eyes when they
were disbelieving or reach for their neck when they heard bad news?
Later it became more nuanced: why did women play with their hair while
on the phone or arch their eyebrows when they greeted one another? These
were small actions, but they captured my curiosity. Why did humans do
such things, in such variety? What was the purpose of these behaviors? I
admit it was an odd pursuit for a teenager. My friends told me as much;
they were focused on trading baseball cards, knowing who had the best
batting average or kicked the most extra points that season. I was far
more interested in learning the intricacies of human behavior. In the
beginning I catalogued my observations on three-by-five-inch cards for
my own benefit. At that time I was unfamiliar with the work of Charles
Darwin, Bronisław Malinowski, Edward T. Hall, Desmond Morris, or my
future friend Dr. David Givens---the giants in the field of human
behavior. I was simply interested in how others acted, and why, and I
wanted to preserve my observations. I never thought I would still be
collecting them on index cards forty years later. Over the years, I
collected several thousand entries. Little did I know back then that I
would later become an FBI Special Agent and would, for the next
twenty-five years, use those observations as I pursued criminals, spies,
and terrorists. But perhaps, given my interest in how and why people
behave, that was the natural trajectory all along. I CAME TO the United
States as a refugee fleeing Communist-controlled Cuba. I was eight years
old and didn't speak English. I had to adjust quickly

---in other words, I had to observe and decode my new surroundings. What
native speakers took for granted, I could not. My new existence
consisted of deciphering the only thing that made sense---body language.
Through their countenance, their look, the softness in their eyes, or
the tension in their face, I learned to interpret what others implied. I
could figure out who liked me, who was indifferent toward my existence,
whether someone was angry or upset with me. In a strange land, I
survived by observing. There was no other way. Of course, American body
language was a little different from Cuban body language. People in
America spoke with a different cadence and vibrancy. Cubans got close to
one another when they spoke, and often touched. In America they stood
farther apart, and social touching might receive an uncomfortable glance
or worse. My parents worked three jobs each, so they did not have the
time to teach me these things-----I had to learn them on my own. I was
learning about culture and the influence it has on nonverbals, even if I
couldn't have put it in those words at the time. But I did know that
some behaviors were different here, and I had to understand them. I
developed my own form of scientific inquiry, observing dispassionately
and validating everything I saw not once or twice but many times before
it made its way onto an index card. As my cards grew in number, certain
patterns in behavior began to stand out. For one, most behaviors could
be broadly categorized as markers of either psychological comfort or
discomfort; our bodies reveal very accurately, in real time, our state
of unease. I would later learn that many of these comfort markers or
behaviors, to be more precise, originated in the mammalian or emotional
areas of the brain---what is often referred to as the limbic system.
This type of involuntary response squared with what I had seen in Cuba
and was seeing now in America. At school or through the window at the
corner store, people would flash their eyes with their eyebrows to greet
those they truly liked. Such universal behaviors I grew to trust as
authentic and reliable. What I did doubt was the spoken word. How often,
after I had learned English, I heard people say they liked something
when just an instant earlier I had seen their face reveal the complete
opposite. And so, too, I learned at an early age about deception. People
often lie, but their nonverbals usually reveal how they actually feel.
Children, of course, are terrible liars; they might nod to acknowledge
they have done

something bad even as they are verbally denying it. As we get older, we
get better at lying, but a trained observer can still spot the signs
that say something is wrong, there are issues here, a person does not
appear to be completely forthcoming, or someone lacks confidence in what
he is saying. Many of those signals or behaviors are collected here in
this book. As I grew older, I came to rely more and more on nonverbals.
I relied on them at school, in sports, in everything I did---even
playing with my friends. By the time I had graduated from Brigham Young
University, I had collected more than a decade's worth of observations.
There, for the first time, I was living among many more cultures (east
Europeans, Africans, Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, Chinese,
Vietnamese, and Japanese, among others) than I had seen in Miami, and
this allowed me to make further observations. At school I also began to
discover the fascinating scientific underpinnings of many of these
behaviors. To take just one example: in 1974 I got to see congenitally
blind children playing together. It took my breath away. These children
had never seen other children yet were exhibiting behaviors that I had
thought were visually learned. They were demonstrating "happy feet" and
the "steeple" with their hands, despite having never witnessed them.
This meant these behaviors were hardwired into our DNA, part of our
paleo-circuits---these very ancient circuits that ensure our survival
and ability to communicate and are thus universal. Throughout my college
career, I learned about the evolutionary basis of many of these
behaviors, and throughout this book, I will reveal these often
surprising facts we take for granted. W HEN I FINISHED my studies at
Brigham Young University, I received a phone call asking me to apply to
the FBI. I thought it was a joke, but the next day two men in suits
knocked on my door and handed me an application and my life changed
forever. In those days, it was not unusual for FBI scouts to look for
talent on campus. Why my name was handed up, or by who, I never learned.
I can tell you that I was more than elated to be asked to join the most
prestigious law enforcement agency in the world. I was the
second-youngest agent ever hired by the FBI. At the age of twenty-three
I had again entered a new world. Though I felt unprepared in many ways
to be an agent, there was one domain I had mastered: nonverbal
communication. This was the only area where I felt confident. FBI work
is,

for the most part, about making observations. Yes, there are crime
scenes to process and criminals to apprehend, but the majority of the
job is talking to people, surveilling criminals, conducting interviews.
And for that I was ready. My career in the FBI spanned twenty-five
years, the last thirteen of which I spent in the Bureau's elite National
Security Behavioral Analysis Program (NS-BAP). It was in this unit,
designed to analyze the top national security cases, that I got to
utilize my nonverbal skills as if on steroids. This unit, comprising
just six agents selected from among twelve thousand FBI Special Agents,
had to achieve the impossible: identify spies, moles, and hostile
intelligence officers seeking to do harm to the United States under
diplomatic cover. During my time in the field I honed my understanding
of body language. What I observed could never be replicated in a
university laboratory. When I read scientific journals about deception
and body language, I could tell that the authors had never actually
interviewed a psychopath, a terrorist, a "made" Mafia member, or an
intelligence officer from the Soviet KGB. Their findings might be true
in a lab setting, using university students. But they understood little
of the real world. No lab could replicate what I had observed in vivo,
and no researcher could approximate the more than thirteen thousand
interviews I had done in my career, the thousands of hours of
surveillance video I had observed, and the behavioral notations that I
had made. Twenty-five years in the FBI was my graduate school; putting
multiple spies in prison based on nonverbal communications was my
dissertation. A FTER RETIRING FROM the FBI, I wanted to share what I
knew about body language with others. What Every BODY Is Saying,
published in 2008, was the product of that quest. In that book the
concepts of "comfort" and "discomfort" took center stage, and I unveiled
the ubiquity of "pacifiers"--- such as touching our faces or stroking
our hair---body behaviors we use to deal with everyday stress. I also
sought to explain where these universal behaviors came from, drawing
upon psychological research, evolutionary biology, and cultural contexts
to explain why we do the things we do. What Every BODY Is Saying became
an international best seller; it has been translated into dozens of
languages and has sold more than a million copies around the world. When
I wrote What Every BODY Is Saying, I had

no idea how popular it would become. At my speaking engagements in the
years following its publication, I kept hearing the same thing: people
wanted more, and they wanted it in a more easily accessible format. What
many readers asked for was a field guide of sorts, a quick reference
manual for behaviors they might encounter in day-to-day life. The
Dictionary of Body Language is that field guide. Organized by areas of
the body---moving from the head down to the feet---it contains more than
four hundred of the most important body-language observations I have
made over the course of my career. My hope is that reading through The
Dictionary of Body Language will give you the same insight into human
behavior that I and other FBI agents have used to decode human behavior.
Of course, we have used it when questioning suspects of crime. But you
can use it as I have every day since I came to this country---to more
fully understand those we interact with at work or at play. In social
relationships, I can think of no better way to comprehend your friends
or partners than by studying the primary means by which we
communicate--- nonverbally. If you have ever wondered why we do the
things we do, or what a particular behavior means, my hope is to satisfy
your curiosity. As you go through the dictionary, act out the behaviors
that you read about and get a sense for how they appear as well as they
feel. By acting these out, you will better remember them the next time
you see them. If you are like me and enjoy people watching, if you want
to discern what people are thinking, feeling, desiring, fearing, or
intending, whether at work, at home, or in the classroom, read on.

The Head

All behavior, of course, originates from inside the head. The brain is
constantly at work, whether on a conscious or subconscious level. The
signals that go out from the brain regulate the heart, breathing,
digestion, and many other functions---but the exterior of the head is
tremendously important as well. The hair, forehead, eyebrows, eyes,
nose, lips, ears, and chin all communicate in their own way---from our
general health to emotional distress. And so we begin with the part of
the body that, from the time we are born until we die, we look to for
useful information---first as parents, later as friends, work mates,
lovers---to reveal for us what is in the mind. 1. HEAD ADORNMENT--- Head
adornment is used across all cultures for a variety of reasons. It can
communicate leadership status (Native American chiefs' feather
headdresses), occupation (a hard hat or miner's hat), social status (a
bowler hat or an Yves Saint Laurent pillbox hat), hobbies (bicycle or
rock-climbing helmet), religion (cardinal's cap, Jewish yarmulke), or
allegiance (favorite sports team, labor union). Head adornments may
offer insight into individuals: where they fit in society, their
allegiances, their socioeconomic status, what they believe, how they see
themselves, or even the degree to which they defy convention.

2. HAIR ---Sitting conveniently on top of the head, our hair conveys so
much when it comes to nonverbal communication. Healthy hair is something
all humans look for, even on a subconscious level. Hair that is dirty,
unkempt, pulled out, or uncared for may suggest poor health or even
mental illness. Hair attracts, entices, conforms, repels, or shocks. It
can even communicate something about our careers; as renowned
anthropologist David Givens puts it, hair often serves as an "unofficial
résumé," revealing where one ranks in an organization. And in many
cultures hair is critical to dating and romance. People tend to follow
both cultural norms and current trends with their hair; if they ignore
these societal standards, they stand out. 3. PLAYING WITH HAIR
---Playing with our hair (twirling, twisting, stroking) is a pacifying
behavior. It is most frequently utilized by women and might indicate
either a good mood (while reading or relaxing) or stress (when waiting
for an interview, for example, or experiencing a bumpy flight). Note
that when the palm of the hand faces the head it is more likely to be a
pacifier, as opposed to the palmout orientation discussed below.
Pacifying behaviors soothe us psychologically when we feel stress or
anxiety; they also help us to pass the time. As we grow older we go from
pacifying by sucking our thumbs to such behaviors as lip biting, nail
biting, or facial stroking. 4. PLAYING WITH HAIR (PALM OUT) ---When
women play with their hair with the palm of the hand facing out, it is
more of a public display of comfort---a sign that they are content and
confident around others. We usually only expose the underside of our
wrists to others when we are comfortable or at ease. This is often seen
in dating scenarios where the woman will play with her hair, palm out,
while talking to someone in whom she is interested. 5. RUNNING FINGERS
THROUGH HAIR (MEN) ---When stressed, men will run their fingers through
their hair both to ventilate their heads (this lets air in to cool the
vascular surface of the scalp) and to stimulate the nerves of the skin
as they press down. This can also be a sign of concern or doubt.

6. VENTILATING HAIR (WOMEN) ---The ventilating of hair is a powerful
pacifier, relieving both heat and stress. Women ventilate their hair
differently than men. Women lift up the hair at the back of their neck
quickly when concerned, upset, stressed, or flustered. If they do it
repeatedly, most likely they are overly stressed. Nevertheless, we
cannot discount overheating due to physical activity or ambient
temperature as a cause. Men tend to ventilate on the top of the head by
running their fingers through the hair. 7. HAIR FLIPPING/TOUCHING
---Hair flipping, touching, or pulling is common when we are trying to
attract the attention of a potential mate. The movement of the hand as
it touches the hair is often deemed attractive (note most any hair
commercial). Our orientation reflex (OR), a primitive reaction that
alerts us to any movement, is especially attuned to hand
movements---something magicians have always counted on. A hand reaching
for the hair can draw our attention even from across the room.
Incidentally, the orientation reflex operates on such a subconscious
level, it is even seen in coma patients as the eyes track movement. 8.
HAIR PULLING ---The intentional and repetitive pulling out of hair is
called trichotillomania. Hair pulling is more often seen in children and
teenagers who are experiencing stress, but it is also occasionally seen
in adults. Men tend to pluck hair from the corners of their eyebrows,
while women are far more wide-ranging: plucking their eyelids, head
hair, eyebrows, and arm hair. This is a stress response; even birds will
pull out their own feathers when stressed. The repetitive pulling out of
the hair, like a nervous tic, pacifies by stimulating nerve endings;
unfortunately, when it becomes severe, it requires medical intervention.
9. HEAD NODDING ---During conversations nodding serves to affirm,
usually in cadence, that the person is hearing and receptive to a
message. Generally, it signals agreement, except in those situations
where the head nodding is accompanied by lip pursing ( see #154), which
might suggest disagreement.

10. HEAD NODDING (CONTRADICTION) ---We usually see this in young
children, as when a parent asks a child "Did you break the lamp?" and
the child answers "No" but nods. This contradictory behavior betrays the
truth. I have seen this with kids, teenagers, and even adults. 11. HEAD
PATTING, BACK OF HEAD ---When we are perplexed or mentally conflicted,
we often find ourselves patting the back of our head with one hand,
perhaps even stroking our hair downward as we struggle for an answer.
This behavior is soothing because of both the tactile sensation and the
warmth that is generated. Like most hand-to-body touching, this is a
pacifying behavior that reduces stress or anxiety. 12. HEAD SCRATCHING
---Head scratching soothes us when we have doubts or feel frustrated,
stressed, or concerned. You see it with people trying to remember
information or when they are perplexed. This explains why it is often
seen by teachers as students ponder a test question. Very rapid head
scratching often signals high stress or concern. It can also signal the
person is conflicted as to what to do next. 13. HEAD STROKING ---Beyond
the function of keeping one's hair in place, people will stroke their
hair with the palm of the hand to soothe themselves when stressed or
confronted with a dilemma or while pondering how to answer a question.
This is not dissimilar to a mother comforting her child by stroking the
child's head. This pacifying behavior can have an immediate calming
effect. Once more, this behavior may signal doubt or conflict,
especially if done to the back of the head. 14. HEAD SCRATCHING WITH
TUMMY RUBBING ---The simultaneous rubbing of the belly and the head
indicates doubt or wonder. It can also signal insecurity or incredulity.
Interestingly, many primates do this as well. 15. INTERLACED FINGERS
BEHIND HEAD, ELBOWS UP ---The interlacing of the fingers behind the head
with the elbows out is called "hooding" because the person looks like a
cobra when it hoods---making the person seem bigger. This is a
territorial display we do when comfortable and in charge. When we hood,
the interlaced fingers behind the head are both comforting and soothing,
while the elbows

out project confidence. Hooding is rarely done when someone of higher
status is present. 16. REACHING FOR HEAD (STUPEFIED) ---People who are
shocked, in disbelief, or stupefied might suddenly reach for their head
with both hands so that the hands are near the ears but not touching
them, with the elbows out toward the front. They might hold this
position for several seconds as they try to make sense of what happened.
This primitive, self-protective response might follow when someone has
made a major faux pas, such as a driver crashing into his own mailbox,
or a player running toward the wrong goal line. 17. INTERLACING FINGERS
ON TOP OF HEAD ---Usually performed with the palms down, this behavior
stands out because it is intended to cover the head and yet the elbows
are usually out and wide. We see this when people are overwhelmed, at an
impasse, or struggling, when there has been a calamity (after hurricanes
or tornados by those who lost property), or when things are not going
their way. Note the position of the elbows: as things get worse, they
tend to draw closer together in front of the face almost unnaturally, as
if in a vise. Also note the pressure: the worse the situation, the
greater the downward pressure of the hands. This behavior is quite
different from "hooding" ( see #15), where the palms are placed on the
back of the head and the person is quite confident. 18. HAT LIFTING
(VENTILATING) ---Under sudden stress, people may suddenly lift up their
hat to ventilate their head. This often occurs when receiving bad news,
during an argument, or after a heated moment. From a safety perspective,
be aware that in situations of high anger (e.g., traffic accidents or
road-rage incidents), disrobing (removing hats, shirts, sunglasses)
often precedes a fight.

The Forehead

From the time we are babies, we begin to scan the forehead for
information. Even at just a few months of age, infants will respond to
the furrows on their mother's forehead---perceiving it as something
negative. This small space between the bridge of the nose and the
hairline reveals to others, in real time, how we are feeling. It is a
remarkable part of the body closely connected to the brain, which allows
us to communicate sentiments quickly, accurately, and prominently. 19.
FOREHEAD TENSION ---On some individuals, stress manifests as sudden
tension of the forehead, a result of the stiffening and tensing of
underlying muscles. The face has more than twenty distinct muscle groups
that can create more than four thousand distinct expressions, according
to Dr. Paul Ekman. Six muscles in particular, including the large
occipitofrontalis, the procerus, and the temporalis, account for the
tightening or furrowing of the forehead when we are stressed. Obviously,
one has to see people in a calm environment to get a baseline read on
their forehead, but when people are stressed, tension of the forehead is
frequently very noticeable and is an excellent indicator that something
is wrong. 20. FOREHEAD FURROWING ---Furrowing of the forehead in
response to a stimulus is usually a good indicator that something is
amiss, there are issues, or a person is insecure. It is also seen when
people are concentrating or trying to make sense of something. Furrowing
of the

forehead is usually associated with doubt, tension, anxiety, or concern.
Keep in mind that Botox, which many use for cosmetic purposes to obscure
stress lines on the forehead, might mask true sentiments. 21. BOTOXED
FOREHEAD (ISSUES) ---Both men and women are now taking advantage of
Botox injections to erase stress lines on their foreheads. This has
created problems for couples and even for children who would normally
look to the forehead for information as to how a person might feel.
Babies as young as four weeks old will respond to a furrowed forehead as
something negative. Interestingly, both children and adults have
reported an inability to read their parents or their spouses who have
used Botox for emotional cues as easily as they could before. 22. STRESS
LINES ---On some individuals, their life struggles are marked by deep
grooves on their forehead, even at a young age. Life experiences often
etch our foreheads with lines, furrows, and other indentations. The
forehead can reflect a difficult or stressful life or a life that has
been spent outdoors in the sun, which tends to make forehead markings
more prevalent. 23. FOREHEAD SWEATING ---If the degree of stress is high
enough, some people begin to spontaneously sweat. Sweating is very
individual. Some sweat profusely with their first sip of coffee, or
climbing a flight of stairs, so make sure to get a baseline of this
behavior before jumping to any conclusion. Baseline behaviors are those
behaviors we equate with "normal," when a person is not stressed or
overly affected by emotions. 24. TEMPLE VEIN THROBBING ---When a person
is under stress, the superficial temporal veins (those nearest the skin
on the sides of our heads and just behind the eyes) might pulse or throb
visibly. It is a very accurate indicator of autonomic arousal due to
anxiety, concern, fear, anger, or, occasionally, excitement. Autonomic
arousal is the brain's way of automatically going into survival
mode---compelling the heart and the lungs to work faster in anticipation
of physical activity such as running or fighting.

25. FOREHEAD MASSAGING ---We tend to massage our foreheads when we have
headaches (literally), when we are processing information, or when we
have worries, concerns, doubts, or anxiety. It is a pacifying behavior,
which helps to soothe tension or apprehension. 26. POINTING AT FOREHEAD
---Pointing a finger at the forehead or making a screwing motion with
the finger while pointing at the forehead is very insulting---it means
that the observer is ill informed, stupid, or crazy. This is a
culturally based cue, generally seen in Germany, Switzerland, and
Austria, where it is very offensive, and sometimes in the U.S. Because
it is insulting it should be avoided. 27. PRESSING HAND ON FOREHEAD
---Pressing the hand flat against the forehead helps relieve tension
caused by stress, doubt, or insecurity. This is different from slapping
the hand on the forehead; it looks as though the person is trying to
push his head backward. As with so many other behaviors, this is
intended to soothe the individual psychologically through tactile
pressure on the skin. 28. PUZZLED LOOK ---The area between the eyes is
pulled together, often causing furrowing or knitting of the eyebrows.
The eyes may squint or look away, and sometimes the head is canted
slightly to the side. We often see this distressed look when someone is
struggling with something mentally or trying to work through a problem.
It usually results from a high cognitive load (arduous thinking or
recalling). 29. COVERING FOREHEAD WITH HAT ---Stress or embarrassment
will cause some to actually cover their forehead with headgear (a hat,
visor, or hood). We generally see this in children and teenagers but
also sometimes in adults. I have often watched drivers do this when
being ticketed for speeding. It is almost as if they are trying to hide
in shame.

The Eyebrows

The eyebrows lie just above the supraorbital arches of the eye sockets
and serve a variety of purposes. They protect our eyes from dust, light,
and moisture, but they also communicate how we feel. From an early age
we rely on people's eyebrows to help us interpret their facial
expressions. And in many cultures, eyebrows are an aesthetic concern:
something to be tweezed, shaped, plucked, colored, highlighted, waxed,
stylized, removed, or extenuated. Like the rest of our face, the
eyebrows are controlled by a variety of muscles ( corrugator supercilii
principally, but also the nasalis and levator labii superioris from our
nose), and thus can be very expressive and communicate exquisitely our
feelings. 30. EYEBROW ARCHING/FLASHING (HAPPY) ---Eyebrow arching or
flashing conveys excitement (such as when greeting a close friend) or
the recognition of something pleasing. We arch our brows in less than
onefifth of a second. It is a gravity-defying behavior, as it is
performed in an upward direction, and as with most gravity-defying
behaviors, it signifies something positive. Babies just a few months old
light up when their mother flashes her eyebrows. Here is a great
behavior to let others know we care and are happy to see them. A happy
eyebrow flash can be immensely useful and powerful in everyday
situations both at home and at work. 31. EYEBROW GREETINGS ---We flash
our eyebrows when we recognize someone we know and cannot speak up at
that moment, or simply to recognize a person's presence, with or without
a smile, depending on circumstances. We are quick to notice when this
courtesy is not

extended to us, for example, when we enter a store and the clerk makes
no effort to establish any kind of eye contact. We can let others know
we value them, though we may be occupied, with a very simple eyebrow
flash. 32. EYEBROW ARCHING (TENSE) ---This occurs when a person is
presented with an unwanted surprise or shock. Coupled with other
behaviors such as a tense face or lip compression, it can let us know
someone has experienced something very negative. It is the tension in
the muscles that control the eyebrows that differentiates this behavior
from the eyebrow greeting described above and it is held for a few
seconds longer. 33. EYEBROW ARCHING (CHIN TOWARD NECK) ---We arch our
eyebrows with our mouths closed, chin toward the neck when we hear
something we immediately question or are very surprised to hear or
learn. When we witness an embarrassing situation we also employ this
behavior, as if to say, "I heard that and I didn't like it." It is a
look teachers often give to misbehaving students. 34. EYEBROW ASYMMETRY
---People use this signal when they have doubts or uncertainty. One
eyebrow will arch high, while the other remains in the normal position
or sinks lower. Asymmetry signals that the person is questioning or
doubting what is being said. The actor Jack Nicholson is famous for
questioning what others say, on- and offscreen, by this method. 35.
EYEBROW NARROWING/KNITTING ---The area between the eyes and just above
the nose is called the glabella, and when the glabella becomes narrow or
furrowed, it usually means there is an issue, concern, or dislike. This
universal sign may happen very quickly and thus can be difficult to
detect, but it is an accurate reflection of sentiments. Some people will
knit their brow when they hear something troubling or are trying to make
sense of what they're being told. The sentiment is communicated with the
\>\< emoji.

The Eyes

Our eyes are the visual gateway to the world around us. From the moment
we are born, we are scanning for information in familiar faces, movement
or novelty, color, shading, symmetry, and always for the aesthetically
pleasing. Our visual cortex, large in proportion to the rest of the
brain, seeks novelty and new experiences. Our eyes show love and
compassion as well as fear and disdain. Welcoming or joyous eyes can
make our day. But eyes can also let us know that something is wrong,
that there are worries or concerns. Eyes can own a room or cower in a
crowd of strangers. We adorn our eyes to attract and avert them to
avoid. They are usually the first thing we notice in others, which is
why when a baby is born we spend so much time looking at the eyes.
Perhaps because we truly are looking through the window to their soul.
36. PUPIL DILATION ---When we are comfortable or like something or
someone we encounter, our pupils dilate. We have no control over this.
When couples are at ease around each other their pupils dilate as their
eyes try to soak up as much light as possible. This is why dimly lit
restaurants are a good place to meet, as it naturally softens the eyes
and makes the pupils larger---an effect that makes us relax even more
around others. 37. PUPIL CONSTRICTION ---Our pupils constrict when we
see something we don't like or when we have negative emotions. Pupil
constriction is easier to detect in light-colored eyes. Pupils suddenly
shrinking to pinpoints suggest something negative has just transpired.
Interestingly, our brain governs this activity to make sure that our
eyes are focused

in times of distress, as the smaller the aperture, the greater the
clarity. This is why squinting improves focus. 38. RELAXED EYES
---Relaxed eyes signal comfort and confidence. When we are at ease, the
muscles around the eyes, the forehead, and the cheeks relax---but the
minute we are stressed or something bothers us, they become tense.
Babies often demonstrate this quite strikingly, as their facial muscles
suddenly scrunch up before they begin to cry. When trying to interpret
any body-language behavior, always refer back to the eyes for
congruence. If the orbits (eye sockets) look relaxed, chances are all is
well. If suddenly there is tension around the eyes or squinting, the
person is focusing or might be stressed. The muscles of the eyes and the
sur rounding tissue react to stressors much more quickly than other
facial muscles do, offering almost immediate insight into a person's
mental state. 39. EYE SOCKET NARROWING ---When we feel stressed, upset,
threatened, or other negative emotions, the orbits of the eyes will
narrow due to the contraction of underlying muscles. The brain
immediately makes the eye orbits smaller in response to apprehension,
concern, or doubt. It is a good indicator that there is an issue or
something is wrong. 40. QUIVERING UNDER EYES ---The tiny muscles
directly under the eyes (the inferior underside of the Obicularis oculi)
and just above the cheekbones, as well as the surrounding tissue, can be
very sensitive to stress. When there is concern, anxiety, or fear, these
soft areas will quiver or twitch, revealing the person's true emotional
state. 41. BLINK RATE ---Blink rates can vary depending on environment
and the amount of stress or arousal a person is experiencing. Each
individual is different, but a typical rate is between sixteen and
twenty blinks per minute, depending on lighting conditions and humidity.
People looking at computers blink less (many of whom complain of dry
eyes or eye infections---tears have antibacterial properties), while
those who work where there is dust or pollen will blink more. Also, be
aware that wearing contact lenses can increase how often we blink. When
we are around someone who arouses us, our blink rate also tends to
increase.

42. FREQUENT BLINKING ---People who are nervous, tense, or stressed will
generally blink more rapidly than those who are not. Frequent blinking
is erroneously associated with deception. It is only indicative of
stress or other factors noted above as even the honest blink more
frequently when being questioned aggressively. 43. EYE CONTACT ---Eye
contact is governed by cultural norms and personal preferences. In some
cultures it is permissible to look at someone for three to four seconds,
while in others anything beyond two seconds is considered rude. Culture
also determines who can look at whom. Even in America, eye contact is
determined by what area of the country you are from. In New York City,
staring at someone for more than a second and a half might be perceived
as an affront. Particular ethnic and cultural groups have their own
norms. For instance, many African American and Hispanic children are
taught to look down when addressed by elders, as a form of respect. 44.
EYE AVOIDANCE ---We avoid eye contact when it is inconvenient to talk to
someone, or when we find a person unlikable, obnoxious, or repressive.
In prison, for example, inmates will avoid eye contact with jailers or
inmates known to be aggressive. Eye avoidance can be temporary or long
term. Temporarily, people might avert their eyes when a person does
something embarrassing. And in the United States, unlike other parts of
the world, when we are in close proximity, as in an elevator, we tend to
avoid making eye contact with strangers and even with those we know,
especially if there are strangers present. Eye avoidance is not
indicative of deception, but it can indicate shame or embarrassment. 45.
GAZE SUPERIORITY ---All over the world, studies have shown that
highstatus individuals engage in more eye contact, while both speaking
and listening. Less powerful people tend to make more eye contact with
these higher-status individuals while listening but less while speaking.
In Japan as well as other Asian Pacific countries this is even more
pronounced. Incidentally, we tend to favor individuals who make direct
eye contact with us, especially if they are of higher status. Eye

contact from high social status individuals, movie stars, for instance,
makes us feel favored. 46. EYE-CONTACT SEEKING ---When we are interested
in starting a conversation, whether in a social or a dating environment,
we will actively scan until we make eye contact that says "I am
here---please talk to me." 47. GAZE AND SENTIMENTS ---Around the world,
those who study dating cues have noted that oftentimes the first clue
that people's feeling for each other have changed is how they look at
each other. Long before words are exchanged, the look of increased
interest telegraphs that the relationship is changing from friendly to
more intimate. How Julie Andrews (as Maria) began to change the way she
looked at Christopher Plummer (Captain Von Trapp) in the movie The Sound
of Music or how Emma Stone (Mia) changed the way she looked at Ryan
Gosling's character (Sebastian) in La La Land is emblematic of how our
gaze changes to reflect our changing sentiment before our words do. It
is true in real life as well as in the movies. 48. GAZE ENGAGING ---This
is a behavior intended to get the attention of another person in a warm
or romantic way. What makes this behavior stand out is the softness of
the face and the repeated attempts to connect, eye to eye, always with a
gentleness of the eyes, face, and mouth. We most often see this in
dating settings, where it lets the other person know you are interested
in further contact or proximity. I have seen strangers engage gazes
across broad spaces, communicating their yearning. 49. GAZING VERSUS
STARING ---There is a big difference between gazing at someone and
staring at someone. Staring tends to be more impersonal, distant, or
confrontational, signaling that we find someone suspicious, alarming, or
odd. On the other hand, gazing signals that we take comfort in someone,
a much more inviting behavior. When we stare we are on alert; when we
gaze we are intrigued, even welcoming. Staring can trigger offense,
especially in close quarters such as a bus or subway.

50. CLOSED EYES ---During a meeting, someone with closed eyes that take
a long time to open or that suddenly shut and remain so for longer than
usual is probably having issues. It is a blocking behavior that reveals
dislike, concern, disbelief, or worries---some form of psychological
discomfort. Long delays in eye opening reveal deep concern. Conversely,
in an intimate setting, closed eyes say, "I trust you, I am blocking
everything else out, and I am in the moment with my other senses."
Notably, even children born blind will cover their eyes when they hear
things they don't like or they find troubling. 51. EYES CLOSING FOR
EMPHASIS ---Oftentimes, when we want to emphasize something or agree in
congruence, we will close the eyes ever so briefly. It is a way of
affirming what is being said. As with all behaviors, context is key to
ensure it is not a reflection of disagreement. 52. COVERING OF EYES
---Sudden covering of the eyes with a hand or fingers is a blocking
behavior associated with a negative event, such as the revelation of bad
news or threatening information. It also indicates negative emotions,
worry, or lack of confidence. You also see it with people who have been
caught doing something wrong. As I note above, congenitally blind
children will also do this, though they cannot explain why; clearly this
behavior has an ancient evolutionary basis. 53. EYES CLOSED, RUBBING
BRIDGE OF NOSE---Individuals who close their eyes and rub the bridge of
their nose at the same time are transmitting that they are concerned or
worried. This is both a blocking behavior and a pacifier, usually
associated with negative emotions, dislike, insecurities, concern, or
anxiety. 54. CRYING ---Crying serves a variety of personal as well as
social purposes, most notably providing a cathartic emotional release.
Unfortunately, children also learn quickly that crying can be used as a
tool to manipulate, and some adults don't hesitate to use it similarly.
In observing a person's behavior, crying should not be given any more
weight than other signals that a person is having a hard time. Crying,
if it occurs with great frequency, can also let us know when someone is
clinically depressed or struggling psychologically.

55. CRYING WHILE CLUTCHING OBJECTS ---Individuals who cry while
clutching at their neck, necklace, or shirt collar are likely undergoing
more serious negative emotions than a person merely crying. 56. EYES
DARTING ---Eyes that dart back and forth feverishly are usually
associated with the processing of negative information, doubt, anxiety,
fear, or concern. Use this behavior in conjunction with other
information such as facial tension or chin withdrawal ( see #184) to
provide a more accurate assessment. It should be noted that some people
will dart their eyes back and forth as they analyze a situation,
consider options, or think of solutions. This behavior alone is not
itself indicative of deception. 57. EYE-ACCESSING CUES ---As we process
a thought, an emotion, or a question posed to us, we tend to look
laterally, downward, or up and to the side. This is referred to as
conjugate lateral eye movement (CLEM) in the scientific literature.
There has been a myth for decades, now well debunked by more than twenty
studies, that a person looking away or to the side while answering a
question is being deceptive. All we can say when someone looks in a
certain direction as they process a question or as they answer it, is
that they are thinking---it is not per se indicative of deception. 58.
EYELIDS FLUTTERING ---Sudden eyelid fluttering suggests that something
is wrong or that a person is struggling with something (think of the
actor Hugh Grant, who often flutters his eyes on-screen when he has
issues or has messed something up). People often flutter their eyes when
they are struggling to find the right word or can't believe what they
just heard or witnessed. Incredulity is often observed as eyelid
fluttering. 59. EYE POINTING ---In some cultures an index finger just
under an eye communicates doubt or suspicion. But many people across
cultures also do this subconsciously in the form of a light scratching
motion as they ponder or question something being said. When traveling
abroad, ask locals if this means anything special. In Romania, I was
told that the finger under the eye was a sign often used to communicate
"Be careful, we don't trust everyone who is listening."

60. EYE-POINTING CLUSTER ---Pointing of the index finger just under the
eye (see #59) clustered with eyebrow arching and compressed lips
simultaneously conveys doubt, bewilderment, or incredulity. This is
especially accurate if the chin is tucked in rather than jutted out. 61.
EYE ROLLING ---Rolling of the eyes communicates contempt, disagreement,
or dislike. Children often do it to their parents to communicate
contention or rebellion. It has no place in a professional setting. 62.
EYELID TOUCHING ---Eyelid touching can be a form of eye blocking coupled
with tension relief. Often when people say something they shouldn't
have, people nearby will touch or scratch their closed eyelid ---this is
a good indicator that something improper was uttered. You see this often
with politicians when one misspeaks and another catches it. 63. FATIGUED
EYES ---Fatigue usually shows in the eyes first. The eyes and the area
around them look strained, puffy, weathered, even discolored. This may
be due to long hours working; external factors, such as stress; or
crying. 64. FAR-OFF LOOK ---When alone, or even in conversation with
others, staring into the distance, avoiding distractions, allows some
people to think or contemplate more effectively. This may be a signal
not to interrupt someone when they are deep in thought or recollection.
65. GLAZED EYES ---Any number of things can cause the eyes to look
glazed, including drugs such as marijuana and alcohol as well as more
dangerous substances. When trying to assess whether a person is under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, an observer will want to take other
behaviors into consideration, such as slurred speech or slowness to
respond. 66. LOOKING ASKANCE ---Looking askance (sideways) is often used
to show a person's doubt, reluctance to commit, disregard,
suspiciousness, or even contempt. It is a universal look that reflects
disbelief, concerns, or incredulity.

67. LOOKING AT CEILING OR SKY ---We often see this dramatic look upward
at the sky, with the head tilted back, when suddenly things seem
impossible or a person has had a run of bad luck. We see this in sports,
such as when a golfer misses a putt. It is a look of disbelief, as if
imploring someone on high, in the heavens, to help us or take pity on
us. This behavior does have some utility; stress causes tension of the
neck, which this position can help relieve by stretching the
sternocleidomastoid muscles of the neck. 68. LOOKING FOR ACCEPTANCE
---When individuals lack confidence or lie, they tend to scrutinize
their audience, scanning faces to see if they are being believed. This
behavior is not necessarily demonstrative of deception, only of seeking
acceptance for what is said. A rule of thumb: the truth teller merely
conveys, while the liar often tries to convince. 69. EYES LOWERED
---This is different from eye avoidance in that the individual does not
break eye contact but rather shows deference, piety, humility, or
contriteness by slightly lowering the eyes so that eye contact is not
direct or intense. This is often culture based, and we see it frequently
with children who are taught not to look back at elders or authority
figures when being chastised. Black and Latino children are often taught
to look down as a form of respect, which should in no circumstances be
confused for an attempt to deceive. In Japan it is rude to stare
intently at the eyes of a person you meet for the first time; at a
minimum, the eyelids must be lowered out of social deference. 70. SAD
EYES ---Eyes look sad, dejected, or depressed when the upper eyelids
droop and seem to have no energy. The look may be similar, however, to
eyelids drooping from fatigue. 71. LOOKING AWAY ---Looking away when
conversing has to be viewed in context. When there is psycho logical
comfort, such as when talking to friends, we may feel relaxed enough to
look away as we tell a story or remember something from the past. Many
individuals find looking away helps them recall details. Looking away is
not an indication of deception or lying.

72. LONG STARE ---In conversations, silence is often accompanied by a
long stare. It can be directed at a person or at something in the
distance; it merely indicates that the person is in deep thought or
processing information. 73. SQUINTING ---Squinting is an easy way to
register displeasure or concern, especially when we hear or see
something we don't like. Some people squint whenever they hear something
bothersome, making this an accurate reflection of their feelings. But
keep in mind that we also squint when we are simply focusing on
something or trying to make sense of something we have heard, so context
is crucial in interpreting this behavior. 74. SQUINTING (SLIGHT)
---Often when we are subduing anger we will squint slightly with lowered
eyelids. This behavior (narrowing of the slits of the eyes) must be
considered in context with other behaviors such as facial tension or, in
extreme circumstances, the making of a fist. 75. STARING AGGRESSIVELY
---A stare can intimidate or serve as the prelude to an altercation.
Aggression is signaled by the laser-like focus on the eyes, with no
attempt to look away or even blink. Interestingly, other primates also
engage in this behavior when observing behaviors that are not tolerated
or when there is about to be a physical confrontation. 76. ANGRY EYES
---Anger is usually displayed by a constellation of facial cues
beginning with the distinctive narrowing of the eyes near the nose (like
this: \> \< ), coupled with a wrinkled or dilated nose and sometimes the
pulling back of the lips to reveal clenched teeth. 77. EYES WIDENING
(STIFF) ---Eyes that remain wide usually indicate stress, surprise,
fear, or a significant issue. If the eyes remain stiffly wide longer
than usual, something is definitely wrong. This is usually caused by an
external stimulus. 78. EYE ADORNMENT ---Since the time of the Egyptian
pyramids, women and men across the globe have adorned their eyes
(eyelids, under the

eye, the sides, etc.) with a variety of colors to make themselves more
aesthetically appealing. Using inks, dyes, minerals, and oils, people
have made this part of their cultural traditions, and it has been passed
down to our modern society for a reason: it works. We are attracted to
eyes, even more so when they are adorned with colors. We are also
attracted to long, thick eyelashes---something that mostly women but
some men accentuate to make themselves more appealing.

The Ears

Cute ears, little ears, sagging ears, deformed ears, big ears,
perforated ears, adorned ears. Our ears stick out---sometimes quite
literally---and serve some obvious practical functions, from collecting
information through sound waves to helping us dissipate heat. But the
ears have other utilities you might not have thought about, offering
significant nonverbal communication. We know from research that in the
early stages of a relationship, lovers spend time studying each other's
ears---how they are shaped, how warm they are, how they respond to human
touch and even emotions. The ears communicate much more than we think,
and in ways that can be quite surprising. 79. EARLOBE PULLING OR
MASSAGING ---Pulling on or massaging the earlobe tends to have a subtle,
soothing effect when we are stressed or merely contemplating something.
I also associate earlobe rubbing with doubt, hesitation, or weighing of
options. In some cultures it means that a person has reservations or is
not sure about what is being said. Actor Humphrey Bogart was notorious
for playing with his earlobe as he pondered questions. 80. EAR FLUSHING
OR BLUSHING ---Sudden, noticeable flushing of the skin of the ear, as
with other parts of the body (face, neck) may be caused by anger,
embarrassment, hormonal changes, reactions to medicine, or autonomic
arousal caused by fear or anxiety. The skin covering the ear turns pink,
red, or purplish. The skin might also feel hot to the touch. Just having
one's personal space violated might cause this reaction.

Most people have no control over skin blushing ( hyperemia) and for some
it is very embarrassing. 81. EAR LEANING ---Turning or leaning our ear
toward a speaker conveys that we are listening intently, we want
something repeated, or we are hard of hearing. This may be followed by
cupping of the ear to literally collect more sound. In dating, we will
allow someone we like intimately to draw near our ear, especially when
it is extended in that person's direction. 82. LISTENING ---Active
listening is an essential nonverbal in both professional and personal
settings. It communicates that we are interested, receptive, or
empathetic. Good listeners yield their turn, wait to speak, and are
patient when others are speaking. To accom plish this we make sure that
we face the person we are interested in hearing so that both ears can
receive the message. 83. EAR ORNAMENTATION ---There are any number of
ways to decorate, deform, perforate, color, plug, or change the natural
look of the ears to fit cultural norms. Ear ornamentation is mostly
culture-specific and serves a clear purpose---to communicate social
status, courtship availability, or group identification. Ear
ornamentation often gives us very accurate insight into a person's
background, occupation, social status, heritage, or personality. 84.
SCARRED EARS ---Heat, chemicals, or trauma can damage ear cartilage and
tissue. Rugby players, wrestlers, and judokas are susceptible to damaged
ears, sometimes called "cauliflower ears."

The Nose

At birth, all mammals' noses seek out the mother's milk, which allows
them to survive. As humans grow older, our noses continue to help us
find the foods we like and to keep us safe, warning us of food that is
putrefied or of odors that would do us harm, while helping to filter the
air that enters our lungs. When it comes to romance and intimacy, our
noses pick up on others' pheromones, making us draw closer while helping
us determine subconsciously whether or not we like a person. We may
pierce our noses or shape them, as a result of cultural cues, to be
thinner, wider, less curved, or more petite. The muscles that cover and
surround the nose are so sensitive that when we dislike what we smell,
they immediately contract, wrinkling our noses to reveal our disgust.
Noses help to distinguish us from others physically, they protect us
from harmful chemicals and bacteria, and as you will see, they are
essential to communication and to understanding others. 85. COVERING
NOSE WITH BOTH HANDS ---The sudden covering of the nose and mouth with
both hands is associated with shock, surprise, insecurity, fear, doubt,
or apprehension. We witness this at tragic events such as car accidents
and natural disasters as well as when someone receives horrible news.
Evolutionary psychologists speculate that this behavior may have been
adapted so that predators, such as lions or hyenas, would not hear us
breathing. It is seen universally.

86. NOSE WRINKLING UPWARD (DISGUST) ---The signal or cue for disgust
usually involves the nose wrinkling upward (also known as a "bunny
nose"), while the skin contracts along with the underlying muscle (the
nasalis), which is very sensitive to negative emotions. Often this
gesture will cause the corners of the eyes near the nose to also narrow.
Babies, beginning at the age of roughly three months and sometimes even
earlier, will wrinkle their noses when they smell things they don't
like. This disgust cue remains with us all our lives. When we smell,
hear, or even just see something we don't like, our nasalis muscle
contracts involuntarily, revealing our true sentiments. 87. UNILATERAL
NOSE WRINKLING ---As noted above, nose wrinkling or crinkling upward is
an accurate indicator of dislike or displeasure and usually occurs on
both sides of the nose. However, there are people in whom this occurs
only on one side of the nose (uni laterally). As the nose muscles pull
upward, wrinkling just one side, they also tend to pull the upper lip of
that side of the face. Some people call it the Elvis effect. When the
side of the nose is noticeably pulled up, it means the same thing as the
full nose wrinkle---dislike. 88. NOSE TWITCHING (CARIBBEAN) ---This
behavior is somewhat similar to the disgust display above (see #86) but
occurs much faster, sometimes in as little as 1/25th of a second. When a
person looks directly at someone, the nose muscle will contract rapidly,
wrinkling the nose upward---but without the eyes squinting as in the
disgust cue above. This behavior is a linguistic shortcut that
wordlessly asks "What's going on?" "What happened?" "What do you need?"
It is seen throughout the Caribbean, including in Cuba, Puerto Rico, and
the Dominican Republic, and thus also found in U.S. cities that have
large Caribbean populations such as Miami and New York. At the Miami
International Airport, I'm frequently greeted at the coffee counter with
this nose twitch, which means "What can I get you?" If you see it, just
place your order. 89. INDEX FINGER TO NOSE ---Placing the index finger
under the nose or on the side of the nose for a period of time is
sometimes associated with pensiveness or concern. Look for other clues
to help you discern what

it means. This behavior is different from sneaking a nose feel ( see
#95) or nose stroking, as in this case the finger just lingers there for
a long time. 90. NOSE BRUSHING ---This distinctive behavior of brushing
one's nose very lightly several times with the index finger is usually
associated with stress or psychological discomfort, though it can also
present in someone pondering something dubious or questionable. 91.
HOLDING NOSE HIGH ---A high nose profile---an intentional tilting of the
head, with the nose pointed upward---indicates confidence, superiority,
arrogance, or even indignation. It is a cultural display, seen in some
countries and societies more than in others. It may signal superiority,
such as when high-status individuals affirm their rank at the start of a
meeting. Italian dictator Mussolini was famous for this, as was General
Charles de Gaulle of France. In Russia, the ceremonial guards at the
Kremlin are notorious for this nose-high behavior. 92. NOSE
TAPPING/SIGNALING ---In many cultures a very overt tapping of the nose
with the index finger can mean "This stinks," "I don't trust you," "I
question this," or "I am watching you very carefully." It can also mean
"I notice you," "You are very clever," or "I acknowledge you" (Paul
Newman and Robert Redford did this to each other in the movie The
Sting). 93. NOSTRIL FLARING ---We usually flare our nostrils (naral
wings) in preparation for doing something physical. Frequently, people
who are upset, feel they have to get up or run out, or are about to
violently act out will flare their nostrils as they oxygenate. In police
work it may signal a person is about to run. Interpersonally, it is a
good marker that a person needs a moment to calm down. 94. PLAYING WITH
PHILTRUM ---The grooved area just above the upper lip and below the nose
is the philtrum. People will play with this area by plucking at it,
scratching it, or pulling on it when stressed---sometimes rather
energetically. The philtrum is also revealing in other ways--- sweat
tends to gather there when people are stressed. They might also place
the tongue between the teeth and the back of the philtrum,

pushing it out. Stimulation of this area with the tongue is an easily
spotted pacifier. 95. SNEAKING NOSE TOUCH ---Sneaking a pacifying touch
by ever so slightly rubbing the nose with the index finger indicates
tension that is being masked and the need to convey the perception that
everything is fine. Look for it from professionals who are accustomed to
being in control but are under stress. It is also often seen in poker
players who are trying to hide a weak hand. 96. RAPID NOSE INHALING
---Many people, when about to deliver bad or unpleasant news, will
rapidly inhale through the nose, loudly enough to be heard, before they
speak. I have also seen people do this as they hear a question that
bothers them, and in some instances before they lie. The hairs and the
nerves in the nose are very sensitive to moisture as well as air
movement and touch. The quick inhale stimulates the hairs and the
connected nerve endings, which appears to momentarily mitigate the
stress of having to say or reveal something that is troubling.

The Mouth

The mouth is essential for eating, breathing, and drinking and is also,
of course, where we form and pronounce words. Highly sensitive to touch
and temperature, the mouth is surrounded by more than ten intricately
reflexive muscles that not only respond to touch but also reflect our
thoughts and sentiments. The mouth can be seductive or sad, joyous or
pained---and it accurately registers when one emotion gives way to
another in an instant. After we look at the eyes for information, it is
here where we search for additional cues as to what is in the mind. 97.
LOUD, SHORT EXHALING ---This type of exhale, where the lips are left
slightly open, indicates high stress or frustration. People exhibit this
behavior when hearing bad news or when confronted with a difficult
situation. It helps relieve stress, especially when we are angry. 98.
CATHARTIC EXHALING ---Exhaling with puffed-out cheeks and tight lips
indicates that stress is being experienced or has passed. You might see
this when a test or an interview is over or after a near accident. This
exhale is very audible and takes longer to perform than the above
version. 99. AFFIRMATIVE INHALING ---A sudden loud inhaling makes a
distinct sound that is used in Scandinavian countries, parts of the
United Kingdom, and Ireland to signify "Yes" or "Yes, I agree." It is a
linguistic shortcut, as no words need to be used. The person quickly
inhales loudly enough to sound as if she is gasping for air. Once, after

a car ride in Sweden, when I asked if we had arrived, the driver merely
did an affirmative inhale---and that was it. 100. SUCKING IN AIR THROUGH
CORNERS OF MOUTH ---This behavior is both seen and heard. The corners of
mouth suddenly open slightly and air is quickly inhaled, making a
sucking sound. It is extremely reliable in what it reveals: fright,
concern, or anxiety. That the majority of the mouth is closed signifies
that the person is, in essence, restricting free movement of the lips,
an action that suggests stress and in some cases pain, such as when
someone steps on your toes. 101. HOLDING THE BREATH ---Polygraphers know
this well: when stressed, many people have an impulse to hold their
breath to try to contain their nervous breathing. Often they even have
to be told to breathe. Holding one's breath is part of the freeze,
flight, fight response. If you see someone restraining their breathing
or actually holding their breath when asked a question, most likely they
are experiencing fear or apprehension. 102. DRY MOUTH ---Stress, fear,
and apprehension can cause our mouths to dry out (the clinical term for
this is xerostomia). Some prescribed medicines as well as illicit drugs
may also cause dryness of the mouth. A dry mouth is not, as some
believe, indicative of deception. It can, however, indicate that someone
is stressed or anxious. 103. SALIVA BALLS OF MOUTH ---A dry mouth due to
stress, medication, or illness can cause saliva to become dry and
clumpy; these clumps--- they often look like little cotton balls---tend
to collect in the corners of the mouth. They are sometimes noticeable in
speakers who are nervous. It is quite distracting. If you are nervous,
it is a good habit to pinch and wipe the corners of your mouth to avoid
saliva balls as well as drink water. The clinical term for a dry mouth
is xerostomia. 104. CHEWING GUM ---Gum chewing is an effective pacifier.
Chewing vigorously might signal concern or anxiety. Some people, when
stressed, will chew rapidly out of habit even if they don't have gum in
their mouths.

105. VOCAL TICS ---Sudden vocal projection of noises, clicks, chirps, or
throat clearing can be alarming if one is not acquainted with Tourette's
syndrome (TS), or other disorders that contribute to vocal tics. Stress
and anxiety may be the catalysts for Tourette's outbursts, and there is
nothing for us to do but recognize that this is out of the person's
control. It is also not uncommon to see the arms move erratically. The
best we can do is encourage others not to stare, as this is embarrassing
for the person with TS. 106. TONGUE BITING/CHEWING ---Some individuals
under stress will bite their tongue or the inside of their cheeks in
order to soothe their nerves. It is very pronounced in those for whom it
has become a nervous tic. The tongue will appear wounded or even
ulcerated in places. Under stress the behavior is of course heightened.
Unfortunately, tongue and cheek biting, like repeated hair pulling, can
become pathological. 107. MOUTH STRETCHING ---When we are afraid or
realize we made a mistake, we often find ourselves involuntarily
exposing the bottom row of clenched teeth as the corners of the mouth
stretch substantially downward and to the side. This is often seen when
we are reminded that we forgot to bring something important. 108.
YAWNING ---Yawning is an excellent pacifier, as it relieves pent-up
stress by stimulating nerves in the jaw; specifically the
temporomandibular joint. It was also recently discovered that the rapid
intake of air when we yawn cools the blood circulating within the palate
of the mouth and, like a car radiator, the blood going to the brain.
Yawning may indicate that someone is too hot or, as I often found during
interviews, that an interviewee was severely stressed. Babies wrapped
too warmly will also yawn with greater frequency as they sleep to help
them cool down. 109. SMOKING ---People who smoke do so more often when
they are stressed. Note any deviations from a person's normal smoking
routine as evidence of how stressed they may be. They may be so stressed
they lose count of how many cigarettes they have lit. Excessive smoking

also leads to tobacco stains on the fingers and, of course, the stench
in their hands. 110. OVEREATING ---Under stress some people will
overeat, sometimes going far beyond their normal food intake. I have
seen people during a football game consume vast amounts of food, to the
point of getting sick, their anxiety over the status of their favorite
team transferred to their appetite. 111. TONGUE IN CHEEK ---Pushing the
tongue firmly against one cheek and holding it in place serves to
relieve tension. This is most often seen in individuals facing high
stress or in those hiding information or who are getting away with
something. It can also be seen in those who are being playful or cheeky.
112. TONGUE JUTTING ---When the tongue suddenly protrudes between the
teeth, sometimes without touching the lips, it means "I got away with
something" or "Oops, I got caught." You also see it when people catch
themselves making a mistake. The tongue jut is universal and is
remarkable in its consistency, whether it is indicating that you got
away with a great bargain or an extra cookie, a higher grade, or a
whopper of a lie. 113. TONGUE INSULTS ---In almost all cultures the
sticking out of the tongue is used as an insult, a display of disgust or
dislike. Children use this technique from a very young age when they
want to insult one another. Pacific Island warriors such as the Māori
will dramatically stick their tongue out and down as a way to intimidate
and insult. Coupled with very wide eyes, a stuck-out tongue can be quite
intimidating, and it is still used to this day in Māori haka ceremonies.
114. TONGUE PROTRUDING ---Oftentimes, while performing a complex task,
people will stick out their tongue, usually to one side or the other, or
drape it over their lower lip. I had an accountant who did this as he
entered numbers into a calculator, and I see it all the time at the
university when students are taking tests. This tongue placement serves
dual purposes: it pacifies us while simultaneously communicating to
others that we are busy and should not be disturbed.

Michael Jordan famously did this while playing basketball; when his
tongue was out, two points usually soon followed. 115. TONGUE PRESSING
AGAINST PALATE ---People might press their tongue against the roof of
their mouth when they are struggling with something. It is seen in
people taking tests, filling out applications, after missing a shot in
basketball, or when somebody needs psychological comforting. The mouth
is generally left slightly open, allowing observers to at least
partially see the tongue. 116. TONGUE LICKING TEETH ---As with lip
licking (see #145), we lick our teeth when our mouth is dry---usually
due to nervousness, anxiety, or fear. The rubbing of the tongue across
the teeth and/or gums is a universal stress reliever, as well as a
potential sign of dehydration. Incidentally, when this is done with the
mouth closed, you can see the tongue track across the teeth under the
lips. 117. TONGUE DARTING ---To relieve stress some people will dart
their tongue back and forth from corner to corner of their mouth
(noticeable through the cheeks) in nervous or worried anticipation.
Usually they think they are not being noticed or that the meaning of
this behavior cannot be deciphered. 118. FLICKING NAILS ON TEETH ---The
flicking of the thumbnail on the teeth releases stress. People who do
this repeatedly are trying to soothe themselves because they are anxious
about something. Keep in mind, however, that as with all repetitive
behaviors, if people do it all the time, then you ignore that behavior
because that is their "norm"---it may be more significant when they stop
doing it. 119. TEETH BARING ---Sometimes people suddenly pull the
corners of the mouth back and hold that position while they show their
clenched teeth. This is a legacy "fear grin" very similar to what
chimpanzees do when they are scared or fear a dominant male. We humans
tend to bare our teeth this way when we get caught doing something we
shouldn't be doing. This behavior might be coupled with a simultaneous
arching of the eyebrows, depending on the circumstances.

120. TEETH TAPPING ---When stressed, bored, or frustrated, some people
will shift their jaw slightly and tap their canines together, favoring
one side of the mouth or the other. This sends repetitive signals to the
brain that help soothe us. 121. VOICE TONE ---The tone of our voice can
make people comfortable or feel like we are challenging them. We can use
the tone of our voice to alter or enhance how we are perceived. You can
come off as nice, sweet, kind, loving, and knowledgeable, depending on
your tone of voice or alternatively as suspicious, indignant, or
arrogant. Tone of voice matters greatly. Ironically, if you want to get
people's attention, lowering your tone of voice will work best. A lower
voice is also soothing, as any parent who has put a child to bed will
attest. 122. VOICE PITCH ---When we are nervous our voices tend to rise
in pitch. Listen for voices that rise or crack when a person is
stressed, nervous, or insecure. This is caused by vocal-cord tension.
123. UPTALK ---Uptalk is when people inflect their tone up at the end of
a declarative sentence, as though it were a question. Studies show that
even a single instance of uptalk on the phone can negatively impact the
listener's impression of the speaker. Though uptalk is popular with many
young people, it makes them sound tentative and lacking in confidence.
124. STUTTERING/STAMMERING ---Some individuals pathologically stutter
(repeating syllables as they try to speak). For some it can be quite
debilitating, as in the case of England's King George VI, famously
depicted by Colin Firth in the 2010 movie The King's Speech. For many of
us who do not stutter pathologically, a high degree of stress or anxiety
can cause us to temporarily stutter or stammer. 125. DELAY IN ANSWERING
---Many people erroneously believe that a delay in answering a question
signals that a person is lying or is buying time in an attempt to muster
a credible answer. Unfortunately, both the honest and the dishonest may
delay an answer but for different reasons. The guilty may in fact have
to think about what to say while the innocent may be thinking about how
best to say it. In my

experience, a delay in answering should make us take note but is not
indicative of deception. In some cultures---for instance, among many
Native Americans---a delay in answering is not unusual as the person
contemplates the complexity and nuance of a question. Stress or fatigue
can also make us slow to answer. A formal inquiry may also cause us to
delay answering because of the seriousness of the hearing. 126. SILENCE
---A prolonged silence, or even just a "pregnant pause," may speak
volumes. Sometimes, when we cannot remember information or we are
contemplating something, a silence is unintentional. But other times it
is very much intended, as when a negotiator may go temporarily silent to
get the other party to fill in the void. Silence can be used to
communicate that the person is pondering, recollecting, considering,
processing, or is nonplussed. Great actors use it effectively, as do
interviewers. 127. SILENCE AND FREEZE RESPONSE ---When a person suddenly
goes silent and stops moving or undergoes breathing changes upon hearing
or seeing something, take note. This is a response to something negative
that shocks them or causes them to reassess what they know or believe.
128. INTERRUPTIVE ARGUMENTS ---Arguing for the sole purpose of
disrupting a meeting or a conversation is an often-used technique to
prevent further discussion. It is the repetitive interruption, not the
words used, that is the nonverbal here that distracts or antagonizes.
The technique does not further a conversation or provide any clarity, it
is clearly intended to aggravate, intimidate, or place someone on
emotional "tilt." I have seen this many times in union meetings as
members disrupt a speaker. 129. CATHARTIC UTTERANCES ---In this form of
a cathartic exhale, we come close to saying a word but never get there.
"Ohhhh" or "woooo" or "fuuuuh" is uttered but never completed. These are
considered nonverbals because the actual words are not spoken, though we
can often intuit their meaning. Often these utterances don't make sense,
especially to foreigners, but they help us to relieve stress without
offending anyone.

130. SPEED OF TALKING ---How fast we speak is a key nonverbal indicator.
In some parts of America people speak very slowly and deliberately,
while in others speech is fast and clipped. These styles communicate
something about the personality of the speakers---where they are from,
where they went to school, and more. Changes in a person's normal speed
of talking may indicate stress or reluctance to answer a sensitive
question. 131. INCESSANT TALKING ---We have all met people who seem to
never stop talking. They might simply be nervous, or they might be
inconsiderate of others and focused only on themselves. Context is key.
In the aftermath of an accident, a person might ramble, talking nonstop.
This is caused by shock. But at a party, the man who talks your ear off
is letting you know who he thinks it most important---and it's not you.
132. INCONGRUENT TALK ---After an accident or tragic event, a person may
begin to speak incoherently. This is a result of stress and the
emotional side of the brain being overwhelmed. Depending on the
circumstances of the event or tragedy, this may last for hours or even
days, as we have seen with soldiers and refugees in combat zones. 133.
REPETITION OF WORDS ---Under high stress, people may repeat certain
words over and over in a nonsensical way. Efforts on your part to get
them to say more may not work. It is as if they are stuck in a loop. I
once heard a victim struck by a vehicle say the word "metal" over and
over again, with a look of fright upon her face. That was all she could
say. 134. SPEED OF RESPONSE ---Some people will take their time
answering a question, starting, then stopping, then continuing. Others
will respond before you finish asking the question. How fast they answer
says something about how they are thinking and processing information.
Keep in mind that speed of response depends upon cultural context as
well as mental agility. 135. SPEEDING THROUGH COMMENTS ---Fast is not
always good when answering a question. When a person speeds through an
apology, the apology loses its meaning---it seems mechanical and
contrived. A

similar principle applies in praising or welcoming people. It is at
these moments that we should take our time. Speeding through an apology
or recognition of another suggests there are issues, such as social
anxiety, reluctance, or lack of conviction. It is the speed of talking
that is the nonverbal here---as if glancing over what is important. 136.
FILLER SOUNDS ---Sounds such as "aah," "hum," "hum," coughing or throat
clearing, and hesitations in speaking may indicate people are
momentarily at a loss for words and feeling they have to fill the void
with at least a sound. Americans are notorious for using filler sounds
as they figure out what to say, struggle to find the right words, or
bide their time while they recall an experience. Because these are not
actual words, they are considered a paralanguage or a nonverbal. 137.
COUGHING OR CLEARING OF THROAT ---People often cough or clear their
throat when they need to answer or deal with something difficult. A
question that is challenging to answer or needs to be qualified might
cause throat clearing. I have noted that some individuals when lying
will clear their throat or cough, but this is not a reliable indicator
of deception, as the honest may also do so when nervous or tense. 138.
WHISTLING NERVOUSLY ---Whistling is a form of cathartic exhaling (see
#98), and it helps us relieve stress. It's a good pacifier and that's
why people tend to do it when traveling by themselves through a dark or
desolate area or when they feel uncomfortably alone. In movies and
cartoons, people or characters are often portrayed whistling while
walking through a cemetery to ward off their apprehension. 139.
TUT-TUTTING ---These tongue and teeth noises are used in many societies
to indicate disagreement, to call attention to something that is wrong,
or to shame. One tut-tuts by placing the tongue against the back of the
front teeth and the upper palate and then rapidly inhaling to make a
sharp, quick sound. This is often seen in concert with a waving finger
indicating that a transgression has occurred and been noticed. Parents
frequently tut-tut when children are about to misbehave. 140. LAUGHTER
---Laughter is a universal display of amusement, happiness, and joy. We
know that when we laugh we experience less stress and

even less pain; indeed, the act of laughing may have arisen in us as a
protective evolutionary benefit. There are, of course, many different
sorts of laughter: unrestrained cackles when we hear a genuinely
hilarious joke; the joyous laughter of children; the obsequious laughter
of those who seek to flatter a leader. How someone laughs says a lot,
and should be examined for the true depth of sentiment and context when
you're in doubt.

The Lips

We purse them in front of smartphones to take selfies and paint them
with lipstick to make them more attractive. We inject them with collagen
to hide our age, and we lick them to keep them moist. Rich in nerve
endings, our lips sense pressure, heat, cold, flavors, tenderness, and
even the movement of air. They not only sense, they can be sensuous as
well. Lips communicate moods, likes, dislikes, even fear. We adorn them,
massage them, Botox them, and play with them---and oh yes, we kiss with
them. In a way, they are one of the things that make us uniquely human.
141. LIP FULLNESS ---Our lips change size and dimensions according to
our emotional state. They get small when we're stressed, larger when
we're comfortable. Full, pliable lips indicate relaxation and
contentment. When we're under stress, blood flows out of the lips to
other parts of the body where it is needed. Lip fullness can serve as a
barometer of a person's emotional state. 142. FINGERTIPS TO LIPS
---Covering one's lips with one's fingers can indicate insecurity or
doubt and should be considered in context. Watch for this behavior,
especially as people hear a question they need to process. This behavior
is also seen when people carefully ponder an issue. Keep in mind that
some people do this frequently, in all sorts of situations---it is a
stress reliever harking back to when they sucked their thumbs, so be
careful with what inference is drawn. 143. LIP PLUCKING ---Pulling or
plucking of the lips is usually associated with fear, doubt, concern,
lack of confidence, or other difficulties.

Ignore people who do this continually to pass the time---for them it is
a pacifier. For those who rarely do it, it's a good indicator that
something is wrong. 144. LIP BITING ---Lip biting is a pacifier, usually
seen when people are under stress or have concerns. We bite our lips
because, after a certain age, it is no longer socially acceptable to
suck our thumbs, and biting our lips stimulates the same nerves in the
mouth. We might also bite our lips when we want to say something but
can't or shouldn't. Note also that some people, when angry, will bite
their lips as a means of self-restraint. 145. LIP LICKING ---Rubbing the
tongue on the lips helps to pacify us in the same way that lip biting
does. This behavior is usually associated with concerns, anxiety, or
negative emotions; however, it could just be that the person has dry
lips, so be careful when drawing conclusions. For some people, however,
this is a very reliable indicator that they are very stressed. As an
educator, I see this all the time when an unprepared student sits down
for a test. 146. LIP NARROWING ---The narrowing of the lips is mostly
associated with negative thoughts, concerns, fears, anxiety, or lack of
confidence. As we process issues or experience stress, the lips tend to
narrow. 147. LIP COMPRESSING ---Throughout the day, as we encounter
negative events or uncomfortable thoughts, and concerns, our lips will
narrow and press together, accurately transmitting, even if only for an
instant, our concerns. Lip compression can be very subtle or can reach a
point where the lips noticeably change color as blood is forced out. Lip
compression can be very fleeting ( 1 / 20th of a second), and yet it
reveals accurately a negative emotion suddenly registered. 148. SLIGHT
PRESSING OF LIPS ---Sometimes we show our annoyance with others by
slightly compressing the lips. Unlike full lip compression, where both
lips are involved, this usually involves only the upper lip. Still, a
slight lip compression might reveal something, when considered along
with the rest of a person's body language.

149. COMPRESSED LIPS PULLED DOWN ---You'll see this striking behavior in
people when they realize they made a major mistake or get caught doing
something wrong. The lips are held tightly together while the muscles
surrounding the mouth contract to bring the lips slightly down,
stretching the upper lip away from the nose and pulling the mouth area
tightly against the teeth. 150. RELUCTANCE TO DECOMPRESS LIPS ---People
who hold their compressed lips together for a long time, reluctant to
decompress them, are signaling a high degree of stress or concern. Lip
compression is, in a way, a battening down of our hatches, much like
covering our eyes with our hands to block out something negative. The
greater the tension or apprehension, the greater the need to keep the
lips compressed. 151. LIP WITHDRAWING ---When we have deep concerns or
anxiety, we might suck our lips into our mouth to the point where they
are no longer visible. This signals something very different from lip
compressing ( see #147), where much of the lips remain visible. This
behavior is often reserved for when there is severe stress, significant
physical pain, or great emotional turmoil. 152. LIP QUIVERING ---The
quivering of the edges of the lips, no matter how slight, in the absence
of alcohol or neurological disorders, indicates discomfort, concern,
fear, or other issues. Young people when questioned by parents or other
adults in positions of authority often display quivering lips, as do
honest people who have never been confronted by law enforcement officers
before. I have also heard from human resources personnel that some young
people's lips will quiver when they are asked if they use illicit drugs.
153. UPSIDE-DOWN LIPS ---When the lips are compressed and the corners of
the mouth turn downward, things are really bad emotionally. This is a
strong indicator of high stress or discomfort. This behavior is
difficult to fake, so it is very accurate. Be careful, however, because
some people have naturally downturned mouths. This indicator is similar
to the "grouper" mouth ( see #156), but in this case the lips either are
very tightly compressed or have disappeared completely.

154. LIP PURSING ---We purse our lips (pinching them tightly toward the
front of the mouth) when we disagree with something or when we are
thinking of an alternative. When audiences take issue with what a
speaker is saying or know it is wrong, you often see this behavior. The
more outward the movement of the pursed lips, the stronger the negative
emotion or sentiment. This is an extremely reliable behavior you also
see in poker when players don't like their own hole cards. 155. LIP
PURSING PULLED TO SIDE ---This is similar to the pursed-lips behavior
above, but with the lips energetically pulled to the side of the face,
significantly altering the look of the person. Usually this happens
quickly, though when there is strong disagreement, the position might be
held for a few seconds. It is an emphatic gesture that says, "I have
real issues here; I don't like what I was asked, what I just heard, or
where this is going." The more pronounced the gesture or the longer it
is held, the stronger the sentiment. We famously saw this expression on
O. J. Simpson trial witness Kato Kaelin as he testified, and gymnast
McKayla Maroney when she came in second place in the vault finals during
the 2012 Summer Olympics. 156. SAD MOUTH ---The mouth, like the eyes,
can be a window into our emotional state. Sadness is usually shown with
the corners of the lips turned down slightly, usually in concert with
lowered upper eyelids. This is sometimes referred to as a "grouper"
mouth or face. It should be noted that some people naturally look this
way---the corners of their mouths perpetually turned down---and for
them, it has nothing to do with negative emotions. 157. THE O ---When we
are surprised or in agony, our lips will often instinctively make an
oval shape, similar to an O. The reason we do this is not exactly known,
but it seems to be a universal behavior across cultures and possibly a
vestigial response we share with alarmed primates. The best-known image
of this is Edvard Munch's painting The Scream. 158. MOUTH OPEN, JAW TO
SIDE ---Similar to jaw dropping (see #179), this occurs when people have
done something wrong or realize they've made a mistake. One corner of
the mouth is pulled to the side, causing

the jaw to shift in that direction; at the same time, the clenched lower
teeth on that side of the mouth are exposed. Students often react this
way when they miss a question they know they should have known; it's
also seen when employees recognize they failed to complete a task. This
behavior might be accompanied by the quick sucking in of air through
clenched teeth. 159. SMILE ---A genuine smile is an instant, surefire
way to communicate friendliness and goodwill. Around the world it
signals warmth, friendliness, and social harmony. Watching someone
smile, especially babies, brings us joy. In family relations, dating,
and business a smile opens doors as well as hearts. There are a variety
of smiles, including social smiles for those whom we don't know but
acknowledge near us, the tense smile of a test taker, and the false
smile of those pretending to like us or trying to act comfortable. 160.
TRUE SMILE ---A topic of much research; a genuine smile involves the
mouth and the muscles around the eyes. This is called a Duchenne smile,
according to body-language researcher Paul Ekman. The face is visibly
more relaxed in a true smile, as the facial muscles reflect actual joy
rather than tension. Studies have shown that a genuine smile can be
truly "contagious," in both professional and personal environments, and
is often a trait we associate with charismatic individuals. 161. FALSE
SMILE ---False smiles, like nervous smiles, are used for perception
management to make others believe everything is OK. They are fairly easy
to distinguish from a true smile; however, in a false smile, sometimes
only one side of the face is involved, or the smile goes toward the ear
rather than the eyes. It looks contrived. A true smile engages the eyes
and the facial muscles smoothly on both sides of the face. 162. NERVOUS
SMILE ---A nervous or tense smile shows anxiety, concern, or stress. The
nervous smile is performed to make others think everything is fine. You
often see this on visitors clearing customs at the airport; they
nervously smile at the inquisitive officer asking questions.

163. SMILING AS A BAROMETER OF EMOTIONS ---How accurate are smiles in
revealing our inner feelings? Very. Studies show that athletes' smiles
differ noticeably depending on whether they finish in first, second, or
third place. Interestingly, this same distinction holds true for
congenitally blind athletes, who have never actually seen a smile on
another person's face. Their smile will reflect their success, or lack
thereof---again confirming that many nonverbals are hardwired in our
brains. 164. CRIMPING CORNERS OF THE MOUTH ---When one corner of the
mouth pinches tight and pulls slightly to the side or up, it reveals
smugness, disdain, dislike, disbelief, or contempt. Where the contempt
is demonstrably overt, this behavior may be dramatized or exaggerated,
leaving no question as to true sentiments. Most of the time crimping the
corner of the mouth is done on just one side of the face but some people
do it on both sides and it means the same. 165. UPPER LIP RISE
---Disgust, negative sentiments, disdain, or dislike will cause the
upper corner of the lip on one side of the mouth to rise slightly or
"tent" upward. When the sentiments are strong, the rise can be very
noticeable, distorting the upper lip toward the nose and exposing the
teeth, almost in a snarl. This is a sign of utter dislike or disgust.
166. UPPER-LIP TONGUE RUBBING ---Some people reflect their positive
emotions by licking their upper lip briskly back and forth. Because the
tongue is in essence defying gravity (going for the upper lip), positive
emotions are more likely involved. This is differentiated from the usual
lip licking, which is done on the lower lip and is associated with
stress release. As with all body-language indicators, there are
exceptions, and some people rub the upper lip to relieve stress, so look
for other confirming behaviors to guide you in drawing conclusions.

The Cheeks and Jaw

Many people think of the cheeks as a dormant fixture and the jaw as
something only useful for chewing and talking---not, in other words,
useful in the study of body language. But our cheeks and jaws give our
faces our unique human shape. We look for leaders to have strong jaws
and the fashion industry is always looking for high cheekbones on
models. We color our cheeks artificially with makeup to increase our
attractiveness and allow hair to grow on our jaws to fill out a
face---which is why President Lincoln grew out his beard. From cheeks
that flush with excitement or embarrassment to jaws that shift when we
feel unsure, these two areas definitely communicate something about us
and should not be overlooked. 167. SUDDEN FACIAL TICS ---Facial tics can
erupt anywhere on the face (the cheek, a corner of the mouth, the eyes,
the forehead) and are specific to each individual. If you suddenly see a
nervous twitch, it is usually caused by tension or anxiety. Facial tics
often occur on or near the cheeks because of the interconnecting muscles
that traverse this area. 168. FACIAL DENTING ---People will push or
press their fingers firmly against a cheek to produce sensations that
relieve stress---literally making a dent into their own skin. These
displays are sometimes quite pronounced, depending on the pressure
applied. This is frequently seen at sporting events when the home team
is doing poorly. Facial denting can be done with one or two hands or a
few fingers on just one side or by pinching the cheeks between the thumb
and the index or middle finger in concert.

169. CHEEK OR FACIAL MASSAGING ---Cheek or facial massaging is a good
way to release stress. Usually done very softly, it can also signal
contemplation. This is a behavior that needs to be considered with other
behaviors for an accurate assessment. 170. CHEEK STRUMMING ---Strumming
the fingers on the cheek indicates that someone is bored and wanting to
move things along. Verify with other behaviors, such as looking bored or
seat shifting. 171. CHEEK FRAMING ---Cheek framing is when a person
rests the jaw on an extended thumb and places the index finger up along
the side of the cheek. This usu ally involves just one hand and suggests
that a person is pondering something, or wants to appear pensive. Some
people use this behavior primarily when they doubt what a speaker is
saying, while others might simply do it as a means to aid concentration.
In dating, it can be an effective pose to show interest from a distance.
172. PUFFING OUT CHEEKS ---The puffing out of the cheeks, without
exhaling, often signifies doubt, deliberation, or caution. This is often
seen in people who are not quite sure what to do next or who are
apprehensive. It is not unusual to see someone hold this pose for quite
a while as they work out the solution to a problem. 173. SNEAKING A
CHEEK TOUCH---Sneaking a pacifier by ever so slightly rubbing the index
finger against the cheek indicates that stress is being managed for the
sake of perception. When people try to conceal a pacifier, like touching
the side of the nose, they do so because they are trying to hide their
insecurity, anxiety, or worry. Surreptitious cheek touching is
frequently noticeable in people being interviewed on TV and in poker
players. 174. CHEEK SCRATCHING ---Cheek scratching is also a pacifier, a
way of dealing with doubts and insecurities. It is more robust than
sneaking a touch, which tends to be more accurate because of its hidden
meaning. Nevertheless, the scratching of the cheek with four fingers
usually indicates reservations, hesitation, bewilderment, or
apprehension.

175. PINCHING THE CORNERS OF THE MOUTH ---Using the fingers to tightly
constrict or pinch the corners of the mouth relieves stress. We rarely
do this when we are content and relaxed. It is different from facial
denting ( see #168). This behavior is usually done by pressing the
fleshy area of cheeks with the fingers and thumbs bilaterally pulling
toward the corners of the mouth, perhaps even pulling on one or both
lips. 176. CHEEK WIPING ---Under extreme stress, it is not unusual to
see people press their hands on their face and drag them downward, as if
wiping their faces clean. Typically, the motion starts just in front of
the ears and concludes near the jawbone. The harder and longer the
person presses down, the more acute the stress. I've seen stockbrokers
do this at the closing bell after a poor day of trading or when a team
loses in the final second of a game. 177. JAW TENSING ---When we are
upset, angry, or fearful, the jaw muscles near the ears tend to tense
up. Look for jaw tension when there is stress, defiance, or emotions are
becoming heated. 178. JAW DISPLACING/SHIFTING ---Jaw displacement or
repetitive jaw shifting (from side to side) is an effective pacifier.
This is also simply a compulsive behavior in some people, so note when
and how often it occurs and look for other confirming behaviors that
something is amiss. Most people do this infrequently, and thus when you
do see it, it is very accurate in communicating that something is
bothering them. 179. JAW DROPPING ---A sudden drop of the jaw, leaving
the mouth open and the teeth exposed, communicates great surprise. This
behavior is often seen when people are shocked or are confronted with an
embarrassing revelation. Why our jaws drop is not completely understood,
but the action is quite accurate in revealing total surprise. 180. JAW
MUSCLES PULSING ---Jaw muscles that pulse, throb, or become tight and
pronounced indicate impatience, tension, concern, worries, anger, or
negative emotions. 181. JAW JUTTING ---When we are angry, we tend to
move or jut the jaw slightly forward. In conjunction with lowered upper
eyelids or tense

lips, this behavior makes anger difficult for a person to hide entirely.

The Chin

Baby, round, squared, sagging, strong, dimpled, cute, or scarred: chins
come in many varieties and shapes. They protect our face, and if need be
our neck, but they also communicate our sentiments, whether pride or
shame. We say "chin up" when others are down, and soldiers proudly
salute the flag with their chins angled high. The chin, in short, can
speak volumes about our internal state, whether we are confident,
frightened, troubled, or emotionally overcome. 182. CHIN UP ---When the
chin is out and up it communicates confidence--- thus the saying "chin
up." In certain European cultures (German, French, Russian, and Italian,
among others) the chin is generally raised higher than normal to signify
confidence, pride, and in certain cases, arrogance. 183. CHIN POINTING
DOWN ---If the chin suddenly points downward in response to a question,
most likely the person lacks confidence or feels threatened. In some
people, this is a highly reliable tell; they literally drop their chin
when they get bad news or as they think about something painful or
negative. 184. CHIN WITHDRAWING ---When we are worried or anxious, we
instinctively move our chin as close to the neck as possible---nature's
way of protecting our vitals. This is an excellent indicator of
insecurity, doubt, even fear. If you see this behavior after asking
someone a question, there are serious unresolved issues. When children
are questioned about something they should not have done,

the chin often comes down, showing contriteness. Many adults respond the
same way. 185. CHIN HIDING ---This is generally employed by children to
hide their embarrassment, show their displeasure toward others, or
demonstrate that they are upset. They tuck their chin down, often
crossing their arms at the same time and then refuse to lift their chin
up. In adults, chin hiding is seen between males, standing face-to-face,
angry or yelling at each other. In this case it serves to protect the
neck in the event of a violent confrontation. 186. CHIN DROP WITH
SHOULDERS SLUMPING ---This is another behavior familiar to
parents---when children lower or try to hide their chin with the
shoulders slumped, effectively saying "I don't want to." If the arms are
also crossed, then the child definitely does not want to. 187. CHIN
TOUCHING ---We touch our chins when we are thinking or evaluating
something. This is usually done with the tips of the fingers. It is not
necessarily a sign of doubt but is something to note when a person is
processing information. When coupled with other behaviors, such as lip
pursing, it suggests that the person is contemplating something
negative, or an alternative to what has been discussed. 188. CHIN
BRUSHING WITH BACK OF HAND ---In many cultures this signifies that a
person has doubts about what is being said. This may also be coupled
with lip pursing. It can be performed side to side or from back to front
of the chin. 189. CHIN CRADLING ---Placing one's chin on the palm of the
hand, coupled with relaxation of the facial muscles, suggests boredom.
But in a law enforcement context, it might signal a range of
possibilities, depending on the circumstances. In a forensic setting, I
have seen the guilty strike this pose while sitting in a room alone as a
form of perception management, to make authorities think they are so
innocent, they are practically bored. 190. ANGRY CHIN PERCHING ---This
chin perch is performed by placing the chin on the knuckles of the
fists, while the elbows are wide and resting

on a table as the person stares into the distance or at a computer
screen. Usually the forehead is furrowed or the eyes are narrowed or
squinting, as a result of something difficult they are pondering or
momentary anger. When you see someone posed like this, it is wise to not
interrupt. 191. CHIN SHIFTING ---Moving the chin left to right against
the palm of the hand is a subconscious conveyance of disagreement. I
have seen people sitting around a conference room table show their
silent displeasure by shifting their chin while resting on the palm of
their hand. 192. BEARD/MUSTACHE STROKING ---Stroking a mustache or a
beard can be highly effective for pacifying stress. As with any
repetitive behavior, ignore it if you see it too often, as some people
with facial hair do this compulsively. If you see it occur suddenly for
the first time or it increases after a topic is mentioned, perhaps the
person has an issue. Cultural context must also be taken into account;
for instance, beard stroking is common among many men from the Middle
East as they pass the time talking. Note that many men with beards find
it soothing to stroke their beards as they pass the time of day. 193.
CHIN DIMPLING ---When people are stressed, experiencing emotional
turmoil, or about to cry, their chin will dimple. This is true for even
the most stoic of individuals. 194. CHIN-MUSCLE QUIVERING ---The sudden
quivering of chin muscles indicates fear, concern, anxiety, or
apprehension. People who are about to cry will also do this. The
mentalis muscle, which covers the chin and causes the skin to quiver, is
one of the muscles that most reflects our emotions, according to
Dr. David Givens. Sometimes the chin will reflect emotional turmoil even
before the eyes. 195. CHIN TO SHOULDER ---We often see this with people
who are embarrassed or emotionally vulnerable. They will, in a very
childlike manner, place their chin against one shoulder, looking demure.
You should especially note when someone does this while answering a
question. It usually means the person has great difficulty discussing a

subject, perhaps because she possesses knowledge she does not wish to
reveal. 196. CHIN POINTING ---In many cultures, people will point in a
direction with their chin, extending it forward as they stretch their
neck. This replaces pointing with a finger, and is seen throughout the
Caribbean, in Latin America, in parts of Spain, and in the Middle East,
as well as on many Native American reservations.

The Face

Though I have already covered individual elements of the face, some
behaviors are best understood within their full context. Human beings
evolved to glean a great deal of information from the face. The eyes and
the mouth especially draw our attention. Usually when we look at someone
we like, we toggle our gaze between the eyes and mouth, because these
two reveal so much information. Mother and baby scan each other over and
over to imprint on each other, to collect information, but also to
bond---no less so than lovers silently scanning each other in a café. We
are naturally fascinated by faces---millions of words have been spent
describing the most famous face of all, the Mona Lisa, precisely because
she is so enigmatic. We are naturally curious about faces, and we are
enticed when we see something special in them. Faces communicate
emotions, thoughts, and feelings, and so throughout our lives we
constantly search there for clues. When the Greeks said that a face
"launched a thousand ships," it was both metaphorical and quite likely
true---that, too, is the power of the face. 197. FACE AVOIDANCE ---For a
variety of reasons, we sometimes try to avoid face-to-face contact with
others, even when we are in their immediate proximity. You see this in
court between victim and suspect, or during contentious divorce
proceedings. The avoidance becomes obvious by how quickly people will
change their demeanor, where they are looking, and how stiff they
become, not wishing to look about.

198. FACE BLOCKING ---This behavior is noted by the person placing their
elbows on top of a table and holding their hands together in front of
their face. When asked a question, rather than putting their hands down,
they peek around their hands or answer directly into them. They are in
essence insulating themselves because of stress, lack of confidence, or
because they don't like the person they are talking to. The hands serve
as a psychological barrier. The reluctance to unveil the face is often a
strong indicator that there are issues. 199. FACE SHIELDING ---Around
the world, people will cup their hands over their face or use objects to
hide their face, usually as a result of shame, embarrassment, fear,
anxiety, or apprehension. Oftentimes when arrestees are being led to the
waiting police car, they will use articles of clothing to face shield.
200. EMOTIONAL ASYMMETRY OF THE FACE ---Recently it has been shown that
the face is remarkable in its ability to reveal multiple sentiments at
once. It can sneer and show contempt while at the same time giving a
social smile. This is likely evidence of multiple internally competing
sentiments, which show up on the face as "leakage." In my observations,
the left side of the face (the right side as you look at the person)
tends to be more accurate, especially when it comes to negative
emotions. This ability of the face to demonstrate different emotions on
different halves is called emotional chirality. 201. FACIAL INCONGRUENCE
---Incongruence between what a person says and how it is reflected in
the face is not uncommon. People might say one thing, but their face is
already telegraphing another. During an exchange of pleasantries, a very
tense face or a face displaying dislike or discomfort betrays true
sentiments, though the person might be obliged to say something nice or
offer a polite greeting. 202. ODD FACE IN CROWD ---In dealing with the
United States Secret Service on protection details as well as various
private-sector companies over the years, I have learned that in a crowd
it is often worth trusting our intuition about the odd face that stands
out. By that I mean the one that looks angry when everyone else is
happy, or that seems transfixed and rigid when the rest of the crowd is
displaying a variety of moods.

Airline personnel tell me that in a long queue at the airport, it is the
odd emotionally charged face, the one that is not fitting in with the
others, that often causes the most problems at the counter. 203.
SERENITY IN TURMOIL ---Often referred to as "narcissistic serenity,"
this takes place when the face has an unusual and incongruous expression
of calm when the situation would seem to call for anything but calm. Lee
Harvey Oswald, Timothy McVeigh, and Bernie Madoff all had this same
oddly serene look when arrested, despite their circumstances and the
horror of their individual crimes. 204. OUT OF PLACE SMIRK ("DUPING
DELIGHT") ---This term, coined by famed researcher Paul Ekman, refers to
the out-of-place smirk or half smile a person gives when getting away
with something. It is very similar to serenity in turmoil ( see #203).
Duping delight is also seen in those who have outwitted someone, or who
think someone has bought in to their lies. It is a pretentious smile at
a time and place where humility, seriousness, or even contriteness are
more appropriate. 205. FACE TOUCHING ---Face touching serves a multitude
of purposes. It can attract others---we often see models touching their
face on magazine covers. Or it can help us relax by stimulating the
myriad of nerves on the face. Context is key.

The Neck

The neck is the weakest and most vulnerable part of our body. Everything
critical for our survival---blood, food, water, electrical signals,
hormones, air---flows through the neck. Made up of numerous muscles
intricately interwoven to hold up our head, hollow cervical bones that
protect the spinal cord, with large veins and arteries that feed the
brain, the neck is obviously very vital. And yet, the neck is often
ignored when it comes to nonverbal communication, even though we know
that our necks signal when we are comfortable, interested, or receptive
to an idea or a person. We touch our necks, cover them, or we ventilate
them, along with other behaviors and in doing so we tell the world what
we are secretly thinking or feeling. Sensitive to the slightest touch or
caress or even the warmth of a breath, the neck is also one of the most
sensual areas of the body. 206. NECK TOUCHING ---Beyond scratching an
itch, neck touching serves as an excellent indicator of insecurities,
apprehension, anxiety, worries, or issues. However slightly, we tend to
touch our neck when something bothers us or we are concerned. Neck
touching, in all its forms is often overlooked, and yet, it is one of
the most accurate when it comes to revealing that something is bothering
us. 207. COVERING OF SUPRASTERNAL NOTCH ---Touching or covering of the
"neck dimple" or suprasternal notch (the indented area of the neck below
the Adam's apple and just above the upper chest) indicates concern,
issues, worries, insecurities, or fear. Men tend to grab their neck or
throat robustly or cover this area with their full hand as they

adjust their tie or grab their collar. Women touch this area more
frequently than men, and they tend to do so more lightly, with the tips
of their fingers. Whether done delicately or strongly, covering the
weakest point of the body signifies that something is at issue. Covering
our neck when we feel threatened most likely evolved as a result of the
countless encounters our species had witnessing countless acts of
predation by large felines which usually go for the neck. For more
information about this, see What Every BODY Is Saying. 208. TIE-KNOT
TOUCHING ---The tie knot covers the suprasternal notch and the neck, and
touching it serves the function of protecting the neck and relieving
anxiety. Men will often do this when they feel social awkwardness or
mild anxiety. Some men will do this repeatedly as a pacifying behavior,
much as a woman might play with a necklace when stressed ( see #209).
209. PLAYING WITH NECKLACE ---Playing with a necklace serves the same
purpose for women as covering the neck dimple with the hand. It protects
a vulnerable area and relieves stress through repetitive movement. 210.
PLAYING WITH SHIRT COLLAR ---Touching or playing with the front shirt
collar serves to pacify or relieve stress in three ways: by covering the
neck area; as a tactile repetitive behavior; and by moving clothing to
ventilate the skin underneath. 211. NECK MASSAGING ---People often
massage the sides or back of their neck to relieve stress. It is easy
for many people to dismiss this sort of behavior, but the fact is that
people usually only do it when something is bothering them. 212.
MASSAGING VAGUS NERVE ---The vagus (Latin for "wandering") nerve
connects the brain to our major organs, including the heart. Under
stress, you might find yourself massaging the side of the neck, near
where you check your pulse. There is a reason for this: stimulation of
the vagus nerve results in the release of acetylcholine, a
neurotransmitter that in turn sends signals to the heart, specifically
the atrioventricular node, which causes your heart rate to go down.

213. SKIN PULLING ---Pulling at the fleshy area of the neck under the
chin serves to calm some men. Sometimes, under great stress, the pulling
becomes extreme. It is rare to see in women. I have seen men under
stress pull with such vigor, it makes their skin blanch. 214.
VENTILATING NECK ---When we are under stress, our skin warms, a
physiological reaction controlled by our autonomic nervous system and
over which we have little control. This often takes place in less than
1/250th of a second. By ventilating the collar and neck area we relieve
the discomfort caused by the flushing or warming of the skin. Heated
arguments or even discussions will cause individuals under stress to
ventilate, as will hearing a word or a comment that is hurtful. Those of
you familiar with the late comedian Rodney Dangerfield (movie
Caddyshack, 1980) will remember him doing this in the movie and in his
stand-up comedy routines when he didn't "get no respect" but especially
when he was stressed. 215. HOLDING FIST IN FRONT OF NECK ---Placing a
fist at the front of the neck serves the same purpose as covering the
neck dimple (suprasternal notch). It is an automatic, subconscious
response to threats, fears, or concerns. This behavior occurs primarily
in men, but I have seen a few women exhibit it when they are under
extreme stress or confronted by something very negative. Many people
mistake the fist for a sign of strength, when in reality, in this
instance, it is a sign of defensiveness, anxiety, and dislike. 216. NECK
VEINS PULSING ---Noticeable pulsing of veins in the neck indicates
stress or anxiety. When a person is fearful or angry, the pulsing can be
very noticeable in some. 217. HARD SWALLOWING ---A hard swallow is
highly visible and sometimes audible. It is a spontaneous reaction to
something unsavory, dangerous, or extremely stressful, and a reliable
indicator of distress. The muscles and ligaments that surround the
throat tighten, which causes the Adam's apple to move energetically up
and down. 218. NECK STRETCHING ---Neck stretching or cracking in a
circular motion is a stress reliever and pacifier. This is often seen
when people are

asked difficult questions they would rather not answer. 219. NECK AND
FACIAL FLUSHING/BLUSHING ---Neck and facial flushing is an autonomic
response to a stimulus and cannot be controlled. Many people blush when
they feel threatened or insecure and in very rare cases when they are
caught lying or doing something illegal. This behavior lets us know that
the individual is troubled, whether by merely an innocent embarrassment
or something more nefarious. Keep in mind always that certain drugs or
foods can cause blushing. 220. ADAM'S APPLE JUMPING ---If someone's
Adam's apple suddenly jolts upward, chances are he's just heard
something that has put him on edge, threatens him, or causes
apprehension. This uncontrollable reaction also occurs when a person
feels highly vulnerable or exposed. The medical term for the Adam's
apple is the laryngeal prominence. The thyroid cartilage around the
larynx (a part of the throat that holds the vocal cords) gives it its
protruding shape (prominence). It is usually larger in men than in
women. This area of the body is highly sensitive and reactive to
emotional stressors. 221. NECK EXPOSURE ---The canting of the head to
the side, exposing the side of the neck, is one of the most used yet
least understood bodylanguage behaviors. We instinctively tilt our head
when we hold or even see a newborn baby---something the child recognizes
and rewards over time with a smile and relaxed face. As we get older,
the head tilt features in courtship behavior, as we stare into a lover's
eyes with our head canted to the side, exposing our vulnerable neck. In
personal and professional relationships this behavior also signifies
that a person is listening and interested. It is a powerfully disarming
behavior---extremely useful during a confrontation. Coupled with a
smile, this is one of the most effective ways to win others over. 222.
NECK STIFFENING ---When people are attentive and receptive, and
especially when they feel comfortable, they will tilt their neck to the
side, exposing more of the neck than usual. If the feeling of comfort
fades, however, their neck quickly becomes rigid. A stiff neck signifies
hyperalertness and vigilance, and might suggest that a person takes
issue with something that was just said, or has a serious matter to

discuss. When a person goes from a relaxed state to a quick stiffening
of the neck, it is a sure sign that something is amiss.

The Shoulders

Whether they are broad, narrow, athletic, slim, attractive, beguiling,
or slumping, our shoulders speak volumes about us. Even from a distance,
one cannot mistake the broad shoulders of an Olympic swimmer or the
sinewy shoulders of a world-class ballerina. The padded shoulders of a
business suit make its wearer stand out, just as the bare shoulders of a
statuesque model grab our attention. Slumped when we are depressed or
wide and pulled back when we're standing proud, shoulders communicate on
our behalf. What they say about who we are, what we have achieved, or
what we are thinking or feeling will surprise you. 223. RAISING ONE
SHOULDER ---One shoulder raised toward the ear as a person answers a
question usually represents insecurity or doubt. In conjunction with
other behaviors (hesitation in answering, arms drawing closer to the
body), this is a good indication that the person lacks confidence in
what he is saying. In negotiations, when one party raises a single
shoulder in response to a query, such as "Is that your best price? ," it
generally signals there is room for negotiation. A oneshoulder-up answer
suggests a lack of full commitment to what is being said. 224. SHOULDER
INTEREST ---The slow, intentional rise of a single shoulder, coupled
with a head tilt toward the same shoulder while making direct

eye contact, signifies a personal interest. We mostly see this in dating
situations, usually in women as they eye someone they like. 225. HOLDING
SHOULDERS HIGH ---When people raise and keep both shoulders high (toward
the ears), they are likely feeling insecurities or doubt. This behavior
is called the "turtle effect." In essence, the individual is trying to
hide in the open. High shoulders are not a sign of confidence. You often
see this when a speaker asks for volunteers from a large group or from a
student who is ill prepared for a question. 226. QUICK SHOULDER
SHRUGGING ---When people are asked a question and don't know the answer,
they often raise both shoulders quickly and prominently. The quick
upward movement is a gravity-defying behavior and those are usually
associated with positive feelings---in this case they really don't know.
This tends to be more honest than a slow shoulder shrug (as they answer
"I don't know") or a shrug of just one hesitating shoulder. 227. SITTING
LOWER AND LOWER ---People who sink lower and lower into their chairs
during a meeting are revealing apprehension or lack of confidence. Like
the turtle effect, this is a way of hiding in the open--- they might
also be hoping not to get called on. But note also that in some people
this might be simply a sign of indifference or disinterest. This
behavior stands out because the shoulders are lower in relation to the
table. 228. SHOULDER/CLAVICLE RUBBING ---During intense or stressful
interviews, interviewees will reach across their chest and press their
hand against their opposite shoulder, then slowly move their hand across
their clavicle toward the chest. Sometimes the hand will then hover
pressed against the chest area, or the process may be repeated. The
tactile and repetitive nature of the behavior help to relieve stress or
apprehension. 229. SHOULDERS WIDENING ---The amplification of the
shoulders from relaxed to broad can be a perceptible display of
authority and confidence that signals a person is in charge. We often
see this with athletes and military personnel. This is why business
suits have padded

shoulders---to make their wearers look more powerful and authoritative.
230. RAISING SHOULDERS WITH PALMS UP, HEAD CANTED ---This is the
"Please, why not?" look, performed with the palms of the hands up, head
canted to one side, with one or both shoulders up. It is a pleading
behavior. Children do this as well as adults, and you often see it with
athletes when they want a referee to reconsider an adverse decision.
231. KOWTOWING ---This is a slight bending forward of the upper torso
and shoulders, which may be intentional or subconscious. Around the
globe, it is performed in some variant in the presence of a higher
authority. In Asia, people bow out of respect, just as the queen's
subjects do in London. The origin of kowtowing has much to do with our
primate legacy, where everyone bends lower to the alpha male---in our
case, someone of higher authority. As a testament to its universality,
when the conquistadores reached the New World, they found that Native
Americans also bowed or kowtowed to their king, just as they themselves
had done in Queen Isabella's court.

The Arms

Our arms not only protect us, balance us, and help us carry things, they
also communicate extremely well. From our self-hugs when we are
stressed, to the raised arms of a person who just came in first place,
to the outward reach of a child seeking a loving hug, our arms are
continually assisting us, warming us, attending to others for us, and
communicating our needs as well as how we feel---far more than we
realize. 232. HUGGING ---Hugging, in all its forms, is universally
indicative of closeness, good feelings, warmth, and cooperation. While
in some cultures a brief social hug, an abrazo (in Latin America), can
serve as a greeting gesture similar to shaking hands, how it is
performed can indicate how the participants feel about each other.
Consider American athletes and movie stars giving each other bro hugs.
As an observer, I always note the hug and the facial expressions to give
me a reliable sense of how two individuals really feel about each other.
233. ANIMATED GESTURES ---Animated gestures reflect our emotions and
also get us noticed. Broad gestures are powerful displays when we're
speaking and are essential to dynamic communication. In many cultures,
emphasis requires exaggerated gestures. To an outsider, people making
such gestures might look like they're about to fight when in fact they
are just being emphatic.

234. GESTURING WHILE SPEAKING ---I often get the question "Why do we
gesticulate?" Gestures are considered an integral part of communication.
Gestures help us to get and maintain attention as well as to highlight
important points. Gestures even help the person speaking by facilitating
greater flexibility in speaking and even with the recall of words.
Gestures affect how our message is received and how much of it other
people remember. When gestures echo the message, the message is
potentiated. We want to be seen gesturing as we speak. If you look at
successful TED Talks, you will notice that gestures are an essential
element utilized by the best speakers. 235. ARMS AGAINST BODY, HANDS
FLEXED ---This is often referred to as restrained elation. When people
are pleased with themselves but are trying not to show it, they might
hold their arms against their body and then lift their hands at the
wrist so the wrist is almost at a ninetydegree angle, with the palms
facing down. This can also take place when people are trying to control
their excitement and don't want to be noticed. The behavior may be
accompanied by a rise in the shoulders and of course facial displays of
joy. 236. ELATION/TRIUMPH DISPLAYS ---Displays of elation or triumph
tend to be gravity-defying---in other words, the gesture is made upward
or outward away from the body. Sometimes we actually jump out of our
seats into the air with our arms and fingers extended. Positive emotions
drive gravity-defying gestures, and so around the world triumph displays
at sporting events tend to be similar: arms up in the air. 237. ARMS
HELD BEHIND BACK ---The regal stance is performed by placing the arms
and hands behind the back. Queen Elizabeth, Prince Charles, and other
British royals often walk this way when they want others to remain at a
distance. For the rest of us, too, it signals to others to give us
space. It is not a good way to endear yourself to others as we tend to
associate aloofness with this behavior. Interestingly, young children
don't like when their parents hide their hands behind their back. 238.
ARMS STIFFENING ---People's arms will frequently stiffen when they are
scared or overwhelmed by an event. Their arms lie dormant at their

sides, making them look unnatural or robotic. Stiff arms are a strong
indicator that something negative has just transpired. 239. ARMPIT
EXPOSING ---The exposure of our inner arm, including the armpit
(axilla), is reserved for those times we are comfortable around others.
Women especially might use this behavior (scratching the back of the
head while exposing the axilla directly toward a person of interest) in
order to garner that person's attention and demonstrate her interest.
Conversely, when our armpits are exposed and someone comes near that
makes us feel uncomfortable, we will immediately cover our armpits. 240.
ARM CROSSING/SELF-HUGGING ---Self-hugging is an effective way to comfort
ourselves while waiting for someone to arrive, while watching a movie in
public, or when we need a little bit of self-comforting. This explains
why so many passengers on a plane will cross their arms while standing
in line to use the restroom. We cross our arms for many reasons. Here
are some of the reasons reported to me: "It's comfortable"; "It's useful
when my arms are tired"; "It hides my boobs"; "I do it when I am
inquisitive"; "It hides by belly." Everyone has a good reason and most
of the time, it gives them comfort. There are a lot of people that mis
takenly equate crossing the arms with keeping people further away---that
is usually not the case. 241. ARM CROSSING/PROTECTION ---In some
instances the arm cross is a means of protection, rather than a
comforting gesture. We might subconsciously seek to shield our
vulnerable ventral (belly) side when we feel insecure or threatened. In
those cases, we will see more tension in the arms and psychological
discomfort in the face. 242. ARM CROSSING/SELF-RESTRAINT ---People might
cross their arms to restrain themselves when they're upset. Picture a
customer at an airport counter who has been bumped from a flight.
Whereas the selfhug ( see #240) is done with very little pressure, this
behavior helps to literally restrain the arms as emotions get out of
control. Note that this self-restraining behavior is usually accompanied
by facial displays of animosity.

243. ARM CROSSING/DISLIKE ---In the presence of someone we don't like,
we might draw our arms across our belly, attempting to distance or
insulate ourselves from that person. Usually this occurs as soon as we
see someone objectionable, and that is what distinguishes this behavior
and communicates our dislike very accurately. This should be
differentiated from self-hugging behaviors by other cues that accompany
it, such as a tense face and feet that also turn away. 244. ARM
CROSSING/MASSAGING ---Crossing the arms at the chest can be comfortable
for many people. However, massaging the opposite shoulder or arm
suggests that a person is stressed or concerned. This is most likely to
occur when the person is seated at a table with her elbows on the
surface, but I have also seen it in people sitting in a chair, a form of
self-hugging while they massage the opposite arm to relieve stress or
worry. 245. ARM CROSSING, HOLDING WRIST ---When confronted with damaging
information in a forensic setting, interviewees will suddenly reach
across their belly and hold the wrist of the opposite hand while
sitting. Look for it immediately after a person has been asked a
difficult question or is accused of something. Poker players have been
observed displaying this behavior when their hand is weak or marginal.
246. ARM SPREADING ---People who spread out their arms over several
chairs or a couch are demonstrating confidence through a territorial
display. Senior executives will do this more often than junior staffers.
Observe when someone of higher rank or status walks in whether the
person withdraws his arms to his sides. 247. ELBOWS SPREADING OUT
---When people are strong and confident, they will gradually take up
more space, spreading their elbows across a table or desk. This tends to
be subconscious, and they are generally not aware that they are
publicizing their self-assuredness. 248. ELBOWS NARROWING ---When we're
sitting with our arms on a table, the moment we feel insecure or
threatened, we will narrow our elbows on the table. We can use this
metric to help us assess how committed or confident others are as
different topics are discussed.

249. ELBOW FLEXING ---The elbow flex is performed by placing hands on
the hips, arms akimbo, and flexing the elbows forward (like a butterfly
flapping its wings) each time we want to emphasize what we're saying.
This is a territorial display that also projects confidence. I have seen
senior managers, coaches, and military officers do the elbow flex as
they emphasize a particular point. 250. ELBOWS INTERLOCKING ---In many
parts of the world the interlocking of arms at the elbows with another
person as you walk or sit is a sign that you are close to the person or
that you are having a very private conversation. This behavior draws the
hips close together, which suggests that things are going well. It is
not unusual in Mediterranean countries or in South America to see both
men and women walking arm in arm. 251. WRIST BEHAVIORS ---We might not
think of the wrists as a window into the mind, but they can be. We
expose the underside of our wrists to others when we like them or feel
comfortable around them. Holding a drink or a cigarette, a woman will
expose the inner wrist to a nearby person if she is interested in them
or comfortable. The minute she is not, she will rotate the wrist and
only expose the outside of the wrist. Our limbic system protects us by
orienting our most sensitive areas--- the underside of our arms, our
neck, our bellies---away from those we dislike or find threatening. 252.
GOOSE BUMPS ---Also called "goose pimples" or "gooseflesh," this is an
involuntary reaction to cold or perhaps even fear---usually visible on
the arms and legs. The formation of goose bumps causes hair to stand up
on the surface of the skin, which is why the medical term for it is
horripilation or piloerection ( see #253). In primates, this display is
even more noticeable when they are scared, as their hair stands up to
make them automatically look larger. Because we as a species have lost
most of our hair, we only see the remnants of piloerection through goose
bumps. 253. HAIR ERECTION (PILOERECTION) ---Sometimes the hair on the
arms, torso, or back of the neck will stand up visibly. From an
evolutionary perspective, this is believed to be a vestigial response we
share with

primates to make us look bigger when we are scared, frightened, or
fearful. When we subconsciously assess a person, a place, or a situation
as potentially dangerous, the hair on the back of our neck will stand
up---when you feel this, take note. These subconscious sentiments of ill
feeling or danger, according to Gavin de Becker in his book The Gift of
Fear, should not be ignored. 254. EXCESSIVE SWEATING ---People under
stress may suddenly sweat profusely as their body attempts to ventilate
itself through evaporation. Many a drug trafficker has been stopped at
the border because he is the only one with sweat rings around his
armpits and his neck glistens with moisture when he pulls up to the
customs officer. Excessive perspiration may signal that a person is
hiding something or is about to commit a crime. That doesn't mean every
sweaty person is guilty of something---just that it behooves us to pay
closer attention. 255. SELF-INJURY ---Individuals who suffer from
borderline personality disorder, as well as others who are emotionally
unstable or depressed, might bear scars where they have cut, slashed, or
burned themselves intentionally. Recognizing these signs in others is
key to getting them help. They might not seek help themselves, but they
are nonverbally communicating their mental health needs through
self-injury. 256. NEEDLE TRACKS ---Individuals who use heroin and other
intravenous drugs will have scars tracking their veins on the inside of
their arms. On long-term abusers, this can be very evident.

The Hands and Fingers

The human hand has no equal. It can hold a scalpel and perform delicate
surgery or grasp a brush and paint the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
Hands gently cradle us at birth and just as easily grasp an axe handle
with enough force to chop down a tree. Our hands are indispensable for
work, for play, and for our protection, and we rely on them every day to
interact with the world around us. We also use them to communicate
effectively---whether we are stopping traffic at a school crossing,
conducting an orchestra, or signaling a friend to quickly come over. Our
hands are constantly communicating to others our passions, our desires,
our abilities, our concerns, and most important, through the gentlest of
touch, our love. 257. CONDITION OF HANDS ---You can tell a lot from a
person's hands. Grooming, scars, and calluses might indicate what kind
of work the person does; an office worker's hands look quite different
from a cement mixer's. Similarly, arthritis as well as neurological
disorders can sometimes be discerned from the condition of the hands as
well as finger movement or agitation. 258. HAND GROOMING ---Well-groomed
hands are a sign of a healthy individual. Clean fingers, with nails of
proper length, indicate that people care about themselves. This
contrasts with people who have dirty or long nails, unkempt cuticles, or
flesh that has been chewed off the fingers. In dating and even in the
workplace, we often draw

conclusions from how well-groomed or healthy-looking a person's hands
appear. 259. FREQUENCY OF TOUCH ---How frequently we touch others is a
good way of communicating how we feel about them. While on some level
the degree of touch is culturally determined, for the most part when we
care about others we tend to touch them more often. 260. HOW WE TOUCH
---A touch can be respectful, loving, playful, sensuous, reserved,
tender, caring, or palliative. A light touch of the skin can send
shivers down our spine, stimulating sexual desire. In fact, a light
touch stimulates the brain differently than a heavier touch. The loving
touch of a caring person with a full palm, warm from the presence of
blood near the surface of the skin, can communicate so much to a newborn
as well as a lover. And yet when our boss pats us on the shoulder with
just the fingertips and says "Good job," our skin crawls because the
gesture doesn't feel right; we know it is contrived and empty. 261.
TOUCH AND SOCIAL STATUS ---In most cultures, whom we can touch, and how,
is dictated by social convention. In almost all societies, higher-status
individuals will more often touch lower-status individuals than the
other way around. In a work environment, you are more apt to see the
boss giving a pat on the shoulder than to see an employee pat the boss.
We must also be aware of when it is proper to touch, where it is proper
to touch (arm or elbow, for instance), and when or if it will be
appreciated. 262. PRESSING THE FLESH ---This is a term that is often
used by politicians to mean shaking hands, gripping an arm, hugging,
holding or kissing babies. Hand shaking can be an opportunity for
politicians to humanize themselves and establish physical bonds. The
connection is literally chemical, as oxytocin (a powerful hormone that
serves to socially bind us) is released when we touch others. 263. HANDS
ON HIPS, ARMS AKIMBO WITH THUMBS BACK ---Known as arms akimbo, when the
hands are on hips, thumbs back, with elbows out, this is a dominance
display. This signals that an individual is ready and

alert, has something to discuss, or there is an issue. Airline agents
tell me that if a person does this while waiting in line, you can bet he
has a complaint. This is a very authoritarian look. This is not a good
way to talk to one's children---it inhibits communication, as the parent
looks like a military drill instructor. 264. HANDS ON HIPS, ARMS AKIMBO
WITH THUMBS FORWARD ---This is more of a curiosity display. The position
of the thumbs may seem a minor detail, but it is significant. Witnesses
often stand and contemplate an event this way, while those who take
action (police, firefighters) will do so with the thumbs back. 265.
TERRITORIAL HAND DISPLAY ---As a form of mild intimidation, a person
will splay out their hands on a desk or table. You see this often at a
return counter, where angry customers take up increasingly more space
with their hands as they argue with the representative. As emotions
increase, note how the hands grow further and further apart. 266.
PUSHING AWAY FROM TABLE ---A sudden stiff-arm pushing away from the
table is a very accurate indicator the person disagrees with something
said or discussed or might feel threatened. The speed of the motion
matters: the more quickly it happens, the more concerning. 267. PLAYING
WITH OBJECTS ---Playing with jewelry or other objects (winding a watch,
tapping a pencil, checking a smartphone) serves as a pacifier. You often
see this behavior in people waiting to be interviewed for a job or to
just pass the time. This is different from "surrogate touching" ( see
#291). 268. OBJECT PLACEMENT ---We might surround ourselves with
objects--- whether a pencil and paper on a work desk or a jacket on a
theater chair---to establish our territory. Object placement can also
signal that we are not fully interested in someone or that a
relationship is in trouble. At a restaurant for instance, when things
are good, we tend to move objects out of the way to get a clearer view
of our companion; when they're not, we'll place flowers or a drink
bottle in our line of sight to serve as a barrier across the table. It
is especially telling when someone moves objects while speaking.

269. HAND STEEPLING ---The hand steeple is performed by placing the
fingertips of both hands together, spreading them, and then arching the
hands so that the tips of the fingers look like a church steeple. This
is a universal display of confidence and is often used by those in a
leadership position. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany is famous for
steepling often. Note, however, that confidence doesn't always guarantee
accuracy. A person may be wrong in their facts but confident as they
speak. Nevertheless, steepling is a useful gesture to convince others of
your commitment to what you are thinking or saying. 270. MODIFIED
STEEPLING ---The modified steeple is performed by interlacing all of the
fingers, with the exception of the index fingers, which are erect and
touching at the fingertips. It looks more contrite than a regular hand
steeple; nonetheless, it still signifies assurance and confidence. 271.
HANDS IN READY/ACTIVE POSITION ---This is where the hands are held about
fourteen inches apart in front of the belly at waist level with the
palms facing each other, fingers spread apart. Speakers often do this to
capture an audience's attention at an important moment. This is not the
rogatory position ( see #272), which requires the palms to be facing up;
here the palms face each other as if the person is holding a beach ball.
This is a useful gesture to build into your public-speaking repertoire.
272. PALMS-UP DISPLAY ---Also known as the rogatory hand position, this
is a universal behavior of humility, compliance, or cooperation, used by
people who want to be accepted or believed. The presentation of the
palms of the hands facing up is a universal way of saying "My hands are
clean," "There is nothing hidden here," "I implore you," or "I am at
your command." It is also used in religious ceremonies to demonstrate
humility and piety. 273. PALMS-DOWN DISPLAY ---Palms-down displays are
more affirmative than palms-up displays. These might be made on a table
or symbolically in the air. The farther apart the arms are (in a
two-handed gesture), or the harder the hand slaps down, the more
committed the person. Affirmative declarations such as "I didn't do it,"
when spoken

as the palms push strongly downward on a table, tend to have greater
validity. Liars struggle to do this properly, generally performing the
gesture too passively. 274. PALM DOWN, FINGERS SPREAD ---When a person
makes a formal declarative statement, such as "I didn't do it," with
palms firmly placed down and fingers spread wide, it is more likely to
be an authentic answer. I have never seen a liar successfully pull off
this gesture, probably because the thinking part of the brain is out of
sync with the emotional part of the brain. In other words, they know
what to say---"I didn't do it"---they just don't know how to dramatize
it because the emotional side of the brain is not fully committed. 275.
HAND RESTRICTING ---Researchers, Aldert Vrij in particular, have noted
that when people lie, they tend to use their hands and arms less. This
can be a powerful behavioral marker, though it can simply indicate
shyness or discomfort. This is where having a baseline of the person's
normal behavior is so important. In any case, it is a behavior to note
but not to necessarily equate with deception. 276. HAND WRINGING
---Rubbing one's hands together communicates concern, doubt, anxiety, or
insecurity. The degree of stress is reflected in how tightly the hands
are wrung. Blotches of red and white skin on the fingers or hands
indicate an elevated level of discomfort. 277. FINGER HOLDING ---When we
meet people for the first time or we feel a little insecure, we tend to
hold our own fingers together lightly in front of us. It is a very
tactile, self-soothing behavior. Prince Harry is famous for this but we
all do it as we patiently wait in line or speak to someone we've never
met before. 278. JITTERY HANDS ---When we are excited or stressed our
hands may become jittery. Jitters, of course, can also be caused by a
neurological disorder, disease, or drugs, but for the most part, when a
person appears otherwise healthy, we should take notice. People might
accidentally knock down objects such as wineglasses when stressed, or
their spoons will shake in their hands. Fingers and hands might shake

uncontrollably after an accident or when we are notified of terrible
news. 279. HANDS AS ANCHORS ---This is where we take possession of an
object to let others know it is ours. It might also happen with other
people, as when we're talking to someone we like and use our hand as an
anchor near this person so others will stay away. You see this most
often at bars or parties---men will pivot around the anchor point as if
permanently attached in order to make sure others don't intrude. It is a
territorial display. 280. HAND THRUST TO FACE ---This might come as the
final affront in an argument. A raised palm thrust at the other person's
face says to stop, go no further, or, in the common parlance, "talk to
the hand." This can be a very insulting gesture and certainly has no
place in amiable interpersonal communication and certainly not in
business. 281. SELF-TOUCHING WHILE ANSWERING ---Take notice of people
who while answering a question are pacifying (any hand-to-body touching
or stroking) rather than emphasizing with their gestures. Over the years
I've noted that these individuals are less confident than those who
while answering use their hands to illustrate a point. 282. INTERLACED
FINGERS---THUMBS UP ---Statements made with thumbs up while the fingers
are interlaced indicate confidence. Usually people do this with their
hands on their lap or on top of a desk or table; their thumbs rising as
they genuinely emphasize a point. This is a very fluid behavior that
might change depending upon the emotions felt in the moment, as well as
how committed the person is to what she is saying. 283. INTERLACED
FINGERS---THUMBS DOWN ---Fingers interlaced with thumbs down tend to
show a low degree of confidence or negative emotions about what is being
discussed. When we are really confident about what we are saying, we
tend to elevate the thumbs subconsciously. As stated above, this is very
fluid, a person's thumbs may go from up to down during a conversation
depending on how they genuinely feel about a topic.

284. THUMB MASSAGING ---Thumb massaging is a mild pacifier. The hands
are intertwined and the thumb on top rubs the one below it repeatedly.
We usually see this when people are waiting for something to happen,
though they might also do this as they are talking, if they are slightly
nervous or anxious. 285. THUMB TWIRLING ---Twiddling our thumbs is a way
to pass the time or deal with small amounts of stress. The repetitive
nature of it is soothing to the brain. 286. FINGERS CLOSE TOGETHER
---When we feel concerned, bewildered, humbled, scared, or cornered, we
subconsciously make the space between our fingers smaller. In the
extreme, when we are very concerned, we curl up our fingers so they are
not sticking out. Here, our limbic brain ensures that our fingers are
not loose when there is a threat. 287. THUMB OUT ---When we feel
confident, the thumb will move away from the index finger. This is
easily observed when hands are on a table. In fact, distance of the
thumb from the index finger can serve as a gauge to a person's
confidence level. It might also show a person's level of commitment to
what she is saying: the greater the distance, the stronger the
commitment. 288. THUMB WITHDRAWING ---When we feel insecure or
threatened, we will withdraw our thumbs subconsciously and tuck them
next to or underneath the fingers. Doing this suddenly means the person
is concerned, worried, or threatened. This is a survival tactic, similar
to dogs tucking their ears down to streamline themselves in case of the
need to escape or fight. 289. THUMB DISPLAYS IN GENERAL ---Watch for
individuals who display their thumbs as they hold on to a jacket lapel
or pant suspenders. I see this often in court performed by attorneys. As
with other thumbs up displays it typically means the person is confident
in what they are doing, thinking, or saying.

290. THUMB UP OK SIGN ---This, of course, is a very positive sign in the
United States, signaling that all is fine. At one time it was used
routinely to hitch a car ride. Note that in some cultures, such as the
Middle East, a raised thumb is a phallic symbol and should be avoided.
291. SURROGATE TOUCHING ---Sometimes, early on in a romantic
relationship, we want to be in closer physical contact with the other
person but feel it is too soon. So we transfer those wishes to an
object. We might stroke our own arm or slide our hand around a glass
repeatedly. Surrogate touching is a form or subconscious flirting as
well as a stress reliever that often serves as an effective substitute
for the touch we desire. 292. RECIPROCAL TOUCHING ---This is where
someone reaches out to touch us and we touch back in return. Usually it
is a sign of social harmony and comfort with others, so when it isn't
reciprocated, there may be an issue. Often in work relations, when
someone is about to get demoted or fired, there will be less reciprocal
touching on the part of the supervisor in the days prior to the employee
dismissal. This also happens in dating situations when there is about to
be a breakup. 293. HOLDING ON TO FURNITURE ---If people hold on to their
chair, or the edge of a desk or podium, as they make a declarative
statement, they are communicating doubt and insecurity. I have sometimes
seen this when people sign a contract they are reluctant to endorse but
must. As an observer, you should always question what insecurity is
driving this behavior. 294. CLINGING BEHAVIORS ---When children are
under stress, they will grab the clothing of the nearest relative for
comfort. In the absence of a parent or an object, they will also grab
their own clothing as if it were a security blanket---which in essence
it is. This tactile experience can be very psychologically soothing.
Adults sometimes do this, too, perhaps as they get ready for a job
interview or a speech. The great tenor Luciano Pavarotti held a
handkerchief in his hand while performing, which, he said in interviews,
gave him "security" and "comfort."

295. EMPHASIZING WITH HANDS ---When we are comfortable, our hands
naturally gesture and emphasize. In some cultures, especially around the
Mediterranean, people tend to gesture more emphatically, and these
gestures are highly significant in context. Great speakers also gesture
frequently. Researchers tell us that when people suddenly begin to lie,
they engage in fewer hand gestures---and with less emphasis. If the
hands suddenly become passive or restrained, it is likely that the
person is losing confidence in what he is saying, for whatever reason.
296. GIVING THE FINGER ---Pioneering psychologist Paul Ekman first noted
how individuals who harbor animosity toward others will subconsciously
give "the finger" (the indecent finger is usually the middle or longest
finger as in "F------ you!") by scratching their face or body with it,
or even just pushing their eyeglasses back into place. It is a
subconscious sign of disrespect. 297. FINGER POINTING ---Almost
universally, people dislike having a finger pointed at them. If you have
to point, especially in a professional or romantic setting, use the full
hand, fingers together, rather than a single finger. This also applies
when pointing to objects. When directing someone to a chair, do so with
the full hand rather than with a single finger. 298. FINGER JABBING
---Jabbing a finger at someone's chest or face is a highly antagonistic
behavior, used to single a person out when there are issues. When ac
tual physical touch is involved, it becomes even more threatening. 299.
USING FINGER AS BATON ---This is where the index finger is used to keep
a rhythm in speech, cadence, or music. It provides emphasis when it
follows a point in speech. It is seen more often in Mediterranean
countries, and some people take offense at that "wagging" finger because
they don't understand that it's a cultural trait, used for emphasis, not
necessarily an antagonistic behavior. 300. TWO-HANDED PUSH BACK ---We
usually see this when people are speaking publicly. They will hold both
hands up in front of them, palms toward the audience, and figuratively
push the audience away.

This has a subconscious negative connotation as when someone says "I
know how you feel," while in essence gesturing "Go away." 301. NAIL
BITING ---Nail biting or cuticle biting is a way of relieving tension
and anxiety. It is a display of worry, lack of confidence, or
insecurities. Even people who never bite their nails might suddenly find
themselves doing so when undergoing extreme stress. This behavior can
become pathological to the point of damaging the skin or even ulcerating
the fingers, destroying the surrounding cuticle or otherwise healthy
tissue. 302. FINGER STRUMMING ---Strumming one's fingers on a table or a
leg passes the time and, like other repetitive behaviors, soothes. In
professional settings you see this as people wait for someone to show up
or finish talking. It is a way of saying, "Come on, let's get things
moving here." This is similar to cheek strumming ( see #170). 303. HANDS
IN POCKET ---Many people are comforted by placing one or both hands in
their pockets while talking to others. But sometimes this is seen as too
informal and in some cultures is considered rude. It should be noted
that some people erroneously view keeping hands in pockets as suspicious
or deceptive. 304. MASSAGING CLOSED FIST ---Massaging the closed fist
with the other hand is a self-restraining and pacifying behavior. It
usually means the person is struggling or worried and experiencing a lot
of underlying tension. You often see this with poker players and stock
traders, or wherever fortunes might be quickly won or lost. 305.
SPEAKER'S FIST ---Sometimes we will see a speaker make a fist while
"hammering home a point." This is not unusual, especially from very
dramatic or enthusiastic speakers. What is unusual is watching as
someone waiting his turn to speak turns his hand into a fist. This
usually indicates pent-up issues, constrained en ergy, or anticipation
of some sort of physical response. It is said that Theodore Roosevelt, a
dynamo of action and adventure, always sat with his hands balled into
fists, as if holding back coiled energy.

306. RUBBING HANDS ON PALMS ---Rubbing our fingers across the palm of
the hand is a pacifier. When it is done repetitively, or with increased
pressure, there is high anxiety and concern. We can rub the palm either
with the fingertips of the same hand or against the opposite hand. 307.
TEEPEE FINGER RUB ---When people feel concern, stress, anxiety, or fear,
they might pacify themselves by rubbing their straightened interlaced
fingers back and forth against one another. The interlaced fingers
provide a greater surface area to stimulate as the hands and fingers are
moved back and forth relieving tension. This is one of the best
indicators that something is very wrong or someone is severely stressed.
This behavior is usually reserved for when things are especially bad. In
less dire situations, we will instead wring our hands or rub them
together without interlacing the fingers. What makes this behavior stand
out is that the fingers are ramrod straight and interlaced. 308.
INTERLACED FINGERS, PALMS UP OR PALMS DOWN ---This is an extreme variant
on interlacing the fingers to displace stress. Here the person holds the
hands palms up and interlaces the fingers, pulling the hands upward
toward the face and making an awkward-looking triangle, with the elbows
down and the palms of the hand arching upward. Or, in the palm-down
variant, the palms remain face down and the fingers are interlaced in
front of the crotch as if to crack the knuckles. This contortion of the
arms and the fingers, by stressing muscles, joints, and tendons of the
hand, relieves stress. I have seen this after a teenager crashed his
parents' car as he waited for his mother to come pick him up. 309.
KNUCKLE CRACKING ---Knuckle cracking, in all its varieties, is a
pacifying behavior. The act of knuckle cracking for some people seems to
soothe tension and so we see it when they are tense or nervous or even
bored. People might crack each knuckle individually or all the fingers
of one hand at once. This behavior increases in frequency with stress.
310. KNUCKLE CRACKING WITH INTERLACED FINGERS ---This behavior is
performed by intertwining the fingers, with the thumbs down, and then

stretching the arms forward until the knuckles crack. As with similar
contorted displays, it signifies a high degree of psychological
discomfort, stress, or anxiety. It also serves as a double pacifier:
both interlacing the fingers and cracking the knuckles. This behavior is
generally exhibited more often by men. 311. TAPPING SIDES OF LEGS
---People will tap their legs with the palms of their hands (usually
near the pockets) when they are impatient or becoming aggravated. I see
this all the time in people waiting to check in at hotels. The tactile
nature and the repetition make this act both a distraction and a useful
pacifier. 312. PREENING ---It is not only birds that preen. Preening can
take many forms: adjusting a tie, repositioning a bracelet, smoothing
out a wrinkle on a shirt, fixing one's hair, reapplying lipstick,
plucking an eyebrow. We preen when we care enough to want to look our
best. Hair preening when we are interested in someone romantically is
especially common. The repeated stroking of the hair also gets us
noticed. Interestingly, when attorneys do something so simple as pulling
at their jacket (a preening behavior) as the jury enters the room, they
are subconsciously perceived by jurors as more likable. 313. PREENING
(DISMISSIVE) ---There is another kind of preening, intended to be
dismissive or disrespectful---almost the opposite of what I just
described. The act of picking lint or hair from clothes or cleaning
one's nails when being addressed by another person is inconsiderate at
best, disrespectful, even contemptuous, at worst. 314. HAND ON LEG,
ELBOW OUT ---Sitting with a hand on the leg, elbow out, usually
indicates high confidence. As this behavior comes and goes as people
converse, we can observe a person's self-assurance waxing and waning.
The elbow-out posturing is a territorial display. 315. FINGERS CURLING,
NAILS FLICKING ---Often when people are nervous, agitated, or stressed,
they will curl up their fingers (usually on one hand) and flick their
nails against the thumb. They might flick one finger or use a variety of
them. It is a way to pacify oneself and can be both distracting and
noisy for others.

316. HAND SHAKING ---The handshake is the favored greeting behavior in
the West, appropriate in both professional and personal settings. A
handshake is often the first physical contact and impression you will
make and take away from another person, and so it is important to get it
right. Think of how many times you have received a "bad" handshake (too
strong, too wet, too soft, too long). A bad handshake leaves a negative
impression that can last in our minds for a long time and make us
reluctant to shake hands with that person again. We should remember that
the custom of shaking hands is not universal; in some cultures a bow or
a kiss on the cheek might be more appropriate. Nevertheless, a good
handshake begins with good eye contact, a smile if appropriate, and the
arm extended with a slight bend at the elbow. The fingers approach the
other person's hand pointing downward, the hands clasp with equal
pressure (no one is impressed that you can crush walnuts bare-handed),
engulfing each other---this allows for the release of the hormone
oxytocin (furthers social bonding)---and after a second or so the hands
are released. Older people will require less pressure, and higher-status
individuals will set the tone for how long you will shake hands and how
much pressure to apply. 317. TENDERED HANDSHAKE ---In some cultures,
most notably in parts of Africa, it is customary to greet a revered or
important person by holding the outstretched right hand supported
underneath the forearm by the left hand. The hand is literally being
tendered or offered as if it were something precious, in the hope that
the person to whom it is offered will take it, thus honoring the
offeror. This gesture might look odd at first to Western observers, but
it is a gesture of deference and high respect and should be accepted as
such. 318. NAMASTE ---In this traditional Indian greeting, the hands are
placed palms together directly in front of the chest, fingers pointed
upward, elbows out, sometimes followed with a small bow or forward lean
and a smile. It is used as a formal greeting---in a sense it replaces
the handshake---and can also be used to say "so long." This gesture has
a deeper meaning than the Western handshake and must be received with
respect.

319. HAND HOLDING ---Hand holding is an innate human tendency; we
observe children doing it very early on, first with parents and later
with playmates. In romantic relationships, both its frequency and its
type (whether a handclasp or the more intimate and stimulating
interlaced fingers) might signal how close or serious a partnership is.
And in some parts of the world, including Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and
Vietnam, it is very common to see men holding hands as they walk
together. 320. OK SIGN (PRECISION CUE) ---When talking about something
very precise, speakers will hold the tip of the index finger and thumb
together to make a circle---what we in America call the OK sign. This
gesture is very common throughout the Mediterranean and is used to
emphasize a specific point while speaking. In the United States we also
use this gesture to indicate agreement or that things are fine or OK.
Note that in other countries, such as Brazil, this sign can be
erroneously interpreted as a vulgar display connoting an orifice. 321.
POLITICIAN'S THUMB ---When politicians are speaking, they will often
extend their arm toward the audience or up in the air while pressing the
thumb against the curled index finger to make a precise, strong point.
In essence, this is a modified precision grip. Again, we see this more
in the United States than in other countries and so it is in part
cultural. Bill and Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, and Canadian prime
minister Justin Trudeau are all known for this gesture, usually used
when making or emphasizing a specific point. 322. RING PLAYING
---Playing with a wedding band by twirling it or taking it off and
putting it on---is a repetitive behavior that people sometimes used to
calm their nerves or pass the time. It is not, as some people claim, an
indication of marital unhappiness. It is merely a self-soothing
repetitive behavior. 323. DISTANCING FROM OBJECTS ---When we have
negative feelings toward something or someone, we often subconsciously
attempt to distance ourselves. People on a diet may push a bread basket
a few inches further away at dinner or even ask that empty wineglasses
be removed from a table if they dislike alcoholic beverages. I have seen
criminals refuse to touch a surveillance photograph or push it back
across the

table because they recognize themselves in the image. These are
important behaviors to note because they speak to what is uppermost on
that person's mind at the moment. 324. RELUCTANCE TO TOUCH WITH PALM
---The consistent reluctance of a parent to touch a child with the palm
of the hand can be a sign of significant issues---whether indifference
toward the child or some other form of abnormal psychological
distancing. And when couples stop touching each other with the palms of
the hand, instead relying on their fingertips, it's likely that there
are issues in the relationship ( see #260). 325. ERRATIC ARM AND HAND
MOTIONS ---Sometimes we are confronted by an individual making erratic
motions with the arms and hands. The arms and hands might be out of
synchrony with the rest of the body and with the person's surroundings.
In these instances, the best we can do is recognize that there may be a
mental condition or disorder at play. Recognition and understanding are
key to lending assistance if necessary, and not to look on as if at a
spectacle.

The Chest, Torso, and Belly

The torso is home to the majority of our vital organs, is generally our
largest body part by mass, and is the area of the body we tend to cover
up first when we feel threatened. It is the body's billboard, offering
clues (with the help of our clothing) about who we are, what group we
belong to, what we do for a living, even how physically fit we are. And
of course, much of the body's essential organs---the heart and lungs
among them---are located in the torso. Our torso, while rarely
recognized in the study of nonverbals, is actually a very good place to
collect information about people, from life choices to how they feel.
326. CHEST HEAVING, RAPID BREATHING ---A heaving chest and rapid
breathing usually indicate stress, concern, fear, worry, or anger.
Context of course is important as there are many reasons for this
behavior, including age, recent physical exertion, anxiety, or even a
heart attack. What is important is to observe and be ready to take
action if necessary. 327. SHALLOW, FAST BREATHING ---Breathing that is
shallow and fast usually indicates fear or anxiety, perhaps even a panic
attack. Watch for the shallowness of a person's breath to gauge their
anxiety level. The shallower and more rapid the breathing, the greater
the distress. Useful is to get them to take one long inhale then exhale
for as long as

possible (3 to 5 seconds) then repeat. This helps to lower the breathing
rate. 328. PRESSING ON CHEST ---In tense situations, a person will press
on their own chest/diaphragm area with the thumb and middle finger
(sometimes all of the fingers) in order to relieve sudden pent-up
stress. The self-administered pressure on the solar or celiac plexus,
near the center of the chest, which is rich in nerves, seems to have a
pacifying effect when pressed upon. The pressure can be very light or
extremely forceful depending on the needs of the individual. It is not
unusual for someone receiving horrible news to press on their own chest.
329. CLAVICLE MASSAGING ---Under stress, individuals will massage the
clavicle (collarbone) on the opposite side (e.g., placing their right
hand upon their left clavicle). The arm drawn across the center of the
body provides a feeling of protection, while the repetitive touching of
the clavicle acts to soothe the person. This area of the body is very
sensitive to touch---one reason it is considered an erogenous zone. 330.
REPETITIVE HAND RAKING OF CHEST ---Repetitive massaging of the upper
chest area with fingers and thumb moving rake-like back and forth is
usually a good indicator of insecurity, concern, or issues. This
behavior is an extremely reliable indicator of anxiety or even a pending
panic attack. What stands out with this behavior is how the curled-up
fingers are used, like a claw or a rake, to perform this behavior rather
than using the full palm of the hand. 331. PALM ON CHEST ---In many
cultures, people place the palm of the hand on the chest to convey
sincerity and as a gesture of goodwill when meeting others. In my
experience, both the honest and the deceptive will do this behavior and
so we should treat the behavior as neutral. It is neither evidence of
honesty nor of sincerity though it may be offered as such. In a forensic
setting, if someone says "I didn't do it," as they place their palm on
their chest, it should not receive any greater weight or value no matter
how well performed. Having said that, I have noted over the years that
truthful people tend to press with more force, fingers wider apart, and
with the full palm against their chest, whereas those who are attempting
to deceive tend to make contact primarily

with their fingertips, and not very forcefully. Still, there is no
single behavior of deception and this certainly is not. You would be
wise to merely consider this behavior and how it is performed among
other behaviors before you come to any conclusion about a person's
honesty or sincerity. 332. PULLING CLOTHING TO VENTILATE ---Pulling on
the front of a shirt or other garment serves to ventilate the wearer.
Whether the shirt is held out at the collar for a few seconds away from
the neck or repeatedly plucked at and pulled away, this behavior serves
to relieve stress, as do most ventilating behaviors. It is a good
indicator that something is wrong. Obviously, in a hot environment,
ventilating behaviors might simply be associated with the heat rather
than stress. But remember, stress causes our temperature to increase,
and this happens very quickly, which explains why in a difficult or
testy meeting, people will be seen ventilating. Note that women often
ventilate their dresses by pulling on the front top and midriff. Also of
importance in a forensic setting is when a person ventilates as they
hear a question or after they have answered it. Most likely they did not
like the question. 333. PLAYING WITH ZIPPER ---Playing with the zipper
on a sweatshirt or jacket is a way of pacifying oneself when nervous or
tense. Students might do this before a test if they are concerned and
poker players do it also as they worry about their diminishing bank
roll. Please note that it is a pacifying behavior and it can also be a
way of dealing with boredom. 334. LEANING AWAY ---Leaning away from a
person is a form of distancing. If we are sitting next to someone who
says something objectionable, we may subtly inch away from him. We often
see this on talk shows. Rarely do we realize just how far away we lean
from others when we find them disagreeable. 335. SITTING BACK ---Pushing
our chair back and leaning away from others at a table is in essence a
distancing behavior that gives us additional insulation, so we can think
and contemplate. Individuals who are unconvinced or still considering a
point often will move slightly away until they are ready to engage, and
then they will once again sit

forward. For some it is a way to communicate they are taking themselves
out for a few minutes to ponder this, or, and this is where other facial
behaviors are useful, if they have decided they cannot support what is
being discussed and so the pulling away is demonstrative of how they
feel. 336. SITTING FORWARD ---When we are ready to negotiate in good
faith, or compromise, we tend to move from a leaning-back position to a
sitting-forward position. This often telegraphs that we have made up our
minds to move forward. One has to be careful, if sitting at a table or
desk that is narrow, not to intimidate the negotiating partner by
leaning too far forward. If negotiating with a team, make sure everyone
is sitting in the same way, and that eagerness to concede is not
betrayed by someone on the team sitting forward before it is time to
make it generally known. 337. TURNING AWAY/VENTRAL DENIAL ---Our ventral
or belly side is one of the most vulnerable places on the body. We will
turn it away from others when we don't like them, they make us uneasy,
or we don't like what they say. Upon meeting someone you don't care for,
your facial greeting might be friendly but your belly will
subconsciously shift away---what is called ventral denial---in essence
denying that person your most vulnerable side. This can even take place
among friends if something disagreeable is said. A good way to remember
this: "Belly away don't want you to stay; belly away don't like what you
say." 338. BELLY/VENTRAL FRONTING ---When we like someone, we will turn
our belly, or ventral side, toward her. We can see this behavior even in
infants. It communicates that a person is interested and feels
comfortable. When we meet someone while sitting down, if we like the
person, we will, over time, reveal our shoulders and torso to that
person as well. In summary, we show our gradual interest in others
through ventral fronting. 339. BELLY/VENTRAL COVERING ---The sudden
covering of the belly with objects such as a purse or book bag suggests
insecurity or discomfort with what is being discussed. People will use
everything from pillows

(a couple arguing at home) to pets to their own knees to protect their
ventral side when they feel threatened or vulnerable. 340. POSTURAL
ECHOING (MIRRORING) ---Our torso tends to echo the posture of those with
whom we feel comfortable; this is called isopraxis. When standing with
friends, people might find themselves mirroring one another's relaxed
posture, a good sign that people are at ease together. In dating we will
see one person lean forward, and the other, if comfortable, mimicking
that behavior. Mirroring suggests agreement in conversation, mood, or
temperament. 341. RIGID SITTING ---A person who sits very rigidly
without moving for long periods is undergoing stress. This is part of
the freeze response, often seen in forensic settings, police interviews,
and depositions, when people are so afraid, they can't move. The freeze
response kicks in subconsciously, as if the person has just confronted a
lion. Rigid sitting is not a sign of deception but rather an indicator
of psychological discomfort. 342. EJECTION-SEAT EFFECT ---A person in a
stressful interview or who has been accused of something might sit in a
chair as if ready to be ejected from a military jet, gripping the
armrests tightly. This, too, is part of the freeze response, and
indicates deep distress or feeling threatened. What makes this behavior
stand out is how rigid these individuals look, as if hanging on
metaphorically for dear life. 343. MOVING CHAIR AWAY ---This is a form
of distancing when leaning away from others is just not enough.
Literally, the person just moves the chair further and further back or
away as if no one would notice. I have seen acrimonious discussions in
academia where one professor moved completely away from the table to the
corner of the room near the window---as if this were somehow normal.
This behavior is motivated on a subconscious level to protect one's
ventral side through distancing from a perceived threat, even if the
threat is mere words or ideas. 344. BODY SLOUCHING ---Slouching projects
relaxation or indifference, depending on context. It is a
perception-management technique often used by teenagers in dealing with
their parents to demonstrate they

don't care. In any formal professional setting, slouching should be
avoided. 345. DOUBLING OVER ---People in emotional turmoil might bend
forward at the waist while seated or standing, as though experiencing
intestinal distress. Usually they do this with their arms tucked across
their stomach. We see this behavior in hospitals and anyplace else where
people might receive especially bad or shocking news. 346. FETAL
POSITION ---Under extreme psychological stress people might enter the
fetal position. This is sometimes seen during intense arguments between
couples, where one partner is so overwhelmed with emotions she will
bring her knees up and sit in the fetal position--- silent---to deal
with the stress. She might also gather a pillow or some other object to
hold against her belly ( see #339). 347. BODY CHILL ---Stress can cause
individuals to feel cold in an otherwise comfortable environment. This
is an autonomic response, in which the blood goes to the larger muscles,
away from the skin, when we are threatened, stressed, or anxious, to
prepare us to either run or fight. 348. DRESSING THE TORSO ---Because
our torso displays most of our clothing, it is important to mention here
that clothing communicates and can give advantages to the wearer.
Clothes often serve to project status within a culture. From name brands
to the colors that we wear, clothing makes a difference in how we are
perceived. It can make us more submissive or more authoritarian, or it
can propel us into the job that we want. It can also communicate where
we are from or even where we are going as well as what issues we might
be having. In every culture studied, clothes play a significant role. It
is one more thing we must consider when we assess individuals to decode
information they convey about themselves. 349. BELLY COVERING DURING
PREGNANCY ---Women often cover their suprasternal notch or throat with a
hand when they feel concerned or insecure. But when they are pregnant,
they will often raise their hand as if to go to the neck but then
quickly move it to cover their belly, seemingly to protect their fetus.

350. BELLY RUBBING ---Pregnant women will often repeatedly rub their
belly to deal with discomfort, but also subconsciously to protect the
fetus. Because it is a repetitive tactile behavior, it also serves as a
pacifier and some researchers say it even helps to release oxytocin into
the bloodstream.

The Hips, Buttocks, and Genitals

A body-language guide must include the area between the navel and the
top of the legs. Our hips, angled just right so we can walk or run on
two legs at great speed, give us shape and form, but they also say
something about us--- whether that something is about our reproductive
health or our sensuality. As the renowned zoologist Desmond Morris
points out in his book Bodywatching, throughout the world the hips and
buttocks serve to attract and entice. The earliest sculpture ever
discovered of a woman, the Venus of Hohle Fels, upward of 35,000 years
old, is a masterpiece of the female form, emphasizing the hips,
genitals, and the buttocks. Similar figurines have been found all over
the world, which speaks to the natural attraction we have for this area
of the body. Here is an opportunity to explore what this area of the
body can communicate to us beyond the obvious. 351. HIP/BUTTOCK SHIFTING
---Hip swiveling or buttock wiggling is a way of dealing with stress,
boredom, or the fatigue of sitting in one place. People might also do
this during contentious debates, either when their emotions have been
riled up or just afterward, as a process of calming down. You rarely see
this with couples early on in their relationship; it tends to show up,
if at all, down the road when there are issues being discussed.

352. HIP RUBBING ---Under stress, people will rub the side of their hips
and legs as a pacifier. It is also used to dry sweaty hands when feeling
nervous. You see this gesture as students prepare to take a test or as
travelers go through customs. 353. HIP-TORSO ROCKING ---Individuals
under psychological duress might rock forward and backward at the hips
while sitting. Severe stress, such as witnessing the death of a loved
one, will initiate this behavior, which pacifies with its repetitive
motion. You might also see this behavior in people suffering from
certain mental disorders such as those on the autism spectrum. 354. HIP
SWAYING ---When bored, we might find ourselves standing and swaying our
hips side to side, as if cradling and rocking a baby to sleep. Swaying
our hips causes the fluid and hairs in our inner ear to move, and that
sensation is very soothing. This is different from hiptorso rocking (
see #353), which is forward and back. 355. HIP-OUT DISPLAY ---The hips
are used by both men and women to get noticed, as in the famous statue
of David by Michelangelo, where he stands contrapposto, with one leg
slightly bent, making his buttocks more prominent and thus more
attractive. Larger hips can also be used to garner attention---something
Kim Kardashian does with pride and regularity. Hip-out displays are
usually seen in courtship behavior to invite notice. In many cultures
throughout the world the hips represent youth and fertility and are
prominently displayed especially during the courtship years. 356.
GENITAL TOUCHING ---Teachers often report how young boys, and sometimes
girls, will touch or pull at their genitals through their clothing. This
is quite natural; the genitals contain an extraordinary number of nerve
endings, which, when touched, not only soothe or calm children, but
feels pleasant. Eventually kids outgrow this behavior, and it is not
unusual or anything to be overly concerned about. 357. CROTCH GRABBING
---This behavior, made famous by Michael Jackson while dancing, shocked
many when first performed, yet today it is

quite common in entertainers. There are many theories as to why some men
do this: to garner attention, as a manhood display, or merely to adjust
for comfort. On adult males, it can be quite disturbing if done
repetitively and at a close distance such as an office, as women have
reported to me. It certainly should be avoided in public. 358. GENITAL
FRAMING ---Often done by cowboys in movies or in photographs, this is
where the man places the thumbs inside the pants or hooks them on his
belt and the fingers straddle the crotch area. Genital framing is used
to garner attention and serves as a masculine display. Usually the
elbows are thrust outward, making the man look bigger and appear
tougher. 359. GENITAL COVERING ---We might place our hands together over
our genitals or crotch in certain situations---in elevators, for
example, where men will look at the numbers or the door while doing so.
This behavior can be effective in dealing with social anxiety or if
someone is standing too close. 360. SITTING KNEES FAR APART ---Often
referred to as "manspreading," this is where a man sits, often on public
transportation, with the knees far apart. This is considered rude due to
how much space a person takes up in this position, and the
less-than-diplomatic display of the inner legs and the crotch, and it is
inconsiderate.

The Legs

Our legs are unique in the animal kingdom as they point inward at the
hips, allowing us to walk, run, sprint, climb, kick, hurtle, swim, and
bicycle. We use our legs for locomotion, for protection, to establish
dominance, and as a steady anchor for our children to hang on to when
they are nervous or shy. Sinewy, long, or stocky, legs are as varied as
their owners. Often ignored when it comes to nonverbals, they can
communicate everything from elegance to nervousness to joy. And because
our legs serve as a survival tool---they can help us escape---they can
be very honest when it comes to how we feel about others. 361. SPATIAL
DISTANCING ---The anthropologist Edward T. Hall coined the term
proxemics to describe the need all animals have for personal space. If
someone stands too close to us, we are uncomfortable. Our spatial needs
are based on both culture and personal preference. Most Americans feel
comfortable in public spaces at a distance of 12 to 25 feet from others;
in social spaces 4 to 12 feet is preferred; while our personal space is
comfortable at about 1.5 to 4 feet. When it comes to our intimate space,
anything less than a foot, we are very sensitive to who gets that close.
These are of course approximations, as it is different for everyone and
varies with culture, nationality, location, and even time of day. At
night we might not feel comfortable walking near a stranger who is
closer than ten feet.

362. TERRITORIAL STANCE ---We use our legs as a form of territorial
display by how we stand. The further apart our feet, the greater the
territorial display. The breadth of a person's stance is telling:
military men and police officers tend to stand with their feet farther
apart than, say, accountants and engineers. The spread of the legs
transmits clearly a sense of confidence and a subconscious claiming of
territory. 363. TERRITORIAL CHALLENGE ---During a heated argument a
person might intentionally invade your personal space, getting just
inches away from your face (figuratively "in your face"), puffing out
the chest, and glaring. This violation of space serves to intimidate,
and might be a prelude to a physical assault. 364. ANGLING TO THE SIDE
---Most people prefer to talk to others from a slightly angled position,
rather than directly face-to-face. When children first meet, they
usually approach each other at angles for a reason---they get a better
reception. I have found that when businesspeople stand facing each other
at a slight angle, the amount of time they spend together increases.
Note that when there is acrimony, it is always best to stand angled
slightly away from the other person as this tends to help diffuse
negative emotions. 365. WALKING BEHAVIORS ---The way we walk
communicates a lot. Some walks are intentionally sexy (Marilyn Monroe's
for example), while others show strength and determination (John
Wayne's). Some walks suggest that a person is on an important task,
while others are more relaxed and casual, or intended to get a person
noticed, like John Travolta's character's walk in the opening sequence
of the movie Saturday Night Fever. And it is not just how we walk,
sometimes we communicate our interest in others by how frequently we
walk by to get a good look or to get noticed. 366. SETTING PACE DURING
WALK ---Whoever sets the walking pace in a group is usually the person
in charge. We will speed up or slow down for the most senior person or
group leader. Even teenagers will do this, deferring to the most
socially prominent one among them by walking at that person's pace. This
might mean the last person in a group is the leader and is setting the
pace to walk no faster. In analyzing groups

remember that it is not who is in front but rather who sets the pace
that is in charge. 367. SITTING BEHAVIORS ---Each culture sits
differently. In some parts of Asia, people squat, buttocks low and knees
high, while waiting for a bus. In other cultures, the legs are
intertwined as you sit, as Gandhi did while working a loom. In Europe
and elsewhere, people often sit with one leg draped over the opposite
knee so that the sole points downward. In America, you will see a
combination of sitting styles, including the figure 4, where the ankle
is placed on top of the opposite knee, with the foot noticeably high.
When it comes to sitting behaviors, it is important to follow both local
customs as well as those of your host. 368. HOLDING LEGS TOGETHER,
SITTING ---Our level of confidence is often revealed by how we sit. Legs
that suddenly come together suggest insecurity. In part, of course, the
way we sit is cultural, but some people will move their legs with great
reliability depending on how they feel emotionally, revealing their
degree of self-assurance. Keep in mind that in many places, women will
sit with their knees together as a matter of social convention. 369.
LEGS SPREADING APART, SITTING ---Legs that are suddenly set wider apart
while sitting during an interview or a conversation suggest greater
comfort or confidence. This is a universal territorial display; the
farther apart they are, the more territory is being claimed. This
behavior is more pronounced in men. 370. ANKLES LOCKING ---While sitting
down, especially in a formal setting, people will often bring their
ankles together and interlock them. I look for people who suddenly
perform this gesture when something controversial or difficult is being
discussed; it usually signals that they are restraining themselves,
expressing reservation, or showing hesitation or psychological
discomfort. 371. ANKLES INTERLOCKING AROUND CHAIR LEGS ---Insecurity,
fear, or concern will cause some people to suddenly interlock their
ankles around the legs of a chair. Some people, of course, sit like this

routinely. However, the suddenly interlocking of ankles around the chair
following a question, or while discussing a sensitive issue, is a strong
indicator that something is wrong. It's part of the freeze/selfrestraint
response. 372. KNEE CLASPING, LEANING BACK ---A firm knee clasp can
signify that a person is self-restraining. You often see this among
nervous job applicants. The feet are on the ground, the knees tightly
clasped, and because of stress, the person is leaning back rather
rigidly. 373. KNEE CLASPING, LEANING FORWARD ---When we do this from the
sitting position, hands on knees, leaning forward, it usually means we
are ready to leave. Often we will also align the feet in the starter's
position, one in front of the other. Do not do this in a meeting unless
you are the senior-most person; it is insulting to signal that you want
to leave if someone else is in charge or superior to you. 374. CROSSING
LEG AS BARRIER, SITTING ---Crossing a leg in such a way that it acts as
a barrier while sitting---with the knee high over the opposite
leg---suggests that there are issues, reservations, or social
discomfort. Whether at home or at work, this behavior accurately
reflects feelings. You often see this occur the instant an uncomfortable
topic is brought up. 375. LEG DRAPING ---Subconsciously, individuals who
feel confident or superior will drape their leg over a desk, chair, or
object---even other people---as a way of establishing a territorial
claim. Some bosses do this regularly, sitting in one chair and draping
their leg over another. 376. LEG RUBBING ---Rubbing the tops of our
quadriceps---a gesture known as a leg cleanser---works to pacify us when
we are under high stress. It can be easy to miss, since it usually
occurs under a table or desk. 377. KNEE RUBBING ---We see repeated
scratching or rubbing of the area just above the knee in people who are
feeling stress or anticipating something exciting. Like most repetitive
behaviors, it serves to pacify, assuaging the excitement or tension.

378. ANKLE SCRATCHING ---In tense situations it is not unusual for a
person to scratch at the ankles. It serves both to relieve stress and to
ventilate the skin. We often see this in high-stakes situations such as
a large pot in a poker game or in a forensic interview when a difficult
question is asked. 379. KNEE FLEXING ---This behavior is performed by
quickly flexing the knees forward while standing, which causes the
person to sink down rather noticeably. Usually the person immediately
recovers. This is a very juvenile behavior, almost akin to the
beginnings of a temper tantrum. I have seen grown men do this at the
car-rental counter when told the car they requested is not available.
380. DRAGGING FEET ---We often seen children drag their feet back and
forth while talking or waiting for something. This is a repetitive
behavior that helps them calm down or pass idle time. Adults might do it
as they await someone's arrival. It can be used to mask anxiety and is a
common behavior with shy inexperienced people on a first date. 381.
ANKLE QUIVERING ---Some people while standing will repetitively twist or
quiver their foot to the side at the ankle, in a show of restlessness,
agitation, animosity, or irritation. This is very perceptible because
the shaking causes the whole body to move. 382. KNEE-HIGH SELF-HUGGING
---We often see teenagers hug their own legs by bringing the knees up to
chest level. This can be very comforting and helps them enjoy a moment
as they listen to music or to help them deal with emotions. I have also
seen some criminals do this while being interviewed to help deal with
stress. 383. STANDING LEG CROSSING (COMFORT) ---We cross our legs while
standing when we are alone or if we feel comfortable with the people
around us. The minute someone causes us the slightest psychological
discomfort, we will uncross the legs in case we need to quickly distance
or defend ourselves from the offending person. You may notice this in
elevators, where a lone rider will uncross the legs the minute a
stranger enters.

384. LEG KICKING, SITTING ---A leg crossed over the knee that goes from
shaking or twitching (repetitive movement) to sudden kicking up and down
after a question is asked indicates high discomfort with the question.
This is not a pacifier, unless the person does it all the time. It is a
subconscious act of kicking away something objectionable. Sudden leg
kicks, in response to a question or a statement, are usually associated
with strong negative feelings. 385. JUMPING (JOY) ---Positive emotions
drive this gravity-defying behavior that is displayed around the world.
Primates also will jump for joy, much like humans do, when they sense
they are about to get a treat. Our limbic system, the emotional center
of the brain, directs this behavior automatically, which is why when a
player scores a point spectators jump up all at once, without being told
to. 386. UNCOOPERATIVE LEGS AND FEET ---Children and sometimes adults
will protest with their feet by dragging them, kicking, twisting, or
going dormant turning themselves into a dead weight. Children do this
when they refuse to go someplace they don't want to go to and often you
will see adults peacefully resisting arrest doing the same. Their legs
are clearly and unequivocally demonstrating how they truly feel about
something. 387. LOSING ONE'S BALANCE ---There are any number of medical
conditions that can trigger loss of balance, including low blood
pressure, or something so simple as getting up too quickly. Drugs and
alcohol might also play a role. Age can be a factor as well. When we see
someone suddenly lose his balance, our first instinct must be to assist
where possible. It is important to note that when the elderly fall, it
can have catastrophic consequences due to frail bones and so immediate
action is required.

The Feet

"The human foot is a masterpiece of engineering and a work of art," said
Leonardo da Vinci after decades of dissecting and studying the human
body. Though relatively small compared with other parts of the body, the
feet carry our full weight and are invaluable in sensing motion,
vibrations, heat, cold, and humidity. We put more pressure on our feet
than on any other part of our bodies, and we punish them with tight
shoes and endless journeys. Sensitive to the slightest touch, they can
be very sensual---or they can break a brick with a karate kick. Like the
rest of the body, they do their intended job exquisitely, balancing us,
allowing us to walk and climb, but they also communicate our feelings
and intentions as well as our fears. 388. FROZEN FEET ---Feet that
suddenly go "flat" and stop moving indicate concerns or insecurities. We
tend to freeze movement when we are threatened or worried, an
evolutionary response that keeps us from being noticed by predators.
389. FOOT WITHDRAWING ---During job interviews, interviewees will
suddenly withdraw their feet and tuck them in under their chairs when
they are asked sensitive questions they might not like. The movement is
sometimes rather noticeable, closely following a question that is
difficult to answer, such as "Have you ever been fired from a job?" At
home, teens might do this when asked where they were the night before.

390. PLAYING FOOTSIES---When we like another person, our feet will be
drawn to them. When we like them romantically, our feet might move
almost subconsciously toward theirs so that they come into contact. This
is why you see people playing footsie under the table in the early
stages of a relationship. The playful touching has an important role in
connecting us to others. Neurologically, when our feet are touched, it
registers on a sensory strip along the parietal lobe of the brain, very
close to where our genitals also register. 391. FOOT ROCKING ---This is
another repetitive behavior that serves to pacify us. We might do this
when we're waiting for someone to hurry up---the rocking shifts from the
heels to the toes, back and forth. Since this elevates us as we rock
forward, it is also somewhat of a gravitydefying behavior. Foot rocking
can both alleviate boredom and demonstrate that a person is in charge.
392. FOOT TURNING AWAY ---When we're talking to someone, we might signal
that we need to leave by gradually or suddenly pointing one foot toward
the door. This is our nonverbal way of communicating "I have to go." It
is an intention cue, and if the person we're talking to ignores it, we
can become very irritated. Be mindful of others, and recognize that when
their foot turns away, chances are they have to go. 393. FEET TURNING
AWAY ---When we are in the presence of someone we dislike, it is not
unusual for our feet to turn together toward the door or away from that
person. In watching juries over the years, I have noted that jurors
often turn their feet toward the jury room the instant a witness or
attorney they dislike begins to speak. At parties, you might see two
people look at each other and even exchange a social smile while their
feet will turn away, indicating their mutual dislike. 394. TOES POINTING
INWARD/PIGEON TOES ---Some people turn their toes inward (sometimes
called "pigeon toes") when they are insecure, shy, or introverted, or
when they feel particularly vulnerable. This behavior, which is
generally seen in children but also in some adults, demonstrates some
sort of emotional need or apprehension.

395. TOES POINTING UP ---Occasionally, when someone is engaged in
conversation, either in person or over the phone, you will see the toes
of one foot point up, at an angle, with the heel firm to the ground.
This is a gravity-defying behavior, which is usually associated with
positive emotions. When good friends run into each other, you will also
see this behavior as they talk. 396. EXPOSING SOLES OF FEET ---In many
parts of the world, especially the Middle East, Africa, and parts of
Asia, displaying the sole of one's foot or shoe is insulting. When
traveling abroad, be careful how you sit--- resting the ankle on a knee
exposes your soles. It is usually preferable to either keep both feet on
the ground or to drape one leg over the opposite knee so that the sole
is pointing downward. 397. BOUNCY HAPPY FEET ---We sometimes register an
emotional high with happy feet---the feet are animated and jumpy. This
is certainly visible in children, when you tell them you're taking them
to a theme park, for example. But we also see it in adults. Poker
players, for instance, might bounce their feet under the table when they
have a monster hand. While the feet themselves might not be visible,
often they will cause the clothing to shake or tremble all the way up to
the shoulders. 398. FOOT TAPPING ---This is a familiar behavior used to
pass the time, to keep tempo with music, or, like finger strumming, to
indicate that we are becoming impatient. Usually just the front of the
foot is involved, while the heel remains grounded, but it can also be
done with the heel of the foot. 399. TOE WIGGLING ---Ever find yourself
wiggling your toes? Chances are you were feeling good about something,
excited, or eagerly anticipating an event. The movement of the toes
stimulates nerves that help to alleviate boredom or stress and can
signal excitement in much the way happy feet do. 400. AGITATED FEET
---Every parent recognizes the agitated feet of a child who wants to
leave the table to go play. Often our feet will telegraph that we want
to leave, even in a boardroom full of adults, through excessive
uncomfortable movements. These might include repetitive

shifting, movement from side to side, foot withdrawal, or repetitively
raising and lowering the heels of the feet. 401. NERVOUS PACING ---Many
people will pace when they are stressed. This acts as a pacifier, as all
repetitive behaviors do. 402. LEGS AS INDICATORS OF DESIRES ---Our legs
often signal when we want to get closer to something or someone. Legs
and feet will gravitate toward a store window displaying candy, or a
person we are interested in. Or we might lean away as if to leave but
our legs remain frozen in place because we like the person we are with.
403. LEG TANTRUMS ---These are most often seen in children when they
twist, move, and energetically stomp their legs, letting everyone know
how they feel. And it's not just children, from time to time you will
see adults do the same, as I did when an executive was bumped from a
flight. This is a reminder that the legs also demonstrate emotions, and
because these are the largest muscles in the body, they do so with
maximum effect. 404. FOOT STOMPING ---Children are not the only ones who
stomp their feet to make their feelings known. We often see this when
people are exasperated or they have reached the limit of their patience.
I've observed men and women stomping their feet in lines that move too
slowly. Usually the foot is only stomped once, just to get noticed. 405.
SOCK PULLING ---Stress will cause skin temperature to rise quickly. For
many people, their feet and lower legs become uncomfortably warm. When
stressed, they will ventilate their ankles by pulling on their socks,
sometimes repeatedly. This is an often unnoticed behavior that signals a
high degree of psychological discomfort. 406. SHOE DANGLE ---When some
people, especially women, are comfortable around others, they will
dangle their shoe near the instep of the foot. This is often seen in
dating situations. The shoe will be slipped back on the very instant a
woman feels uncomfortable or no longer likes what the other person is
saying.

407. GENERAL FOOT AND LEG AGITATION ---A person may present in an
agitated state wherein their feet are restless and they shift or pace,
racing to and fro seemingly without purpose. This might be because of a
diagnosable event, such as an allergic reaction to a drug, illicit drug
use, shock after a tragedy, or a panic attack. Concurrently, they might
display clenched fists, fidgety hands, some lip biting, and even eye
twitching. This generalized state of agitation is a nonverbal signal
that something is wrong and the person is struggling to deal with it.
Medical assistance or psychological counseling might be needed. Don't
expect the person experiencing such agitation to be able to speak or
think coherently at a moment like this.

Conclusion

My hope for this book is that it will open your eyes to the world around
you, to help you understand and appreciate others through this unspoken
language we call nonverbals. But reading about it is only the first
step. Now comes the more interesting part: looking for and testing what
you have learned. By verifying these observations on your own, "in the
field," every day, you will develop your own skill set for decoding
human behavior. The more you study and verify, the easier it becomes,
and you will come to immediately notice signs others miss. We humans are
all in the people business. To be attuned to others is to care.
Leadership is all about understanding and communicating, and body
language is a key piece of that. Effective leaders listen and transmit
on two channels: the verbal and the nonverbal. And even though our world
is becoming increasingly digitized and depersonalized, face-to-face
contact is still extraordinarily important in building relationships,
establishing trust and rapport, understanding others, and relating
empathetically. Technology has its uses---it helped me write this
book---but it has limitations when it comes to selecting a best friend
or someone to spend your life with. The nonverbal cues we give, and
those we notice in others, matter significantly. Of course, no book can
encompass all of human behavior. Others will focus on different
behaviors and contribute to our knowledge beyond my scope---perhaps one
day it will be you. It has been my intent always to share my knowledge
and experiences with others, and doing so has brought me great
happiness. I hope you also will share with others what you've learned
about body language and nonverbal communication. May your life be as
enriched as mine has been, learning about why we do the things we do. It
has been an interesting ride. Thank you for sharing it.

Acknowledgments

I begin each journey into writing fully aware and mindful that so many
people have helped me along the way and not just in writing. Most will
never be recognized because I have long forgotten the name of a teacher
who answered a question, or the neighbor who shared a lunch, or the
coach who taught me to discipline my focus. I have forgotten their names
but not their acts of kindness. Nor have I forgotten the countless
people all over the world, from Beijing to Bucharest, who have honored
me by buying my books, following me on social media, and encouraging me
to write. A hearty thank-you. To Ashleigh Rose Dingwall, thank you for
your assistance in reading the manuscript and for your valuable
suggestions. To the men and women of the FBI, especially those in the
prepublication review unit, thank you for your tireless assistance
always. William Morrow is presently home to four of my books precisely
because of people like publisher Liate Stehlik and the wonderful team
who worked on this project in cluding Ryan Curry, Bianca Flores, Lex
Maudlin, and production editor Julia Meltzer. To my editor at William
Morrow, Nick Amphlett, who championed this project, expertly guiding it
through its many paces, I have more than gratitude. Nick, you were most
kind and generous with your time, your ideas, and the editing process.
You and your colleagues collectively made this work possible and I thank
you. To my dear friend and literary agent Steve Ross, director of the
Book Division at the Abrams Artist Agency, you have my most profound
gratitude. Steve is the kind of agent most writers wish they had because
he listens, he cares, he counsels, and he gets things done. Steve, you
are unique. Thank you for your guidance and leadership when it was
needed the most. A big thank-you also goes out to your colleagues David
Doerrer and Madison Dettlinger for their assistance on this and other
projects.

I would not be here writing if not for my family, who have always
supported me and allowed me to be curious and follow my own path less
taken. To Mariana and Albert, my parents, thank you for all the
sacrifices you made so that I could triumph. To my sisters, Marianela
and Terry, your brother loves you. To Stephanie, my daughter, you have
the loveliest of souls. To Janice Hillary and my family in London, thank
you for your encouragement and understanding---always. Lastly to my
wife, Thryth, who is so wonderfully supportive of everything I do, but
especially of my writing--- thank you. From your kindness I draw
strength and from your encouragement I aspire to be better in all
things. I am a far better person since you entered my life. Your love is
felt each day in the most important of ways---by everything you do.

Bibliography

Alford, R. (1996). "Adornment." In D. Levinson and M. Ember (Eds.) ,
Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology. New York: Henry Holt. Burgoon, J.
K., Buller, D. B., & Woodall, W. G. (1994). Nonverbal communication: The
unspoken dialogue . Columbus, OH: Greyden Press. Calero, H. H. (2005).
The power of nonverbal communication: How you act is more important than
what you say. Los Angeles: Silver Lake Publishers. Carlson, N. R.
(1986). Physiology of behavior (3rd ed). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. Darwin,
C. (1872). The expression of emotion in man and animals . New York:
Appleton-Century Crofts. Dimitrius, J., & Mazzarela, M. (1998). Reading
people: How to understand people and predict their behavior---anytime,
anyplace . New York: Ballantine Books. Ekman, P., Friesen, W. Y., &
Ellsworth, P. (1982). Emotion in the human face: Guidelines for research
and an integration of findings. Ed. Paul Ekman. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press. Etcoff, N. (1999). Survival of the prettiest: The
science of beauty . New York: Anchor Books. Givens, D. G. (2005). Love
signals: A practical guide to the body language of courtship . New York:
St. Martin's Press. ---------. (1998--2007). The nonverbal dictionary of
gestures, signs & body language cues . Spokane, WA: Center for Nonverbal
Studies. Http://members.aol.com/nonverbal2/diction1.htm. ---------.
(2010). Your body at work: A guide to sight-reading the body language of
business, bosses, and boardrooms. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Hall, E. T. (1969). The hidden dimension . Garden City, NY: Anchor
Books. ---------. (1959). The silent language . New York: Doubleday.
Iacoboni, M. (2009). Mirroring people: The science of empathy and how we
connect with others . New York: Picador. Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A.
(2002). Nonverbal communication in human interaction (5th ed.) . New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. LaFrance, M., & Mayo, C. (1978). Moving
bodies: Nonverbal communications in social relationships . Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole. LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious
underpinnings of emotional life . New York: Touchstone. Montagu, A.
(1986). Touching: The human significance of the skin. New York: Harper &
Row Publishers. Morris, D. (1985). Bodywatching: A field guide to the
human species . New York: Crown Publishers. ---------. (1994). Bodytalk:
The meaning of human gestures . New York: Crown Trade Paperbacks.
---------. (1971). Intimate behavior . New York: Random House.
---------. (1980). Manwatching: A field guide to human behavior . New
York: Crown Publishers. ---------. (2002). Peoplewatching: A guide to
body language . London: Vintage Books. Morris, Desmond, et al. (1994).
Gestures . New York: Scarborough Books. Navarro, J. (2016). "Chirality:
A look at emotional asymmetry of the face." Spycatcher (blog).
Psychology Today, May 16, 2016.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/spycatcher/201605/chiralitylook-emotional-asymmetry-the-face.
Navarro, J., & Karlins, M. (2007). What Every BODY Is Saying: An ex-FBI
agent's guide to speed-reading people . New York: HarperCollins
Publishers. Navarro, J., & Poynter, T. S. (2009). Louder than words:
Take your career from average to exceptional with the hidden power of
nonverbal intelligence. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. Panksepp, J.
(1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal
emotions . New York: Oxford University Press. Ratey, J. J. (2001). A
user's guide to the brain: Perception, attention, and the four theaters
of the brain . New York: Pantheon Books.

Index

The pagination of this digital edition does not match the print edition
from which the index was created. To locate a specific entry, please use
your ebook reader's search tools. abrazo, 109 acceptance, looking for,
38--39 acetylcholine, 99--100 active listening, 44--45 adornments. See
also clothing; hats on cheeks, 79 on ears, 45 on eyes, 41--42
affirmative inhaling, 54 aggressive stare, 41 agitated feet, 171 angling
to the side, 158--59 angry chin perching, 88 angry eyes, 41 animated
gestures, 110 ankle quivering, 164 ankle scratching, 163 ankles
interlocking around chair legs, 161 ankles locking, 161 answering, delay
in, 62 apology, speeding through, 65--66 arguments hand thrust to face,
127 interruptive, 63 territorial challenge, 158 arms, the, 109--18 arm
crossing, 112--14 dislike, 113--14 holding wrist, 114 massaging, 114
protection, 113 self-restraint, 113 arm hugging, 109, 112--13 arm
motions, erratic, 142 armpit exposing, 112 arms against body, hands
flexed, 110--11

arms akimbo, 121--22 arms held behind back, 111 arm spreading, 114 arms
stiffening, 111--12 arthritis, 119--20 askance, looking (sideways), 38
authoritative poses, 107, 121--22 autonomic arousal, 19, 44 balance,
loss of, 165--66 baring teeth, 60 beard stroking, 88--89 behind back,
arms held, 111 behind head, interlaced fingers, elbows up, 14--15 belly,
the, 143--52 belly rubbing, 152 head scratching with, 14 belly/ventral
covering, 148--49, 152 belly/ventral fronting, 148 "bird" finger, 132
biting lip, 70 nails, 133 tongue, 56 blink rates, 29--30 blushing of
neck and face, 101--2 of skin of ear, 44 body chill, 151 body slouching,
150 Botox, 18, 69 bouncy happy feet, 170--71 bowing, 108 brain, 9, 17,
19, 27, 28, 29, 97, 125, 129 breath holding, 54--55 breathing chest
heaving, rapid, 143 shallow, fast, 144 brushing chin with back of hand,
87 brushing nose, 50 "bunny nose," 48 business suits, padded shoulders,
105, 107 buttocks, the, 153--56 buttock shifting, 153--54 cathartic
exhaling, 53--54 cathartic utterances, 63--64 "cauliflower ears," 45
cheeks, the, 79--82 puffing out, 81 strumming fingers on, 80

tongue in, 58 cheek framing, 80--81 cheek massaging, 80 cheek
scratching, 81--82 cheek touching, 80, 81 cheek wiping, 82 chest, the,
143--52 palm on, 145--46 pressing on, 144 repetitive hand raking of, 145
chest heaving, rapid breathing, 143 chewing gum, 55--56 chewing tongue,
56 chin, the, 85--90 chin brushing with back of hand, 87 chin cradling,
87--88 chin dimpling, 89 chin drop with shoulders slumping, 86--87 chin
hiding, 86 chin-muscle quivering, 89 chin perch, 88 chin pointing, 90
chin pointing down, 85--86 chin shifting, 88 chin to shoulder, 89 chin
touching, 87 chin up, 85 chin withdrawing, 86 clavicle massaging, 144
clavicle rubbing, 107 clearing of throat, 66 closed eyes, 33 for
emphasis, 33--34 rubbing bridge of nose, 34 closed fist, massaging, 134
clothing business suits, padded shoulders, 105, 107 clinging behaviors,
131 dressing the torso, 151--52 playing with, 99, 146 preening, 137
pulling to ventilate, 146 cognitive load, 21 compressing lips. See lip
compressing conjugate lateral eye movement (CLEM), 35--36 coughing, 66
covering of belly, 148--49 of belly, during pregnancy, 152 of eyes, 34

of forehead with hat, 21 of genitals, 156 of nose with both hands,
47--48 of suprasternal notch (neck dimple), 98 cracking knuckles, 136
with interlaced fingers, 136--37 cradling chin, 87--88 crimping corners
of the mouth, 77 crossing arms. See arm crossing crossing leg as
barrier, sitting, 162 crossing standing leg, 164 crotch grabbing,
155--56 crying, 34--35 chin-muscle quivering, 89 fatigued eyes, 37 while
clutching objects, 35 culture and body language, 2--3 curling fingers,
138 darting eyes, 35 tongue, 60 de Becker, Gavin, 117 decompress lips,
reluctance to, 72 delay in answering, 62 disgust, 48, 49, 58, 77
dismissive preening, 137 distancing, spatial ( proxemics), 157--58
distancing from objects, 141 doubling over, 150--51 dragging feet, 163
draping legs, 162 dressing the torso, 151--52 drop of the jaw, 83 dry
mouth, 55 Duchenne smile, 76 "duping delight," 94 ears, the, 43--45 ear
flushing or blushing, 44 ear leaning toward speaker, 44 earlobe pulling
or massaging, 43--44 ear ornamentation, 45 ejection-seat effect, 149--50
Ekman, Paul, 17, 76, 94, 132 elation displays, 110--11 elbow flexing,
115 elbow out, hand on leg, 138 elbows interlocking, 115--16 elbows
narrowing, 115 elbows spreading out, 115

elbows up, interlaced fingers behind, 14--15 Elvis effect, 49 emotional
asymmetry of the face, 93 emotional chirality, 93 emphasis closed eyes
for, 33--34 elbow flex, 115 with hands, 131--32 using finger as baton,
133 erratic arm and hand motions, 142 evolution, 4--5, 47, 67, 91, 98,
117, 167 excessive sweating, 117 exhaling cathartic, 53--54 loud, short,
53 exposing soles of feet, 170 eyes, the, 27--42 blink rates, 29--30
blocking behaviors, 33, 34, 37 closed. See closed eyes covering of, 34
glazed, 38 quivering under, 29 relaxed, 28--29 eye-accessing cues,
35--36 eye adornment, 41--42 eye avoidance, 30--31 eyebrows, the, 23--25
eyebrow arching chin toward neck, 25 happy, 23--24 tense, 24 eyebrow
asymmetry, 25 eyebrow greetings, 24 eyebrow narrowing/knitting, 25 eye
contact, 30--31 eye-contact seeking, 31--32 eyelids fluttering, 36
eyelid touching, 37 eye pointing, 36 eye-pointing cluster, 36--37 eye
rolling, 37 eyes darting, 35 eyes lowered, 39 eye socket narrowing, 29
eyes widening (stiff), 41 face, the, 91--95. See also individual
elements of face hand thrust to, 127 face avoidance, 92

face blocking, 92 face in crowd, odd, 93--94 face shielding, 92 face
touching, 95 facial denting, 80, 82 facial flushing/blushing, 101--2
facial incongruence, 93 facial massaging, 80 facial tics, 79--80 false
smiles, 76 far-off look, 37 fatigued eyes, 37 "fear grin," 60 feet, the,
167--73 feet agitation, 171 feet dragging, 163 feet turning away, 169
fetal position, 151 filler sounds, 66 fingers, the, 119--42 as baton,
133 giving the finger, 132 interlaced. See interlaced fingers finger
holding, 126 finger jabbing, 132--33 finger pointing, 132 finger rub,
teepee, 135 fingers close together, 129 fingers curling, 138 finger
strumming, 134 on cheek, 80 fingertips to lips, 70 fist holding in front
of neck, 100--101 massaging closed, 134 speaker's, 134--35 flaring
nostrils, 51 flashing eyebrows (happy), 23--24 flexing elbows, 115
flexing knees, 163 flicking nails on teeth, 60 flipping hair, 12
flushing of neck and face, 101--2 of skin of ear, 44 fluttering eyelids,
36 foot and leg agitation, 173 foot rocking, 168--69 footsies, 168 foot
stomping, 172

foot tapping, 171 foot turning away, 169 foot withdrawing, 168 forehead,
the, 17--21 pressing hand on, 20 forehead furrowing, 17--18 forehead
massaging, 20 forehead sweating, 19 forehead tension, 17--18 forward
sitting, 147--48 framing cheeks, 80--81 framing genitals, 156 freeze,
flight, fight response, 55, 149--50, 161 frequency of touch, 120--21
frequent blinking, 30 frozen feet, 167 furniture, holding on to, 131
furrowing of the eyebrows, 25 of the forehead, 17--18 puzzled look,
20--21 gaze and sentiments, 32 gaze engaging, 32 gaze superiority, 31
gazing versus staring, 33 genitals, the, 153--56 genital covering, 156
genital framing, 156 genital touching, 155 Givens, David, 2, 10, 89
giving the finger, 132 glabella, 25 glazed eyes, 38 goose bumps, 116
grabbing the crotch, 155--56 greetings, 138--40 eyebrow, 24 hand
shaking, 138--39 hugging, 109 namaste, 139--40 turning away, 148
"grouper" mouth, 74 gum chewing, 55--56 hair, 10 playing with, 10--11,
137 running fingers through, 11 ventilating, 11--12 hair erection (
piloerection), 117 hair flipping/touching, 12

hair preening, 137 hair pulling, 12--13 Hall, Edward T., 2, 157 hands,
the, 119--42 as anchors, 127 condition of, 119--20 jittery, 126--27
pressing on forehead, 20 in ready/active position, 124 hand displays,
territorial, 122 hand emphasis, 131--32 hand grooming, 120 hand holding,
140 hand motions, erratic, 142 hand on leg, elbow out, 138 hand raking
of chest, repetitive, 145 hand restricting, 125--26 handshakes, 121,
138--39 hands in pocket, 134 hands on hips, arms akimbo, 121--22 hands
on palms, rubbing, 135 hand steepling, 123--24 hand thrust to face, 127
hand wringing, 126 happy eyebrow arching/flashing, 23--24 happy feet,
170--71 hard swallowing, 101 hats, 9--10 covering forehead with, 21
lifting (ventilating), 16 head, the, 9--16 interlaced fingers behind,
elbows up, 14--15 interlacing fingers on top of, 15--16 reaching for
(stupefied), 15 head adornments, 9--10 head nodding affirmative, 13
contradiction, 13 head patting, back of head, 13 head scratching, 14,
112 with tummy rubbing, 14 head stroking, 14 head tilts, 38, 50, 102--3,
106 hiding chin, 86 hips, the, 153--56 hip/buttock shifting, 153--54
hip-out displays, 155 hip rubbing, 154 hip swaying, 154 hip-torso
rocking, 154

holding fingers, 126 fist in front of neck, 100--101 on to furniture,
131 hands, 140 shoulders high, 106 holding nose high, 50 holding of
breath, 54--55 "hooding," 15, 16 horripilation, 116 hugging, 109. See
also self-hugging hyperemia (skin blushing), 44, 101--2 incessant
talking, 64 incongruence, facial, 93 incongruent talk, 64--65 indecent
finger, 132 index finger to nose, 49--50 inhaling affirmative, 54
sucking in air through corners of mouth, 54 insults exposing soles of
feet, 170 hand thrust to face, 127 pointing at forehead, 20 tongue, 58
intention cues, 169 interlaced (interlacing) fingers behind head, elbows
up, 14--15 knuckle cracking with, 136--37 modified hand steepling, 124
palms up or palms down, 135--36 teepee finger rub, 135 thumbs down, 128
thumbs up, 128 on top of head, 15--16 interlocking elbows, 115--16
interruptive arguments, 63 isopraxis, 149 jabbing a finger, 132--33 jaw,
the, 79, 82--83 jaw displacement, 83 jaw dropping, 83 jaw jutting, 83
jaw muscles pulsing, 83 jaw shifting, 83 jaw tensing, 82 jewelry,
playing with, 123 jittery hands, 126--27 joy, 67, 75, 76, 111, 165

jumping (joy), 165 jutting jaw, 83 jutting tongue, 58 knee clasping
leaning back, 161 leaning forward, 162 knee flexing, 163 knee-high
self-hugging, 164 knee rubbing, 163 knitting eyebrows, 25 knuckle
cracking, 136 with interlaced fingers, 136--37 kowtowing, 108 laughter,
67 "leakage," 93 leaning an ear, 44 leaning away, 147 moving chair away,
150 leaning back, knee clasping, 161 leaning forward, knee clasping, 162
legs, the, 157--66 hand on, elbow out, 138 as indicators of desires, 172
tapping sides of, 137 leg agitation, 173 leg cleanser, 162 leg draping,
162 leg kicking, sitting, 164--65 leg rubbing, 162 legs spreading apart,
sitting, 160--61 legs together, sitting, 160 leg tantrums, 172 licking
lips, 70--71 tongue licking teeth, 59 lifting hat, 16 limbic system, 3,
116, 129, 165 lips, the, 69--78 fingertips to, 70 the O, 75 upside-down,
73 withdrawing, 72 lip biting, 70 lip compressing, 71 pulled down, 72
reluctance to decompress lips, 72 slight pressing of lips, 71--72 lip
fullness, 69 lip licking, 70--71

lip narrowing, 71 lip plucking, 70 lip pursing, 73--74 pulled to side,
74 lip quivering, 73 lip rise, upper, 77 listening, 44--45 long stare,
40 looking askance (sideways), 38 looking at ceiling or sky, 38 looking
away, 39--40 looking for acceptance, 38--39 loss of balance, 165--66
loud, short exhaling, 53 loud inhaling, 54 lowered eyes, 39
"manspreading," 156 massaging arm crossing, 114 cheek or facial, 80
clavicle, 144 closed fist, 134 earlobe, 43--44 forehead, 20 neck, 99
repetitive hand raking of chest, 145 thumb, 128 vagus nerve, 99--100
mirroring, 149 modified hand steepling, 124 Morris, Desmond, 2, 153
mouth, the, 53--67 mouth open, jaw to side, 75 mouth stretching, 56--57
moving chair away, 150 mustache stroking, 88--89 nail biting, 133 nails,
flicking on teeth, 60 nails flicking, 138 namaste, 139--40 "narcissistic
serenity," 94 narrowing of elbows, 115 of eyebrows, 25 of eye socket, 29
of lips, 71 neck, the, 97--103 holding fist in front of, 100--101 neck
dimple, covering of, 98

neck exposure, 102--3 neck flushing/blushing, 101--2 necklace crying
while clutching, 35 playing with, 99 neck massaging, 99 neck stiffening,
103 neck stretching, 101 neck touching, 97--98 neck veins pulsing, 101
neck ventilating, 100 needle tracks, 118 nervous pacing, 172 nervous
smiles, 76 nervous whistling, 66--67 nose, the, 47--52 covering with
both hands, 47--48 holding high, 50 index finger to, 49--50 sneaking
touch, 51--52 nose brushing, 50 nose inhaling, rapid, 52 nose
tapping/signaling, 50--51 nose twitching, 49 nose wrinkling unilateral,
48--49 upward (disgust), 48 nostril flaring, 51 O, the, 75 object
placement, 123 objects distancing from, 141 playing with, 123 odd face
in crowd, 93--94 OK sign, 140 thumb up, 130 orientation reflex (OR), 12
out of place smirk ("duping delight"), 94 overeating, 57--58 oxytocin,
121, 139, 152--53 pace during walk, 159--60 pacing, nervous, 172 padded
shoulders, 105, 107 palm on chest, 145--46 palm out, playing with hair,
11 palms-down displays, 125 fingers spread, 125 interlaced fingers,
135--36 palms-up displays, 124--25

interlaced fingers, 135--36 panic attacks, 144, 145, 173 patting back of
head, 13 shoulder, 121 perspiration. See sweating philtrum, playing
with, 51 pigeon toes, 169--70 piloerection, 117 pinching the corners of
the mouth, 82 pitch of voice, 61 playing footsies, 168 playing with a
ring, 141 playing with hair, 10--11, 137 playing with necklace, 99
playing with objects, 123 playing with philtrum, 51 playing with shirt
collar, 99 playing with zipper, 146 plucking lips, 70 pointing chin, 90
eye-pointing cluster, 36--37 eyes, 36--37 a finger, 132 at forehead, 20
politician's thumb, 140--41 postural echoing, 149 precision grip, 141
preening, 137 pregnancy (pregnant women), 152 "pregnant pause," 62--63
pressing hand on forehead, 20 pressing on chest, 144 pressing the flesh,
121 protruding tongue, 59 proxemics, 157--58 puffing out cheeks, 81
pupil constriction, 28 pupil dilation, 27--28 pursing lips, 73--74
pulled to side, 74 pushing away from table, 122 puzzled look, 20--21
quick shoulder shrugging, 106--7 quivering ankle, 164 chin-muscle, 89
under eyes, 29

lips, 73 raised palm thrust, 127 raised thumb. See thumbs up raising one
shoulder, 105--6 raising shoulders with palms up, head canted, 108 rapid
breathing, 143, 144 rapid nose inhaling, 52 reaching for head
(stupefied), 15 reciprocal touching, 130--31 regal stance, 111 relaxed
eyes, 28--29 reluctance to touch with palm, 142 repetition of words, 65
repetitive hand raking of chest, 145 restrained elation, 110--11 rigid
sitting, 149 ring playing, 141 rocking foot, 168--69 rogatory hand
position, 124--25 rolling of the eyes, 37 running fingers through hair,
11 sad eyes, 39 sad mouth, 74 saliva balls of mouth, 55 scarred ears, 45
scratching ankle, 163 cheek, 81--82 head, 14, 112 knee, 163 security
blankets, 131 self-hugging, 112--13 knee-high, 164 self-injury, 117--18
self-touching, while answering, 127 sentiments and gaze, 32 serenity in
turmoil, 94 shaking hands, 121, 138--39 shallow, fast breathing, 144
shielding face, 92 shifting chin, 88 shifting hip/buttock, 153--54
shifting jaw, 83 shirt collar crying while clutching, 35 playing with,
99 shoe dangle, 173 shoulders, the, 105--8 chin to, 89

patting, 121 shoulder interest, 106 shoulder rubbing, 107 shoulder
shrugging, 106--7 shoulders widening, 107 silence, 62--63 sitting
behaviors, 147--50, 160--63, 164--65 skin blushing, 44, 101--2 skin
pulling, 100 slight pressing of lips, 71--72 slouching, 150 slumped
shoulders, 105 chin drop with, 86--87 smiles/smiling, 75--77 smirk, out
of place, 94 smoking, 57 sneaking a cheek touch, 81 sneaking nose touch,
51--52 social status, and touch, 121 sock pulling, 173 soles of feet,
exposing, 170 spatial distancing, 157--58 speaker's fist, 134--35
speeding through comments, 65--66 speed of response, 65 speed of
talking, 64 spreading apart legs, 156, 160--61 spreading out arms, 114
spreading out elbows, 115 squinting, 40 slight, 40 stammering, 62
standing leg crossing, 164 stare, long, 40 staring aggressively, 41
staring versus gazing, 33 starter's position, 162 steepling, hand,
123--24 stiffening of arms, 111--12 of neck, 103 stomping foot, 172
stress lines, 19 stretching neck, 101 strumming fingers, 134 on cheek,
80 stuck-out tongue, 58 stuttering, 62 sucking in air through corners of
mouth, 54 sudden facial tics, 79--80

suprasternal notch, covering of, 98 surrogate touching, 130--31
swallowing, hard, 101 swaying hips, 154 sweating excessive, 117
forehead, 19 hands, 154 playing with philtrum, 51 talk/talking angling
to the side, 158--59 cathartic utterances, 63--64 coughing or clearing
of throat, 66 delay in answering, 62 filler sounds, 66 foot turning
away, 169 gesturing while, 110 incessant, 64 incongruent, 64--65
interruptive arguments, 63 pitch of voice, 61 politician's thumb,
140--41 repetition of words, 65 silence, 62--63 speaker's fist, 134--35
speeding through comments, 65--66 speed of, 64 speed of response, 65
stuttering/stammering, 62 toes pointing up, 170 tone of voice, 61
two-handed push back, 133 uptalk, 61 using finger as baton, 133 "talk to
the hand," 127 tapping foot, 171 nose, 50--51 sides of legs, 137 teeth,
60--61 teepee finger rub, 135 teeth baring, 60 teeth tapping, 60--61
temple vein throbbing, 19 tendered handshake, 139 tense eyebrow arching,
24 tensing jaw, 82 territorial challenge, 158 territorial displays

the arms, 114, 115 the hands, 122, 127, 138 the head, 15 the legs, 158,
160--61, 162 territorial stance, 158 throat clearing, 56, 66 throbbing
temple vein, 19 thumb displays, 129--30 thumb massaging, 128 thumb out,
129 thumbs down, interlaced fingers, 128 thumbs up, 129--30 interlaced
fingers, 128 OK sign, 130 thumb twirling, 128 thumb withdrawing, 129
tics facial, 79--80 vocal, 56 tie-knot touching, 98--99 toes pointing
inward, 169--70 toes pointing up, 170 toe wiggling, 171 tone of voice,
61 tongue biting/chewing, 56 tongue darting, 60 tongue in cheek, 58
tongue insults, 58 tongue jutting, 58 tongue licking teeth, 59 tongue
pressing against palate, 59 tongue protruding, 59 tongue rubbing,
upper-lip, 78 torso, the, 143--52 trichotillomania, 12--13 triumph
displays, 111 true smiles, 76 tummy, the. See belly, the turning away,
148 feet, 169 foot, 169 "turtle effect," 106 tut-tutting, 67 twiddling
thumbs, 128 twitching nose, 49 two-handed push back, 133 uncooperative
legs and feet, 165 unilateral nose wrinkling, 48--49 upper lip rise, 77

upper-lip tongue rubbing, 78 upside-down lips, 73 uptalk, 61 vagus
nerve, massaging, 99--100 ventral covering, 148--49 during pregnancy,
152 ventral denial, 148 ventral fronting, 148 vocal tics, 56 voice
pitch, 61 voice tone, 61 Vrij, Aldert, 125--26 "wagging" finger, 133
walking behaviors, 159 walking pace, 159--60 What Every BODY Is Saying
(Navarro), 7, 98 whistling nervously, 66--67 widening shoulders, 107
wiggling toes, 171 wiping cheeks, 82 withdrawing chin, 86 feet, 168
lips, 72 thumb, 129 word repetition, 65 wringing hands, 126 wrist
behaviors, 116 xerostomia, 55 yawning, 57 zipper, playing with, 146

About the Author

JOE NAVARRO has spent a lifetime observing others. For twenty-five
years, as a Special Agent for the FBI, he conducted and supervised
interrogations of spies and other dangerous criminals, mastering the art
of nonverbal communication. After retiring from the Bureau, he became a
sought-after public speaker and consultant, and wrote the groundbreaking
bestseller What Every BODY Is Saying. Now, Navarro returns with his most
ambitious work yet. The Dictionary of Body Language is a pioneering
field guide to nonverbal communication, revealing the more than four
hundred behaviors that will allow you to gauge anyone's true intentions.
Moving from the head down to the feet, Navarro shows the hidden meanings
behind the many conscious and subconscious things we do. Readers will
learn how to tell a person's feelings from subtle changes in their
pupils; the lip behaviors that may betray concerns; the many different
varieties of arm posturing, and what each one means; and many other
fascinating insights. Readers will turn again and again to The
Dictionary of Body Language ---a bible for understanding what your boss
really means, whether a potential romantic partner is interested or not,
and how to put yourself forward in the most favorable light. Discover
great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.

Also by Joe Navarro

What Every BODY Is Saying : An Ex-FBI Agent's Guide to Speed-Reading
People Louder Than Words : Take Your Career from Average to Exceptional
with the Hidden Power of Nonverbal Intelligence Phil Hellmuth Presents
Read 'Em and Reap : A Career FBI Agent's Guide to Decoding Poker Tells

Copyright

While the manuscript for this book was reviewed by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) prior to publication, the opinions and thoughts
expressed herein are those of the author exclusively. THE DICTIONARY OF
BODY LANGUAGE . Copyright © 2018 by Joe Navarro. All rights reserved
under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment
of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,
nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books. Cover design by Lex Maudlin Cover illustration ©
Leremy/Shutterstock Illustration credits: here, here, here, here, here,
here, here, here, here, here © Anna Rassadnikova/Shutterstock, Inc.;
here © freelanceartist/Shutterstock, Inc.; here © Oksana
Usenko/Shutterstock, Inc.; here © makar/Shutterstock, Inc. FIRST EDITION
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Navarro, Joe,
1953- author. Title: The dictionary of body language : a field guide to
human behavior / Joe Navarro. Description: New York, NY : William
Morrow, \[2018\] \| Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018024764 \| ISBN 9780062846877 (trade paperback).
Subjects: LCSH: Body language---Dictionaries. Classification: LCC
BF637.N66 N378 2018 \| DDC 153.6/903---dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2018024764. Digital Edition AUGUST 2018 ISBN:
978-0-06-284686-0 Version 06192018 Print ISBN: 978-0-06-284687-7

About the Publisher

Australia HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd. Level 13, 201
Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada HarperCollins Publishers Ltd Bay Adelaide Centre, East Tower 22
Adelaide Street West, 41st Floor Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 4E3
www.harpercollins.ca India HarperCollins India A 75, Sector 57 Noida
Uttar Pradesh 201 301 www.harpercollins.co.in New Zealand HarperCollins
Publishers New Zealand Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive Rosedale 0632 Auckland,
New Zealand www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 1 London Bridge Street London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 195
Broadway New York, NY 10007 www.harpercollins.com


