How to be instantly charismatic. The SHR Method:

Charisma is what makes you stand out in an interview, client pitch,
negotiation, meeting your future in-laws, etc. The best part? It's a
skill you can learn. Turns out there are 3 powerful steps to being
charismatic. Make someone feel: • Seen • Heard & • Remembered Let's dive
in...

1. Seen • Give a real compliment. The kind that sparks an interesting
story they can tell you about... • Chatting virtually? It could be the
art hanging on their wall. • In person? Maybe it's something they're
wearing. Bonus points if you notice their "thing of pride" (that most
others don't). • Keep your eye contact strong, and your phone away. Show
that you're fully engaged and they have your complete attention. (It's
surprisingly rare).

2. Heard • (Pre-meeting) Write down meaningful questions. Review
previous messages you've exchanged so they're fresh. • (Mid-meeting)
Recap their important points so they feel understood. "So what I'm
hearing is..."; "I love that you said..." • (Post-meeting) Always send a
note. Always. It could be an email, text, ping... • For anything
work-related, list your big takeaways + next steps. (4-5 bullets is
ideal). • End it with something warm, like an inside joke.

3. Remembered • Keep a list of tiny, personal details. Add more to the
list every time you connect. • People are always endeared when you
remember their pet's name, their child's birthday, an upcoming vacation
they've planned... • Include these in your thank-you note, and keep them
top-of-mind the next time you connect.

That's it! The secret (and paradox) of charisma? It's not about being
interesting. It's about making the other person feel interesting. Try
these 3 things, and you'll instantly stand out from the rest. "People
will forget what you said. People will forget what you did. But people
will never forget how you made them feel." --- Maya Angelou

Thanks for reading! If you liked this post, follow me for more life
hacks about social intelligence and personal growth. Have any other tips
to make people feel seen, heard, and remembered? Let us all know in the
comments!


