Table of Contents Title Page 365 DAYS TO DECLUTTER AND ORGANIZE YOUR
HOME More Books by Jamie Stewart: 365 DAYS TO DECLUTTER AND ORGANIZE
YOUR HOME ENTRYWAY Entryway makeover 1. Use it or lose it! 2. Consider
adding mudroom. 3. Mudroom organizing idea: Table with drawers. 4.
Remove off-season items and hide clutter instantly! 5. Multipurpose
rooms that work. 6. Solutions for non-existent entryway. 7. Define your
entry with this clever idea. 8. Life hack -- mudroom cubby systems! 9.
Remember to organize your shoes. 10. Declutter your shoes -- a simple
shoe bench. 11. Savvy shoe storage ideas. 12. Creative and unusual shoe
storage ideas. 13. Pant hangers and crown molding for your shoes. 15.
Declutter grimy winter footwear in your entryway. 16. Time-saving
solutions for mudroom closet. 17. Organize a small entryway closet --
Closet makeover. 18. A space-saving idea for your small entryway closet.
21. Gym lockers for your small mudroom. 22. Reorganize your keys. 23. A
decluttering secret from professional organizers. 24. Use stylish
wrought iron hooks. 25. Keep your screws and nuts in one place with this
clever idea. 26. Sports equipment and outdoor toys. 27. Too many
baskets. 28. Keep incoming/outgoing mail organized in your entryway. 29.
Another way to organize incoming/outgoing mail. 30. Dealing with your
kids. 31. Let your imagination run wild!

KITCHEN Hello kitchen! 32. There is no wrong place to start. 33.
Reorganize and declutter floating shelves in the kitchen. 34. Declutter
small kitchen appliances. Therefore, when you want to find certain
appliance, you will always know where it is. 35. A systematically
organized cooking space. 36. Prepare your meals in decluttered kitchen.
37. Create more cook-friendly kitchen. 38. Organize your pots and pans.
39. Another way to keep pots and pans well organized. 40. Pot and pan
holder. 41. Don't forget to organize and declutter your knives. 42.
Organize your cutting boards. 43. Lazy Susan -- Spice organizers. 44.
Alphabetize your favorite spices. 45. How to organize your bakeware? 46.
Create a baking zone. 47. How to keep your baking cabinet neat and tidy?
48. A kitchen organizing trick for baking sheets. 49. Reorganize and
categorize kitchen utensils. 50. Declutter your recipes and cookbooks.
51. Find the right home in your home for your favorite recipes. 52. No
pantry solutions. 53. Organize food in your pantry. 54. Organize your
foods by categories. 55. Organize your canned goods and jars once and
for all. 56. Organize your bulk items and dried goods. 57. A shoe
organizer can help you to organize all these snacks. 58. How to store
chocolate and desserts -- Make sense of the mess. 59. Organize your tea
bags. 60. Keep bulk herbal teas neat and tidy. 61. Clean your stovetop
with leftover vegetable oil. 62. Trays -- Organizing idea for your
kitchen counter. 63. Organize your food containers.

64. Get rid of that messy pile in your kitchen drawer. 65. The clever
solutions for your junk drawer. 66. Keep your refrigerator clean and
organized (Part I). 67. Keep your refrigerator clean and organized (Part
II). 68. Declutter refrigerator shelves and drawers. 69. Take
organization to the next level. 70. It's time to organize your freezer
(Part I). 71. It's time to organize your freezer (Part II). 72. Go one
step further. Prevent your freezer burn. From time to time, sort through
each container in order to place the oldest items in front of the
freezer. If you buy in bulk, you should purchase a deep freezer. 73. An
unexpected way to use a magazine holder. 74. Declutter your kitchen
gadgets and appliances. 75. Store your kitchen gadgets and appliances.
77. Smart organizing ideas for your kitchen (Part II). 78. Smart
organizing ideas for your kitchen (Part III). 79. Organize cleaning
zone. 80. Kitchen organizing tips: sink front tray. 81. Organize under
the sink 82. Labels are great help for keeping kitchen items organized.
83. Keep your veggies organized. 84. Organize kitchen cabinets with
tension rods. 85. Pegboard for small kitchen tools. 86. Get a lot of
extra storage with hanging shelves. 87. You should keep your dishes near
the sink. 88. Two commandments of a clutter-free pantry. 89. Let go of
sentimental clutter! 90. Hang wrapping paper rolls on your closet
ceiling. 91. Keep drawers organized. 92. Designate a drinking zone. 93.
Create your very own cocktail bar. 94. Solutions for your tiny kitchen.
95. Keep it user-friendly. 96. Keep your mugs neat and tidy. 97. Store
your supplements and vitamins. BATHROOM

Make your bathroom sparkle and shine! 98. Buy organizing products by
considering the bigger picture. 100. Let dust be your guide! 101. A
systematic plan for your bathroom. 103. End your day with a clean
bathroom cabinet. 104. Cut clutter in the bathroom -- Shower and bath
caddies. 105. Under the bathroom sink. 106. Under-the-sink storage
ideas. 107. Clever and practical: over-the-door bin. 108. A simple way
to store more in your bathroom. 110. Floating shelves -- a brilliant
idea for small bathroom. 111. Three storage tricks for a tiny bathroom.
112. A quick way to clean your medicine cabinet. 113. A cheap and clever
way to store bath toys. 114. A magnetic strip -- organize small metal
grooming items. 115. A clever solution for toilet paper. 116. Organize a
complete makeup (Part I). 117. Organize a complete makeup (Part II).
118. An ingenious idea for storing your small beauty products. 120.
Change your habits -- change your bathroom. 121. Personalized bathroom
shelves. 122. Organize your nail polishes. 123. Two cheap solutions to
keep your perfume collection organized. 124. How to organize your
drawers once and for all? 125. Solve overstuffed drawers. 127. Organize
your hair accessories. 128. A fun way to organize trinkets. 129. Hair
ties, ponytail holders, and headbands. 130. A solution for storing spray
bottles. 131. Items that are rarely used. DINING ROOM Dining room
promotes healthy eating at home so keep it neat and tidy. Get your
dining room shipshape! 132. The "three-box" method for your dining room.
133. Declutter dining room cabinet. 134. Keep dining room cabinet
organized.

135. How to maintain a decluttered dining room? 136. Declutter the
dining room table. Step one: Bring them all together and start sorting
into three categories: "kitchen accessories", "other accessories", and
"dining room accessories". It will take less than 10 minutes. Step two:
Now you need to find a spot for each and every item. Put away things
that do not belong here. Things that belong in the kitchen, take them to
the kitchen. The other things will need their "homes" in the other rooms
of the house. Afterwards, to maintain a clear dining table henceforward,
you will need to find homes for all the things that seem to accumulate
on your dining table. That's all you've got to do. 137. Promote beauty
and order. 138. Corral kids' belongings. 139. Dining room organizations
-- baskets. 140. Use dresser in your dining room. 141. Keep your
sideboard neat and tidy. 142. Your cocktail cabinet. 143. Extra storage
-- rolling bar cart. 144. You get a lot of extra storage with hanging
shelves. 145. Sort your newspapers and magazines. 146. Wheeled furniture
for small living space. 147. How to throw a dinner party in a small
apartment? 148. Weeknight dinner party -- keep party supplies on hand.
BEDROOM 149. Get organized -- divide into zones. 150. Declutter your
bedroom -- surplus furniture. 151. Handy tips to help declutter your
bedroom. 152. Turn a dresser into bedside tables. 153. Use the advantage
of hidden storage. 154. Turn bedroom clutter into d√©cor. 155. Rolling
cart for your bedroom. 156. Small furniture will open up your space.
157. Get organized: use dividers. 158. Hang instead of stand. 159.
Organization hacks for your tiny bedroom. 160. Maximizing under-bed
storage.

161. Turn your desk into a bedside table. 162. Declutter your bedroom
and sleep peacefully. 164. Declutter and organize your relaxing zone.
165. Dealing with clutter according to your personality --
Sentimentalist. 166. Under bed boxes and storage to save your space.
167. Declutter the work zone. 168. Change your habits, change your
workspace for the better. 169. One of the best organizers of all time --
command hooks. 170. Baskets for your work zone. 171. Desk makeover --
never enough baskets. 172. Think outside the shelf. 173. Use empty cans
to create your desk organizer. 174. A high-level organization -- rolling
cart. 175. Maximize storage space in your workstation. 176. Handle
paperwork, documents and mail. 177. Create a spot for incoming papers.
178. You can easily sort the files. 179. Solve cable-clutter problem.
180. A shoe organizer can help you to organize your craft supplies. 181.
Pegboard for your small tools. 182. Keep your craft supplies organized
-- empty pasta jars. 183. Beauty is in the little things. 184. Let go of
book clutter. 185. Create a minimalist wardrobe. 186. Get rid of
unwanted clothes. 187. An easy way to spring-clean your wardrobe. 188.
Three hacks for organizing your wardrobe. You can take some classic
pieces to a tailor for alterations and create a vintage look. Organize
your clothing by type, so that everything is visible. Then, organize by
color. For example, sweaters light to dark, long-sleeve tops light to
dark and so on. Thus, you will achieve an overall feeling of happiness!
189. Organize your clothing in a vertical fashion. 190. Organize your
clothes in a stylized way.

191. Take your closet organization to the next level. 192. You get a lot
of extra storage with hanging shelves. 193. Small space survival --
multiple levels of clothing bars! 194. Organize and store all of your
sweaters effortlessly. 195. Organize your caps and hats. 196. Keep your
ties well organized. 197. How to declutter your scarves? 198. A storage
solution for your scarf collection -- hangers. 199. The clever concept
to store your scarves. 200. Keep your jeans organized. Repairing and
repurposing. Out of sight means less visual clutter, but jeans hidden in
the wardrobe tend to be forgotten. Therefore, consider shortening or
hemming if you think it'll be worth it. Set aside anything that needs
repair and take it to the tailor as soon as possible. 201. Keep your
skirts neat and tidy. 202. The best way to store your skirts. 203.
Life-changing clothing organization tips -- dresses. It's hard to change
dresses if you can't see them. Consider buying decorative garment rack
and hang your favorites. To make the best of your closet, consider
installing an extendable valet rod. You can use different color hangers
for different seasons. Lovely! 204. Life-changing clothing organization
tips -- tops. 205. Life-changing clothing organization tips -- jackets
and blazers. 206. How to organize your tiny closet? 207. One of the best
space saving tools -- multi-tiered hangers. 208. Brilliant organization
ideas -- over-the-door rack. 209. Double your closet space. 210. A few
life hacks for your tiny closet. 211. Creative solutions for your small
closet. 212. Simple hacks to organize your dressing table. 213. Cubby
systems are still irreplaceable. 214. Cute and stylish storage. 215. Be
creative -- try displaying your favorites. 216. Organizing jewelry can
be challenging.

217.Organize your jewelry boxes. 218. A stylish way to organize your
clutches. 219. Keep your sunglasses neatly organized. 220. Keep your
purse neat and tidy. Organize essentials in designated places: cell
phone, wallet, keys, notebook and pen, small pack of tissues, lip balm,
and hand cream. You can do it! 221. Hang your ironing board. LIVING ROOM
Enjoy your clutter-free living room! 222. Organizing hacks for a
clutter-free living room. 223. Go a step further. 224. Simple and
traditional living room storage ideas. 225. Ideas for organizing your
open shelving. 226. A cozy living room makeover -- dressers. 227. Cut
clutter in the living room closet. Items that should go in the closet;
Clutter and garbage. Follow these few steps and you will declutter your
closet easily and effortlessly. After decluttering, you should sort your
items one by one. 228. Keep living room closet well organized. 229. You
get a lot of extra storage with hanging shelves. 230. Floating shelves
-- decorative and functional ideas. 231. Be practical but chic! 232. Get
the right coffee table. 233. Organize your coffee table. 234. Dress up
your coffee table. 235. Cute nesting tables -- the solution for a small
living room. 236. Old-fashioned ottoman. 237. Built-Ins - maximize space
in your living room. 238. Just imagine -- storage bench! 239. Organize
your favorites -- collectible figurines. 240. Rolling cart in your
living room. 241. Tackle kids' belongings. 242. Dining room
organizations -- baskets. 243. Creative storage ideas for a small living
room.

244. Creative organization solutions -- freestanding cabinets. 245.
Burlap buckets as clever organizers. Apart from photographs and
paintings, you can hang your favorite collections on the wall. You can
also purchase a stylish ottoman with space storage and hide your burlap
baskets there. 246. A single drawer file cabinet. 247. Put furniture to
work -- console table. 248. Add glam with narrow shelves. 249.
Traditional hutches and armoires. 250. A simple hack -- cute decorative
trays. 251. Pro organizer trick -- a table skirt. 252. Organize your
mini bar. 253. The clever ideas to make the most of your space in living
room. 254. Organize books according to your style. 255. Cut the book
clutter with stylish bookcases. 256. Prevent magazine clutter. 257. Keep
your magazines neatly organized (Part I). 258. Keep your magazines
neatly organized (Part II). 259. Organize your comic book collection.
260. Make a better visual impression -- hide electronics. 261. Cubbies
in your living room. 262. Home office in your living room. 263. A great
solution for extra storage in your living room. 264. The simplicity and
beauty -- floor bins. 265. How to throw a party in a small living room?
266. Organizing your recordings (I). 267. Organizing your recordings
(II). 268. Velcro -- organize your remote controls. 269. How to maintain
a decluttered living room? CHILDREN'S ROOM "Cut clutter game" 270.
Declutter kids' rooms -- well begun is half done! 271. Let's play the
"Cut clutter game"! 272. Declutter kid's room -- surplus furniture. 273.
How to declutter children's bedroom? 275. Organize a comfortable
sleeping area.

276. Maintain kids' room. 277. Organize kids' study space. 278. Use
desktop and drawer organizers. 279. Organize kids' study area-- cube
shelves. 280. Organize kids' study area -- floating shelves. 281. 2-in-1
organizer -- pegboard shelving system. 282. A savvy solution for small
items. 283. Quick ideas for organizing crafts supplies. 284. One of the
best ways to declutter craft supplies. 285. Use recycled storage --
"monkey see, monkey do" method. 286. Repurpose items for organization
and storage. 287. Declutter craft supplies -- shoe organizer. 288. Quick
and clever idea -- pegboard. 289. Small cubbies -- storage and display.
290. Display kids' artwork. 291. How to combat book clutter? 292. Choose
the appropriate storage. 293. Keep kids' books neatly organized -- wall
book bin. 294. A great idea to organize and store kids' books. 295. Life
hacks for tiny room -- corner bookcase. 296. Go one step further -- a
container with wheels! When everything has its own spot, your child can
find what he/she is looking for quickly and easily. Consider purchasing
the containers with wheels as a storage for small items. This fun kids'
storage solution will cut clutter and help your child keep bedroom neat
and tidy. In this way, you will teach your child to care for her/his
belongings. At the same time, your child will have fun. Make it work for
you! 297. Organize kids' toys -- basics. 298. Let go of sentimental
toys. 299. A simple plan to declutter the toys. 300. Store and simplify.
301. It's time to get organized -- built-in shelving systems. Try to use
every inch of available space in child's room with built-in shelving
systems. The lower shelves can be used for small toys and favorites
while the upper shelves can display artwork and collectibles.

302. Corner cubby system -- you're ready to get organized! 303. A
clutter-free life -- look for double-duty solutions! 304. Choose the
right toy box. 305. Use old baskets to keep toys off the floor. 306.
Clever toy storage trick -- hidden buckets. 307. Store kid's puzzle
pieces. 308. Simple solutions for the favorite puzzles. 309. Some more
organizing ideas for kids. 310. A totally clever idea for car toys. 311.
Use a shoe organizer to declutter small toys. 312. Garden baskets for
plush toys and stuffed animals. 313. Store and organize card games. 314.
A clever idea for big toys. 315. Two life-changing decluttering hacks --
reuse old toys! 316. A storage chest. 317. Declutter kids' clothes --
basics. 318. Organize outgrown kids' clothes. 319. Clutter-busting ideas
for your little ones. 320. Display child's favorites. 321. Reorganize
and declutter room with wrought iron hooks. 322. A catchall basket in a
kids' room. 323. Teach your little ones to be organized -- multicolored
drawers. PETS Life hacks for a clutter-free pet's area 324. How to
organize pet supplies? 325. A clever organization for your beloved pet.
326. Declutter and reorganize a walk station. 327. Feed your fur friend.
328. Keep pet food neatly organized. 330. Adorable containers for pet
toys. 331. A special sleeping spot. LAUNDRY ROOM Let it shine! 332. The
plan for simplifying your laundry -- basics. 333. Declutter the laundry
room -- divide into zones. 334. Washer and dryer organization.

335. Space utilization -- a smart organizer between washer and dryer.
336. A clever laundry concept -- rolling laundry caddy. 337. Get your
cleaning supplies neatly organized. 338. Behind the door -- an
over-the-door shoe organizer. 339. Think outside the jar. 340. A great
way to organize your cleaning supplies -- under sink space. 341.
Organize your stain removal kit. 342. How to use an old armoire to
improve your laundry routine? 343. Great ideas to organize storage in
your laundry room. 344. Organize your junk drawer. 345. Adjustable
laundry guard. 346. The new concept for laundry room -- shelves. 347.
Spend less time doing laundry -- designated hampers. 348. A few creative
ways to make doing laundry easier. 349. Instant laundry organization --
a wall-hung cabinet. 350. Perfect solutions for your drying zone --
drying racks. 351. DIY drying rack. 352. Fold away ironing board. 353.
An ingenious idea -- pull out folding table. GARAGE Let's get organized!
354. Declutter your garage -- tackle this task over the weekend. 355.
Focus on one area at a time. 356. How to keep all of your gardening
tools neat and tidy? 357. Creative organization solutions -- install
shelving. 358. Utilize the garage ceiling. 359. Hang a pegboard in your
garage. 360. A creative storage idea -- old school lockers. 361. A
practical solution -- drawers in your garage. 362. A space-saving
solution -- workbench. 363. Utilize every bit of space -- corner
shelves. 364. A simple idea to organize gardening tools. 365. Keep balls
neat and tidy.

CLICK HERE TO DOWNLOAD

365 DAYS TO DECLUTTER AND ORGANIZE YOUR HOME Written by: Jamie Stewart
Copyright ¬© 2016 All Rights Reserved All rights reserved. No part of
this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without written permission
from the publisher, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a
review. Warning-Disclaimer The purpose of this book is to educate and
entertain. The author or publisher does not guarantee that anyone
following the techniques, suggestions, tips, ideas, or strategies will
become successful. The author and publisher shall have neither liability
or responsibility to anyone with respect to any loss or damage caused,
or alleged to be caused, directly or indirectly by the information
contained in this book.

More Books by Jamie Stewart:

365 DAYS TO DECLUTTER AND ORGANIZE YOUR HOME If you are tired of seeing
the clutter in your house and wasting time looking for items, it's time
to tackle the problem once and for all. When your home is jammed with
stuff, you might feel a discomfort and pressure. There is no doubt,
clutter can really influence the way you live and work. Your clutter
defines a part of you as a person, too. For example, if you love
collectibles, these things reflect your passion. If your space is jammed
with book clutter, it reveals your personality. However, do not settle
with living in a messy home. You deserve better! Consequently, your
question is "Where do I start?" We all know how annoying clutter can be.
For people who are overwhelmed by different types of clutter, this may
seem like a daunting and never-ending task. Honestly, who has time and
energy to declutter the entire house in one go? Luckily, the solution is
easier than you suppose. A good decluttering plan and the right tools
are just what you need now. There are simple life hacks for decluttering
your entire house that will save you time and energy. Set the mood with
your favorite music and get to work! Try to break down the job into a
few small manageable tasks and avoid discouragement and tiredness.
Divide your entire house into a few zones like this: a. entryway, b.
kitchen, c.¬†bathroom d.¬†living room, e. dining room, f.¬†bedroom, g.
children's room, h. pet area, i. laundry room,

j. garage. Next, divide these areas into smaller parts. It could be one
shelf, one closet, a wall, and so on. As you probably already know, it's
easy to let our house turn chaotic. Stick to simple rules to streamline
your living space. It will be easy because the same basic rules for
decluttering work for any room. Now, focus on one area at a time. Each
and every item should fit into one of these zones. If you find some
items that don't fit into one of these designated "zones", consider
donating or tossing them. It's just that simple! There is an old adage:
"It is better to take many small steps in the right direction than to
make a great leap forward only to stumble backward." This book contains
365 simple and quick decluttering tasks that you can handle easily and
effortlessly. Everything big and meaningful starts with baby steps. Here
are a few declutter guidelines to help you stay on track. a. Schedule a
decluttering day; b. Take small simple steps to reach your goal. Start
with just fifteen minutes each day. Once you've gotten a part of your
house decluttered, take the time to celebrate your small win and enjoy
this uncluttered look. Remember -- each small win is an accomplishment
unto itself. c.¬†Keep moving. Take another fifteen minutes the next day.
And so on. Before you know it, you will have uncluttered and organized a
whole room! Close your eyes and spend a few minutes visualizing your
uncluttered home. Think about how you want your home to look. Don't
limit yourself and let your imagination run wild! Here are a few smart
strategies for you. 1. Get essential decluttering tools ready. These are
trash boxes and bags, donate boxes and the right organizers.

1.  Find the right organizers like boxes, tote bags, hutches, and the
    other appropriate containers. Sort and declutter through your home:
    then, go out and buy a storage piece.

1. Consider buying double-duty furniture pieces.

1.  Here's a great trick. Take a picture of your room. Then, move just
    one or two items. Take a picture again. What does it look like?
    Better?
2.  Don't force and rush yourself. You can create a "maybe" box if you
    are not sure. There is a time for everything, so take a deep breath.
    It's completely normal to feel down sometimes. However, it's
    important to make progress, a little bit every day. Be a student of
    life! You can start clearing and decluttering your entryway. For
    example, pick a part of your mudroom closet. It doesn't matter what
    part of the closet. It could be just one shelf. Toss unwanted things
    and leave the shelf looking neatly organized. Find a place for your
    essentials. Display your favorites. Then, keep moving. Choose the
    another room and repeat the same procedure. Take your time to enjoy
    the new look. Tomorrow is a new day! A beautiful, uncluttered and
    well-organized home is the result of the work of all household
    members. However, if you live with those who do not want to work
    together, it would be difficult to manage. Then, if you live with a
    pack-rat, the situation could become even worse. You want to make
    changes and get organized and they do not want it at all. You tend
    to organize a simple lifestyle, but they gather things and spend a
    lot of money. And you can face a terrible mess! Luckily, every
    problem has a solution! Have an honest conversation with your family
    members or roommate. Try to understand their needs, try to be
    encouraging rather than nagging and negative. Do not judge and stop
    trying to convince someone to do her/his household chore. Set the
    standard, but do not tell people how to live their lives. Don't be
    afraid to express your feelings and show by example -- it is the
    most effective way to get others to follow you. Teach them to love
    uncluttered house! "If you would convince a man that he does wrong,
    do right. But do not care to convince him. Men will believe what
    they see. Let them see." ‚Äï Henry

David Thoreau And they will see very quickly -- they spend less time
cleaning and maintaining things! Remember -- nobody's perfect. Teach
your child that he/she doesn't need stuff to be happy. Your children
learn by the "monkey see, monkey do" method. So you have to set a good
example and find a creative and fun way to involve your kids in the
process. Step into a wonderful world of freedom and beauty hiding behind
all that mess!

ENTRYWAY

Entryway makeover Your entryway is the first place that guests see when
they enter your house. There are perfect solutions that can make an
efficient entry area. Learn to love the uncluttered look of your
entryway. Life is beautiful when you have simple tricks up your sleeve!

1. Use it or lose it! There is an old American adage "A place for
everything and everything in its place". This is so true. The key is to
establish a storage spot for every single object in your entryway.
Simplify your life. Determine the essentials and find them their home.
Clean the clutter out of your entryway once and for all. This rule
applies to all rooms without exception. Even for the basement and attic.
2. Consider adding mudroom. Do you have a hall closet jammed with
clutter? Here are a few life hacks for decluttering and cleaning out
your hall closet. a. While you are going through this mess, ask
yourself: Do I really need all these things in my hall closet? Is
anything in this area unused? Toss unwanted items. You can donate some
of them to a homeless shelter. b. Anyway, if you have a lot of items and
you can't get rid of them, consider adding a mudroom. The overburdened
hall closet is something quite normal for most families. However, you
can conquer your hall closet. If you are able, you can build a small
room around your front door. It could have walls of glass with charming
shelves for potted plants. So you will spend less time cleaning and
maintaining things.

3.  Mudroom organizing idea: Table with drawers.

Your mudroom can be one of the most challenging rooms to keep organized.
All year round. You and your kids bring lots of junk home. Umbrellas,
shopping bags, briefcases, newspapers, all of these items have a way of
getting dumped in the entryway. Don't let your entry room become a
chaotic place. You can equip your mudroom with lockers, floating
shelves, bins, baskets for outdoor toys, etc. Consider buying a nice
table with a drawers and shelf underneath. So, you can place large items
upon the shelf, while smaller things, like keys or papers, can go in the
drawers.

4.  Remove off-season items and hide clutter instantly! There is an old
    space-saving idea -- remove off-season items from your entryway.
    Don't store them in your hall closet. It's summertime and you still
    keep kids' ski equipment in your entryway closet. Remove these items
    to another convenient place (e.g.¬†basement, attic, garage etc.) You
    should also consider buying an attractive bureau (a chest of
    drawers) to hide unwanted items instantly. However, designate a spot
    for keys, a spot for sunglasses, wallets, etc. And stick to it.

5.  Multipurpose rooms that work. You can also merge the mudroom
    function with the functions of a kitchen storage by adding
    cupboards, drawers, and even a small freezer. At the same time, you
    will declutter your kitchen and pantry. You can also create
    mudroom/laundry room by putting your washer there. The possibilities
    are endless. Lovely!

6.  Solutions for non-existent entryway. The front entry forms the first
    impression. No entry hall? No worries, there are perfect solutions
    that can make an efficient entry area.

a. A pile of shoes, baskets, boxes, kids' backpacks... There are too
many items at the entrance of your home. Get rid of unwanted things that
are located at your front door. b. Try your best to create a functional
walkway. c.¬†Work vertically and use any small bits of wall. d.¬†Opt for
the right furniture. Choose consoles with a narrow profile or folding
chairs. e. Make your items work double-duty. For instance, you can use a
storage bench.

7.  Define your entry with this clever idea. You can create the illusion
    of an entryway by using a small-sized bookshelf as a room divider.
    Everything from mail and school papers to backpacks and caps can
    find a spot in a hutch like this. You can put a basket for keys, a
    tray for small items and other items here. A shallow bookshelf will
    separate your entry from the rest of your house. It will define the
    entry area while taking up very little space.

8.  Life hack -- mudroom cubby systems! Mudroom cubbies can bring order
    to all these accessories you and your family use on a daily basis. A
    lot of items such as toys, shopping bags, boxes newspapers,
    flip-flops, backpacks, handbags have a way of getting dumped around
    your doorway. If you prefer more hidden storage, don't use open
    cubbies. You should install cubbies with doors. Then, pay attention
    to the size of your cubbies. You don't want those cubbies take up
    most of space in your mudroom. This great and useful piece of
    furniture helps keep your entryway clutter-free.

And remember -- your foyer is the first place that guests see when they
enter your house. Choose some chic mudroom cubbies and make a great
first impression!

9.  Remember to organize your shoes. There is no doubt that even a few
    pairs of extra shoes can create mess and clutter. How to declutter
    your shoes? There are a few basic tips:

<!-- -->

a.  Therefore, the standard tip is simple -- get rid of anything you
    have not worn in a year or two. You can donate your old shoes.
b.  You may be able to repair some pair of shoes.
c.  Everything else that you can't wear or donate, just throw it in the
    trash.
d.  A simple pallet can be used to store shoes. Remove off-season shoes
    from your entryway. It's important to maintain this new clutter-free
    environment you've created. Once a month, you should take some time
    to clean this space of dust and dirt. And remember -- it gets easier
    with time!

<!-- -->

10. Declutter your shoes -- a simple shoe bench. Do you have the pile of
    shoes and boots that have accumulated by your door? What could you
    do with this clutter? Consider buying a simple shoe bench. Each
    family member can be assigned a place for holding their shoes. Place
    a mat inside the door and clean it frequently. Ask all family
    members to put their shoes on their designated spots.

11. Savvy shoe storage ideas. You have a lot of shoes, right? Rain
    boots, shoes for play, sneakers, slippers, sandals, etc. To keep
    your shoes protected and well organized, you

should find the right organizer. Here are a few storage ideas to keep
your footwear neat and tidy. a. Shoe storage cabinet is one of the best
solutions for your entryway. For sure, you have to have a space that is
large enough for it. b. Shoe rack is a handy and cut solution.
c.¬†Hanging storage fits perfectly on your door. d.¬†Floor to ceiling
shelf is an amazing solution for small apartments. You should purchase a
proper shoe organizer according to your personal needs and preferences.
The choice is yours.

12. Creative and unusual shoe storage ideas. Your footwear collection
    can make your home looks cluttered. Fortunately, there are many
    cheap and simple ideas. Looking for inspiration? These ideas work
    for all types of apartments and houses, especially for small
    apartments.

<!-- -->

a.  Hooks. You can hang shoes on hooks or nails. Therefore, your shoes
    will be right at hand.
b.  Convenient shelves. Consider installing wall mounted shelves. From
    now on, you can organize your shoes without taking up any floor
    space at all.
c.  Stylish towel rod. You can hang your high heels on the towel rod. It
    is a great minimal look!
d.  Cart. You can fit all of your slippers into a slim cart to wheel
    around the entryway.

<!-- -->

13. Pant hangers and crown molding for your shoes. Here are two great
    ideas to organize your shoes.

<!-- -->

a.  Hang your tall boots on pant hangers in your closet and save a lot
    of space on the closet floor.

b. Use crown molding to organize your high heels. You just have to
attach them to the wall upside down. So, free up the floor space and get
your favorite shoes well organized.

14. A clever way to organize high heels. "I don't know who invented high
    heels, but all women owe him a lot." -- Marilyn Monroe. Ladies are
    aware that even a few pairs of high heels can create clutter. This
    is because you didn't find a spot for them all. Nonetheless, ladies
    are constantly buying new shoes, particularly high heels. Don't
    worry at all, there are creative ways to organize your high heels in
    a closet, even in your entryway. You can purchase tall shoe box in a
    size that perfectly fits your favorite high heels. You will protect
    your shoes from potential wear-and-tear. This is just one of the
    hundreds of possibilities. If you get inspired, you can tackle this
    task as well.

15. Declutter grimy winter footwear in your entryway. Grimy shoes are
    scattered all over your hallway. Place a boot tray next to the front
    door. You can find them at local home improvement superstore. You
    can go the extra mile for your family by putting wheels on the tray.
    It makes stylish boot statement. For that purpose, you can also
    design a rolling shoe crate.

16. Time-saving solutions for mudroom closet. You're probably spending
    too much time decluttering and cleaning your hallway, as well as
    every other room in your house. However, there are time-saving
    solutions. In order to do that, you need to start by changing your
    decluttering approach.

a. Get a jump start on your mudroom closet. As you work through the
items in your mudroom closet, here are two important questions to keep
in mind: Is this useful? Is this beautiful? Now throw out any clutter
that are laying around. b. Decide on the purpose. Ask yourself: What is
the function of this closet? For instance, if you don't have a coat
closet, so coats can go there. If you're lacking wardrobe space, you can
install a cute holder with clothespins to hang hats, caps, gloves, etc.
c.¬†Maximize space. This is definitely an area where closet is a big
help. You can choose long narrow closet to maximize space in your
entryway. However, it all depends on the space that is available to you.
You are ready to start living your life!

17. Organize a small entryway closet -- Closet makeover. You can
    organize all items in your small entry closet with a few clever
    ideas. Here are a few pointers for cleaning out your small entry
    closet.

<!-- -->

a.  First of all, free up your space. Empty your closet and bring all
    items together. Make sure that you are sorting items into designated
    piles: things to throw away, things to donate, and things to sell.
    After that, reorganize your items.
b.  Then, consider using vertical space in your closet. There are
    amazing vertical shoe organizers that will hold 20 pairs of shoes
    and more.

<!-- -->

18. A space-saving idea for your small entryway closet. There is a
    brilliant idea to maximize closet space. Tiny hangers are perfect
    items for your tiny entryway. There is a variety of materials and
    brands, so give it a try.

Of course, this isn't a permanent solution. You'll have to take time to
declutter your small closet occasionally. You'll be able to simplify the
clutter so that you can enjoy your closet to the fullest. Learn to love
the uncluttered look of your entryway!

19. Take the entryway organization to the next level. Do you have coat
    stand that is cluttered with coats, jackets, gloves, and scarves?
    And your coat stand takes too much space, right?

<!-- -->

a.  Declutter your coat stand. Get rid of excess items. Donate some of
    your coats and jackets to charity.
b.  A row of wall pegs can be a great asset.
c.  Then, you can use clothespins that have a hook for wet mittens or
    gardening gloves. These hooks can be found at a local hardware store
    or home centers.

<!-- -->

20. The wire baskets for simple organization. If your entryway space
    isn't big enough for a furniture, use wire baskets to keep clutter
    out of sight. They will make it easy for you to store your sports
    equipment like balls, bike helmets, mittens, and other everyday
    items. It would be great if you are able to invest in baskets with
    lids.

21. Gym lockers for your small mudroom. You don't have to buy a mudroom
    cabinet. Here is a clever idea to maintain your clutter-free
    environment. Gym lockers make very useful storage options for the
    mudroom. Try to find vintage gym lockers online; then, prime and
    paint them to match your mudroom. They are tall and narrow so that
    they are ideal for a small place. Each family member will be
    assigned a locker for holding coats, shoes, umbrella, backpack or
    other things.

22. Reorganize your keys. Every family member has a bunch of keys. Are
they scattered everywhere? Organize your keys in a designated spot in
your entryway. You can use a bowl or rack.

23. A decluttering secret from professional organizers. You can utilize
    your entryway to put a trash bin. Your family and guests can empty
    their pockets or purses there. In this way, they don't bring any
    trash to your house. Teach your kids to use that trash bin, so this
    simple hack will make a big difference.

24. Use stylish wrought iron hooks. Do you want to have some everyday
    items at your fingertips? You can use some pretty wrought iron hooks
    to hold seasonal jackets, pet leashes, bags, baskets with handles,
    and other things. Life is beautiful when you have simple tricks up
    your sleeve! You can also hang the basket to hold small items such
    as keys or papers. Each family member will be assigned a couple of
    hooks for holding seasonal and everyday items. Lovely!

25. Keep your screws and nuts in one place with this clever idea. Every
    home has some extra bolts, nails, nuts, and screws, and they can
    easily get lost. Putting them away is easy, but finding them is the
    hard part. You can store them in between packing tape. Next, label
    it with a permanent marker. Perfect! Put these packs in a designated
    drawer. The little things

make us happy, right? Catch clutter and reorganize your home and your
life!

26. Sports equipment and outdoor toys. Kids' items for outdoor
    activities are usually scattered in your entryway. You can use a
    trash can for these items, but there are a lot of advanced ideas.

<!-- -->

a.  Use duffel bags for sports equipment. Tote bags are also a great
    idea.
b.  Hang up tennis rackets on the walls. There are other items that can
    be hung on hooks on the wall, too. Let your imagination run wild!
c.  You can designate a spot for each of sports activity. Kids' bins are
    perfect solutions for these items.
d.  For small items that tend to get thrown around you can use an old
    bookshelf.

<!-- -->

27. Too many baskets. A basket is a clever solution for almost all kinds
    of things. Toys, spray bottles, beauty products, and so on. Baskets
    are great for a quick fix, too. Especially if you are not ready for
    unexpected guests or you are in a hurry. In this way, you can teach
    kids to pick up after themselves. You can make some way to use up
    that big gap of space under your entryway cabinet. You can also use
    some cup hanger hooks to hang your baskets with handles. It will
    make a big difference. Give it a try!

28. Keep incoming/outgoing mail organized in your entryway. There are
too many paperwork, mail, school papers, and the other paper that you
get each day. Where do you put them? If you put them into your entryway
every day, you might as well have a designated spot for them. a. Bring
all papers together and check them out. Toss every unwanted paper. b.
Try to use each and every nook in your entryway. Keep your
incoming/outgoing mail organized and tidy in a latter cage. Simply hang
a small cage on the wall and use vertical space. Lovely!

29. Another way to organize incoming/outgoing mail. Where do your papers
    go when you walk in the door? Keep everything in one easy-to-find
    place like a bill clips. Mount a few bill clips on a wall in your
    hallway to keep track of your paperwork.

30. Dealing with your kids. When your kids arrive home from school, they
    like to dump their backpacks somewhere in a hallway. Backpacks,
    jackets, caps, and school supplies can get scattered next to the
    front door. It will create a lot of clutter, right? To help your
    kids to build a good habit of putting away their stuff, use this
    little trick. Place wall hooks at convenient spots by the door for
    their backpacks. If your kids can't reach the coat rack, assign wall
    hooks for their coats, jackets, scarves and so on.

31. Let your imagination run wild! If you have been decluttering for the
    past few days, you certainly got tired. Wait a minute. You already
    take your first step. This advice will help you not to give up --
    Change your perspective and use your imagination!

For instance, take photos of your house. You will see your home in a
completely new light! You can only take a picture of the room you have
already organized. It will give you an extra incentive. Remove just one
or two things more. Take picture again. Isn't it better? Well done! Just
keep up the good work!

KITCHEN

Hello kitchen! It's time to tackle the kitchen clutter. You should
divide your kitchen into several main zones: food; cooking, baking, and
food preparation; cleaning; storage; Therefore, every item in your
kitchen should fit into one of these four groups. Thus, you can
declutter, organize and clean entire kitchen easily and effortlessly.
Maybe you think you can't make time to remove trash from your kitchen,
but there is a simple solution. Just focus on one small area, one by
one! 32. There is no wrong place to start. "Do not wait; the time will
never be just right. Start where you stand, and work with whatever tools
you may have at your command, and better tools will be found as you go
along." -- Napoleon Hill Therefore, focus on the part of your kitchen.
That might be one drawer, it doesn't matter. It does not sound just like
a revolutionary idea, but you will build one small success on top of
another small success. Afterwards, you can build a "mountain" of
success. a. Examine the selected drawer. Then, empty the drawer on the
kitchen table on a counter. b. Immediately get rid of what you won't
need. Do not accumulate anything, and put unnecessary items into
donation boxes and garbage bags.

c.¬†Then, clean the drawer, and sort the items by frequency of use.
Purchase drawer dividers and organize everything. Arrange things that
are used the most frequently in the front part of the drawer. Put rest
of the thing behind them. This bright idea will save your time and
energy.

33. Reorganize and declutter floating shelves in the kitchen.

Now, you have to declutter floating shelves in the kitchen. The way you
organize your shelves also plays a part in making a clean and tidy
kitchen. a. Place a large quilt on the floor. b. Remove items from your
floating shelves, one by one and transfer them to the quilt. In this
way, you can see an abundance of stuff in your kitchen. You may need to
remove some items to the other room. c.¬†It's time to clean your items
that have gotten dusty. d.¬†Afterwards, place things back in floating
shelves. And remember -- Balance is the key to a happy kitchen. Don't
overfill your space with a lot of things. Realistically, how many baking
dishes, measuring cups or graters do you need? Get rid of the surplus
and take back your kitchen!

34. Declutter small kitchen appliances. If you have a lot of small
    appliances, they can create a clutter. Here are a few ideas to take
    control of your small appliances.

Before organizing those items, take inventory. How many small appliances
do you have? Have you been given a lot of hand-me-downs? Declutter
duplicate appliances. For example, if you have two blenders, think about
letting one of them go. You can sell these items at a garage sale or you
can donate them to charity. Ask yourself: Which ones do you use most
frequently? Divide all items into two categories:

"rarely use" and "use often." Therefore, keep only necessary items and
purge the rest. Therefore, try to store what you will use. Keep your
small appliances well organized in a kitchen cabinet. Therefore, when
you want to find certain appliance, you will always know where it is.

35. A systematically organized cooking space. You can make the most of
    your kitchen. Before you start cluttering of your cooking zone,
    consider how many cabinets you have. Which area are used for which
    cooking tasks? How many kitchen appliances and dishes can you purge?
    You can get a detailed plan on paper.

<!-- -->

a.  Bring all cooking utensils and tools together. Toss unwanted cooking
    tools.
b.  Put the spices, oils and bottles of vinegar into designated spots.
c.  Organize spoons, knives, cutting boards, etc.
d.  Organize your pots, pans skillets, and other cookware. Try to
    organize all cookware close to your stove. And from now onwards,
    when you want to find your cooking tool, you'll always know where it
    is.

<!-- -->

36. Prepare your meals in decluttered kitchen. Cookware such as mixing
    bowls, cutting boards, kitchen gadgets, knives and blender should be
    organized in a specific area. In this way, they will always be at
    your fingertips. Cut through the unnecessary kitchen tools that
    might have accumulated. Get rid of items that don't work. Free up
    space in your kitchen so that you can enjoy your space to the
    fullest.

37. Create more cook-friendly kitchen. If you are able, create a station
on your counter where you will keep your cooking essentials. Cooking
oil, salt, black pepper, and garlic are the most commonly used cooking
ingredients. In this way, your space becomes more cook-friendly. Use an
old cutting board to designate this spot.

38. Organize your pots and pans. Empty your kitchen cabinet and utilize
it for your pots and pants. Begin with the largest pots so arrange them
on the bottom of the cabinet; then, work upwards to the smallest pots
and pans. Or store them on an open shelf. Of course, get rid of old and
rusty pots and pans and organize the good ones. Your pans and pots get
unwanted stains? Don't waste your time to scrub and clean them. You can
utilize this great trick and remove the stains easily and effortlessly.
You will need apple peels. Yes, that's it! Strip off pot stains with
apple peels. Add the apple peels to your pan or pot; pour in water;
then, allow the water to simmer for about 3 minutes. Then, pour out the
water; lastly, cleanse the pot with a rag.

39. Another way to keep pots and pans well organized. Countertops look
    like magnets for clutter. Unwashed dishes, utensils, bags, pots,
    pans, there are too many items there. You can start with all these
    pots and pans and find a convenient place to store them. Otherwise,
    you will not be able to cook, bake and eat. If you continue to pile
    up all these things, your kitchen will be jammed with clutter. The
    most common and the easiest way to organize your pots and pans is to
    hang them on the wall. If you're lacking cabinet space, hang your
    cookware. Take back your kitchen!

40. Pot and pan holder. If you do not know what to do with pots and pans
    because you have a small kitchen, there is no need to

be concerned. You can easily build a simple storage area for your
favorite cookware. How about using an old pallet for this purpose? You
have to paint the pallet: then, anchor the pallet to the wall with
drywall screws; lastly, you should add some hangers. In this way, you
can keep your pots and pans neat and tidy.

41. Don't forget to organize and declutter your knives. There are too
    many knives in your kitchen. Bring all knives together on a kitchen
    table. Get rid of unwanted knives. Now you should organize the good
    ones. It may be hard to get started, but it saves you work. There
    are a few great ways to keep your knives organized.

<!-- -->

a.  Hang knives on a magnetic strip.
b.  Consider putting your knives in a designated drawer, but make sure
    to organize them with drawer dividers.
c.  In-drawer knife block is also a great solution.

<!-- -->

42. Organize your cutting boards. The old magazine rack is a great
    storage option. You can install magazine rack inside the cabinet
    door to hold your cutting boards. You should screw the rack on the
    inside of cabinet door. This is an amazing space saver and a great
    spot for easy access to your cutting boards. Nice and tidy!

43. Lazy Susan -- Spice organizers. For those who are overwhelmed by
    kitchen clutter, here is a great idea to declutter your spices. Do
    you constantly buy herbs and spices? Do you spend money buying
    duplicates for spices you already have somewhere? Do you keep
    expired spices? Your spice rack may be jammed with unwanted bottles
    of spices and herbs.

Use Lazy Susan as your new spice organizer. You can use multiple Lazy
Susans and divide your favorite spices into categories. You can organize
everything by grouping items by type and frequency of use. Items that
are used the most frequently should be the most accessible. It's
important not to limit yourself. Spice it up!

44. Alphabetize your favorite spices. Have you got a large variety of
    spices? Do you like cooking and experiment with new flavors? Do you
    want to keep your herbs and spices organized? It will take only 15
    minutes and you will find what you need much easier every time you
    cook. To alphabetize your favorite spices, bring them together.
    First, toss out expired spices. Then, arrange them in alphabetical
    order. A spice rack will help you to keep them organized once and
    for all. There is only one rule you should follow -- put every spice
    back into its proper spot after the usage.

45. How to organize your bakeware? How many pieces of baking equipment
    do you really need? It depends on the size of your family and your
    personal preferences. It's not the same thing: bake the cookies for
    yourself and your spouse or baking for sixmember family. Further, if
    you adore baking and you bake croissants, rolls, cookies, and cakes
    more frequently, you will need proper baking equipment. On the other
    hand, if you mainly buy your favorite treats in the bakery, you will
    need less baking items. The average kitchen contains many more
    dishes than it is necessary. In other words, if you think that you
    need a wide variety of baking items, here's a simple guideline.
    Four-member family will need:

<!-- -->

a.  Bakeware: 2-qt baking dish, 1 8x8 casserole, 2 cookie sheets, 2
    muffin tins, 1 tart pan, 2 round cake pans, and 1 bread pan.
b.  Baking equipment: a rolling pin, a wire rack, 2-3 mixing bowls, 12
    cookie cutters, and flour sifter.

Get rid of unwanted baking items. Throw away everything that is rusty,
warped and useless. In this way, you can organize and store your
bakeware. It means you should store bakeware and baking equipment in a
kitchen cupboard that is near to your oven. The clutter will be gone and
you will enjoy baking in the comfort of your home.

46. Create a baking zone. Do you like making delicious cookies, rolls,
    loaves of bread and other bakery products? Keeping all of your
    ingredients within arm's reach of your preparation area will make
    you feel great. You can corral all ingredients in a designated
    kitchen cabinet or shelf. Clear out the designated kitchen cabinet
    and make space for your favorites.

<!-- -->

a.  Bring all of your baking ingredients together and check the
    expiration dates.
b.  Throw unwanted ingredients away.
c.  Create a list of missing ingredients and go shopping as soon as
    possible.
d.  Put the ingredients into containers or mason jars, grouping them
    according to their purpose.
e.  Label these containers and jars and stock your new space. Enjoy
    baking and fall in love with the order in your baking zone.

<!-- -->

47. How to keep your baking cabinet neat and tidy? If you make baked
    goods frequently, you like keeping your ingredients on hand.
48. Use large-sized containers for flours, granulated sugar, powdered
    sugar, and old-fashioned oats.

1. Next, medium-sized containers are perfect for brown sugar, chocolate
chips, and tapioca. 1. Use small-sized containers for cocoa powder,
baking powder, baking soda, cornstarch, and coconut. You can choose any
type of containers that easy to open when your hands are messy. Fill
your containers with the ingredients and you will tackle this task
easily and effortlessly.

48. A kitchen organizing trick for baking sheets. Are your baking trays
    and sheets falling all over kitchen shelves and cabinets? Or it's
    difficult to find the baking tray that you need right now. The
    reason is that you didn't create a special place for your bakeware
    and they are scattered with other dishes. Here's a great kitchen
    organizing trick. Keep your bakeware organized on top of kitchen
    cupboards! In this way, they are always easily accessible.

49. Reorganize and categorize kitchen utensils. Your hand-held kitchen
    tools deserve a special spot in your kitchen. There are so useful
    and you want to have them at your fingertips. Cheese knife, bread
    knife, spatulas, colander, corkscrew, filet knife, funnel, grater,
    lemon squeezer, baster, and other utensils can create a lot of
    clutter.

<!-- -->

a.  You can group them together and categorize them by their various
    uses.
b.  Clear out all of your drawers and wipe them down.
c.  Then, get rid of utensils that you haven't used in the last year.
    Try to donate as much as you can.

d.¬†Use baskets, bins and trays for storing your most commonly used
utensils. e. If you're short on space, you can store them in your
large-sized slow cooker.

50. Declutter your recipes and cookbooks. If you set some ground rules,
    every item falls into its place. One of these ground rules is -- you
    should complete each area before moving on to the next area. Today,
    decide to organize recipes and cookbooks. If you take your time,
    turn on the music and make a cup of tea for yourself, it will seem
    like a breeze. The whole process depends on how many loose recipes
    you have got piled up. If you are constantly waste time searching
    for certain recipes, it's time for decluttering and organizing. Here
    are a few pointers for organizing your cookbook and recipes.

<!-- -->

a.  Bring all recipes and cookbooks together.
b.  Then, think about your reasons for saving recipes. Therefore, review
    each and every recipe. Get a garbage bag ready. Toss all unwanted
    recipes and organize all your reams of recipes.
c.  Sort the recipes by categories. Divide them into groups. For
    example, old family recipes, new non-tested recipes, practical
    recipes, etc. Whatever you like. Enjoy cooking!

<!-- -->

51. Find the right home in your home for your favorite recipes. The
    kitchen is the heart of the home. Your kitchen allows you to express
    your creativity through organizing and cooking. If this space is
    well-planned

and organized, you can enjoy eating, food prep, and cooking. In terms of
cookbooks and recipes, here are a few organizing ideas: a. Some
cookbooks that you use on a regular basis deserve a special spot in the
kitchen. As far as the rest of cookbooks, you can arrange them on
bookshelf outside the kitchen. b. Journal type notebooks with bound-in
pages. c.¬†Photo albums with clear plastic protectors. d.¬†Computer
cookbook and recipe software.

52. No pantry solutions. Do you live in a small house or an apartment
    without a pantry? Many apartments are pantry-less, no big deal! You
    still can make the most of your small kitchen.

<!-- -->

a.  First, get a garbage bag ready and toss the old food and expired
    items.
b.  You can designate a few cupboards in which to store your food.
c.  In order to get extra space storage, you can lose the boxes.
d.  Use baskets to corral small items.
e.  Try to use space in your refrigerator to the fullest.
f.  Try to use each and every nook in the kitchen cabinets.

<!-- -->

53. Organize food in your pantry. Another area to declutter will likely
    be your pantry for sure. The pantry is one of the biggest clutter
    magnets in every house. First, check out the labels, and read
    expiration dates carefully. Then, throw away expired items. Donate
    foods that you will not plan to eat, the food that no longer fit
    your dietary regimen or your children no longer want to eat that.

Here are some useful tips for you. 1. For instance, designate a shelf
for drinks, coffee, and tea.

1.  Designate an easy to rich area with healthy snacks for your
    children.

2.  Organize your cupboards so that the items you use most frequently
    could be the most accessible. In this way, you can also teach your
    kids to always put things back in their designated places.

3.  Organize your foods by categories. Now you can start grouping foods
    by categories. There are five basic categories:

<!-- -->

1)  Canned goods and jars
2)  Bulk items (e.g.¬†rice, nuts, beans, and other dry goods)
3)  Snacks
4)  Chocolate and desserts
5)  Prepackaged food Don't forget to use doors. You should use the space
    on the inside of your pantry doors. Purchase a good door organizer
    and store bottles, sauces, jars, etc. And an extra tip for you: Use
    a pantry inventory sheet and pen to keep track of what you have!

<!-- -->

55. Organize your canned goods and jars once and for all.

Every family likes canned goods. Jam, pickled vegetables, salads, yummy!
Organizing canned goods and jars in a pantry can be achieved in many
different ways. Of course, it depends on your own preferences. This is a
handy tip that will save the space in your pantry. Add a tiered shelf to
the pantry to see easily all of your jars. How to choose the right
tiered shelves? Here are three major criteria: 1) pay attention to the
size of the canned goods you typically store; 2) consider the amounts of
your canned goods; 3) pay attention to space available in your kitchen
or pantry. Then, arrange your jars and cans and enjoy. A great option
for corralling the various canned goods is to utilize an over-the-door
organizer. It's time to take back your pantry!

56. Organize your bulk items and dried goods. Bean bags, flour, rice,
    oats, sugar, cereals, lentils, and the other dried goods need their
    special place. It is true they take up a lot of space, but if they
    are well organized, you will not have that issue. Dried goods can
    create a lot of dirt, too. These foods make a lot of crumbs all over
    the kitchen cabinets. Especially open bags!

<!-- -->

a.  First of all, get a supply of glass jars.
b.  Next, check expiration dates and toss expired dried goods.
c.  Sort your food into groups. For example, bring all types of sugar
    together: powdered sugar, brown sugar, caster sugar, granulated
    sugar, etc. Put each type of sugar into a separate jar. Add labels
    for easier orientation. Done!
d.  Afterwards, you should follow this rule -- put every jar back into
    its proper spot after the usage. That's it!

<!-- -->

57. A shoe organizer can help you to organize all these snacks.

Your family loves snacks, right? However, they are falling on the floor
of your pantry, they are chucked to the back end. You are looking for
the seasoning packets and you can't find them! There is a simple trick
for that. A plastic Over-the-Door shoe organizer is your solution! It is
perfect for storing all these bags and boxes. a. Hang a shoe organizer
on the door of the pantry. b. Put your favorite snacks into their seats.

58. How to store chocolate and desserts -- Make sense of the mess.
    De-cluttering your pantry will make meal preparation and food
    shopping much easier. You should keep these general guidelines in
    mind:

<!-- -->

a.  First of all, check expiration dates and toss expired treats.
    Discard all sweets that have been opened a long time ago.
b.  Give away or donate any chocolate or dessert that you won't eat.
c.  Store your chocolate away from direct sunlight, protected from
    moisture.
d.  If you store the chocolate in a kitchen cabinet, you can use closet
    racks as organizers.

<!-- -->

59. Organize your tea bags. It's tea time. Do you have a dozen different
    types of tea? Do they take up a lot of space? They are scattered in
    your kitchen closet, right? There is a clever solution to keep them
    well organized. You should make a tea tin with some dividers. Take a
    tin container with the lid and put a decorative paper into the
    bottom of the tin. Measure and cut cardboard in order to make
    dividers. You can label them if you like. Add tea bags in each
    compartment. You can use smaller or bigger container, it's up to
    you. It will free up space in your cabinet.

This method will require you to purchase spice jars, but it's an
effective organizational method and should appeal to those who like
uniformity. Make sure you measure the height of the jars and drawers
before purchasing. You can even go one step further and organize your
spice drawer alphabetically. It sounds crazy, but it will make your life
easier. If you are switching your spices into new containers, do not
forget to label the bottom of the jars with the expiration date.

60. Keep bulk herbal teas neat and tidy. If you and your family like
    bulk tea, you probably have a lot of tiny bags in your kitchen. They
    are scattered all over kitchen cabinet and you waste your time
    searching for certain herbal tea. And you feel helpless and
    hopeless. It's time to solve the problem. Purchase medium-sized
    screwed jars. This organizational method should appeal to those who
    like uniformity. You can even go one step further and organize your
    teas alphabetically. And of course, do not forget to label the jars
    with the names of your teas and expiration date. Voil√†! This will
    make your life much easier.

61. Clean your stovetop with leftover vegetable oil. It's time to
    declutter your oils. If you have leftover cooking oils, oils for
    salad dressings or for other purposes, don't throw them away. You
    can use it in a way that you couldn't imagine. You can clean your
    stovetop without harsh chemicals. Yes, you can! The grease buildup
    on the stovetop can be eliminated with leftover vegetable oil. So
    drop a few dribbles of leftover oil on the grease stain. Then, rub
    at it with kitchen paper towel. Done!

62. Trays -- Organizing idea for your kitchen counter. First of all --
    remove the unnecessary things that don't belong here. You should
    also remove teapots, toasters, coffee makers, and so on. Honestly,
    if

you make coffee only in the morning, it'll take about 5 minutes every
day. After that, your coffee maker will stand unused by tomorrow
morning. Take trays of different sizes and shapes that will hold
different items. Each of them will have a specific purpose. One tray
holds napkins and coasters. The other tray will be "home" for salt,
pepper, spices you use frequently, bottles of the oil, etc. The third
tray will be home for important things such as keys.

63. Organize your food containers. Are these great containers for wet or
    dry foods scattered in your cupboards? Further, you have food
    containers without their lids and those that are cracked or smelly
    or stained. Now it is absolutely clear that you should throw them
    away. Honestly, you probably have too many kippers. You need 4 small
    rectangular containers for individual serving lunches, 2 large
    containers for salads, and 2 containers for packing snacks. That's
    it! You can put the containers into a cupboard or a large drawer,
    it's up to you. Then, organize them by size and shape. Begin with
    the largest containers and place them on the bottom; then, work
    upwards to the smallest containers.

64. Get rid of that messy pile in your kitchen drawer. Do you have a
    junk drawer in your kitchen? While you are going through this pile,
    ask yourself: Do I really need all these things in my kitchen? You
    can find markers that have dried out, broken pencils, empty bottles,
    anything and everything. Of course, they don't belong in the kitchen
    drawers. Empty the drawer and start cleaning. Get rid of anything
    that is almost empty. Sure, there are necessary items that should be
    stored somewhere else. Therefore, transfer them to the suitable
    places. When you have finished this dirtiest part of the job, you
    can organize your drawer.

65. The clever solutions for your junk drawer. It's time to organize
your junk drawer once and for all. The question is: What would you like
to have handy but hidden? So grab a few organizers (e.g.¬†recycle sturdy
plastic containers) and divide those miscellaneous items into
categories. It's clear that you have to go through your junk drawer and
tidy up it from time to time. It is important to bring junk under
control and maintain organization. An extra tip: You can use an ice cube
tray for small things.

66. Keep your refrigerator clean and organized (Part I). a. Take a big
trash bag. b. Declutter the outside of your refrigerator (remove notes,
children's drawings, fridge magnets, etc.) Do you really need those
cheap magnets you received as the promotional items? c.¬†Remove all
drawers and shelves. d.¬†Get rid of old and expired items from your
refrigerator and freezer.

67. Keep your refrigerator clean and organized (Part II). a. Clean your
refrigerator thoroughly. Use mild soap and water. b. Place washable
lining in the drawers and on the shelves. They will absorb spills.
Replace them every six months. c.¬†Add everything back to your
refrigerator. Use organizing bins on the shelves. Use containers to keep
like items together. d.¬†Create your shopping list.

68. Declutter refrigerator shelves and drawers. It is extremely
    important to understand the basic rules for organizing the
    refrigerator. Here are some of them.

<!-- -->

a.  Put condiments on the door of the refrigerator.
b.  Meats and cheeses should be kept in the coldest part of your
    refrigerator.
c.  Take some vegetable bins for the fresh products.
d.  Keep beverages on a designated shelf.
e.  Designate certain shelves for certain items. Therefore, you can find
    them quickly and easily. Consider labeling the containers to make it
    easy for your family to put things into their places.

<!-- -->

69. Take organization to the next level. Consider labeling the
    containers in your refrigerator. Take the organization of your
    refrigerator to a new level. Put removable labels on many of the
    containers. It sounds crazy, but it will make your life easier. You
    will be able to see the entire content of your fridge at a glance.

70. It's time to organize your freezer (Part I). Having a neat and tidy
freezer will save your time, energy, and money. Here are a few pointers
for organizing and cleaning out your freezer. a. Unplug your freezer and
remove the ice from the freezer trays. b. Ditch anything that has
expired. Get rid of freezer-burnt food. Toss the food that you will
never eat. c.¬†Clean your freezer thoroughly. Scrub it with a sponge,
water, mild soap or homemade cleaner. Clean up the drawers and
detachable shelves. Wipe down the walls of your freezer with paper
towels. d.¬†Add drawers, shelves and the food back. Seal your food in
foodsaver bags. Put these tips into practice and you will enjoy your
frozen food!

71. It's time to organize your freezer (Part II). a. Group all your food
into categories based on how often you use it. b. It's time to gather up
your supplies. Therefore, consider purchasing some organizers. Use at
least one bin for each category of food. You can find inexpensive
plastic containers to store your food properly. Make sure to choose the
right containers, such as adequate foils, plastic bags, or plastic
containers. Your goal is to keep air out and maximize freezer space.
c.¬†Actually, you should freeze foods with high moisture content. You
should know what's freezable. You can freeze meat, fish, berries,
shrimp, etc. On the other hand, you can't freeze fried foods or yogurt.
d.¬†If you want to be even more organized, take the time to label and
date your foods. You don't want to defrost the wrong thing, right?

72. Go one step further. You are doing very well! Keep up the good work!
    It's time to take the organization on your freezer to the next
    level.

<!-- -->

a.  Prevent your freezer burn. From time to time, sort through each
    container in order to place the oldest items in front of the
    freezer.
b.  If you buy in bulk, you should purchase a deep freezer.
c.  Find a creative way to divide up space. Consider buying modern
    freezer dividers.

<!-- -->

73. An unexpected way to use a magazine holder. Do you like frozen
    foods? Frozen vegetables, fruits, fish, nuts, etc. But these bags
    are scattered all over your freezer and it is difficult to find what
    you need. Have you ever had that painful moment when you

open your freezer and some heavy item falls down on your toe? If you had
that "ouch" experience, you know that you have to reorganize your
freezer. You can use your old magazine holders to store bagged frozen
foods. You can add labels and take your task to the next level. And from
now on, when you want to find some frozen food, you will always know
where it is. Lovely!

74. Declutter your kitchen gadgets and appliances. How to know when to
    throw some gadgets away or donate them to charity? Group these items
    into following categories:

75. You haven't used it in the last year

76. You know for sure that your family will never use it again. Just
    create" I would never use that" list

77. It is too old

78. It is broken and completely useless

79. You have duplicate After this, it's easy to know what to do next.
    Enjoy!

80. Store your kitchen gadgets and appliances.

The best way to keep your kitchen gadgets organized is to group them by
type. Otherwise, you will forget what you have and where you put it.
Here is an example. a. The first group: hand mixer, stand mixer,
blender, food processor, and juicer. b. The second group: toaster,
panini press, popcorn machine, and waffle iron. c.¬†The third group: deep
fryer, bread machine, pressure cooker, rice cooker, and slow cooker.76.
Smart organizing ideas for your kitchen (Part I). It's time to get rid
of kitchen clutter. You can organize tasks as follows: a. Plastic cups
and water bottles. Plastic water bottles are not items that you think
you might want to keep, right? You should toss them right now. If you
have prepared trash bags, it will only take 10 to 15 minutes. b.
Declutter plastic grocery bags. Bring them together. You can organize a
few plastic bags and put them into a tissue box. For the rest of the
bags, put them into a large-sized bag and please recycle them. It's so
easy to recycle plastic bags!

77. Smart organizing ideas for your kitchen (Part II). It is time to
organize lunch boxes. It will be a 15-minute mission. How to get rid of
excess food storage containers? It is easier than you think. But a huge
pile of these food containers will fall out each time you open your
cupboard. It is even worse when your drawer can not be closed well
because it is so stuffed with items. Therefore, you need to get control
over these items. Keep a reasonable amount of lunch boxes. And you
should toss or recycle the rest. This is especially true for old
margarine and yogurt plastic containers. Margarine and yogurt plastic
containers are cheap solutions, but after a long time, they look bad and
smell bad, too. Then, you should get rid of all the boxes that no longer
had their lids. Afterwards, try to recycle old plastic lunch boxes and
the other food storage containers.

78. Smart organizing ideas for your kitchen (Part III). Serving trays,
bowls, platters, utensils and the other party serving pieces take up too
much space, but they are rarely used. Only a few times a year. However,
they are scattered everywhere in your pantry, in cabinets and drawers.
How to keep the beast at bay? a. Keep the best serving pieces. Nest the
items by size on an assigned shelf. Remember --they do not have to stand
on your fingertips because you do not use them so often. b. Throw out
damaged serving pieces. c.¬†Here is a very good tip: square pieces take
up less space than round ones! Consider this for the next time when you
go shopping.

79. Organize cleaning zone. Learn to love the uncluttered and clean look
    of your kitchen. It's time to declutter and organize kitchen
    cleaning supplies. There are a lot of items, such as all-purpose
    surface cleaner, sponges, microfiber cloths, scrub brushes,
    dishwashing liquid, dish gloves, dishwasher detergent, paper towels,
    trash bags, etc. Things related to cleaning should be organized
    around the dishwasher and kitchen sink. Organize them in special
    containers and you will not waste time looking for things. Never
    again. Make it shine!

80. Kitchen organizing tips: sink front tray. You know that your sink
    needs to stay empty and clear most of the time. We have everyday
    activities in this area of the kitchen, such as washing dishes,
    cooking, food preparation, etc. This is an important area because
    you wash and dry your dishes here. This is the area for storing
    rags, sponges, dishwashing cloves and the other things. You can
    install a sink tray in order to hold all clutter that often gathers
    around a kitchen sink. This isn't so difficult as it seems.
    Actually,

you can buy building products at your local hardware store for \$20 -
\$100 and you will tackle this task over the weekend.

81. Organize under the sink It's time to clear the clutter around your
    sink. Catch clutter and reorganize your cleaning area!

<!-- -->

a.  Take everything out of the cabinet and get rid of anything you never
    use. It would be great if you are able to discard anything toxic.
b.  Clean up this area really well.
c.  Now get organized! Purchase new organizers or reuse old organizers.
    Divide your items among the bins and baskets. Sort by category.
d.  You can put dishwasher pods into a sealed tub. You can keep your
    dish rack under the sink.

<!-- -->

82. Labels are great help for keeping kitchen items organized. There are
    many computer programs to print your labels. Labels come in
    printable PDF templates, which are editable. It means that you will
    be able to change colors, size, font types, etc. Just use different
    colors for different groups. Then, you have to glue them to
    containers. From now on, you will always know where everything is.
    Find these useful templates on the Internet and let your imagination
    go wild!

83. Keep your veggies organized. This is a handy tip that can save your
    space in the pantry. Every family buys a huge amount of vegetables,
    right? Of course, every family likes salads, stews, soups and the
    other vegetable dishes. If you are a vegetarian or vegan, the
    situation is hilarious!

We just leave all our vegetables rolling around on our dining table or
kitchen worktops. Sounds familiar? Therefore, it's time to get your
veggies organized! Corral them in a drawer. Place veggies in the wicker
baskets. Then, put your baskets into the drawer. You can organize two,
three or more drawers, it all depends on the amount of veggies and your
personal preferences. Good luck!

84. Organize kitchen cabinets with tension rods. Do you want to store
    your favorite pans, tins, cake pans, cookie sheets, and trays near
    the oven or stove for easy access? Realistically, each of us has a
    favorite frying pan that we use most frequently. Then, we can have
    many baking pans but we are constantly preparing cookies in two
    favorite ones. You can organize your favorites in a simple way.
    Install tension curtain rods spaced between shelves in kitchen
    cabinet. In this way, you can store flat cookware and bakeware and
    prevent them from piling up. In this manner, you can separate
    cookware from bakeware and everything will be at your fingertips.

85. Pegboard for small kitchen tools. You can add a pegboard to your
    kitchen in order to maximize a vertical space. And you will have a
    quick and easy access to the frequently used kitchen tools.

<!-- -->

a.  Purchase the pegboard of choice. Then, paint it in your favorite
    color.
b.  Next, install your pegboard. Installing a pegboard is a quick and
    inexpensive way to improve your space. You can also use a metal
    caddy for this purpose.

<!-- -->

86. Get a lot of extra storage with hanging shelves.

There are a lot of kitchen tools that you use on a daily basis.
Especially if you love cooking every day. Tired of seeing the clutter in
your kitchen? So what to do with these piles of bowls, dishes, spoons,
and other kitchen equipment? Dish cloths and towels that are scattered
everywhere. What about hanging shelves? Hanging shelves are inexpensive
and practical solutions for small kitchens and tight storage spaces.
They are easy to install and you can find them in popular colors and
different sizes. The possibilities are endless. Therefore, consider
putting hanging shelves into your organization scheme for the kitchen
and pantry.

87. You should keep your dishes near the sink. Store everyday dishes in
    cabinets near the dishwasher and sink. Toss everything you no longer
    use. Get rid of chipped plates and other damaged dishes. You can
    also use wire racks to create multi-level shelving. And you will get
    an extra storage. It may free up your space. Is anything better than
    entering into your kitchen and seeing a clean and organized space?
    Happiness indeed!

88. Two commandments of a clutter-free pantry. Do you have a system to
    keep snack packs easily accessible for your children? The solution
    is setting up a drawer in your pantry to corral snack packs and
    treats.

<!-- -->

a.  You can add drawers at the bottom of your pantry. This idea provides
    quick access to snack foods. Your kids will love this idea. Store
    these items in the labeled drawer, so that children will always have
    easy access to them when they come back from school. But remember,
    be sure to buy healthy treats such as packs of nuts, whole grain
    cereal, granola bars. That drawer should be low enough for small
    hands to reach.

b. Secondly, you can store your favorite snacks corralled in clear
plastic containers so that your kids can see at a glance what is kept
inside. This is a great solution for an afternoon pick-me-up. And you
will have less mess, which means -- less stress!

89. Let go of sentimental clutter! If you still have not cleaned the
    kitchen, it doesn't matter. Here's a life hack for you -- it's all
    good! Of course, you know that clear kitchen is better than
    cluttered, and yet, it is difficult to begin. You don't like the way
    your kitchen looks and it holds a spiritual aspect. Somewise.
    However, you are tired of seeing the clutter in your kitchen. If you
    are saying now, "Yes, it's my story", don't worry, you are not
    alone. Millions of people have to deal with this problem. As always,
    the simplest solutions are the best. It is very important to have
    the right attitude. Resolve sentiment and throw away all these
    unwanted and useless things. You will need garbage bags. Declutter
    every single drawer and cupboard, no exceptions. Ask yourself: "When
    have I last used this... pan, pot, knife, etc.?" Let go of
    sentimental clutter! Fill your sink with soapy water for a clean-up
    of dirty items. And so forth. Baby steps. And remember, work without
    any pressure. If you got tired, you can finish your job tomorrow.
    And that's fine. All is well when we move forward!

90. Hang wrapping paper rolls on your closet ceiling. Do you like to
    have a few rolls of gift wrap for Holidays? If you always store a
    couple of gift wrap rolls on hand, this solution will work for you.
    If you don't have a handy storage, you should consider putting
    anchor screws in a wall and running

galvanized wire in a closet ceiling. And Voila! It will utilize wasted
space and colorful rolls of wrapping paper will have their designated
spot. 91. Keep drawers organized. Utilize your drawers to organize
heavy-use items that are most frequently used. For example, keep all
your peelers together, or all of your rubber scrapers or can openers. If
you are lacking empty drawers, adhesive hooks are also great for this
purpose. Carefully organize all of your cutting tools such as knives,
cheese cutters, scissors, apple slicer, and so on. Afterwards, keep all
less common items together. These are items for special occasions like
temperature gadgets, pastry tools, or fishing fillet equipment. It's a
great look!

92. Designate a drinking zone. Organize a mini coffee shop in your very
    own kitchen! You only need to find a spot, e.g.¬†on your countertop
    to start organizing your favorite drinks. Get rid of your old and
    useless coffee machine.

<!-- -->

a.  Choose your favorite coffee machine and you will make this space
    special. You can purchase a coffee urn, teapot, traditional coffee
    maker, or espresso machine. It's up to you.
b.  Next, keep your most-used cups and mugs handy. You can arrange them
    on a nice tray. Then, keep your favorite tea and coffee jars well
    organized in your drink area.
c.  After that, organize condiments. Find some pretty vessels to keep
    your honey, sugar or cream.
d.  Afterwards, add wooden disposable stir sticks or washable spoons.
    Enjoy your coffee!

93. Create your very own cocktail bar. If you love making cocktails and
you already have a few mixers, glasses, and spirits scattered all over
your kitchen, it's time to organize them. And make the homemade cocktail
bar. Exciting! A few essential spirits and liquors and a few mixers will
do just fine. You will also need recipe book, shaker, strainer, stirring
spoons, ice bucket, measuring cups and muddler. You will also need sugar
cubes, cocktail skewers, cutting board, knife and pretty glasses.
Designate a spot for your mini bar and jazz up your night with homemade
cocktails!

94. Solutions for your tiny kitchen. Here are a few more ideas for your
    tiny kitchen.

<!-- -->

a.  You can hang the baskets with fruit and other items that would
    otherwise be taking up counter space.
b.  The false drawer under a sink can be replaced with a tilt-out drawer
    front.
c.  If you have a pantry-less kitchen, consider buying a dresser with
    deep drawers. You can paint it and get extra space storage.

<!-- -->

95. Keep it user-friendly. Your kitchen is probably the most challenging
    area in your house. If you're lacking worktops, here are a few
    solutions.

<!-- -->

a.  Consider adding a rolling table or cart.
b.  Folding wall table is a great option for adding a work surface.
c.  You can also purchase 3-in-1 table seats. You will free up your
    cramped space and keep it user-friendly.

<!-- -->

96. Keep your mugs neat and tidy.

Cups and coffee mugs are fun to shop for, but after a while, most seem
to disappear into the darkness of our cupboards. There is a simple
question for you -- Do you have much more cups than people in your
family who use them? You could free up a lot of space in your cupboards
by getting rid of some of them. How about simple hooks? Hanging mugs
from hooks along the bottom of a shelf will free up kitchen space and it
also looks cozy. Then, if you have any extra shelf, it would be great.
You can also maximize the storage by using racks on the shelves.
Declutter your kitchen, declutter your life!

97. Store your supplements and vitamins. Decluttered vitamins can make a
    mess in every house. Here are a few steps to keep them well
    organized. Step one: Bring all vitamins together. Step two: Check
    all expiration dates; get rid of expired items. Step three: Leave
    vitamins in their original containers. When storing your vitamins,
    be sure to keep them away from extreme temperatures. The best
    solution is a cupboard away from the oven. Brilliant!

BATHROOM

Make your bathroom sparkle and shine! Bathroom needs a systematic plan
for organizing and decluttering. Divide your space into three zones and
declutter each and every bit of your bathroom. Putting your bathroom
items back is as easy as ABC. Afterwards, prepare a relaxing bath and
enjoy!

98. Buy organizing products by considering the bigger picture. First of
all, you have to set up certain spots for certain items. What to do
further? Of course, you should buy specific organizing products. Or you
can make them yourself. Just make sure to buy organizing products that
match the d√©cor of your space. For example, you can use plastic
containers for your bathroom but you will not use them for your living
room with solid wood furniture. You can put some plastic items in kids'
room, too. It is important to make a difference and consider the
aesthetics. If you have no idea what to purchase and find this
difficult, stick to a simple rule -- The simpler, the better! Once
you've purchased a new organizing product, use it to improve your life.
And you will wonder how you ever got along without them!

99. Decluttering missions for the entire bathroom. Take the 10-10-10
    challenge! This would mean:
100. 10 items to be repaired and returned to the positions to which they
     belong;
101. 10 items to throw away;
102. 10 items to donate; It will be an exciting way to organize 30
     things in your bathroom right now. This challenge is an incredibly
     fun to take so that children will join you willingly. What's the
     best of all? This challenge will become an entertaining competition
     between your kids. Keep this tip in your back pocket and use it
     every time when your bathroom is a total mess. You can use this
     trick in any part of your house. The principles remained the same.

100. Let dust be your guide! Do you have troubles organizing the
bathroom's limited space? Do you really need that comb with missing
teeth? What about that fraying toothbrush? Realistically, your bathroom
is an activity-intensive room. Accessing shower gel, soap, shampoo or
conditioner can be annoying when they aren't stored at your fingertips.
First of all, take a black plastic garbage bag and throw away broken
items, valueless products, empty bottles, and so on. Even half-used
products. If you haven't used that lotion for six months or the past
year, you probably never will. Here is a simple trick -- dust can be
your guide. It means, any product with a dusty coating goes to the trash
right now! Next, use a box that is designated as "donate box" for
surplus products that are still useful. The whole process will take less
than 15 minutes. Declutter your bathroom once and for all!

101. A systematic plan for your bathroom. Bathroom needs a systematic
     plan for storing and organizing . Try to divide your space into
     three zones.

<!-- -->

a.  The first zone is designated for everyday items. E.g. soap,
    toothbrushes, the shampoo, shower gel, and the razor. This zone
    should be user-friendly and very accessible. Store these items on
    countertop, in the top drawer, or in hanging baskets.
b.  The second zone holds items that are used weekly and monthly. E.g.
    makeup, perfumes, nail care equipment. Store them in the middle
    drawer and on the toilet-top storage cupboard, taking care to give
    the items easily accessible spots.
c.  The third zone is designated for the items that are rarely used. It
    includes under-sink space and the shelf above the bathroom door.

102. Keep your bathroom clutter-free and sparkling! There are a lot of
products that can make your bathroom sparkle. Household cleaning cloths,
wipes, mops, cleaning brushes, scouring pad, glass cleaners, microfiber
cloths, etc. However, all of these small products could make clutter
because they never have their designated place. And you still have a
mess in the bathroom. Your goal is to clean and organize your bathroom
in a short time, so you can get on with the more important and funnier
things in your life. The solution is easier than you think. Add a
tension rod underneath a bathroom cabinet to maximize space. Then, hang
"S-hooks" for storing your cleaning products as well as the other
bathroom supplies. You can also add a second tension rod for even more
space.

103. End your day with a clean bathroom cabinet. Is there anything
     better than walking up into a clean space? Get this done today and
     you will be a happier in the evening. This easy task will affect
     your mood for the rest of your day for sure. Ready, set, go!

<!-- -->

a.  First of all, take everything out of the cabinet.
b.  Then, wipe down the interior and shelves.
c.  Have a trash bag on hand and toss unwanted items. Dispose of
    everything that you haven't used in the last year and everything
    that is empty and nearly empty.
d.  Create your shopping list. In this way, you'll be able to simplify
    the clutter so that you can enjoy your bathroom to the fullest.

<!-- -->

104. Cut clutter in the bathroom -- Shower and bath caddies.

Personal hygiene products are scattered all over your bathroom. And you
hate all that mess! Keeping your bathroom tidy and organized can be
challenging. However, with a goodwill you can win this battle. Your
favorite moisturizers, lotions, deodorants and the other products can be
cleverly organized and stored. Try hanging a bath caddy! You should hang
it on a hook mounted on the wall and the problem is solved. Shower and
bath caddies will declutter the floor of your bathroom. Therefore,
install this great item close to your bathtub or hang it in your shower
cabin, and take a shower right now! You can use bath caddies in order to
organize your makeup, too. After decluttering, prepare a relaxing bath
and enjoy!

105. Under the bathroom sink. Are you embarrassed to let anyone come
     into your bathroom? Is your bathroom sink cabinet is jammed with
     unwanted items? There is no doubt -- clutter can really influence
     the way you live. Here're simple hacks for decluttering bathroom
     sink cabinet.

<!-- -->

a.  Take everything out and lay it on the ground.
b.  Throw out or recycle everything that is broken and useless.
c.  Wipe down your bathroom sink cabinet.
d.  Reorganize your tools by categories. Use baskets to keep them neat
    and tidy. Your bathroom will be in order and you will be happy!

<!-- -->

106. Under-the-sink storage ideas. Here are some creative ideas to
     organize useful space under your sink.

<!-- -->

a.  Keep your cleaning supplies and tools in an easy-to-grab basket so
    you can take it every time you start cleaning.
b.  Fill another basket with boxes of tissue or extra toilet paper.
c.  Hang spray bottles on a tension rod.

d.¬†Place large-sized items such as toilet brush and bottles in the back.

107. Clever and practical: over-the-door bin. This bin is ideal for a
     cramped space in a bathroom cabinet. It can hold your hair brushes,
     favorite styling products, hair dryer and other items. It's a great
     way to utilize empty space in bathroom cabinets. Never search your
     home again for your favorite styling tools with this handy
     over-the-door bin!

108. A simple way to store more in your bathroom. Tired of wasting time
     searching for a bath item you need? A shoe holder is a simple but
     great organizer that can be used in many different ways. The
     possibilities are endless. Anyway, this is a wonderful way to
     declutter and organize your bathroom. You can attach a shoe holder
     to the inside of a bathroom cabinet. And you will get an extra
     storage for your bottles, cleaners, spray bottles, cosmetic
     products, and so on. Catch clutter and reorganize your bathroom!
     Happiness indeed!

109. Keep your beauty product neat and tidy in a small bathroom. Small
     bathroom? No worries, there are so many creative solutions to keep
     your miniature bathroom well organized. First of all, you have to
     declutter your bathroom. Get rid of all unwanted products and
     tools. Now you should designate spots for each and every bathroom
     item. Make a use of every nook in your bathroom by hanging baskets
     or bags with handles on stylish hooks. It's best to purchase
     uniform hanging baskets due to the aesthetic effect.

110. Floating shelves -- a brilliant idea for small bathroom. Use
floating shelves to create extra storage in your miniature bathroom.
They are perfect to stash extra towels and other items. The benefits are
obvious. In this way, you will use every inch, and space will be
clutter-free at the same time. Floating shelves fit in narrow spaces and
they can corral a lot of bathroom essentials.

111. Three storage tricks for a tiny bathroom.

<!-- -->

a.  Save space by stacking your products in a decorative magazine
    holder. It is a thin and useful organizer.
b.  Hang your hairdryer and hair curlers on adhesive hooks inside of a
    bathroom cabinet door.
c.  Organize your bottles, deodorants, and lotions on an old wine rack
    and save space in bathroom. You can paint the rack and get a stylish
    organizer. These organization tricks will leave you feeling great
    and refreshed.

<!-- -->

112. A quick way to clean your medicine cabinet. Create one spot for
     medicines. Bring the medicines into one place. First, get rid of
     outdated stuff and utilized items such as the dirty bandages, the
     old creams, expired ointments and drugs, as well as all medicines
     that did not have any effect on your health problems. Get rid of
     "just in case" items because these things take up space, and,
     honestly, they weigh us down. Therefore, free up your space for
     more beautiful things than drugs and medicaments.

113. A cheap and clever way to store bath toys.

Bathtub toys can create a huge clutter in your bathroom. If they are
scattered all over the bathroom and fall down on the floor, it's time
for decluttering. You can simply hang a multilevel fruit basket for
additional storage. Take advantage of vertical storage and you will
declutter your bathroom instantly. A fruit basket can be used as a caddy
so that water drains out, and the toys are easy for your child to reach.
This idea works for kid's shampoo, sponges, and other bath accessories.
Try to hang the fruit basket in an unused corner. Put bath toys into the
basket and you will keep toys in one place. If you have a tiny bathroom,
it will save the space a lot. Brilliant!

114. A magnetic strip -- organize small metal grooming items. Nail
     clippers, tweezers, bobby pins, hairpins and other small metal
     items are scattered everywhere in your bathroom. Tired of searching
     for your small metal grooming aids? Install a magnet to hold all
     these super useful metal items! You can add a magnetic strip to the
     inside of a medicine cabinet or other storage area. It's up to you!

<!-- -->

a.  You can buy a magnetic tape at any home improvement store.
b.  Then, you should cut a magnetic strip in order to fit your medicine
    cabinet; peel away the cover on the tape side.
c.  Arrange your small metal items. You can do it yourself!

<!-- -->

115. A clever solution for toilet paper. If you purchase bulk paper
     towels, you probably have a problem to store them. How about shoe
     bags? Put the bags into bathroom closet and that's it.

In this way, you'll be able to simplify the clutter in your bathroom so
that you can enjoy this space to the fullest. Clever.

116. Organize a complete makeup (Part I). Are you a makeup addict? Do
you spend money buying duplicates for beauty products and tools you
already have? Are your products are scattered all over the bathroom?
Even a small amount of beauty products can make your bathroom look
cluttered. If you feel helpless because you can't solve the problem, you
are not alone. There is a solution. Follow these few steps and you will
declutter your makeup products easily and effortlessly. Ready, set, go!
a. It's time to start throwing out the unwanted products. Gather up all
of your beauty products. Check expiration dates. b. Try your best to
minimize the number of beauty products in your home. If you can't
remember the last time you used a beauty product, ask yourself, "Can I
see myself using this again?" c.¬†Clean up your beauty products. It would
be good if you use a mat for powdery mess. d.¬†After that, you should
find a convenient place to store your favorite products. And from now
on, when you want to find some beauty product, you'll always know where
it is. The clutter-cutting benefits are obvious! Lovely!

117. Organize a complete makeup (Part II). You buy all kinds of makeup
products because they make you look and feel better, right? Do you keep
your makeup and beauty products well organized? If your makeup is a
mess, you can't enjoy it to the fullest. There is no doubt, one of the
best solution to keep your makeup organized is a drawer with dividers.
Group makeup products in a way that is logical to you. Toss unwanted
makeup. Determine how to best organize what's left by grouping your
beauty products by type and frequency of use. Enjoy doing your makeup!

118. An ingenious idea for storing your small beauty products. Are your
     makeup products like eye shadow, mascara, and lipstick are
     scattered all over the bathroom cabinet? Put your everyday small
     beauty products into an easily accessible spot. Consider using a
     jewelry organizer to visibly store all these small items. If you're
     lacking cabinet space, this will be a great idea for you! And from
     now on, when you want to find your favorite mascara or lipstick,
     you'll always know where it is.

119. A cookie jar and a cupcake tray in your bathroom. Out of sight
     means less visual clutter, but things hidden in the bathroom
     cabinet tend to be forgotten. Here are two amazing and chip hacks
     for decluttering and organizing bathroom accessories, makeup, etc.
     Make them visible and easily accessible. You can use a cookie jar
     to store your lip glosses or nail polishes. Then, you can stack
     your makeup products on the tiers of a cupcake tray. In this way,
     you can group them by categories.

120. Change your habits -- change your bathroom. Duplicates. This
clutter is demanding of you a lot of hard-earned money. Group items in a
way that is logical to you. Designate a spot for all your duplicates and
extras. A plastic container works well. When you run out of any product,
check that container to see if you already have it on hand.

121. Personalized bathroom shelves. If you have space on the wall,
     consider installing personalized boxes. You will have a cute
     storage box for each family member. You can store items your family
     use most frequently so they should be easily reachable. You can
     paint these shelves so each family member will have her/his
     favorite color. Cute!

122. Organize your nail polishes. You love nail polishes, there are
     dozens of them. They are scattered all over the house. And you know
     why? Because they don't have their designated spot. If you have an
     old spice rack, you will find an ideal home for your nail polishes.
     You can also store essential oils there. You may paint this spice
     rack using a color of choice.

123. Two cheap solutions to keep your perfume collection organized. You
     can organize overflowing bathroom with these unusual life hacks.
     First of all, gather up all perfume bottles. Now get rid of empty
     bottles and unwanted perfumes. Use these cheap organizers:

<!-- -->

a.  A spice rack can be a perfect shelf for your fragrances.
b.  You can also display your perfume bottles on top of a cake stand.

<!-- -->

124. How to organize your drawers once and for all?

Bathroom drawers can work wonders to tame clutter. We often wonder how
bathroom drawers get so messy? a. First, take the drawers out and empty
them. Bring all items together. Check expiration dates and check each
and every item. Ask yourself, "Can I see myself using this again". If
you think you will never use it again, simply throw it away. b. Clean up
your drawers. c.¬†Then, you can decorate your drawers. You can coat the
inside of your drawers with wallpaper cut to fit. Use drawer dividers
and decluttering-smart clear bins to take the organization to the next
level!

125. Solve overstuffed drawers. With the right setup, there's a place
     for each and every bathroom item. After decluttering, create three
     piles:

<!-- -->

1)  Items that should go in the drawer;
2)  Stuff that shouldn't go in the drawer;
3)  Clutter and garbage. Deal with the clutter immediately and group
    necessary items by category. For example, tuck your hairdryer and
    other corded appliances in a basket; then, put the basket into
    decluttered drawer. Put the rest of your items back in place using
    the baskets. As you can see, the solution is simpler than you
    thought.

<!-- -->

126. Use utensil tray for your favorite beauty products. Are your
     tweezers, lipsticks, mascara, makeup brushes, and the other beauty
     products scattered in your bathroom? Place the utensil tray in a
     drawer in the bathroom to keep these items organized. This is
     really useful

for all these small items that every girl has in her life. Create your
beauty zone without any investment. Lovely!

127. Organize your hair accessories. You are doing your hair and you
     need some bobby pins urgently. Where are the thousands of bobby
     pins you bought? Hair clips, hair grips, barrettes, hair bands...
     there are too much items. This is a budget-friendly way to organize
     your favorite cheap but valuable small items. Actually, you will
     need zero dollars! You can clean an old shoe box and use it for all
     your hair trinkets. Cover the box with wrapping paper of choice.
     And Voila! Bask in the glory of your new lifestyle!

128. A fun way to organize trinkets. Girls love trinkets. Earrings,
     bracelets, necklace, etc. Yours or your daughter's costume jewelry
     deserves a special "home". However, it does not have to be an
     expensive box or jewelry holder. You can use mason jars! You can
     also add some labels to group your jewelry. Then, you can paint
     your jars, wrap a fancy ribbon around them, add lace and tinsels.
     You will have great and inexpensive jewelry storage. At the same
     time, you will have fun decorating your jars.

129. Hair ties, ponytail holders, and headbands. For everyday hairstyle,
     make sure you're stocked up on essential hair accessories.
     Nevertheless, they are scattered throughout the bathroom, bedroom,
     and the other rooms. And they create clutter! Realistically, how
     many of those trinkets do you need? Therefore, get rid of old and
     useless headbands and ties. Free yourself from this type of
     clutter. You can use an oatmeal container for hair accessories
     storage. Or you can purchase an inexpensive decorative bin for that
     purpose.

130. A solution for storing spray bottles. Do you have a great amount of
spray bottles in your bathroom? Various types of bathroom cleaners,
disinfecting spray cleaners, floor cleaners, glass cleaner, and so on.
You are aware that you have to free up all that space in your bathroom.
How to do it? The tension rod is a simple and effective solution!
Install tension rod in a bathroom closet. You even don't have to pay a
handyman; it's not rocket science. You can do it yourself and free up
space in your bathroom significantly. Putting the spray bottles back is
as easy as ABC. Give it a try!

131. Items that are rarely used. When it comes to organizing the
     bathroom, there are some items that are rarely used. For instance,
     guest towels or holiday party curling iron. Yes, it's true, they
     are rarely used but they are necessary from time to time. And they
     can make a lot of clutter. A shelf above the bathroom door is a
     great spot for these items. Well-organized bathroom truly makes our
     lives easier.

DINING ROOM

The importance of eating together Is your dining room a catch-all for
clutter? It's time to win your battle with clutter. There's nothing more
beautiful than waking up to a clean dining room space. Dining room
promotes healthy eating at home so keep it neat and tidy. Get your
dining room shipshape!

132. The "three-box" method for your dining room. First, you should buy
three boxes. They will be: "keep", "give away", and "trash". As you set
out to declutter your dining room, this interesting technique will help
you a lot. This also can be super funny competition between you and your
kids or you and your husband. Each and every item in your dining room
should be placed into one of the three categories. All without
exception. Remember -- no item was passed over!

133. Declutter dining room cabinet. You should find space for your
     porcelain dinnerware sets, tablecloths, candles, expensive glasses,
     napkins and other items. Dining storage allows you to keep
     everything neat and tidy. However, if your dining storage is jammed
     with clutter, you probably waste your time searching for a certain
     item. Luckily, there is a great way to declutter dining room
     cabinets.

<!-- -->

a.  Step one: Take everything out including cabinet organizers like
    shelf dividers. It will help you to see the available space in the
    cabinet.
b.  Step two: Wipe down your cabinet and remove dust and spills.
c.  Step three: This is the fun part. You should make six piles -- "keep
    in cabinet", "put away in another place", "give away", "sell",
    "trash", and "recycle (repurpose)". Keep in mind -- Small appliances
    are fun to shop for, but after a while, most of them seem to
    disappear into the darkness of your cabinet. Some of them have
    sentimental significance, but you don't use them and they just
    gather dust. Resolve sentiment and throw away all these unwanted and
    useless things. Now, you are ready to organize your dining room
    cabinet.

134. Keep dining room cabinet organized. Is your dining room a catch-all
for clutter? Most of the odds end up in the corner of your cabinet. This
plan will get your cabinet in shape and help prevent clutter from
building up in the future. First, you should find a place for things you
use every day. They should be at your fingertips. If you have limited
space in your cabinet, remove rarely used items to the another place in
the house. In this way, you can easily organize your casual dinnerware
and everyday items such as a tablecloth, napkins, cutlery, etc. Sort by
category: for example, 1) napkins and napkin rings, 2) cutlery, etc.
Now, you only need to maintain this new clutter-free environment you've
created. Bravo!

135. How to maintain a decluttered dining room? Yes, the clutter defines
     a part of you as a person. For example, if you love magazines or
     books, these things reflect your passion and this is quite normal.
     If you enjoy browsing through magazines in your dining room, this
     is quite normal, too. But you should be organized. Do not leave
     magazines scattered on the dining table. How to maintain
     decluttered dining room?

<!-- -->

a.  Try to spend ten minutes each evening clearing out everything that
    doesn't belong in your dining room.
b.  Then, each time you plan to buy something new for your dining room,
    search through your drawers and cabinets so you do not buy
    duplicates.
c.  It is important to sort through your dining room cabinets at the
    start of each season.

<!-- -->

136. Declutter the dining room table. Any type of clutter tends to
     accumulate on your dining room table if kitchen accessories and
     other items don't have a designated place where they are

stored. So take the time to declutter and clear off your table. a. Step
one: Bring them all together and start sorting into three categories:
"kitchen accessories", "other accessories", and "dining room
accessories". It will take less than 10 minutes. b. Step two: Now you
need to find a spot for each and every item. Put away things that do not
belong here. Things that belong in the kitchen, take them to the
kitchen. The other things will need their "homes" in the other rooms of
the house. c.¬†Step three: arrange items from the third category and keep
them organized on your dining table. Afterwards, to maintain a clear
dining table henceforward, you will need to find homes for all the
things that seem to accumulate on your dining table. That's all you've
got to do.

137. Promote beauty and order. Retake the valuable surface of your
     dining table with this simple hack. This trick works for the most
     of the people. Put something pretty, such as flower arrangement, on
     the dining table. You will discourage placing all sorts of things
     on your table. Easy.

138. Corral kids' belongings. If your children use the dining table for
     board games and homework, no big deal. However, that's not the main
     purpose of the kitchen table. Teach them to clear the supplies off
     dining table after each usage. Then, they should store their
     belongings at the place designated. It is very important for small
     items such as toy bricks and blocks, pencils and the other school
     supplies. These items can create clutter and you should control it.
     Nevertheless, the best solution is to set up desks or work table
     for those activities.

139. Dining room organizations -- baskets.

If you find you can't use your dining room for what it meant to do
because of certain reasons, it's time to solve this problem. There are a
lot of reasons you should use your dining room more frequently. The
family dining room is more than a place to eat. This is the area where
the family can sit down together and socialize with one another. The
dining room is perfect for gatherings with family and friends. However,
if your dining room is jammed with stuff, it cannot serve its purpose.
Baskets are perfect organization tools for this kind of room. You can
keep a lot of things in them. In that way, you will remove clutter from
table, chairs and display cabinets. If your dining room is filled with
knick-knacks, candles, lighters, napkins, and other small items,
consider buying pretty straw baskets. You can go one step further and
purchase the baskets with handles to hang them on a wall with hooks.

140. Use dresser in your dining room. Dresser is the super organizing
     piece of furniture. You can find an old dresser or even an antique
     dresser at garage sales. Now you can keep silverware, china,
     linens, candles, hand wipes and other things well organized. You
     can divide and organize items by categories or frequency of use.
     For example, designate drawers for the following categories:

141. napkins,

142. tablecloths,

143. disposable dishes,

144. place mats, etc.

141. Keep your sideboard neat and tidy. Coasters, china, stemware,
silverware bottle openers, and so on. There are a lot of things in your
sideboard. This piece of furniture is designed to hold so many items and
because of that it is perfect for your dining room. How to keep it
organized and enjoy your dining room to the fullest? a. Set aside some
time, e.g.¬†on Saturday morning, after family breakfast. Remove
everything from the sideboard and bring together. Toss damaged, broken,
and useless things. Donate duplicates and things that you will never use
again. b. Further, wipe down your sideboard and remove dust and spills.
Clean and polish each item. c.¬†Create groups for all things that you
will put back on the sideboard. Designate a spot for each group of
items. Decide how to store them: vertically or horizontally. Arrange
your items and enjoy the new look of your sideboard!

142. Your cocktail cabinet. Do you like cocktails and romantic dinners?
     Are your spirits and liquors scattered all over kitchen and dining
     room? If your answer is yes -- consider organizing a cocktail
     cabinet.

<!-- -->

a.  Sort items into categories.
b.  Assign a space for your mixers, ice buckets shakers, trays, and
    other cocktail party equipment.
c.  Assign a space for the bottles and group them into categories.
d.  Line the shelves with paper or cork linings and place your glasses
    on it. Keep glasses upright and in widely spaced rows.

<!-- -->

143. Extra storage -- rolling bar cart.

Wheeled furniture is always a great solution. This is the especially
good idea for small space. If you need an extra counter space, consider
buying a cart. You can organize everything in a simple and practical
way. You can also transport your dishes from kitchen to dining room
using this cart. You can find a metal cart with glass and bottle
support. A small rolling bar cart is just what you need to make things
more manageable. And you can place your cart anywhere you want.

144. You get a lot of extra storage with hanging shelves. There are a
     lot of things that we use on a daily basis. We just need these
     items each and every day. Especially if we have kids. Parents are
     aware of it. However, what to do with this pile of toys,
     newspapers, books, groceries and other items that are scattered all
     over dining room? When it comes to clearing clutter from your
     dining room, these things are the first in the list. Are you
     looking for a daily activity organizer? What about floating
     shelves? Floating shelves are inexpensive and practical solutions
     for your dining room. They are easy to install and you can find
     them in popular colors and different sizes depending on their
     purpose. The possibilities are endless.

145. Sort your newspapers and magazines. You love your magazines so
     much. However, do you have magazine holders? Or do you have a
     special home for them, for example, on a bookshelf? If your answer
     is No, it's time to sort your favorite magazines. Here are a few
     steps to do that easily and effortlessly.

<!-- -->

a.  Decide which magazines you need to keep. If your answer is -- "I
    probably should read", get them out of your house.
b.  If you need to read some magazines for work assignment or your kids
    need some of them for school, you can keep them.
c.  Therefore, you should organize them and put them into the place
    designated. A good solution is to purchase a couple of magazine
    racks.

146. Wheeled furniture for small living space. This is a life hack that
can help you to declutter fast and easy. Wheeled tables, desks, and
wastebaskets offer the advantage of being easily moved. You can find
even ottomans, side tables, and chairs on wheels. They are perfect for a
cramped space because they can easily be repositioned.

147. How to throw a dinner party in a small apartment? You have a small
     dining room or you don't have that space at all, but you love
     parties. Don't let a small space hold you back! Here are some
     tricks to make it a snap.

<!-- -->

a.  A living room with the furniture moved out of the way can make a
    great space for your dinner party.
b.  Use folding chairs that can be easily replaced. Your guests can sit
    on pillows, why not?!
c.  If you can't make a dining table works in your living, throw a
    cocktail party with appetizers. To serve, use large platters on a
    coffee table as well as carts and wheeled furniture.

<!-- -->

148. Weeknight dinner party -- keep party supplies on hand. It's time to
     declutter your party supplies. Toss everything that is broken and
     useless. You can use a large-sized shoe box and label it "Party
     Box". Keep the necessities in this box. Your party box will include
     balloons, candles, streamers, etc. And you'll have peace of mind
     knowing that you're well prepared. Then, choose your favorite party
     recipes and enjoy the fun. There is a money saving hack: remember
     to shop sales after the holidays. Prices for

party supplies are the lowest at this time.

BEDROOM

Get your bedroom in tip-top shape! "Three Rules of Work: Out of clutter
find simplicity; From discord find harmony; In the middle of difficulty
lies opportunity." -- Albert Einstein Get rid of unwanted items and opt
for small pieces of furniture. You will free up your space
significantly! It might seem like a daunting task, but you can start
with baby steps. Declutter one area at a time and don't move to the next
zone until you have finished the previous. It is such a relief and
happiness to have all those items finally sorted! Get your bedroom in
tip-top shape!

149. Get organized -- divide into zones. As you probably know, it's easy
to let a room turn chaotic. Use these simple rules to streamline your
bedroom. Actually, one of the best methods to tackle the problem is to
divide your bedroom into areas. There are three main zones: 1) the
sleeping zone; 2) the relaxing and entertaining zone; 3) the grooming
zone. There are many of us that have the fourth part and it is the work
zone. Everything in your bedroom should fit into one of these three or
four categories. If you have an item that doesn't fit, it may not belong
in your bedroom. Declutter one area at a time and don't move to the next
zone until you have finished the previous. Good luck!

150. Declutter your bedroom -- surplus furniture. Is your bedroom jammed
     with furniture? Having too many chairs, tables, dressers, and other
     things makes the bedroom appear smaller.

<!-- -->

a.  Get rid of surplus furniture and you'll get more space for you.
    Think about what you can sell or donate. You can sell them at garage
    sale or you can give them away. You should use only the pieces that
    are necessary for your bedroom to function. Remember -- less is
    more!
b.  Clean your room thoroughly.
c.  The way you arrange furniture can make a big difference. Find a spot
    for each and every piece that makes the most sense to you.
d.  Add a new decoration, maybe a picture. Enjoy your new bedroom.

<!-- -->

151. Handy tips to help declutter your bedroom. "Three Rules of Work:
     Out of clutter find simplicity; From discord find harmony; In the
     middle of difficulty lies opportunity." -- Albert Einstein

a. Step one: While you are going through this mess, ask yourself: Do I
really need all these things in my bedroom? Is anything in this area
unused? Toss unwanted items. b. Step two: This is the fun part. You
should make six piles -- keep, put away in another place, give away,
sell, trash, and recycle (repurpose). If there are items that could be
useful to someone, give it to them. c.¬†Step three: Designate a spot for
each and every item. Put items back in their places. To maintain this
decluttered environment, stick to a few important rules: a. Make your
bed every morning. b. Keep your clothes organized. Place them in your
closet or in the laundry basket. c.¬†Avoid bedside clutter. d.¬†Do not
ruin what you have achieved.

152. Turn a dresser into bedside tables. There are a lot of random items
     under your bed, on the floor and all over the bedroom. You can
     replace your side tables for dressers and get some extra storage
     for all your small items and tchotchkes. Of course, this trick will
     not spoil the aesthetics of the room.

153. Use the advantage of hidden storage. If you are looking for a place
     to keep your sports equipment, blankets, nighttime necessities and
     other things, wicker trunk is a perfect solution. This cute hidden
     storage has plenty of space and it also gives the bedroom an
     elegant decorative effect and evokes a homey feel.

154. Turn bedroom clutter into d√©cor.

If lots of items are littering your floor, you can arrange them in an
artful way. You can stack your big fat books and get a nice decor. You
can arrange magazines in the same fashion. This is a little change, but
it can apparently transform your bedroom. It is such a relief and
happiness to have them finally sorted!

155. Rolling cart for your bedroom. If you wonder how to live a more
     organized life, here's a simple hack. Use a rolling chart in your
     bedroom! This amazing chart can be used as a bedside table.
     Consider buying the cart with a drawer so you can keep jewelry,
     keys, and other favorites well organized. This cart can also hide
     everyday clutter. The possibilities are endless, so be creative!

156. Small furniture will open up your space. No matter how big your
     bedroom is, opt for small pieces of furniture and you will free up
     your space significantly. It's better to have a few pieces with
     drawers and a few floating shelves than a large closet. In this
     way, you will achieve the better results because each and every
     item will find their "home". In the large closet, they could be
     scattered and invisible.

157. Get organized: use dividers. All these small items create a lot of
     clutter in your bedroom. It might seem like a daunting task, but
     you can start with baby steps. Luckily, there are drawer dividers
     to keep all items neat and tidy. You can also use small dishes such
     as vintage cups. Don't throw your accessories into a large drawer
     once you get home. Divide the drawers and put every item back into
     a designated spot. Get your bedroom in tip-top shape!

158. Hang instead of stand.

You can hang a wicker basket to save space in your bedroom. You can use
this basket for your socks, slippers, scarves, mittens, etc. This is a
perfect spot for items that we usually throw somewhere in the bedroom
once we get home

159. Organization hacks for your tiny bedroom. You have a tiny bedroom.
     Fortunately, there are a lot of great tricks to make the most of
     your room. Consider buying a console table. It will be used as a
     shelf and a desk. This is a great place for your morning coffee,
     magazines, a book, glasses, etc. And you will feel good. Feeling
     good can be a way of life.

160. Maximizing under-bed storage. It is a great place to keep an alarm
     clock, your magazines, books, reading glasses, tissues, and so on.
     You will have more useful space in your bedroom. And of course,
     some things will be hidden so they do not spoil the aesthetics of
     the room. Great!

161. Turn your desk into a bedside table. You do not have to have a
     large bedroom in order to be happy. Balance is the key to a happy
     bedroom. Don't overfill your space with a lot of things. Here's a
     hack that will save a lot of space. Simply place your desk next to
     the bed and you will get two in one!

162. Declutter your bedroom and sleep peacefully. Within the walls of
     our home, we try to live a balanced life. The key to a balanced
     life is organization. Bedroom allows us to express our creativity
     through organizing and decorating. In terms of creativity, do you
     really need a footboard? If you have a tiny bedroom, it can be a
     completely

unnecessary piece of furniture. Therefore, put your desk instead of the
footboard. Great idea! Remember -- Take control of your clutter!
Everyone can designate five minutes a day to put things away. Remove
anything that doesn't belong in the bedroom and go to sleep.163. Use
every corner in your tiny bedroom. If you don't have a closet in the
bedroom, you can hang your clothes on a tension rod. You can also hang
towels and other items. If you are a fan of the simplicity, this is a
right solution for you. And when you want to find some item, you will
always know where it is.

164. Declutter and organize your relaxing zone. Is your relaxing zone
     jammed with items, so you are not able to relax there? Organization
     of relaxing zone requires decluttering, cleaning, and sorting to
     make your space a calming haven. You can tackle this problem with a
     few simple hacks!

<!-- -->

a.  Gather decluttering tools such as garbage boxes and bags. Bring all
    items together and sort all items. Create six piles: keep, put away
    in another place, give away, sell, trash, and recycle (repurpose).
    Sort each item into one of the piles. Work systematically around the
    entire space.
b.  Toss unwanted items.
c.  Take a duster and clean your ornaments, lamps, vases and other items
    such as guitars, painting equipment, books, etc.
d.  Get it tidy! Put everything back and enjoy the new look of your
    bedroom. To soften this area, organize your pillows. There's nothing
    more beautiful than waking up to a clean space.

<!-- -->

165. Dealing with clutter according to your personality --
     Sentimentalist.

"If you know the enemy and know yourself you need not fear the results
of a hundred battles." -- Sun Tzu You can stop clutter session in the
bedroom once and for all if you know yourself! As you declutter and
organize, pay attention to the root of the problem. Your bedroom reveals
more about you. If you are a sentimentalist, you probably have a box of
unsorted photos in the corner of your bedroom. Or you have the Teddy
Bear collection from your childhood. Learn to let go. However, take your
time. It's not going to get better by pushing yourself too hard. Work in
short intervals, take a break, and enjoy a cup of tea or lunch. Free
your mind. Go for a short walk or take a shower. Do meditation and calm
your mind. A fresh mind will help you make smarter decisions.
Self-examination. Take a random item and ask yourself: What's
significant about this item? Do I like it enough to display it further?
Can I give someone else my stuff? Of course, you do not have to get rid
of everything. Save the best items and get rid of the rest. Enlist help
if you need it. Remember -- you are not alone. And little by little, it
will set you free!

166. Under bed boxes and storage to save your space. Sometimes you do
     not know where to put large items such as coats, blankets, bed sets
     and similar things. There is a lot of space under your bad, right?
     The whole box with blankets, duvet covers, pillows, and bedding
     sets could fit there. Once you use these items, you will be
     surprised by its benefits. You can keep things like winter clothes
     in this under bed storage boxes. Therefore, these items stay out of
     your way but they're still close at hand. Give it a try and keep
     your room in tip-top shape!

167. Declutter the work zone. It is the time to organize place where you
     do homework, study or work. Here are some guidelines:

a. Gather decluttering tools such as garbage bags. Bring all items
together. You should have four garbage bags: keep, give away, sell, and
trash. Sort each item into one of the piles. b. Then, throw unwanted
items away. Toss everything that is broken, rusty, useless, etc. c.¬†It's
not enough for your workspace to be tidy --- it must be clean, too. Take
a duster and clean your stuff. d.¬†Put everything back and enjoy your new
desk. Remember -- you can turn your workspace into a clutter-free
paradise!

168. Change your habits, change your workspace for the better. Your
     penholder contains a lot of pencils, but only one pen works. And
     many of your pencils are dry. Then, you have a lot of junk mail on
     your desk. Your penholder is old and dusty. So you need to start
     throwing the old paper, boxes, pencils, and so on. Otherwise there
     will be no space for you in this room. Clutter makes you confused
     and distracted. The scientists believe that a huge number of things
     that make you happy are within your control. So, help yourself in
     an easy way. Close your eyes, breathe deeply and visualize neat and
     tidy workspace. Enjoy your visualization for a few minutes. Focus
     on the result -- productivity without stress and confusion. Feel
     happiness and calmness. It will increase your chances to declutter
     your desk right now. By practicing this mental exercise for 5 to 6
     minutes a day, you will be happy to put your desk in order at the
     end of each working day. Make a list of your obligations for the
     next day and you will form a new good habit. Good luck!

169. One of the best organizers of all time -- command hooks.

Attach hooks on the wall next to the desk and you'll get extra storage
space for your workspace. Hang your backpacks, laptop bag, purse, and
the other bags that you need for work. Be inspired by command hooks!
There are lots of ways to use command hooks. Here're some of them: a.
You can use two hooks to make wrapping paper easy to tear. It can be a
great solution for adhesive tapes, too. b. Then, hang a wire file box on
the side of your desk. c.¬†You can use special hooks for holding cords.
d.¬†You can design a paper towel holder with two hooks and a spare wire.

170. Baskets for your work zone. Here's a great hack for your work zone,
     especially for those with tiny workspace -- Use hooks to hang
     baskets on the wall! You can use old wire basket and paint them to
     add vintage charm to your space. This trick makes your everyday job
     beautiful! Of course, this system will be easy to maintain because
     your items are in sight. You will be so happy that your tiny
     workspace has clean surfaces and a bit of personality.

171. Desk makeover -- never enough baskets. Position buckets on the side
     of your craft table or work desk and you'll get extra space storage
     for your small items. Add baskets to hold your necessities and
     trinkets. You will have all these items at your fingertips and desk
     will be clutter-free! And remember -- it must be inspiring!

172. Think outside the shelf. Turn your wire storage baskets on their
     sides, attach them to the wall, and you've got stunning shelves!
     Turn boring wire baskets into functional storage solution. These
     unconventional shelves are both fun and practical.

You can also use nesting basket and get wall-mounted baskets for your
room. Adorable!

173. Use empty cans to create your desk organizer. There is no doubt --
     clutter can really influence the way you think and work. If you are
     looking for an easy way to organize your home office here's a
     simple hack for decluttering your workspace. You can use empty cans
     for pencils, markers, rulers, scissors, adhesive tapes and the
     other useful items. All you have to do is to clean up a few tin
     cans and cover them with a trendy color of your choice. And you get
     the clever desk organizer!

174. A high-level organization -- rolling cart. If you have lots of
     small items at your workstation a rolling cart is the right
     solution. There is another huge advantage -- this cart is small
     enough to fit under your desk. You can place it in a corner, too.
     And you will be able to transfer it wherever you want. Lovely!

175. Maximize storage space in your workstation. This is an inexpensive
     and simple solution for cluttered workspace. You will use wall
     space and free up the rest of the workspace. Consider installing
     freestanding wall units and declutter your workstation.

176. Handle paperwork, documents and mail. "You can't have everything.
     Where would you put it?" -- Steven Wright Does your workplace look
     like this: you have piles and piles of papers on your desk? There
     are lots of papers scattered on your desk. And you have

no system to organize them. Not at all. The person who works in a messy
workspace spends a lot of time looking for things. This person can be
also distracted by unnecessary things. Here is a trick to free up your
workspace and increase your work capacity. In terms of papers and
documents, ask yourself: Is this item essential? It is really important
question, especially if you tend to save material "just in case". Bring
your papers all together. You can extract the information from these
materials and store it in a minimized form. Therefore, go digital --
switch to paperless statements and scan as much as you can. You should
digitalize your business as much as you can and eliminate paper clutter
forever.

177. Create a spot for incoming papers. You used to have piles and piles
     of incoming papers. Various notices, receipts, manuals, flyers,
     warranties and the other papers. The whole family, including you,
     put them into different spots and they are scattered all over the
     house -- on the kitchen table, on the dresser in the hallway, on
     the counter, etc. Even all over your car. So you can't find
     anything! Stop battling with the paper clutter once and for all!
     Designate an in-box tray in a certain location of your home. Put
     each and every paper into that in-box tray. Got some papers? Put it
     into your inbox. Done! This is a little change, but it can
     apparently transform your paperwork. It is such a relief and
     happiness to have them finally sorted!

178. You can easily sort the files. A mountain of paperwork is a
     nightmare for many people. The reason is simple. We didn't create a
     good spot for them and papers keep piling up for days, weeks,
     months... No worries, the solution is at your fingertips. You can
     organize some simple folders. First of all, you should bring the
     papers all together. Simply go throughout all rooms in your house
     and pick up any paper clutter.

1. Bring them into one place. Now you have your pile of papers. 1. Next,
create the folders.

1.  Then, add labels. For instance, you can make the label named
    "Bills". Or "Trash". Or "Papers requiring action" (e.g.¬†forms,
    school papers, etc.)

2.  Take a handful of papers from the pile. You should make quick
    decisions: file them right now or trash them. That's it!

3.  Solve cable-clutter problem. Organizing your cables is a
    never-ending battle. You probably don't want a bunch of cables
    hanging down there. However, there is a simple trick. Rain gutters
    are the cheap solutions. Set up your creative cable management under
    your desk and enjoy! Go to your local home center or hardware store
    and pick up a rain gutter. You will also need some accessories to
    install it. Of course, you can buy a cable organizer and solve the
    problem easily. Get your cables under control today!

4.  A shoe organizer can help you to organize your craft supplies. You
    have a huge collection of craft supplies, right? However, they are
    falling on the floor of your room, they are chucked to the back end.
    There is a simple trick for that. A plastic Over-the-Door shoe
    organizer is your solution! It is perfect for storing all these
    small items.

5.  Hang a shoe organizer on the door of your room or the closet.

1. Put your craft supplies in their seats.

181. Pegboard for your small tools. You can add a pegboard to your
     workspace in order to maximize a vertical space. In this way, you
     will have a quick access to the frequently used tools.

<!-- -->

a.  First, purchase the pegboard of choice.
b.  To take this project to the next level, paint your pegboard in your
    favorite color.
c.  Next, install the pegboard in your workspace. Installing a pegboard
    is a quick and inexpensive way to improve your workspace. Keep your
    workspace safe, organized and beautiful by storing your frequently
    used tools on your pegboard. Have fun!

<!-- -->

182. Keep your craft supplies organized -- empty pasta jars. Your
     clutter is demanding of you a lot of time and energy. If you feel
     that you spend too much time reorganizing, cleaning, tidying,
     dusting and more, your house is probably cluttered. You are aware
     that your items need to be stored somewhere. If your rooms are
     crowded and cabinets overflowing, it's time to declutter your
     space. Otherwise, if that trend continues, you will not be able to
     bring one more new item in the house. A little stuff, necessary and
     unnecessary, create pile and piles of clutter, right? For example,
     craft supplies. Scissors, glue, pencils, and sharpener, as well as
     kids' craft supplies can be found all over your house. You can
     easily keep them well organized with empty pasta jars. It means,
     clean empty pasta jars and fill them with craft supplies. This
     solution is completely suitable for small toys, too. Chip and easy!

183. Beauty is in the little things. "It has long been an axiom of mine
that the little things are infinitely the most important." --Arthur
Conan Doyle Small-sized cubby system that can stand on your desks or
dresser table is a great idea for organizing your craft and office
supplies. You can choose among designs and sizes to keep the clutter
under control.

184. Let go of book clutter. If you are a book addict and love reading
every day, you probably face the book clutter. Reading in bed is one of
the greatest pleasures for you, but you have too many books and
magazines, right? Therefore, it's time to cut the book clutter and get a
clean bedroom! As you probably already know the simplest solution tends
to be the best one. You can build the library book cart to organize all
your magazines and books. Of course, your mini library can be
repositioned to another place in your bedroom. Clever!

185. Create a minimalist wardrobe. The cluttered closet where your
     clothes fall on your head when you open it can be a fearful thing.
     Horror movie. Do you need all these things? Of course, you don't.
     Therefore, it's time to get rid of them. If something prevents you
     from taking rid of unwanted things such as emotional reasons, you
     can help yourself. Of course, you have memories, you spent a lot of
     money on your clothes, you spent a lot of time, and so on. However,
     you should focus on quality over quantity and you should focus on
     the present moment. Where should you start?

186. Set aside some time, for instance, on Saturday morning, after
     family breakfast.

187. Take clothes out, empty it into a pile.

188. Take a deep breath and start organizing. Don't overthink it.

189. Get three large-sized boxes ready. Those are "keep", "maybe", and
     "toss". Sort everything into these three boxes.

1. Take another deep breath and let it go! Experience a true freedom and
happiness. Think twice or thrice before buying your next skirt or hat.
Just breathe freely!

186. Get rid of unwanted clothes. If you find that your closet is always
     overflowing, it's time for cleaning. This is a great hack to get to
     the root of this problems and start a good declutter. Hang some
     clothes hangers in the closet "backwards," when using the pointer
     forcing out toward you. Once you utilize a piece of clothes, add
     the hanger back to your closet. After about six months, take out
     clothes that you have not worn. Afterwards, look at what is left.
     Interesting. Thus, you can remove the pieces of clothing you don't
     need any more!

187. An easy way to spring-clean your wardrobe. It is time to remove
     winter clothes because you will not need it until next season. You
     can store your winter clothes in a box. You can take a few boxes
     and label them: sweaters, jackets, scarves, winter hats. Then,
     organize your spring clothes. You can group your items according to
     the simple rule "like with like." Group them by sleeve length or
     color. Be creative and practical. Keep clothes that really suit
     you. Get rid of old and outworn clothes. Throw out those old skirts
     because you don't feel good in them. Get rid of those pants that no
     longer fit you. Take a special box for items you are donating to
     charity. It will make you feel better instantly.

188. Three hacks for organizing your wardrobe. Turn on some good music
     and start creating the list of what you have in your wardrobe and
     the list of what you need. Think of all combinations and remove
     from the list everything that you no longer wear.

a. Why you keep items that make you feel ugly? This creates a heavy vibe
and you don't want it. You want a happier and well-organized wardrobe!
Therefore, get out of your house all these unwanted pieces of clothing.
b. You can take some classic pieces to a tailor for alterations and
create a vintage look. c.¬†Organize your clothing by type, so that
everything is visible. Then, organize by color. For example, sweaters
light to dark, long-sleeve tops light to dark and so on. Thus, you will
achieve an overall feeling of happiness!

189. Organize your clothing in a vertical fashion. If you love a mix of
     vintage clothing and new trendy pieces, this is going to be one of
     your favorite hacks. This awesome trick allows you to see
     everything, even vintage clothing from two or more years ago. Do
     not lose track of your favorite old clothes. Therefore, simply
     stack them vertically. You can sort them by colors to ensure the
     best results!

190. Organize your clothes in a stylized way. Skip bench seat at the end
     of the bed or foot rest and use this place as extra space storage.
     Actually, you can use a low cubby bench to hold your favorite bags,
     slippers, jeans, sweaters, and other pick-me-ups. And you still
     will be able to use a flat surface of the storage.

191. Take your closet organization to the next level. Wire shelf divider
     is a fantastic invention! Shelf dividers are ideal for creating and
     maintaining more organized closet. They help support stacked
     clothing items, so they will help take your closet organization to
     the next level. You can find wire shelf dividers in a variety of
     sizes and shapes, so you can choose your style.

They are see-through barriers that are perfect for organizing stacks of
your clothing. You will be able to stack your sweaters, blouses and
shirts higher than ever before!

192. You get a lot of extra storage with hanging shelves. There are a
     lot of things that we use on a daily basis. We just need these
     items each and every day. Especially if you have kids. Parents are
     aware of it. However, what to do with this pile of toys, house
     slippers that are scattered everywhere, socks, everyday accessories
     that you like to wear most frequently? When it comes to clearing
     clutter from your bedroom, these things are the first in the list.
     Are you looking for daily activity organizer? What about hanging
     shelves? Hanging shelves are inexpensive and practical solutions
     for tight spaces. They are easy to install because they have hangs
     from standard closet rods. Very simply. You can find them in
     popular colors and different sizes depending on their purpose. For
     example, you will be able to win the battle with clutter in your
     daughter's room with pink colored hanging shelves. The
     possibilities are endless.

193. Small space survival -- multiple levels of clothing bars! This
     clever idea will allow you to keep your tiny closet filled with
     your upto-date clothing effectively. First and foremost, pack
     off-season clothes in vacuum-sealed bags. Then, maximize closet
     space by hanging multiple levels of clothing bars!

194. Organize and store all of your sweaters effortlessly. Do you have a
     lot of sweaters in a very little closet space? If your sweaters are
     always scattered everywhere in the closet or stacks of sweaters

constantly fall over, here're two simple life hacks. 1) First, fold your
sweaters neatly. Folding sweaters properly will significantly save space
in your dresser. Therefore, learn a simple folding technique for
sweaters. It's easy! 2) Further, you should store them. Be creative or
purchase sweater boxes to have peace of mind. Try to find clear boxes so
everything will be visible and accessible. The boxes keep your favorite
sweaters safe from dust and pests, too. The boxes will make the most
efficient usage of space in your dresser or closet.

195. Organize your caps and hats. If you are a cap addict or you have a
     collection of well-loved caps, here is a simple hack for keeping
     your caps and hats tidy and organized. It is really important to
     get rid of unwanted cups. Consider a question: Do I really think
     it's worth it to have all these caps in my house? Find a local
     place to donate them or sell them at garage sale. Of course, you
     can store them one inside the other, but there is a better solution
     to keep them properly. How about simple hooks? And each and every
     cap, winter cap, baseball cap and hat gets its own place. Many of
     us like simple solutions without spending too much money and
     complicated installations, right? Use wardrobe hooks to keep your
     cap collection organized.

196. Keep your ties well organized. You can use a wall space to organize
     items in your wardrobe. If you have a large-sized wall in your
     closet, it can be a perfect home for your favorite ties. You can
     arrange a pegboard for this purpose. In this way, you will be able
     to organize and rearrange your items whenever you want. There is an
     old rule -- Out of sight, out of mind! You should keep your ties
     organized. Otherwise, you will not be able to see and find all of
     them. This idea works for hats, shawls, scarves and other items
     that you can hang. Let your imagination go wild!

197. How to declutter your scarves? Are your scarves scattered all over
your house? Do you waste your time looking for your favorite scarf that
matches your red coat? Here're a few steps you should follow and
decluttering your scarves will be a breeze. a. Bring everything
together. You will get a messy pile. b. Then, throw out outworn,
damaged, and shabby scarves. Get rid of everything you have not worn for
the past year. Keep only necessary scarves and purge the rest.
c.¬†Lastly, only store what you will use. Many professional organizers
advise us to fold our scarves instead of hanging them. However, it
depends on your personal preferences and storage solutions.

198. A storage solution for your scarf collection -- hangers. You can
     store your scarves creatively. There are a lot of great ways for
     storing scarves. So choose the way that fits the best into your
     wardrobe. One of the best ways to store your scarves is to wrap
     them around hangers. This method makes everything easy to spot. Be
     creative and enjoy your scarves!

199. The clever concept to store your scarves. Choose among these
     creative ways to store your scarf collections. Get inspired and
     motivated to win your battle with clutter in your closet and
     bedroom.

<!-- -->

a.  You can fold or roll your scarves up and store them in a drawer.
b.  Try to hang them on command hooks on the back of a door.
c.  Then, you can hang them on a towel rod in your closet.

d.¬†Hang shower hooks on a hanger and rearrange your scarves. You can
display your scarf collection effectively with this inexpensive trick.

200. Keep your jeans organized. Are you sentimentally attached to your
     jeans? Purge your closet following these simple guidelines.

<!-- -->

a.  Analyze every individual pair of jeans. Can you see yourself wearing
    these jeans? If your answer is NO, get rid of it no matter how
    stylish or expensive it might look. If your jeans don't make you
    feel absolutely amazing, get rid of it right now. You can donate
    them or give them away.
b.  Repairing and repurposing. Out of sight means less visual clutter,
    but jeans hidden in the wardrobe tend to be forgotten. Therefore,
    consider shortening or hemming if you think it'll be worth it. Set
    aside anything that needs repair and take it to the tailor as soon
    as possible.
c.  Keep them neat and tidy. Items like jeans can be much more easily
    stored by organizing on a shelf. You can sort them by style, color,
    etc. However, you can choose your favorite method of organizing.
    Remember -- even if you get rid of all your jeans, you're still you!

<!-- -->

201. Keep your skirts neat and tidy. Start by going through your
     wardrobe and deciding what skirts you need to get rid of. Try to
     give away your clothes rather than throw away. You never know who
     might be able to use your hand-me-downs. After that, you can sort
     the rest of your skirts. The great way to organize your skirts is
     to divide them into three zones. Here's how to store all your
     skirts.

<!-- -->

a.  The first zone is designated for casual everyday skirts. For
    example, work skirts, beach skirts, etc. This zone should be very
    accessible.

b. The second zone holds skirts that are used weekly or monthly. E.g.
elegant and classy skirts for evening outings, fancy clothes skirts,
etc. c.¬†The third zone is designated for the skirts that are rarely
used. Getting your closet fresh and well organized is a good first step
toward using and enjoying it every day.

202. The best way to store your skirts. Hang your skirts on hangers with
     clips. Make sure to fold in the sides so the outside of your skirt
     will not be marked by the clips. Group your skirts in a way that is
     logical to you. Take your wardrobe to the next level and use double
     rods.

203. Life-changing clothing organization tips -- dresses. As you
     probably already know, the best way to keep your dresses organized
     is to hang them. Of course, there are a lot of tricks to make it
     easier.

<!-- -->

a.  Sort your dresses by outfits; in this way, it's easy to choose
    something to wear in the morning, something to wear in the evening,
    etc. You can also group your dresses by color or by length. Simply
    choose the solution that works for you.

b.  It's hard to change dresses if you can't see them. Consider buying
    decorative garment rack and hang your favorites.

c.  To make the best of your closet, consider installing an extendable
    valet rod.

d.  You can use different color hangers for different seasons. Lovely!

<!-- -->

204. Life-changing clothing organization tips -- tops. I you have a
     place in the wardrobe, hang your tops.

Here's an unusual tip: hang all your clothes in the same direction. It
sounds crazy, but it will make your life easier. It creates a look of
the high level of organization, as well as makes your choice easier.
There is an adage that says, "It's better to donate than accumulate".
Therefore, get rid of surplus items and cut the clutter.

205. Life-changing clothing organization tips -- jackets and blazers.

<!-- -->

a.  The first rule is -- You can free up a lot of space in your wardrobe
    by getting rid of unwanted blazers and jackets. Bring your jackets
    and blazers together and decide: keep or toss. That's it!
b.  Hang your jackets and blazers on good-quality wooden hangers. Wire
    hangers are bad for your jackets.
c.  Then, sort them by color. You can also group them by outfits.
    Therefore, choose the solution that works for you.

<!-- -->

206. How to organize your tiny closet? Small closet presents real
     storage challenge. However, be inspired and make the most of your
     cute tiny closet.

<!-- -->

a.  First and foremost, go through your clothes to get rid of things you
    don't wear anymore. There is a well-known rule: If you haven't worn
    some piece of clothing in more than a year, it must go. Divide the
    items into boxes: give away to charity or toss.
b.  Now, it's time to organize your things. It's important to use all of
    space available to you. You can add a second closet rod, but if you
    don't want a permanent solution, consider installing a tension rod.
c.  Then, consider installing shelves above the closet rod.
d.  Space on the back of your closet door is so useful. So install an
    over-the-door rack.

e. Use multiple-tiered hangers as one of the best space-saving tools.
Hang your skirts, blouses, pants, etc.

207. One of the best space saving tools -- multi-tiered hangers. When
     your tiny closet turns into nightmare closet, you start looking for
     solutions. Multi-tiered hangers can provide you with more
     organizing space than regular hangers. They come as a 3 tier
     hanger, 4 tier hanger, and a 5 tier hanger. All you need to do is
     to find the right multi clothes hangers that will transform your
     closet into an organized haven. How to choose the right tiered
     hangers?

<!-- -->

a.  A tiered skirt hanger will provide you with the maximum amount of
    hanging space for your favorite skirts and cut out the clutter in
    overstuffed mini closet.
b.  Opt for cascade hangers for an easy-to-see look!
c.  A swing-arm slack hanger makes it easy to pull your pants or skirts
    off of the hanger; at the same time, you don't have to take the
    hanger out of the closet.
d.  The more pieces of clothing you have, the more multi-tiered hangers
    you may need. Choose tiered hangers that make the most sense to you,
    according to your preferences.

<!-- -->

208. Brilliant organization ideas -- over-the-door rack. Tired of
     searching for an article of clothing in your overstuffed closet?
     Over-the-door racks give you maximum storage capabilities. You can
     hang your bags, scarves, belts, etc. There is also an over-the-door
     shoe cubby to organize your shoes.

209. Double your closet space. Here's a perfect solution for your
miscellanies -- Place a small set of drawers (plastic or wooden) in your
overcrowded closet. You can store sewing needles and thread, socks,
spare bra straps and other trinkets in these cute drawers. And from now
onwards, you will keep your accessories under control. Don't forget to
put a full-length mirror for a head-to-toe check. Enjoy!

210. A few life hacks for your tiny closet. Your tiny closet can be
     turned into a well-organized space.

<!-- -->

a.  Simple-to-install wire racks are perfect for streamlining your
    closet.
b.  Then, you can use extra clothing rods, as well as command hooks to
    keep items organized.
c.  Make use of the floor space to store bags, shoes and odds. Remember
    -- your closet still needs occasional clean-up. Take it under
    control!

<!-- -->

211. Creative solutions for your small closet. Living in a small house
     or apartment can have its own advantages, but a small closet isn't
     one of them. Luckily, you can extend and even double your closet
     space. Here're the solutions that will blow your mind.

<!-- -->

a.  You can double your hanging space by adding an extender rod.
b.  Double closet space with under shelf baskets and use all the space
    available to you!
c.  If you want to keep the price down, consider this practical solution
    -- Give yourself some extra shelving by hanging a spice rack on your
    wall next to the closet.

212. Simple hacks to organize your dressing table. Clutter can really
dampen your mood. One day you wake up and realize -- your makeup and
beauty products have taken over your entire bedroom. Lip glosses and
perfumes cluttering up the desk, nail polishes scattered all over the
bedside table. And your dresser table is jammed with your beauty stash.
If you're looking to streamline your dressing table, follow these four
easy steps. a. Step one: Gather up your products. Therefore, go around
your entire bedroom and gather up your beauty items. b. Step two: check
each and every item. Check expiration dates and throw everything that is
useless. Get rid of duplicates, too. c.¬†Step three: dust your table and
clean everything in your makeup bags. You can use makeup remover wipes
and cosmetic sanitizer wipe as the most convenient solutions. d.¬†Step
four: put beauty products and tools back. Keep them neat and tidy. In
this way, your dresser table will be decluttered and beautiful.

213. Cubby systems are still irreplaceable. And one of the best tricks
     to get ship-shape in any corner of your bedroom is to purchase
     storage cubbies. You can use this simple solution for almost all of
     your things. It will help you to keep your bedroom tidy and
     beautiful. You can designate a spot for sports equipment, another
     spot for bags and backpacks, the third spot for shoes, and so on.
     Cubby will inspire you to display your favorites, too. The
     possibilities are endless.

214. Cute and stylish storage. If you have a large-sized closet, but you
     need some more ideas for keeping your bedroom in order -- add
     stylish bench system. Canvas cubes inside make a great spot to hold
     your pick-me-ups. With this versatile solution, you can use flat
     surface of this bench, too.

215. Be creative -- try displaying your favorites. Don't toss your
travel souvenirs or jewelry into a random junk drawer. If you are
lacking storage space, why not show off your favorites? It will be the
most beautiful d√©cor! Use vertical storage systems and you will get
extra space in your bathroom.

216. Organizing jewelry can be challenging. First and foremost, get rid
     of anything you don't use a long time. You should throw away
     anything damaged or dingy. You may be able to repair some pieces of
     jewelry, especially those that have sentimental value. Then, clean
     your jewelry thoroughly. Now it's time to putting things away.
     Consider picking a ring tree holder to keep your rings handy. Then,
     arrange your jewelry in your old boxes or purchase some new trendy
     jewelry displays. There are amazing hacks to organize your
     necklaces and bracelets such as hanger jewelry holder, necklace
     stands, jewelry displays, and so on. It's up to you!

217.Organize your jewelry boxes. Here are a few simple steps to
declutter your jewelry box once and for all. a. Empty your jewelry box
or boxes on a table. b. Can something be tossed out? Throw out any
trash. Dump inexpensive chains, cheap and rusty costume jewelry, defunct
watches, etc. Then, discard all earrings that have lost their mates.
Remove broken jewelry that is not worth repairing. The rest that is
worth repairing set aside and take to a jeweler. c.¬†Next, sort your
jewelry into two groups: the jewelry you use every day and the pieces of
considerable value. As for the second group, store them in a
safe-deposit box.

d.¬†Old jewelry with sentimental associations can be stored separately if
possible. That's it, your jewelry collection should be manageable from
now onwards.

218. A stylish way to organize your clutches. If you are a purse addict,
     here is a simple hack for keeping your clutches and wallets
     well-organized. Don't toss your collection of clutches into the
     dark abyss of a closet. You can keep them one inside the other, but
     there is a much better solution. How about a kitchen lid rack? And
     each and every clutch bag gets its own slot. Many of us love these
     simple solutions to create designated storage and keep things
     organized. You can move this rack to the dresser and keep your
     favorite clutch bags free of dust. Or you can transfer it to a
     shelf. Anyway, it can be a great decoration for girl's room. So
     glam!

219. Keep your sunglasses neatly organized. Your sunglasses are
     scattered all over your house. There are sunglasses in your purse,
     on your kitchen table, all over your closet, in dressers, etc. But
     today's the day!

<!-- -->

a.  Get rid of broken, chipped and unwanted glasses. Old fashion trends
    become fresh again, but you cannot save all your items. So it's time
    to get rid of sunglasses that you wore in high school. You can
    create the "not sure" pile and consider giving away, donating, or
    tossing.
b.  It's time to store and organize your sunglasses. Here're a few
    amazing ideas to keep your sunglasses neatly organized.

<!-- -->

1.  Install a small towel rack to hang your eyewear.
2.  You can use a simple clothes hanger.

1. Display your favorites on a beautiful tray. Show your collection with
a pride! You can store your sunglasses in a cute mini basket. You can
hang the basket on a wall. So be creative and inspired, the
possibilities are endless!

220. Keep your purse neat and tidy. A huge number of women carry
     handbags packed with clutter. Makeup, visit cards, old candy
     wrappers, minty mints, pens, tissues, snacks... There is a simple
     way to tackle this problem.

<!-- -->

1)  First, dump out your handbag on the table.
2)  Throw out any trash, such as expired membership cards, unwanted
    photographs, the perfume that's missing the spray bulb. Out!
3)  Next, declutter your wallet. Organize your credit cards, phone
    numbers, and money.

Organize essentials in designated places: cell phone, wallet, keys,
notebook and pen, small pack of tissues, lip balm, and hand cream. You
can do it!

221. Hang your ironing board. It is no doubt that the ironing board is
     taking up too much space in almost every home. This thing always
     falls on you when you open the closet door. Doesn't that sound
     familiar? Buy coat hangers at a local store, or use old clothes
     hangers and hang your bothersome ironing board.
222. Measure the length of the ironing board.
223. Place two hangers on the wall in the closet. Screw them according
     to the instructions. Be sure to make them high enough in order to
     allow the ironing board to hang properly.
224. Just hang it up and expand your closet space easily and
     effortlessly.

LIVING ROOM

Enjoy your clutter-free living room! Are you embarrassed to let anyone
come into your living room? Are you putting other things on hold until
you solve the problem with clutter in living room. Did you know that you
can make every corner of your house or apartment useful? Throw away,
toss or donate unwanted items. Try to recycle your items and do your
part to keep the environment clean. Simplify the clutter and enjoy your
relaxing area to the fullest!

222. Organizing hacks for a clutter-free living room. There is no doubt
that even a few extra items can create mess and clutter in your living
room, especially if it is tiny space. How to declutter your living room?
There are a few basic tips: Get rid of unwanted items. As you work
through the items in your living room, here are two important questions
to keep in mind: Is this useful? Is this beautiful? Now throw out any
clutter that is laying around. Get rid of surplus furniture, too. Decide
on the purpose. Ask yourself: What is the function of this piece of
furniture? Think about what you can sell or donate. You can sell them at
garage sale or you can give them away. You should use only the pieces
that are necessary for your living room to function. Clean your room
thoroughly. Reorganize your items. Find a spot for each and every item
that makes the most sense to you. It's important to maintain this new
clutter-free environment you've created. Once a week, you should take
some time to clean this space of dust and dirt. Remember -- it gets
easier with time!

223. Go a step further. Magazines, kids' items and office supplies are
     scattered all over your living room, right? Sick and tired of
     cleaning and organizing? It seems like a never-ending job. Happily,
     there are simple life hacks to keep clutter under control. Step
     one: Savvy furniture. Try to choose functional furniture that
     doubles as an extra space storage. For example, a coffee table with
     a lower shelf or benches with hidden storage Step two: There is no
     doubt, the living room is the most frequented room in every house.
     For that reason, it is a catch-all for clutter! Now, you should
     remove excess ornaments and plants. During this phase, toss
     unwanted decoration, threadbare rugs, broken things, and other
     useless items. Please be practical with every item.

Step three: Think twice before you start purchasing organizers. Is there
something else that you can throw away? It's so important to ensure you
have enough space storage to organize everything. Remember -- less is
more! Now, doesn't that feel better?

224. Simple and traditional living room storage ideas. Despite the size
     of your room, you are looking for ideas to save the space and make
     the room look organized and clutter-free. There are a lot of ways
     to organize your items in the living room.

225. An open shelf is one of the most common pieces of furniture.

226. Then, you can use different dressers and sideboards

227. Cabinets are irreplaceable when the question is about storage.

228. Next solution is lots of cute baskets.

229. Display cabinets with their snazzy design are always in vogue. The
     possibilities are endless so choose what suits you!

230. Ideas for organizing your open shelving. Open shelving is a great
     idea to add some much-needed organization to your living room.
     Follow these simple rules and you will keep your living room
     shipshape.

a. Preparation. First and foremost, make sure you'll have enough space.
If you are not sure, consider buying adjustable shelving. b.
Categorization. Group items by category. Put like with like.
c.¬†Imagination. Invest in good containers such as decorative wire
baskets or vintage buckets. Let your imagination run wild!
d.¬†Presentation. Display your favorites like family heirlooms and
photographs. However, be careful not to overcrowd your shelves.

226. A cozy living room makeover -- dressers. A dresser serves as a
     perfect closet alternative or as an ideal supplemental living room
     storage. How to organize your dresser? Here are a few rules. Free
     up your space. Get a jump start on your dresser. As you work
     through the items on your dresser, keep in mind this question: Is
     this useful? Then, throw out any clutter. Decide on the purpose.
     Ask yourself: What is the function of this dresser? For example, if
     you're lacking wardrobe space, you can store your clothes here. Or
     your dresser will hold items that you use every day. It's up to
     you. Dresser is one of the best storage solutions for the living
     room so that you'll be able to simplify the clutter and enjoy your
     relaxing area to the fullest.

227. Cut clutter in the living room closet. Is your closet in the living
     room jammed with clutter? If you are struggling with clutter in
     your closet, you are not alone. Luckily, with the right setup, you
     will find a place for each and every item. Take everything out of
     the closet. Work systematically around the entire space. Ready,
     set, go! Create three piles:

<!-- -->

a.  Stuff that shouldn't go in the closet;
b.  Items that should go in the closet;
c.  Clutter and garbage.

Follow these few steps and you will declutter your closet easily and
effortlessly. After decluttering, you should sort your items one by one.

228. Keep living room closet well organized. Keep the clutter down by
     organizing all your necessities in a closet.

<!-- -->

a.  After decluttering, you should organize the living room closet
    according to your preferences. Ask yourself: What is the function of
    this closet?
b.  Living room is definitely an area where the closet is a big help.
    You can choose long narrow closet to maximize space in your living
    room.
c.  There are so many brilliant ideas to maximize closet space. Remember
    to use hangers with clips, multiple & tiered hangers, hooks,
    baskets, and other great solutions to keep your closet neat and
    tidy. This versatile storage can hold all kinds of items, from your
    coats to yoga pants. If you still need a space storage, a console
    cabinet is a perfect solution for your essentials.

<!-- -->

229. You get a lot of extra storage with hanging shelves. There are a
     lot of necessities that make our living room looks messy.
     Especially if we have kids. However, what to do with this pile of
     newspapers, books, toys, snacks and other items that are scattered
     all over your living room? What about floating shelves?! Floating
     shelves are inexpensive and practical solutions for your living
     room. Floating shelves are easy to install so you will get an extra
     storage without taking up floor space. You can find them in popular
     colors and different sizes to fit within your living room. Good
     luck!

230. Floating shelves -- decorative and functional ideas. Decorative and
functional floating shelves can be mounted on nearly any wall in your
living room. They offer you plenty of accessorizing options. These
amazing shelves can be grouped or stacked so you will get an extra
storage and space to display your favorites. Floating shelves cut
clutter and add style to your living room at the same time. Here's a
practical idea to organize your house plants. Arrange your house plants
on floating shelves and you will get an elegant and chic decorative
detail. They are easy to maintain versatile storage options for you.
Make functional and beautiful living room!

231. Be practical but chic! It's a great idea to use a combination of
     open shelves and cupboards. In this way, you can display your
     favorites and conceal clutter. Therefore, select smart and savvy
     storage units to ensure everything is put back in place. Choose
     from a huge number of brands, designs and colors and enjoy your
     relaxing environment.

232. Get the right coffee table. To get an extra space storage in your
     living room, you can purchase a coffee table with built-in storage.
     You can get the table with either an open shelf storage or shelf
     drawers. Drawers can conceal all sorts of necessities such as
     remotes, books magazines, and coasters, so you will be able to turn
     a simple table into a great storage.

233. Organize your coffee table. How about decluttering your living
     room? You can start from a coffee table. Do you have the coffee
     table jammed with clutter? Does anything belong in another room?
     Can something be tossed out?

Your coffee table in the living room is perfect for items that are apt
to be used frequently. But usually, it is cluttered with a wide variety
of items. However, you can make the most of your storage options. Clean
your coffee table and clear clutter out of drawers. Now you can use it
for the stack of your favorite magazines, the books, coasters, candle
holder, etc. Anyway, try to keep this storage spot organized.

234. Dress up your coffee table. Sick and tired of clutter on your
     coffee table? Books, newspapers, remote controls, pencils, toys...
     Retake the valuable surface of your coffee table with this simple
     hack. Place a nice tray on your table to corral small items. In
     this way, you will discourage placing all sorts of things on your
     coffee table because they already have their home. Easy.

235. Cute nesting tables -- the solution for a small living room. It
     serves as a multi-tiered coffee table in your living room. It is
     easy to move piece of furniture and it provides you with more
     capabilities than open coffee tables. They are perfect for small
     living rooms because they take up less space. They come in sets of
     two or three, so you get an extra tabletop surface as needed.

236. Old-fashioned ottoman. This is an excellent storage furniture
     because it can conceal a large number of items. Ottoman comes in a
     variety of styles, designs, sizes, and colors, so you can bring
     organization to your living room in a stylish way. Remove the lid
     and you can store anything from blankets to toys.

237. Built-Ins - maximize space in your living room.

Built-ins will give your living room a well-organized appearance. You
can frame your doorway with shelves and add amazing storage to your
living room. You can organize your books or display your favorite
collection. Built-ins can turn an unused space in the living room into a
multi-functional storage. You can use irregularly shaped walls and
nooks. Make the most of your small living room!

238. Just imagine -- storage bench! Use your imagination and visualize
     two functions into one. Yes, it is a storage bench! It provides a
     place to sit, and cubbies below can be used for bins. This is a
     real space saver. Corral kids' toys, craft supplies, and other
     trinkets and conceal them under your bench. You can choose from
     designs and styles and your living room will get a stylish and
     well-organized appearance.

239. Organize your favorites -- collectible figurines. It's time to find
     the right home for your collectibles. Display them and add an
     artistic touch to your walls. Floating shelves are a savvy solution
     for your favorite collectibles. In this way, you will get a
     stunning home d√©cor that declutters and stores at the same time.

240. Rolling cart in your living room. The rolling cart is an especially
     good idea for a small living room. If you need an extra counter
     space, consider buying a cart. A small rolling bar cart is just
     what you need to make things more manageable. And you can place
     your cart anywhere you want. It can serve as a good home for your
     house plants.

241. Tackle kids' belongings. If your children use coffee table for
board games and drawing, no big deal. Teach them to clear the supplies
off coffee table after each usage. Then, they should store their
belongings at the place designated. Gather small items such as toy
bricks and blocks, pencils and kids craft supplies and conceal them.
Nevertheless, the best solution is to set up desks or work table for
those activities. However, if you don't have a space for an additional
furniture, use stylish canvas storage bins and declutter your living
room. It is a great solution when you are in a hurry.

242. Dining room organizations -- baskets. If you find you can't use
     your living room for what it meant to do because of certain
     reasons, it's time to solve this problem. This is the area where
     the family can socialize with one another. Your living room is a
     perfect place for gatherings with family and friends. However, if
     your living room is jammed with stuff, it cannot serve its purpose.
     If your living room is filled with knick-knacks, consider buying
     pretty straw baskets. Baskets are great organization tools for
     living room. You can keep lots different things in them. Remove
     clutter from your coffee table, armchairs, and floor. You can go
     one step further and purchase the baskets with handles to hang them
     on a wall using hooks.

243. Creative storage ideas for a small living room. After decluttering
     your home, you realize -- there are lots of items of sentimental
     value to you! If you would like to save the items of great
     importance to you, you should find them a "home" in your "home". It
     can be your living room. Install small rectangular shelf for open
     storage, and clear off the floor in your living room. Display your
     favorites such as the books, and things of great importance like
     antiques and heirloom.

244. Creative organization solutions -- freestanding cabinets. If you
are looking for a stylish way to organize your home, consider installing
freestanding cabinets. This amazing furniture can be used to separate
living room from the rest of the house. It also provides you with a
large amount of storage.

245. Burlap buckets as clever organizers. How about stylish
     burlap-covered buckets? You can use them to hold odds, crafts, and
     other necessities. Then, hang them on the wall and get clutterfree
     environment!

Apart from photographs and paintings, you can hang your favorite
collections on the wall. You can also purchase a stylish ottoman with
space storage and hide your burlap baskets there.

246. A single drawer file cabinet. A mini filing cabinet will not take a
     lot of space in your living room but it is incredibly practical. It
     serves as a storage for your files and documents, as well as a side
     table. Use its surface to showcase your decoration or use it as a
     mini coffee table. It is a simple solution to conceal clutter when
     you are in a hurry. Your discreet cabinet still needs occasional
     clean-up, so get rid of excess items from time to time.

247. Put furniture to work -- console table. Multipurpose furniture is a
     must-have in your small living room. Choose the furniture with
     moving parts and storage space, so you will save space and cut
     clutter at the same time. Consider buying a console table and add
     style to your living room. Trendy baskets can be lined up beneath
     for an extra space storage.

248. Add glam with narrow shelves. Add style and glamour to your home
     with narrow shelves. They are perfect for easy access to the things
     you use every day in your living room. Remember -- any unused space
     is a great spot for storage space! Don't neglect the corners
     because they are the perfect place for those shelves. Small narrow
     shelves will provide you with just enough space for your everyday
     items, as well as beautiful display space for your collectables.

249. Traditional hutches and armoires.

Tackle the clutter problem with these old-fashioned pieces of furniture.
Don't go out and shop for some storage pieces before you sort through
your living room. If you have an old armoire jammed with clutter,
consider repairing and you will get a lot of extra space for storage.
Hutches and armoires provide you with plenty of concealed storage for
organizing your items.

250. A simple hack -- cute decorative trays. Opt for decorative trays to
     keep organized small items and necessities that you use on a daily
     basis. Find "home" for your eyewear, small toys, pencil, book,
     crafts, office supplies, etc. Here is a brilliant idea: each family
     member can be assigned a tray for holding everyday items.

251. Pro organizer trick -- a table skirt. Here's an opportunity to
     express your creativity! Choose stylish table skirt to hide your
     organization storage under table. Therefore, corral your
     necessities and put them in the baskets. Then, hide your baskets
     behind the table skirt. So glam.

252. Organize your mini bar. For this purpose, you can find a metal cart
     with glass and bottle support. It is just what you need to make
     things a lot easier. When you're hosting a party, use your rolling
     cart. Simply move the whole station all over your living room.

253. The clever ideas to make the most of your space in living room.
     Your home entertainment center probably consists of TV set, DVD/CD
     player, sound system, the collection of DVDs and CDs, etc. And all
     these

items can create a disorganized jumble. You can save floor space by
installing a flat panel, wall-mounted television. If you have an older
TV set, tuck it into a television cabinet or an armoire. An armoire can
also provide extra storage space in your living room. It is a great idea
for small apartments. So keep it in mind and think twice before getting
rid of your old armoire.

254. Organize books according to your style. If you are a big fan of
     books, you can face the problem with too many books and a lack of
     shelves. Too many books create too much clutter in your house.
     Drawers wouldn't shut, shelves are full and old books could be
     found in every room. Book, books, book... So you finally realize,
     it's time to let go of some of them. The advice is simple -- remove
     the excess and set yourself free! There is no doubt, it is a large
     project, but it is important to start from somewhere.

<!-- -->

a.  First of all, you must get rid of some books. What can you do with
    your old and unwanted books? You can sell these books online or
    donate them to the local library.
b.  Now dust the shelves and the books. You can use a vacuum cleaner for
    some of the books.
c.  Next logical step, sort your books by genre or author. You can also
    arrange them by the frequency of use. It's totally up to you. The
    books should be nice and neatly sorted and easily accessible.
d.  Keep in mind that you can store over thousands of books on your
    ereader. Keep your books organized from now onwards; enjoy reading!

255. Cut the book clutter with stylish bookcases. A stylish bookcase is
one of the best ways to keep your books neatly organized. They are
perfect for storing magazines, ornaments, family photographs, and other
accessories. You can go one step further and use bookends and magazine
holders. Use fabric-covered box files for storing day-to-day paperwork.

256. Prevent magazine clutter. Are your floor and tabletops cluttered
     with magazines? Or your magazines are stacked in piles in a corner
     of your living room? It's time to cut that clutter once and for
     all! Here are a few steps to clear clutter and get organized. Step
     one: Bring all your magazines together. Step two: Have a trash bag
     on hand and toss unwanted magazines. Dispose of everything that you
     haven't used in the last year and you will never use again. Try to
     recycle your magazines and do your part to keep the environment
     clean. Step three: Decide which magazines you need to keep. If your
     answer is -- "I probably should read", get them out of your house.
     If you need to read some magazines for work assignment or your kids
     need some of them for school, you can keep them. Step four: Sort
     and organize your magazines.

257. Keep your magazines neatly organized (Part I). You love your
magazines so much. However, do you have magazine holders? Or do you have
a special home for them, for example, on a bookshelf? If your answer is
No, it's time to sort your favorites. Here are a few ideas to do that
easily and effortlessly. a. Therefore, you should organize them and put
them at the place designated. A good solution is to purchase a couple of
magazine racks. b. Go to your local store and pick a stylish magazine
holder. Display your magazines in the living room and delight your
guests who love to read magazines. c.¬†Vertical spine bookcase is a great
idea if you have a huge collection of magazines; in this way, you can
group them by category. Enjoy your clutter-free living room!

258. Keep your magazines neatly organized (Part II). There are a lot of
extraordinary ways to sort your magazines. a. A stylish crate on wheels
is a great way to organize your magazines. b. Consider hanging
decorative buckets and bins and find a perfect home for your favorite
magazine collections. c.¬†You can opt for an over-the-door magazine
storage pockets. You can use these ideas to organize all your ripped out
magazine pages, too. Good luck!

259. Organize your comic book collection. a. You should place your
comics in protective bags to keep them safe from dirt and spills. These
bags come in three most common materials: polyethylene, mylar, and
polypropylene. b. Then, organize your comics in the right boxes. It's
good to find acid-free boxes. You could organize them by series or by
the publisher, it's up to you. Consider buying a comic notebook as a
perfect solution for your favorites. c.¬†After that, you should find a
storage spot for your collectables.

260. Make a better visual impression -- hide electronics. Sometimes,
     even a few essential tech pieces can make clutter. For that reason,
     keeping your living room tidy and organized can be challenging.
     Especially if you own a small living space. You can tuck your
     scanner or printer into the drawers and cut clutter once and for
     all.

261. Cubbies in your living room. Cubbies are ideal furniture for living
     room. They are easy to manage and rearrange. Cubbies are great for
     storage and display. How to declutter your cubby system? Follow a
     few simple steps.

<!-- -->

a.  Take everything out and lay it on the ground.
b.  Throw out, donate or recycle everything that is useless.
c.  Wipe down your cubbies.
d.  Reorganize your items by categories. Use baskets if needed to keep
    everything neat and tidy. Organize your collectables, photographs,
    figurines, books and other favorites once and for all.

262. Home office in your living room. You can set up your home office
inside a closet in your living room. And you will get plenty of storage
space. With the door closed, nobody know your home office was there.
Clever.

263. A great solution for extra storage in your living room. You can
     frame your sofa with custom cubbies that will provide you with
     extra space storage. First and foremost, get rid of all unwanted
     items to free up space for necessities. Then, arrange your items
     grouping them by categories. You can install a mix of open and
     closed storage. In that way, you can display your favorites and
     hide some items. Make the most of your living room with this savvy
     design solution!

264. The simplicity and beauty -- floor bins. Tired of blankets, plush
     toys, pillows and other clutter in your living room? Eliminate
     clutter and beautify your room with this clever storage solution.
     Consider buying floor bins. They come in different sizes and
     patterns so you can match your d√©cor. These floor bins are cute and
     attractive, so you can easily teach your kids to pick up after
     themselves!

265. How to throw a party in a small living room? You have a small
     living room, but you love throwing parties. Don't let a small space
     hold you back! Be creative and use your space in a unique way.
     Prevent excess clutter during the party and keep everything under
     control.

a. Rearrange your furniture. A living room with the furniture moved out
of the way can make a great space for your party. b. A creative mindset.
In terms of seating plan, you should be creative. You can use folding
chairs, poufs, pillows, etc. c.¬†Buffet style. Serve appetizers on large
platters and arrange them on your coffee table and other countertops.
You can serve beverages on stylish rolling carts. Try to utilize every
available surface such as a console and shelves. Choose the right
lighting, throw a smile, and you will throw the most glamorous party
ever!

266. Organizing your recordings (I). The most households have
     considerable libraries of CDs, DVDs, and other recordings.
     Organizing these items can be challenging.

<!-- -->

a.  It is the best to alphabetically group the films by title and the
    music by artist.
b.  It's the most convenient to place your recordings on a shelf
    specifically meant for them. These shelves won't take up your space
    too much.
c.  If you collect VHS tapes, you had better label all of those tapes
    before they create a clutter nightmare.
d.  In terms of DVD library, the best advice you ever got is -- Borrow
    it, don't buy it! So, you can rent movies instead of buying them.
e.  As your musical taste changes, your old CDs can create a lot of
    clutter. You can sell them on the Internet. Do a search for "sell
    CDs" or "Used CDs," and you will find specialized websites.

<!-- -->

267. Organizing your recordings (II). Thanks to technological progress
     and advances, recordings have been improved by digitization. For
     example, digital video recorders use a hard

drive to store a lot of hours of programming. MP3s are revolutionizing
the storage of music. Compressed digital music files significantly save
our home space. Now we can store thousands of songs on a small device.
DVD burners can record programming on thin DVDs, and they take up far
less space than videotapes. The files should be backed up from time to
time and that's it! The clutter-cutting benefits are obvious!

268. Velcro -- organize your remote controls. There are too many remote
     controls nowadays. One remote control for DVD player, the second
     one for TV, the third one for an air conditioner, and so on.
     Consider attaching Velcro on the wall and on the back of your
     remote control. You can organize your gamepads in the same way.

269. How to maintain a decluttered living room? Your clutter defines a
     part of you as a person. For example, if you love collectibles or
     books, these things reflect your passion. However, you should be
     organized. How to maintain decluttered living room?

<!-- -->

a.  Try to spend ten minutes each evening clearing out everything that
    doesn't belong in your living room.
b.  Then, each time you plan to buy something new for your living room,
    search through your drawers and cabinets so you do not buy
    duplicates.
c.  It is important to sort through your cabinets and drawers at the
    start of each season.

CHILDREN'S ROOM

"Cut clutter game" It's time to let go of past and make space for new
memories. Before you start decluttering kids' room, sit down and try to
explain the organization process to them. Stick to simplicity.
Decluttering and organizing are best shown by example. Let's play the
"Cut clutter game"!

270. Declutter kids' rooms -- well begun is half done! While the same
basic rules for decluttering apply when you organize children's room,
there are some small differences and the additional considerations. How
to begin? a. First and foremost, you should involve your kids in the
process of decluttering their rooms. The primary and the most important
goal is to teach them how to care for their things. b. Before you start
decluttering, sit down and try to explain the organization process to
them. They should understand basics, so stick to simplicity. Everything
else will be described during the process. Decluttering and organizing
are best shown by example. c.¬†Make space for children's questions. If
children understand what is expected of them, they will be much more
cooperative.

271. Let's play the "Cut clutter game"! This is a special challenge for
     you. And for your kids, too. After explaining of the decluttering
     process, go from intention to realization. Here is a stepby-step
     guide for decluttering children's room.

<!-- -->

a.  Toss and put away: Use trash and recycle boxes or bags. Toss
    everything that are missing important parts or that are broken. You
    should decide together with your kids. You can create the "not sure"
    box but decide as soon as possible.
b.  Cleaning: Use this opportunity to dust, vacuum and wipe down
    furniture. It's a good idea to involve your kids in cleaning their
    room.
c.  Divide and conquer: To achieve the best results, you can divide
    children's room into several main zones. These are 1) the sleeping
    zone, 2) study zone, 3) the entertaining zone, and 4) the grooming
    zone.

<!-- -->

272. Declutter kid's room -- surplus furniture.

If kid's room is jammed with surplus furniture, it's time to declutter.
Having too many tables, baskets, kids tabourets, and other things make
the room appear smaller. a. Get rid of surplus furniture Think what will
stay and what will go. You can sell them at the garage sale or you can
donate them. The same basic rule for decluttering applies here -- less
is more! b. The way you arrange furniture can make a big difference.
Find a spot for each and every piece that makes the most sense to you.

273. How to declutter children's bedroom? Toss it or keep it. While you
     are going through the room, ask yourself: "Do my kids really need
     all these things in the bedroom?" and "Is anything in their
     sleeping area unused?". Remember to ask: "What's important to my
     child?". Then, toss unwanted items. Keep it simple. Make six piles
     together with your kids -- "keep", "put away in another place",
     "give away", "sell", "trash", and "recycle (repurpose)". Sort. It
     is important to designate a spot for each and every item. Put items
     back in their places.

274. Buy organizing products by considering the bigger picture. After
     dividing kids room into zones, you have to set up certain spots for
     certain items. What to do next? Of course, you should buy
     organizers. You can also make them yourself. Just make sure to
     purchase organizers that match the d√©cor of kids' room. It is
     important to consider the aesthetics. If you have no idea what to
     purchase and find this difficult, stick to a wellknown rule -- The
     simpler, the better!

275. Organize a comfortable sleeping area.

It's so easy to let a child's room turn chaotic; moreover, most people
have a small child's bedroom. It's important to declutter bed and under
bed space periodically. a. Pick all the garbage off the floor and throw
it away. Remove all items that don't belong in kids' bedroom. b. You
should only have pillows and one soft toy on the child' bed. c.¬†Then,
declutter a bedside table. Free up space for necessities such as a glass
of water, a lamp, and maybe a magazine or a book. Consider buying a
bedside table with drawers so your child will be able to put necessities
back. In this way, you will keep it from getting too messy.

276. Maintain kids' room. To maintain your fresh and uncluttered
     environment, stick to a few basic rules:

<!-- -->

a.  Make beds every morning.
b.  Keep kids' clothing organized. Place them in the closet or the
    laundry basket.
c.  Take control of bedside clutter. Make sure kids don't ruin what you
    have achieved.

<!-- -->

277. Organize kids' study space. Tired of messy kids' desk? By
     decluttering and organizing kids' study space, you'll feel less
     stressed and your house will be well organized. You will need two
     basic things: 1) a child-friendly desk, 2) a storage space for
     school and craft supplies.

<!-- -->

1)  Kid's desk serves as a homework station, as well as a craft area.
    Therefore, make sure they have a good-sized and uncluttered work
    surface. Throw away everything that is useless. Divide into sections
    to make decluttering easier. For example, declutter and sort items
    in only one drawer. Do not go on until you have finished that job.
    Then, choose another drawer or shelf, and so on. Rome wasn't built
    in a day!

2) Storage solution is a very important issue for your overall
organization. So, make sure to provide your kids with enough storage
space. Choose from different drawers, cabinets, baskets, bins and other
storage solutions according to your needs. This makes it easier for kids
to pick out their items.

278. Use desktop and drawer organizers. Is kids' desk cluttered with
     papers, pens, rulers, notebooks and other items? Do you want to
     help your kids bring order to their homework station? The solution
     is simple -- use desktop and drawer organizers. Your kids can
     divide their items and group them into categories for better
     organization results. Choose from different designs, patterns, and
     sizes and create a wonderful space for studying and creative
     activities.

279. Organize kids' study area-- cube shelves. Conquer wasted space with
     amazing cube shelves for the wall that your little ones will love.
     Choose from a variety of colors and sizes, adorn your walls, and
     help your kids get organized. In terms of materials, opt for
     see-through acrylic to make things more manageable. Clear the desk
     of clutter and delight your little ones!

280. Organize kids' study area -- floating shelves. Floating shelves are
     a fun and unique storage space for kids. It is very important that
     kids can display their favorites on these shelves. Floating shelves
     will help you to maintain order in kid's rooms. Floating shelves
     can hold artwork, books, collectible figures, photographs, and
     other necessities. The possibilities are endless!

281. 2-in-1 organizer -- pegboard shelving system.

If your children need a little extra encouragement to declutter their
own space, you have to find a creative and clever solution. Pegboard
shelving system is a cute and clever room organizer that your little
ones will love. Attach the shelves to the wall so that the children can
reach them easily. These shelves will inspire your kids to keep their
room well organized. They offer the opportunities for creativity and you
can customize them according to your needs. Get a spotless and beautiful
kid's room!

282. A savvy solution for small items. If kids' room is jammed with tons
     of clutter, transparent containers make your life easier!
     Transparent containers are practical because they offer an easy
     visibility of items. They are perfect for storing small items such
     as craft supplies and school supplies. You can stack your new
     containers and save space in kids' room. If you are switching small
     items into new containers, try to maintain clutterfree area with a
     few easy tricks. Designate a spot for each category. For example,
     designate a box for crayons; then, label that box. Next, designate
     a box for watercolors, and so on. These transparent containers can
     hold anything. Kids will love them!

283. Quick ideas for organizing crafts supplies. Install a peg rack on
     the back of a closet door for an extra space storage. It can hold
     tools such ribbons, spools of thread, and so on. This trick will
     free up kids' space for work so that kids can neatly store their
     crafts supplies.

284. One of the best ways to declutter craft supplies. There are a lot
     of ideas to organize kids' small items. Cabinet with drawers is one
     of the best storage solutions. The items are grouped into
     categories and sorted in designated spots.

You can label the drawers; then, add dividers to the drawers to bring
order to whole space.

285. Use recycled storage -- "monkey see, monkey do" method. Your little
     ones learn by the "monkey see, monkey do" method. So you have to
     set a good example. Teach your child that he/she doesn't need stuff
     to be happy. Find a creative, cheap and fun way to stash and
     organize these necessities. Watercolor pens, pom poms, feathers,
     and other items are scattered all over the desk. Use empty coffee
     cans to store crafting items and declutter work area. Simply wrap
     these cans in a decorative paper of choice and arrange them on
     kids' desk. Kids will be delighted! You can also repurpose old
     galvanized buckets.

286. Repurpose items for organization and storage. A wire shower caddy
     can be a great spot for crafts supplies. Hang a caddy on the wall
     and organize notebooks, scissors, pencil holders, and other
     necessities. Just make sure it is low enough for little hands to
     reach.

287. Declutter craft supplies -- shoe organizer. The way you organize
     kids' craft supplies plays a big part in making a clean and tidy
     room. If you want to save money and declutter kids' room at the
     same time, use a shoe organizer! It will hold almost all of craft
     items. Make sure to choose transparent shoe organizer, so kids can
     easily reach desired items. Invite your kids to join you and group
     all items into categories. Remember -- when you free yourself from
     clutter you have much more to give to the things that really matter
     in your life.

288. Quick and clever idea -- pegboard. Pegboard is an ideal contrivance
for storing kids' crafts supplies. Paint the pegboard and hang it above
kids' desk. Just make sure it is low enough for your little ones to
reach. Kids will be inspired because they will have everything visible
and accessible.

289. Small cubbies -- storage and display. Whether you want to organize
     toys, craft supplies, or something else, small cubbies are always a
     great idea for kids' room. They are easy to manage and rearrange.
     Follow these simple steps to declutter and reorganize your cubby
     storage.

<!-- -->

a.  Take everything out and lay it on the ground.
b.  Throw out everything that is useless.
c.  Wipe down your cubbies.
d.  Reorganize and group craft supplies by categories. Use cans, bins or
    baskets to keep everything neat and tidy. It will be the great
    display for kids' artwork, too.

<!-- -->

290. Display kids' artwork. There are a lot of nifty ways to display
     your child's masterpieces. Here're some unique solutions for
     displaying your child's art.
291. You can hang them using clothespins that are attached to a strip of
     wood.
292. Consider using picture frames and display them on a wall.

1. A chalkboard is always good idea to keep your wall clean.

1.  Clipboard display is one of the simplest solutions ever.

291. How to combat book clutter? Decluttering kids' books can be a
challenging task, but with the right plan you will get them well
organized. Bring all books together. Toss or donate. Toss everything you
no longer use. Get rid of damaged books. Consider donating books that
children will never read. Keep. Keep current reference books and books
of great financial value. Keep books of great sentimental value, too.
Sort and organize. Designate a spot in kids' room for their books.
Invest in a good bookshelf because the number of books will increase
over the years. You can sort books in a manner that is logical to you.
You can alphabetize kids' books to make them easier to find desired
books.

292. Choose the appropriate storage. Now, kids' room is under control.
     Relatively. But half a loaf is better than none! So, be careful. If
     your children go back to their old habits, toys, clothing and
     papers are likely to start piling up again. Of course, you don't
     want that to happen! Therefore, you have to devote some time to
     your little ones, teaching them to follow good habits. You can
     teach your child that each and every item has a "home". Your little
     ones learn by example and they want to be involved. Therefore,
     allow them to choose the "home" for their favorite books. Ask your
     child to help you select the right storage space. It is important
     that this storage should make sense for your child, not for you.
     Thus, your child will learn basic organizing skills.

293. Keep kids' books neatly organized -- wall book bin. Wall book bin
is designed to be attached directly to the wall next to the desk. It can
hold not only books but also magazines, comic books, folders, binders,
etc. This is a simple and kid-friendly way to get kids' necessities well
organized. You can install a few book bins and sort the books by
categories. Cute.

294. A great idea to organize and store kids' books. There are a lot of
     inexpensive and practical ways to organize books in kids' room. One
     of the most creative ideas is built-in bookshelves! You can use
     cheap and available materials and build amazing storage space for
     kids' books. If you tend to avoid custom-made shelves and you are
     planning to make your own DIY shelves to match d√©cor -- consider
     creating built-in bookshelves. Good luck!

295. Life hacks for tiny room -- corner bookcase. This handy solution
     will save space in a tiny kids' room. The corner bookcase will
     maximize space while offering enough storage space for books. You
     can find them in popular colors and different sizes to fit into
     d√©cor. Your kids will have a quick and easy access to the
     frequently used school books, comic books or picture books.

296. Go one step further -- a container with wheels! You are doing very
     well for now! So keep up the good work! It's time to take the
     organization on kids' room to the next level. When everything has
     its own spot, your child can find what he/she is looking for
     quickly and easily. Consider purchasing the containers with

wheels as a storage for small items. This fun kids' storage solution
will cut clutter and help your child keep bedroom neat and tidy. In this
way, you will teach your child to care for her/his belongings. At the
same time, your child will have fun. Make it work for you!

297. Organize kids' toys -- basics. Toys. You feel like they are
     everywhere in your house. On the kitchen table, on the shelves, in
     bathroom, in your bed, everywhere on the floor... But toys are
     super funny! However, what to do?

<!-- -->

1)  Donation and garage sell. Try your best to minimize the number of
    toys in your house. Be convinced that less is better and always
    choose quality over quantity. Find a local place to donate. If you
    want to have a garage sale when you are finished this job, plan the
    date right now. Planning garage sale will give you an additional
    motivation to stay on target and finish this a time-consuming task
    on time. It will also help you to prepare for your garage sale (for
    example, invite families and friends to join you, advertise it in a
    local paper, and so on).
2)  Toss and give away. It's time to start throwing out the unwanted
    toys. Discard the things that are stained, broken, missing some
    parts, etc. You have to get rid of things that are no longer age
    appropriate, too. Of course, you can't give away items that aren't
    useful to anyone.
3)  Storage. After that, you should find a convenient place to store
    kids' toys. Keep the toys in the baskets, closet, or storage boxes.
    It's up to you. Teach your kids to love the uncluttered look.

<!-- -->

298. Let go of sentimental toys. Did you spend your hard-earned money on
     insanely expensive toys? After a while, they are broken or missing
     some important parts. Or they are no longer age appropriate. How to
     know when to throw some toys away or donate them to charity? You
     can divide these toys into following categories:

1. Children haven't used it in the last year; 1. You can create" they
would never use that" list;

1.  These toys are too old;

2.  They are broken and completely useless;

3.  You have duplicates. You will find that you enjoy being in your home
    and kids room, and you'll spend less time maintaining and cleaning
    your home. Set yourself free!

4.  A simple plan to declutter the toys. If you struggle with toy
    clutter, come up with an efficient toy-organizing plan and you will
    get all toys under control once and for all. Focus. First and
    foremost, try to focus on one area of kids' room at a time. Apply
    simple rule named "only one activity at a time" and avoid being
    distracted. For example, focus on under bed storage. Gather all of
    the toys into bed. Keep track of the toys. Next, you should
    designate a spot for each and every toy, without exception. You can
    add labels and take this task to the next level. Therefore, from now
    on, when your child wants to play with certain toy, he/she will
    always know where it is.

5.  Store and simplify. Here's a great tip for simplifying kids'
    bedroom.

Consider buying beds that come with storage options. Built in, drawers
and shelves are perfect solutions for kids' room. Kids' items can be
tucked away underneath the bed, while everyday necessities can be at
arm's reach. Of course, bring your little ones into the process and ask
them for their opinion.

301. It's time to get organized -- built-in shelving systems. It's a
     fact -- accumulating toys is much easier than giving them away.
     Decluttering toys can be tricky, but you can get them into
     ship-shape for sure. You only need enough storage space and good
     clever plan to store your items. Try to use every inch of available
     space in child's room with built-in shelving systems. The lower
     shelves can be used for small toys and favorites while the upper
     shelves can display artwork and collectibles.

302. Corner cubby system -- you're ready to get organized! Make
     advantage of every corner of kids' playroom using simple cubby
     system. Corral toys and other small playthings in wicker baskets;
     then, put them into your cubby storage. Open cubbies are perfect
     storage and display for different games, plush toys, artwork, etc.
     Choose from different colors and styles to coordinate your cubby
     system with your existing furnishings. Teach your kids the value of
     the right organization and beautiful room!

303. A clutter-free life -- look for double-duty solutions! Look for
     double-duty solutions and you will get children's room in order!
     For example, consider buying a cute storage bench with drawers.
     Choose

from different sizes, designs and colors to fit a room's d√©cor. Now you
can sort all toys by style or color. You will need a little bit of
organization to put every misplaced item into its designated spot. After
that, your life will be much easier!

304. Choose the right toy box. Toy box provides kids' playroom with a
     plenty of storage. Toy box is one of the best options if you don't
     have enough space in children's room. It doubles as a bench for an
     additional seating and it can be repositioned everywhere. The toy
     boxes are made of sturdy material and they come with safety hinge.
     You can choose from colors and designs to delight your kids and cut
     toy clutter once and for all.

305. Use old baskets to keep toys off the floor. A basket is a great
     solution for kid's toys because you can organize them very quickly.
     Pick the toys and just load up the basket. It would be even old
     laundry basket, it does not matter You can also teach your kids to
     declutter the entire room, playing at the same time. It will be
     their fun activity! However, you should set an example for your
     children. They always learn more from example than words. Take the
     basket and give another basket to your child. You will be surprised
     with the results!

306. Clever toy storage trick -- hidden buckets. Place the buckets
     filled with toys in the inner storage of your ottoman. You can use
     plastic buckets, galvanised buckets or the other toy storage bins
     and enjoy this uncluttered look. You can choose designs and colors.
     You can also stack up small buckets and keep them together with zip
     ties. In terms of outdoor toys, the same principle applies to them.
     Put metal buckets into your mudroom closet. You can use labels and
     take the organization to the next level. Enjoy this practical
     solution for toy messes!

307. Store kid's puzzle pieces. You totally understand this never-ending
process of organizing and storing kids' puzzles. If they lose a certain
part of them, the toy becomes useless. You can use zipper pencil
pouches. Further, you can store all of the pouches in one of your bins.
It makes it easy to grab a certain zipper pouch. In that way, the
puzzles will be easily accessible for your little ones. In addition to
this solution, you can use a gallon zip top bag for puzzle pieces.

308. Simple solutions for the favorite puzzles. To keep puzzle pieces
     neatly organized, grab some lidded containers; then, organize each
     puzzle to a separate box. Then, cut out the picture of the
     completed puzzle and tape it to the lid. Brilliant idea!

309. Some more organizing ideas for kids. This life hack will help you
     to declutter kid's room cheap and easy. You can reuse an old wooden
     crate as an additional storage space for kids' stuff. Paint it and
     add wheels to the bottom if desired. Fill this vintage crate with
     kids' favorite toys. It's great idea to fill it with toys that kids
     use everyday The wheeled crate offers the advantage of being easily
     moved. They are ideal for a cramped space because they can easily
     be repositioned. You will free up space in the room and your kids
     will be happy!

310. A totally clever idea for car toys. Corral all toy vehicles once
     and for all. If you have a few dozen car toys, and you want to
     organize them and display your collection, the clutter will be gone
     in fifteen minutes! With this clever idea, you will have a
     convenient place to store the collection of car toys. Use a
     magnetic knife strip for storing and displaying car toys. This is a
     kind of bar that is typically used for knives. Install the magnetic
     strip in a child's

bedroom and organize toys by color, by size, etc. Of course, ask your
son for help. Be creative and enjoy!

311. Use a shoe organizer to declutter small toys. You can organize
     children's items right now. If you don't want to spend your money
     on new baskets, bins and other organizers, use a shoe organizer to
     hold all kids' plastic dolls. This idea works for plastic animals,
     small balls, marbles, play mobiles, fast food toys, etc. There is a
     rule -- out of sight, out of mind! Make sure to choose transparent
     shoe organizer, so kids can easily reach the toys.

<!-- -->

a.  First, bring all small toys together.
b.  Then, go through these toys, getting rid of everything that missing
    parts and that are broken.
c.  Invite your kids to join you and help you to choose which things to
    give away and which things they would like to keep.
d.  Clean a shoe organizer properly.
e.  Then, put plastic toys into this amazing organizer. You and your
    kids can group all items into categories. Anyway, this solution will
    give your kids more space to play in their room.

<!-- -->

312. Garden baskets for plush toys and stuffed animals. Keep kid's
     favorite plush toys in one place with this great idea. Simply hang
     garden baskets on a wall. Make sure to hang them at a low height so
     your little ones can reach them and put them back easily. Teach
     your children to love the uncluttered look. It's a lovely look!
     This clutter is demanding of you a lot of hard-earned money. Help
     your kids declutter their stuff. There is one more important tip
     for you -- begin buying fewer toys and avoid duplicate toys. Fewer
     toys will benefit your kids in many different ways. Kids will learn
     to be more creative and they learn to

take greater care of their stuff. It results in a less-cluttered and
healthier home!

313. Store and organize card games. Your clutter demands energy and
     time. When your house or apartment is untidy and cluttered, it's
     harder to relax. A lot of unnecessary things distract us and make
     us confused. Clutter slows us down. Clutter comes with a price. The
     price is our peace. Declutter and organize your home and you will
     spend less time cleaning and maintaining item. If your kids love
     card games, they should be properly organized. Why? If some cards
     have been lost, what's the point of keeping the game further? Ask
     yourself: Is this useful? So, get rid of useless card games. When
     you go to declutter kids' stuff you will find a lot of these items.
     So organize them clever. Here is a cheap and easy idea -- You can
     use a soap organizer as a place to hold kid's card games!

314. A clever idea for big toys. Toys everywhere. Large dolls, big
     plastic toys, toy trucks, and other big toys create a lot of our
     clutter. Keep big toys well organized and easily accessible by
     putting them in a plastic hamper! You can get your kids to pick up
     their toys. They only need a special place for their special items.
     It doesn't matter how much that special place costs. It could be an
     old basket as you can see. It's important to teach your kids to
     declutter their playroom.

315. Two life-changing decluttering hacks -- reuse old toys! "Inside of
     every problem lies an opportunity." -- Robert Kiyosaki. There is no
     doubt, finding a clever solution for organization of many toys can
     be very challenging. Keeping all toys in one place is difficult
     never ending battle. However, there are many solutions if you are
     willing to roll

up your sleeves and face this problem. And you realize: every problem
has a solution. a. Instead of buying new storage containers, old Lego
blocks can be used to corral small toys. Children can also keep their
art supplies there. b. The second idea is to use some of old wooden
building blocks as modern design hooks! In this way, you get some
interesting hooks to hang shawls, bags or keys. Thus, you will free up
space in kid's room and make the most of old toys.

316. A storage chest. Picture books, toys, and the other items tend to
     pile up over again. Consider buying a blanket chest or wicker
     chest. Anyway, you should purchase a low storage chest. In this
     way, you can store items that your kids use on a daily basis. Kids
     playroom will be in order and you will finally be happy.

317. Declutter kids' clothes -- basics. When you go to declutter your
     kids' clothes, find some large boxes such as moving boxes, as well
     as a couple of garbage bags. You can also ask for empty boxes at
     your grocery store or local restaurant. Here is a simple question
     to keep in mind: Is this really useful? Here are some guidelines to
     get started decluttering of children's clothes:

<!-- -->

a.  Toss, donate, or recycle. Take everything out of the kids' closet.
    Have a trash bag on hand and toss unwanted pieces of clothing. Don't
    keep the pieces of clothes that need repair, unless you are planning
    to repair them.
b.  Clean up. Then, wipe down the interior and shelves.
c.  What's the purpose? Keep things that are in wearable condition.
    Throw away the items with stains or tiny holes.
d.  "To be, or not to be..." Create a "maybe" box if you are unsure
    about some items. Make final decisions within a month.

e. The best part. Create your shopping list. f.¬†Outgrown kids' clothes.
Carefully store outgrown kids' clothes if there are younger siblings
that can wear hand-me-downs.

318. Organize outgrown kids' clothes. After decluttering and organizing,
     you realize that you have a few boxes of outgrown kids' clothes.
     What will you do with all of those old kids' clothes? Is there
     anything better than see an organized wardrobe? Get this done today
     and you will be a happier in the evening. Ready, set, go! Here are
     a few ideas to help you get rid of outgrown kids' clothes Keep it
     for your future child. If you are going to have more kids, you can
     keep old clothes that are in wearable condition. Don' t save worn
     out or stained clothes. If you decide to keep clothes for your
     future child, there are a few tips to keep in mind.

319. First and foremost, clean everything thoroughly.

320. Never store your valuable clothes in the dry cleaning plastic bags.

321. Loosely stack clothes into storage boxes or bags.

322. Loosely pack shoes with clean tissue paper; it will help maintain
     their shape. Donate. If you are not going to have any more
     children, consider donating. Remember -- you can donate only good
     clothes. Donate kids' clothes that other people will love and want.
     Everything that is shabby, ripped or stained throw into a trash
     can! Let it go. There are items of sentimental value for you. You
     might save these things for your future grandchild. But, think of
     it -- they too will have

many clothes for sure! Therefore, it's time to let go of past and make
space for new memories.

319. Clutter-busting ideas for your little ones. Remember -- every
     solution must fit the child. Each and every storage solution has to
     be kid-friendly. Obviously, you can't use a storage such hanging
     rods or dresser drawer that are out of reach. Each and every piece
     of furniture, as well as storage space, must be suitable and
     accessible to small hands. Here are some useful ideas to tackle the
     storage problems:

320. You can remove closet doors for easier access.

321. Look for child-sized hangers.

322. Then, you have to lower hanging rods.

323. Use floor-level baskets and bins as much as you can.

324. Consider building a comfy built-in window seat.

325. Consider buying a small dresser with a few drawers.

326. Don't forget -- under the bed is a clever and useful storage spot.
     You can use under bed carts with wheels.

327. Display child's favorites.

A simple and inexpensive garment rack is always a great clutter-busting
solution. You can turn kid's closet into a display for their favorites.
There is an old rule -- out of sight, out of mind. You can find a
garment rack with extra storage on the bottom that could be utilized for
kids' shoes and backpacks. Therefore, everything is transparent and
accessible and it will make getting dressed quick and easy.

321. Reorganize and declutter room with wrought iron hooks. Would it be
     great to have everyday items at your fingertips? You can use some
     wrought iron hooks to hold backpacks, jackets, baskets with
     handles, and other things. You can also hang the basket to hold
     small items such as craft supplies. Each child will be assigned a
     couple of hooks for holding her/his necessities. Lovely!

322. A catchall basket in a kids' room. This is a clever idea to help
     your kids get organized in their room. Consider buying a
     large-sized decorative basket with a lid. Whenever your child
     leaves something lying around that doesn't belong in the kids'
     room, it goes into designated catchall basket. Put the basket into
     the corner of the room to save space. Clever!

323. Teach your little ones to be organized -- multicolored drawers.
     Teaching kids some good organizing habits can be tricky, but it's
     worth the effort. Is anything better than entering into kids' room
     and seeing a clean and organized space? The multicolored drawers
     offer plenty of storage space for different kids' items such as
     socks, caps, underwear, etc. Your child will learn that underwear
     goes in green, caps in yellow, and so on. Easy!

PETS

Life hacks for a clutter-free pet's area "Until one has loved an animal
a part of one's soul remains unawakened." -- Anatole France. If your
home is jammed with pet knickknacks and you can't manage it, it's time
to relax. You always do your best, but things are getting out of control
sometimes. No big deal! You can learn how to keep pets' stuff organized.
Organization of "pet zone" requires decluttering, cleaning, and sorting
to make your space a calming haven. Let's get organized!

324. How to organize pet supplies? Whether you have cats, dogs, hamster,
or any other pets, these decluttering and purging tips will help you
find a spot for pet supplies. a. Gather all of items in one place. b.
Throw away damaged and broken items, as well as expired food. c.¬†Donate
unopened bags of food that your pet doesn't like to eat and items that
are in good condition. d.¬†Now it's easy to organize the items that have
left. There are a lot of storage and organization solutions and you can
choose according to your personal preferences.

325. A clever organization for your beloved pet. At the beginning, put
     like items together. For instance, gather items you need to walk
     your dog into one pile, bath accessories go in the second pile,
     etc. Create a station for each activity and your pet will get
     organized once and for all. Then, find a spot for each and every
     item. It's wise to create a pet binder to keep important pet
     information wellorganized and sorted. The information includes
     off-limit foods, allergies, anamnesis, the phone numbers of nearest
     veterinary clinics, pet passport, and so on.

326. Declutter and reorganize a walk station. Position a dog walking
     station next to entrance. If you want to maintain uncluttered
     entryway, try to organize walking equipment. Keep leashes, treats,
     collars, doggy sacks and other items in a tote bag. Then, hang this
     bag on a hook and enjoy the new uncluttered look. You can also
     store these items in a designated bin or another appropriate
     container. You can find these adorable containers online, too.

Prepare a home away bag for your dog by putting certain essentials.
These are a water bottle, food bag, poop bags, chewy toys, and so on.
It's great to have this home away bag on hand. Catch clutter and
reorganize your entryway!

327. Feed your fur friend. For your pet, mealtime is one of the happiest
     moments of the day. Here're a few pointers to help you organize
     your pet.

<!-- -->

a.  It is important to designate a spot for bowls or pet feeders.
    Consider buying a pet food mat to keep the place neat and tidy.
b.  Keep their dishes for food and water in an out-of-the-way spot so
    your pet will enjoy the meal without interruption. Choose dishes
    that suit the needs of your pet. Make sure that their food and water
    are easily accessible.
c.  Toss unnecessary items and sort feeding supplies in order to keep
    them organized and easily accessible.
d.  It's very important to keep pet food handy at feeding time. It
    should be right next to the feeding spot.

<!-- -->

328. Keep pet food neatly organized. Tired of wasting time searching for
     a bag with dry cat food you need? Your pantry is jammed with pet
     foods that are not sorted and organized?

<!-- -->

a.  It's time to start throwing out the unwanted pet food. Gather up all
    products. Check out the expiration dates. Consider donating or
    giving away if you have a lot of food bags that your pet doesn't
    like. Only store what you will use.
b.  Now, group foods in a way that is logical to you.
c.  Designate a spot in your pantry for pet food. Add labels to jars for
    better organization results. Try your best to keep pet's food easily
    accessible and fresh. Store dry pet food in a cool and dry
    environment.

Canned food should be stored in a dry environment (50-100 degrees F). If
you prefer to buy food in bulk, you have to transfer dry food to an
appropriate container. A clean metal container works well. Opened cans
of dog/cat food should be stored in the refrigerator. b. Check the
expiration dates periodically and keep the pantry tidy and clean.

329. Declutter and organize pet toys. When you need pet's favorite toy
     or pillow, do you look through the whole house for it? Our beloved
     pets have a lot of stuff. If you're stuck, start by setting small
     goals, one by one. When the time comes to declutter toys, stick to
     wellknown basic rules to organize your pet supplies.

<!-- -->

a.  Gather all toys together and lay them on the ground. Sort them and
    discard the toys that are broken, old and useless.
b.  It is important to store all pet toys in one place for better
    organization. Find suitable containers that don't take up too much
    space.

<!-- -->

330. Adorable containers for pet toys. If you decide to keep all pet
     toys in one designated place, you should purchase the appropriate
     storage bin or basket. Make your pets feel extra special by storing
     their toys in durable toy storage. After playing with your puppy or
     kitty, putting the toys back is as easy as ABC! If you are
     switching the toys into new containers, try to maintain this
     uncluttered and beautiful look. Spend five minutes every evening
     putting the toys back where they belong and Voil√†! Everything works
     in perfect order.

331. A special sleeping spot.

Cats and dogs love safe and quiet sleeping place. You can choose from
different pet beds such as a built-in bed, plush bed, bag bed, etc. Find
a suitable machine washable bed and maintain this area uncluttered and
clean. Remember -- designate a spot for your fur friend in a quiet
corner of your house. Your pet will spend a lot of time there. He/she
will have a quiet sleeping spot and you will solve a problem with pet
hair.

LAUNDRY ROOM

Let it shine! Within the walls of our home, we try to live a balanced
life. You do not have to have a large laundry room in order to be happy.
You do not need to have a laundry room at all. All you need is a few
simple and easy organizing tricks. Balance is the key to a happy home!

332. The plan for simplifying your laundry -- basics. If your laundry
room is cluttered and you can't manage it, it's time to relax. You have
too much laundry. So what? You always do your best, but things are
getting out of control sometimes. No big deal! You can learn how to keep
your laundry room organized and more efficient. Here are a few tips: a.
Declutter your laundry room. Old and broken items, detergent bottles,
ripped clothing... Out! b. Main purpose. It is very important to define
your laundry room. If you are able, use that room only for the task of
laundry. c.¬†Label it. Label, at least, two laundry baskets: 1) by color
and 2) by clothing type. You can label one more basket as "other". Ask
all family members for help and you will appreciate it if they follow
the specified rules. Declutter your life!

333. Declutter the laundry room -- divide into zones. Laundry room tends
     to fall into chaos without the right decluttering plan. Here's a
     plan to help you get well-organized. Divide your laundry room into
     zones: 1) an area for washer and dryer; 2) an area for laundry
     supplies; 3) drying zone; 4) laundry ironing and folding. Focus on
     one area at a time to simplify your decluttering process and get
     organized.

334. Washer and dryer organization. It's time to purchase pedestals for
     your washer and dryer. You can build them yourself, too. This easy
     project will make a pleasant laundry area. Pedestal is a great spot
     for storing items in the laundry room. Let your imagination run
     wild and create the pedestal with drawers for an extra space

storage. You can put baskets with laundry supplies into cubbies and save
space significantly while keeping everything on hand. Lovely!

335. Space utilization -- a smart organizer between washer and dryer.
     You can also utilize space between washer and dryer by putting a
     laundry organizer. The laundry organizer takes vertical space and
     keeps your supplies within reach. There are a few handle drawers
     that slide smoothly, so you will be able to sort and group your
     laundry accessories. Therefore, add storage and get everything
     organized. Improve your daily laundry routine!

336. A clever laundry concept -- rolling laundry caddy. There is one
     more amazing solution to utilize space between washer and dryer.
     Rolling laundry caddy keeps your laundry supplies perfectly in
     place. Its sturdy construction offers the reliability and overall
     ease of use. The rolling laundry caddy provides you with a few
     shelves; therefore, you can group your items by categories. For
     example, the lowest shelf holds liquid and powder detergents,
     detergent capsules and tablets; the shelf in the middle holds
     fabric softeners and scent boosters; top shelf holds stain
     removers, bleach, etc. Anyhow, you will organize and sort your
     laundry accessories according to your personal preferences.

337. Get your cleaning supplies neatly organized. Whatever you use
     liquid or powder detergent or you like to use homemade detergent,
     they can make clutter in your laundry room. Here are a few ideas to
     keep your cleaning supplies neat and tidy.

<!-- -->

a.  Your goal is to eliminate as much junk as possible, right? Check
    your cleaning supplies. Get rid of expired items and almost empty
    bags

and bottles. b. Realistically, how many laundry products do you need?
Consider buying a detergent that works for all fabrics. Baking soda and
vinegar are excellent homemade solutions for softening and protecting
your clothes. c.¬†Use glass jars to keep track of your cleaning supplies.
Remember -- keep your detergents in a cool and dry place.

338. Behind the door -- an over-the-door shoe organizer. Do not
     underestimate the importance of a good organizer. However, you
     don't have to waste your hard-earned money on some expensive
     organizers. Turn a laundry door into extra storage space by hanging
     an over-the-door shoe organizer. This versatile organizer can hold
     various types of things such as cleaners and tools. Therefore, you
     will keep them out of the way but visible. Then, behind the door,
     you can designate a spot for essentials like a mop, broom, ironing
     tools, etc.

339. Think outside the jar.

<!-- -->

a.  Detergent tablets and pods, mini soaps and other small cleaning
    products are useful and innovative solutions, but they tend to be
    forgotten. You can store detergent capsules, pods and other small
    cleaning items in a glass candy jar.
b.  Then, you can store your liquid detergent in a beverage dispenser.
    Simple but practical!
c.  Remember -- get rid of "just in case" items because these things
    take up so much space and weigh you down.

340. A great way to organize your cleaning supplies -- under sink space.
Space under the sink is usually hard to get to and, therefore, it
becomes forgotten over time. Space under the sink offers a lot of
possibilities to store your laundry supplies. a. Corral your detergents
by using a metal caddy or a bucket and conceal it under your sink. b.
You can organize spray bottles by installing a tension rod under your
sink. c.¬†Then, try to store garbage bags. d.¬†One of the most useful
organizing solutions is a clear bin. Use a few clear bins to keep your
detergents neatly organized. Go one step further and label your bins.
Make cleanup a breeze!!

341. Organize your stain removal kit. How many stain removers do you
     really need? Get rid of unwanted product and organize cute stain
     removal kit. Corral all stain removers in one basket. You can also
     use a rimmed tray. A Lazy Susan works well, too. It is important to
     keep your stain removal kit in an easy-to-access spot. Then, put
     the basket or the tray under the sink. Now everything is well
     organized and easily accessible. Done!

342. How to use an old armoire to improve your laundry routine? Avoid
     the hassle of rummaging through laundry room with an unfinished old
     armoire. Armoires fit into the unutilized space in a corner. Create
     a great laundry center in your basement or another suitable place.

<!-- -->

a.  The floor of the armoire makes a great spot for laundry bags.

b. Then, you can utilize the doors to hold cleaning items. c.¬†Use the
shelves to keep detergent bags and bottles. d.¬†You can also use the top
of armoire to store the items that are rarely used.

343. Great ideas to organize storage in your laundry room. The laundry
     room is one of the most challenging rooms in your house. Therefore,
     the laundry room needs a systematic plan for organizing and
     decluttering. If you want to keep all products and tools neatly
     organized, you should choose the right storage options. Little
     plastic baskets. You can group like items by categories and
     designate a plastic basket for each category. They are great and
     cheap solutions for putting all items in their spots. Then, go one
     step further, find labels on the Internet, print them and put the
     label on each basket. Bag laundry sorter. It is one of the best
     laundry organizers you will ever find. Your family will be able to
     divide all of their clothes among three separate hampers. This
     wheeled organizer is easy to use. When it comes time to wash
     clothes, empty out the hampers and that's it. Once you've purchased
     a new organizer, you will wonder how you ever got along without it!

344. Organize your junk drawer. If you have a junk drawer in your
     laundry room filled with clutter, it's time to organize it once and
     for all. You can tackle this task today. Ready set go!

<!-- -->

a.  Get four bags: "trash", "keep", "donate", and "other room". Bring
    all items together and divide them into one of these four bags.

b. Turn the drawer into functional storage for your essentials. Here are
some of them: paper towels, tissues, light bulbs, extra soaps, cleaning
wipes, and so on. c.¬†Use drawer dividers to reorganize your essentials,
free up this useful storage space, and take control of your laundry
room!

345. Adjustable laundry guard. Cut clutter in your laundry room and
     utilize a top surface of your washer. Install the laundry guard to
     keep your clothes on top of the washer, while providing an extra
     work surface in your laundry room. This innovative solution keeps
     clothes, especially small pieces like socks, from falling off.
     Clever!

346. The new concept for laundry room -- shelves. If your laundry room
     turns into a cramped space, here is a new inspiration and
     motivation for you! You can use floating shelves to take advantage
     of space above a washer and dryer. This new custom look of your
     laundry offers a lot of possibilities to store all necessities
     (e.g.¬†sewing kit, scissors, clothespins, laundry bags, etc. You can
     divide these essentials into two main categories:

<!-- -->

1)  The items that are used most frequently go to the lowest shelves.
2)  The items that are used rarely go to the highest shelves. As you can
    see the shelves save space in the laundry room. Therefore, you can
    opt for waterproof wire shelves, too; they also offer many practical
    possibilities to streamline your laundry room.

<!-- -->

347. Spend less time doing laundry -- designated hampers.

Do you have just one or two cheap hampers? And your family fill them and
do not sort laundry? Consider adding designated hampers. For example,
label them like this: "colors", "white", "denim". Ask family members to
separate clothes and group them by colors. Ask them to empty their
pockets, too. Then, try to hang your hampers and free up the floor
space. Put this trick into practice and make your laundry day easier!

348. A few creative ways to make doing laundry easier.

<!-- -->

a.  Rolling laundry basket dresser. With this great asset, you can spend
    less time doing laundry for sure. Simply roll this basket dresser
    around your house and pick up the family's laundry. This mobile
    solution allows you to presort laundry easily and do laundry chore
    faster and better.
b.  Labeled baskets. You can use cute laundry baskets assigned to each
    family member. Label them to save your time and give yourself a
    little peace of mind!

<!-- -->

349. Instant laundry organization -- a wall-hung cabinet. Utilize all
     your wall space by hanging the cute cabinet to create a convenient
     laundry station. Cut clutter in your laundry room and find a spot
     for each and every item. Organizing your laundry routine is as easy
     as ABC! Here's how to achieve that.

<!-- -->

a.  Use the inside of your cabinet to organize laundry tools and
    accessories. Group items by frequency of use. The details matter, so
    consider adding wicker baskets for better organization.
b.  Then, attach the iron holder to the side of your cabinet.
c.  Next, beneath the iron, attach a clothes hanger that will hold
    ironed clothes and save space in your laundry room.

It does not sound just like a revolutionary idea, but you will build one
small success on top of another small success. Afterwards, you can build
a "mountain" of success. Say Goodbye to clutter and chaos and fall in
love with order and beauty!

350. Perfect solutions for your drying zone -- drying racks. A drying
     rack is a perfect choice for clothes that need to be air-dried,
     such as button-down shirts.

<!-- -->

a.  Folding drying rack. It doesn't occupy a lot of space. Folding
    drying rack is adjustable and convenient solutions not only for the
    laundry room but also for the terrace.
b.  Rolling drying rack. This is a great solution for your air drying
    and delicate clothes. This adjustable rack can be folded and easily
    rolled wherever you want.
c.  Versatile laundry center. You can also find a rolling garment rack
    with shelves and get an extra storage with a portability feature.

<!-- -->

351. DIY drying rack. There is a great DIY hack that will improve your
     laundry chore. You can save space and time by installing a
     bath-towel holder on the underside of a shelf. Use hangers for
     extra space and enjoy this super-functional addition to your
     laundry room! Of course, check the other DIY projects such as
     wooden ladder with hooks, projects with towel bars and clothes
     lines, etc. Be creative!

352. Fold away ironing board. You can turn the most unorganized space in
     the house into the peaceful haven.

Your ironing board can take up a lot of space and your laundry room
looks cluttered. However difficult decluttering task may seem, there is
a simple solution. You can save your space by building the fold away
ironing board instead. Get a spotless and beautiful laundry room!

353. An ingenious idea -- pull out folding table. It will free up space
     in your laundry room, while providing you with a useful surface for
     folding laundry. It is more convenient to use than a traditional
     table for quick touch-ups for your clothes. You will be surprised
     how pleasant laundry can be when space is user-friendly.

GARAGE

Let's get organized! Do you need a convenient and efficient place to
work? Do you need an extra storage in a limited garage space? One day
you realize -- your garage is jammed with stuff and you forgot of your
passion and dreams because of your hectic lifestyle. There are a lot of
easy and practical solutions to get your garage neat and tidy. Take back
your garage, follow your passion and enjoy your home to the fullest!

354. Declutter your garage -- tackle this task over the weekend. If your
garage is a messy place filled with unnecessary items, it's time to take
back this valuable space. The garage is usually jammed with tools,
equipment, automotive gear, seasonal supplies, etc. Unfortunately, the
garage is holding area for the clutter from the house, too. However, you
have to solve this clutter problem sooner or later. You can apply some
of these ideas and find what suits your usage level. One of the best
methods to declutter garage is to divide this space into zones. For
example, automotive, tools, gardening, and storage. If you find some
items that don't fit into one of these designated "zones", consider
donating or tossing them. It's just that simple!

355. Focus on one area at a time. Set the mood with your favorite music
     and get to work! Focus on one area at a time. Try to break down the
     job into a few small manageable tasks and avoid discouragement and
     tiredness.

<!-- -->

a.  Bring all items together. Consider tossing, selling or donating
    unwanted items. Get rid of things "just in case", too.
b.  The rest of items that you have decided to keep, group by
    categories.
c.  Use large totes because they can hold many things.
d.  Designate an empty bin for the clutter from your house. From time to
    time, you should empty this bin and maintain this clutter-free
    environment.

<!-- -->

356. How to keep all of your gardening tools neat and tidy?

If you are tired of seeing the clutter in your garage or a shed and
waste time looking for tools, it's time to solve this problem. There is
no doubt -- clutter can really influence the way you work. The
well-organized tools will save you time and energy. Here're simple hacks
for decluttering the garden shed. 1) Take out all of you gardening tools
that you have in the garage. Check out each individual tool. Clean out
everything. 2) Create two piles: 1) items that you want to keep, and 2)
items that you need to get rid of. Get rid of everything that is broken
and useless. That's simply trash. 3) Reorganize your tools. For example:
keep frequently used tools close at hand using the hooks. Use a pegboard
to hang small tools. Use an old wooden palette for larger tools. Find a
convenient place to store each and every tool and you will tackle this
task over the weekend.

357. Creative organization solutions -- install shelving. Get more
     storage space in your garage by installing vertical shelving
     systems. Free up floor space and organize all items by function.
     Sturdy wire racks can hold almost anything, but you can choose from
     the other materials such as wood, metal or plastic. It depends on
     your personal needs. Use different containers to group all items by
     categories and keep your garage neatly organized. You can use small
     bins for items such as flashlights, rolls of adhesive, and so on.
     From now onwards, you will see everything!

358. Utilize the garage ceiling. Whether you have a small or large
     garage, there is probably a lot of space you aren't using such as
     the ceilings. You can hang bikes and free up the floor space. Then,
     you can storage containers to the ceiling by using wood boards and
     elbow grease. This space-saving product will take some time but the

advantages are significant.

359. Hang a pegboard in your garage. Classic pegboard (perforated
     hardboard) is one of the most effective ways to organize your tools
     and accessories in the garage. This space-saving storage solution
     is easy to install, cheap and practical. Of course, you should
     follow manufacturer's instruction in order to reduce the risk of
     personal injury. Utilize a vertical space in your garage and make
     your tools more visible.

360. A creative storage idea -- old school lockers. Here is an amazing
     and inexpensive storage solution for you -- find old school
     lockers. You can find them online, paint them and assign one to
     each family member. Our clutter defines a part of us as a person.
     For example, if you love collectibles, these things reflect your
     passion. Anyway, most of these things end in your garage. One day
     you realize -- your garage is jammed with stuff and you forgot of
     your passion and dreams because of your hectic lifestyle. These
     personalized lockers offer you the possibility to organize your
     stuff. Clever!

361. A practical solution -- drawers in your garage. Drawers are always
     simple but practical garage storage for your necessities. First and
     foremost, you should identify all of your needs. How many items are
     you planning to keep in your drawers? You can build DIY sturdy
     drawers or reuse an old dresser. Clean some shoe boxes and put them
     into your drawers to take your task to the next level.

362. A space-saving solution -- workbench. Do you need a convenient and
efficient place to work? Do you need an extra work surface in a limited
space? A workbench is a space-saving solution for your garage. a. You
can reuse a spare chest of drawers. b. The second solution is to build
your own sturdy workbench to fit your workshop and your needs. There are
lots of different designs of the workbench. You can choose from folding
workbench, workbench with drawers and shelves for tool storage, modular
workbench, and so on.

363. Utilize every bit of space -- corner shelves. Clear the clutter and
     utilize every unused nook in your garage. Build the corner shelves
     and organize all small items in your garage. These shelves will
     provide you with an easy access to everything.

<!-- -->

a.  First and foremost, get rid of unwanted stuff!
b.  After that, you can manage what you own in your garage. Designate a
    spot for every item.
c.  If you can't find a spot for certain item, it means -- toss or
    remove to another location in your house.
d.  Then, display small items on your corner shelves and enjoy
    clutterfree garage! Utilize every bit of space in your garage!

<!-- -->

364. A simple idea to organize gardening tools. Use leftover PVC pipes
     to create a tool holder.

<!-- -->

1)  First, cut the pieces of pipes to length at an angle on the bandsaw.
2)  Then, drill the hole into each of them. Attach them to the wall.

3) Designate a certain pipe for certain group of items. Arrange your
gardening tools. Therefore, you can always find them quickly and easily.
And from now on, when you want to find some tool, you will always know
where it is.

365. Keep balls neat and tidy. If you store outdoor toys and sport
     equipment in your garage, and the garage is jammed with clutter,
     it's time to handle the problem. Do not settle with living in a
     messy environment. It's important not to limit yourself. You can
     utilize space between the studs. You can use bungee cords to store
     balls. So install ball holder and keep your balls organized with
     the attached bungee cords.

Thank you for reading, If you have enjoyed this book, please take a few
seconds to leave feedback for book on Amazon.


