Amazing Way to Deal With Change in Your Work and in Your Life Made by
Blinkist

These key insights in blinks were written by a team of experts at
Blinkist. We screen the world of nonﬁction to choose the very best
books. Then, we read them deeply and transform them into this concise
format that brings you the most inspiring ideas from the text. Maybe
these blinks will inspire you to dig deeper, or maybe they're enough to
start you thinking and then on to something new. However you read
blinks, we hope they help you become an even brighter you.

What's in it for me? Don't be afraid of change; enjoy life's adventures!
"It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a
rich man to enter the kingdom of God." Parables, like the one above from
the Bible, are timeless: they oﬀer poignant life lessons, showing us how
to better cope with challenges both big and small. While Who Moved My
Cheese? isn't an ancient parable, its message is no less pertinent.
Learning to overcome fear, handling major life changes gracefully and
ﬁnding a path to realize your dream -- these are issues with which every
person struggles in life. In this story, four characters live in a maze:
two mice, named Sniﬀ and Scurry, and two little people, named Hem and
Haw. As they travel the maze looking for cheese, it becomes clear that
their journey isn't just to ﬁnd food -- it's a quest to better
understand human nature. Read on to see what they ﬁnd out. In these
blinks, you'll learn how to better prepare for a major life change; why
thinking like a "simple" mouse may better help you reach your goals; and
how to visualize your goals to improve your chances of attaining them.

Your "cheese" or success in life may be paralyzing you. The two mice,
Sniﬀ and Scurry, don't think about things too much. They instead spend
their time running up and down the corridors of their maze, in search of
cheese. This seemingly "brainless" way in which these two mice set about
achieving their goal is instructive, and is often the most eﬀective
method in reaching your own goals. In fact, acting without thinking too
much can save you time and energy. If there's no cheese at the end of a
path, for example, Sniﬀ and Scurry simply turn around and scramble down
another path -- without wasting time being angry or frustrated. Hem and
Haw were also searching for cheese in the maze, but not because they
were hungry. Rather, they thought that ﬁnding cheese would make them
feel happy and successful. With their more "complex" brains, Hem and Haw
worked out strategies to ﬁnd cheese, memorizing the maze's dark corners
and blind alleys. Yet with all this planning, they still often got
confused, and sometimes lost their way. And whenever the pair came up
empty-handed, they became depressed, wondering if happiness would ever
be attainable. In "real" life, we too tend to overcomplicate things. Not
only do we overthink issues or events, but we also become overly
attached to the status quo. Finally, Hem and Haw found a huge stash of
fancy, imported cheese down one corridor, at Cheese Station C. Every day
they made sure to wake up early and visit the station for a snack.

Yet the pair's life gradually began to revolve around the feast at
Cheese Station C. They felt at home there, and were very proud of it --
yet they also began to take it for granted. Like Hem and Haw, when we
ﬁnd success or "our cheese," we can quickly become dependent on it, so
much so that our life revolves only around our "cheese."

"The more important your cheese is to you, the more you want to hold on
to it."

Good situations never last forever, so be prepared! So Hem and Haw woke
up one morning and were shocked to realize that their cheese was gone.
Indeed, change always happens, sooner or later. Being aware of this can
help you keep a closer eye on your current situation, to better
anticipate the change ahead. Sniﬀ and Scurry, in contrast, never took
the stash for granted, and made sure to keep an eye out for any changes
to the supply. Consequently, the two mice noticed that the amount of
cheese was slowly but steadily declining. If you expect things to remain
the same, you may miss the signs that things are indeed changing. Hem
and Haw were so thrilled with the cheese that they didn't notice the
stash dwindling nor even when the cheese started to mold! Sometimes the
things we believe about ourselves make it harder to accept change. If
you feel you deserve success, good health or an endless supply of
cheese, anything that takes these things away from you will feel unfair
-- so much so that you might even deny the fact that change is happening
at all. Hem and Haw felt deep down that Cheese Station C was a reward
for their hard work. After all, they had spent tons of time looking for
it! So when the stash ﬁnally disappeared, they just couldn't accept
reality. You never want to ﬁnd yourself in this position. Instead, keep
your eyes peeled for signs of change in your life and adapt as soon as
you can. The sooner you do, the sooner you'll ﬁnd your way again. Once
Sniﬀ and Scurry realized that Cheese Station C was almost out of cheese,
they moved on without stressing too much about it. And luckily, they
found a huge stash at another station, Cheese Station N.

Hem and Haw were not so lucky. Unable to cope, the pair kept returning
to the empty station, growing increasingly hungry, depressed and weak.
Take a lesson from these two "little people": The less you hem and haw
and the sooner you adapt to change, the better oﬀ you'll be.

"If you do not change, you can become extinct."

Visualizing your goals helps you push through the fear that keeps you
from dealing with change. Why do so many of us -- like Hem and Haw --
get blindsided by big changes? It's fear. Fear is what makes confronting
change so diﬃcult. After all, change requires you to cope with a new
situation and grapple with a new set of rules. That can be both
disorienting and frustrating, so it's natural to be scared of change.
For example, once they came to grips with the empty Cheese Station C,
Hem and Haw had to venture again into the maze to ﬁnd food. They worried
that they might get lost, or ﬁnd themselves in a blind alley with no way
out. But remember this: as long as you're afraid of leaving your comfort
zone, things will never get better. Imagine that your partner has left
you, or that an injury is keeping you from playing your favorite sport.
The loss you feel -- of love, of movement -- can be devastating. You
won't be able to recover, however, until you ﬁnd a new way to ﬁll your
life with things that bring you joy again. This means that you
necessarily have to look for something new. Even though Hem and Haw were
hungry, they were still too fearful to explore new paths in the maze.
Instead, they smashed down the walls of Cheese Station C to see if there
was something to eat behind them! But all in vain. Haw eventually
discovered a good way to deal with his fear. He visualized himself
sitting atop a huge wedge of his favorite cheese, soft-rind French Brie.

Indeed, visualizing your goal in vivid detail will actually increase
your desire to attain it. So if you ﬁnd yourself stuck, or you can't
tame your fear, visualize your goal. That will stoke your desire and
give you the energy to move forward.

"What would you do if you weren't afraid?"

Dare to move in a new direction and things will get better. After
visualizing his goal, Haw moved on to ﬁnd new cheese. But Hem refused to
budge. He stayed at the empty cheese station, angry and emaciated, and
crucially, far too afraid to go out and search for cheese. At the same
time, Haw's experience improved dramatically. When you move in a new
direction, you learn how to better embrace change. If you manage to
conquer your fears just once, the next time you're confronted with
change, you'll have the conﬁdence to move on again. Never again will
fear paralyze you as it did previously. Haw found the courage to move
on, even though he was all alone and still scared when he started his
journey. But he slowly gained conﬁdence. Although he came across just a
few bits of cheese early on, he was still proud of himself for having
come so far. Life just felt better now that he was no longer dominated
by his fears. Haw learned an important lesson, that fear you let
accumulate in your mind before you move in a new direction is usually
much more intense than a new situation actually deserves! And once you
start moving, it's likely that things will improve. Sure, sometimes a
new situation might end up being "cheeseless." But don't fret! There's
always new cheese to be found. Your new "cheese" could be a new friend,
a new job, or even a new way to handle conﬂicts or do business. All you
need to do is step outside your comfort zone and start the search.

Gradually Haw began to regain his full strength and conﬁdence. Full of
anticipation, he searched the maze until he found Cheese Station N and
tons of cheese -- the place where Sniﬀ and Scurry had been all along.

"When you move beyond fear, you feel free."

Use the lessons you've learned from this "cheesy" parable to reach your
own goals! So how can you apply the lessons of this parable to the
beneﬁt of your business or even your life? Consider telling your team
the story of Hem, Haw, Sniﬀ and Scurry. They may begin to think more
favorably about change and the potential beneﬁts it can bring to an
organization. You can also learn valuable information by asking your
employees with which character they identify. For example, people who
feel an aﬃnity for the mice Sniﬀ and Scurry could become the agents of
change that your organization needs. People who are "Sniﬀs" are great
observers. They notice the smallest of changes, which enables them to
predict subsequent larger changes in a marketplace. Sniﬀs can also
discover new products and competitive angles, or update a company's
corporate vision. People who are "Scurrys," on the other hand, like to
get things done. These employees should be encouraged to take action
based on a new corporate vision. The "Hems" of your organization,
however, often feel unsafe during times of change. This may pose a
problem, especially if they aren't able to ﬁnd the courage to turn into
"Haws." You'll have to work hard to demonstrate the ways that change can
work to their advantage. The experience of the "little people" and mice
can teach your team to be on the lookout for new opportunities. Just
consider how our parable ends. Even though there was plenty of cheese at
Cheese Station N, Haw -- having learned his lesson -- kept exploring the
maze, looking for other stashes.

Indeed, what works today won't necessarily work tomorrow. As the
environment changes, your business needs to change, too -- or you'll be
left behind. So remember, even when things look good, keep an eye out
for new, exciting opportunities.

Final summary The key message in this book: If there's one thing we know
about life, it's that change is inevitable. So how do you handle change?
To not only cope but thrive in a changing environment, you'll need to
develop the kind of attitude and mind-set that makes adapting to change
less frightening and more rewarding. Suggested further reading: The One
Minute Manager by Ken Blanchard and Spencer Johnson With global sales of
over 13 million, The One Minute Manager is a classic that's still
changing the workplace. It explains how managers can get outstanding
results from their employees while spending as little time actively
managing them as possible. A one minute manager needs just three simple
tools to boost productivity -- and transform their company. Got
feedback? We'd sure love to hear what you think about our content! Just
drop an email to remember@blinkist.com with the title of this book as
the subject line and share your thoughts!

Nice work! You're all done with this one. We publish new books every
week at blinkist.com.

Come and see -- there's so much more to learn. Inspired to read the full
book? Get it here. Copyright © 2014 by Blinks Labs GmbH. All rights
reserved.


