Contents

Cover About the Book About the Author Title Page Epigraph The Story
Behind Out of the Maze Foreword, by Emerson Johnson, Austin Johnson, and
Christian Johnson A Seminar: Chicago Out of the Maze The Original Story
of Who Moved My Cheese? The New Story: What Happened Next Hem's Dilemma
The Facts of the Matter Hem Ventures Into the Maze The Stranger Trying
Harder Hem's Dream Hem Chooses a New Belief What If You Believed It Was
Possible? "What's Outside the Maze?" Dark Corners and Blind Alleys Out
of the Maze A Discussion Letter from Dr Spencer Johnson Afterword by Ken
Blanchard, Ph.D. Acknowledgments Copyright

About the Book

Who Moved My Cheese? offered millions of readers relief for an evergreen
problem: unanticipated and unwelcome change. Now its long-awaited sequel
digs deeper, to show how readers can adapt their beliefs and achieve
better results in any field. Johnson's theme is that all of our
accomplishments are due to our beliefs: whether we're confident or
insecure, cynical or positive, open-minded or inflexible. But it's
difficult to change your beliefs -- and with them, your outcomes. Find
out how Hem, Haw, and the other characters from Who Moved My Cheese?
deal with this challenge.

About the Author

Spencer Johnson, MD, is the author of Who Moved My Cheese?, the global
multi-million-copy bestseller. He is also the author of The Present and
Yes or No, and the co-author of The One Minute Manager®. His works have
become cultural touchstones and are available in over forty languages.
He died in July 2017.

"I can't believe that!" said Alice. "Can't you?" the Queen said in a
pitying tone. "Try again: draw a long breath, and shut your eyes." Alice
laughed. "There's no use trying," she said; "one can't believe
impossible things." "I daresay you haven't had much practice," said the
Queen. "When I was your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day.
Why, sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before
breakfast." ---LEWIS CARROLL Imagination is more important than
knowledge. Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the world.
---ALBERT EINSTEIN

The Story Behind Out of the Maze

The story of Who Moved My Cheese? was originally created by Dr. Spencer
Johnson to help him deal with a difficult time in his life. After years
of sharing his little fable with others and seeing how much it helped
them in their lives and work, he made the story into a short book.
Within six months of publication, Spencer's little parable had more than
one million hardcover copies in print, and within five years, more than
21 million copies. In 2005 Amazon reported that Who Moved My Cheese? was
their number-one best-selling single book title of all time. Over the
years, Spencer's beloved classic has found its way into homes,
companies, schools, churches, the military, and sports teams. It has
spread around the world in many foreign languages. Its readers and fans
have reported that the wisdom they found in reading the story has
improved their careers, businesses, health, and marriages. Its appeal
has been universal. Yet Spencer felt there were still some unanswered
questions. "Many people who read the original story," he wrote in his
notes for this sequel, "wanted to know more about why and how. Why do we
adapt sometimes and do well in changing times, while at other times we
don't? And how can we adapt in a changing world sooner and more easily,
so we're happier and more successful, however we define what 'success'
is for us?" The answer to those questions, Spencer felt, could best be
found and expressed by taking the Cheese story one crucial step further.
Who Moved My Cheese? showed its readers a pathway for adapting to change
in their lives and work. Now Out of the Maze provides the tools to help
you step onto that path and not only adapt to change, but change your
destiny.

Foreword by Emerson Johnson, Austin Johnson, and Christian Johnson

We are very happy that you are about to read Out of the Maze. From an
early age, our father always enjoyed looking for ways to help people.
When he was a teenager he started a swim school to help other
neighborhood kids swim. As a young adult he trained as a surgeon, then
discovered his true passion was writing. Through his writing he felt he
could be of service to a greater number of people. We miss him dearly
and are incredibly proud of his contributions to the world. He himself
often used the words and aphorisms in this story, throughout both the
highs and lows of his life. When he was diagnosed with pancreatic
cancer, they helped him view his illness in a new light before he
passed. They gave him the tools to embrace the change he was facing with
love and gratitude. At the end of the story we have shared a letter he
wrote in the final stages of his illness, which we feel illustrates the
extent to which he used these insights within his own life. We hope you
enjoy this book, and wish you the very best. The Johnson Family July
2018

A Seminar Chicago

ONE CRISP AUTUMN day, a group of people met for another session of a
weekly

business development seminar. This was their next-to-last class, and for
today they had been assigned to read a little story about two
characters, Hem and Haw, who each responded very differently to change.
The book was called Who Moved My Cheese? Dennis, the seminar leader,
called the class to order. "Okay, everyone, I want to start off with a
question: Who the heck did move our cheese, and what are we gonna do
about it?" The students laughed. Dennis had a way of putting them at
ease, yet they also knew he had some serious insights when it came to
business. They began discussing the book. Some said they had gotten a
lot out of the story, both in their work and in their personal lives.
Some, though, had questions. "I get the whole thing about adapting to
change," said Alex, who worked in the tech industry. "But that's easier
said than done. How exactly do we go about doing that?" Mia, a doctor,
agreed. "Some changes seem easy to go with. But some seem really
difficult." "And my job hasn't just changed," Alex added. "Seems like
it's disappearing completely." "Me too," said Brooke, who was in
publishing. "Sometimes it feels like I don't even recognize the field
I'm in anymore." "Sometimes I don't recognize my life anymore," said
Alex. The others laughed. "Seriously," he said. "So much is changing at
once. I'd 'Move with the cheese' if I could---but half the time I have
no idea where the cheese even went!" While this was going on, a young
man in the back, Tim, raised a hand and said something. Dennis put up
both hands to stop the action, and once everyone else had quieted down,
he asked Tim to repeat his question so they could all hear it. Tim
cleared his throat and said, "What about Hem?"

Alex turned to look back at the young man. "What about him?" Tim said,
"Whatever happened to him?" The room fell silent, as everyone thought
back to the story of Hem and Haw and asked themselves the same question.
"That's what I want to know," Tim continued. "Because honestly, Hem is
the character in the story that I most relate to. "Haw seems to catch on
and find his way. Meanwhile Hem is sitting back there in his empty home,
alone and upset. Seems to me, he wants to figure this all out just as
much as Haw, but he's genuinely stuck. And I hate to say it, but that's
pretty much how things are for me, too." At first, nobody said anything.
Then Mia spoke up. "I know what you mean. That's kind of how my
situation feels, too. I want to go where the cheese is. But I don't even
know where to begin." One by one, they realized how much they resonated
with what the young man said. In the story, the Haw character went out
and found "New Cheese." He went with the change, and it worked out for
him. But Hem was still lost. A lot of them felt that way themselves. All
that week, Dennis thought about the young man and his question. When the
class gathered the following week, he said, "I thought a good deal about
your questions from last week, about why Haw changed but Hem didn't, and
what might have come next. "I think there's more to the story, and I'd
like to share it with you." The place got so quiet you could hear a
mouse blink. Everyone wanted to know: What happened to Hem? "You
probably remember the events of Who Moved My Cheese," Dennis began...

The Original Story of Who Moved My Cheese?

ONCE, LONG AGO in a land far away, there lived four little characters
who ran

through a Maze looking for Cheese to nourish them and make them happy.
Two were mice named Sniff and Scurry, and two were Littlepeople named
Hem and Haw. The Maze was a labyrinth of corridors and chambers, some
containing delicious Cheese. But there were also dark corners and blind
alleys leading nowhere. One day they all found their favorite Cheese at
the end of a corridor in Cheese Station C. After that, they kept
returning to the same place every day to enjoy more of that wonderful
Cheese. It wasn't long before Hem and Haw had built their whole lives
around Cheese Station C. They had no idea where the Cheese came from, or
who put it there. They just assumed it would always be there. And then
one day, it wasn't. When they saw that the Cheese was gone, Sniff and
Scurry set off right away in search of New Cheese. But not Hem and Haw.
The two Littlepeople stood there, stunned. Their Cheese was gone! How
was this possible? No one had warned them! It wasn't right! This was not
the way things were supposed to be. They spent days being upset. Finally
Haw noticed that Sniff and Scurry had run off into the Maze, and he
decided to follow the mice and go look for New Cheese, too. "Sometimes,
Hem, things change and they are never the same again," said Haw. "This
looks like one of those times. Life moves on. And so should we." And so
saying, he left. After a few days, Haw showed up again at Cheese Station
C with a few small pieces of New Cheese, and offered some to Hem. But
Hem didn't think he would like this New Cheese. It wasn't what he was
used to. He wanted his own Cheese back. So Haw reluctantly set off again
on his own to look for more New Cheese. And that was the last Hem had
seen of his friend Haw.

The New Story: What Happened Next...

FOR DAYS, HEM stayed in his home by Cheese Station C, pacing back and
forth,

fussing and fuming. He still expected more Cheese to appear every day,
and couldn't believe it when that didn't happen. He felt sure that if he
stood his ground and waited it out, things would turn around. But they
didn't. And why didn't Haw come back? Hem came up with many different
answers as he paced. At first he told himself, "He is coming back. He'll
be here any day now, and things will go back to normal." But it had been
"any day now" for days, and Haw still wasn't here. As he grew still more
upset, Hem's thoughts took a different direction. "He forgot about me."
"He's hiding from me." "He's doing this on purpose! How could my friend
betray me like this?" This last thought made Hem angry, and the more he
focused on it, the angrier he got. He was angry that Haw had left him
alone, angry that the Cheese was gone, and angry that nothing he did
seemed to fix or improve the situation. Finally he stopped and shouted,
"IT'S NOT FAIR!" Worn out from pacing and being upset, Hem collapsed
into his favorite armchair and began to brood. What if Haw had got lost?
What if he'd been hurt, or worse? Hem forgot about being angry and just
thought about his friend, and about what terrible things might have
happened to him. After a while a different question occurred to him.
Instead of "Why hasn't Haw come back?" he began to wonder, "Why didn't I
go with him?" If he had gone with Haw, he reasoned, maybe things would
have been different. Maybe Haw wouldn't have gotten lost. Maybe nothing
bad would

have happened to him. Maybe they would be eating Cheese together right
now. Why didn't he move with the Cheese like his friend did? Why didn't
he go with Haw? The question gnawed at him, like a mouse gnawing on a
piece of Cheese. Meanwhile, he was getting hungrier and hungrier. Hem
got up out of his chair again to do some more pacing, and he tripped
over something on the floor. He bent down and picked it up. It was only
after he blew off the dust that he recognized it. It was an old chisel.
He remembered the day when he held that chisel while Haw whacked at it
with a hammer until they made a big hole in the wall of Cheese Station
C, looking for New Cheese. He could almost hear the sound of the hammer
and chisel echoing off the walls of the room. Ping! Ping! Ping! He poked
around on the floor until he found the hammer they had used, and blew
the dust off that, too. He hadn't realized till that moment just how
long it had been since the two of them, Hem and Haw, had gone looking
for Cheese together. He missed his friend. And he was starting to worry.
All this time he still expected more Cheese to appear, and for Haw to
come back. But there was still no Cheese, and no Haw. He had to do
something. He could no longer stay home and wait. He had to go out into
the Maze and search for Cheese. Hem rummaged around, found his running
shoes, and put them on, the way he and Haw used to do when they were
first exploring for Cheese. As he began to lace them up, he reviewed
what he knew about the facts of the situation. He knew that he had to
find more Cheese. If he didn't, he would die. He knew that the Maze was
a dangerous place, full of dark corners and blind alleys that led
nowhere. So he had to be very careful. Finally, he knew that if he was
going to get through this, find more Cheese, and survive, it was up to
him. He was on his own. He wrote all this down on a piece of paper and
put it in his pocket, so he wouldn't forget.

Knowing The Facts of the Matter felt reassuring to Hem. At least he knew
where things stood. He looked at the hammer and chisel. Maybe they would
help him in his journey ahead, exploring the deeper recesses of the
Maze. He picked up the tools, put them in a bag, and slung it over his
shoulder. Armed with The Facts of the Matter, and a strong hammer and
chisel, Hem ventured out into the Maze.

FOR THE NEXT few days, Hem wandered through corridors, working his way

deeper and deeper into the Maze. The corridors were empty, except for a
few small rocks here and there. No sign of Cheese. Every time he came to
a new chamber, he poked his head inside to scan for Cheese. But every
single chamber was empty. Every so often, he would come to a dark
corner. When that happened, he would quickly turn back and head the
other way. He was determined not to get lost. Now and then, he passed by
a blind alley. He would peer down, just to make sure, and when he saw
that it ended in nothing but a brick wall and darkness, he would hurry
on his way. Here and there, Hem could see that Haw had passed by that
way, because Haw had scratched notes on the corridor walls, each note
framed with a drawing of Cheese. They made no sense to Hem. Anyway, he
was too hungry and too tired to stop and read. There was still no sign
of any Cheese at all. As he explored, Hem kept thinking about that
question that had gnawed at him, turning it over in his mind again. Why
didn't he go with Haw? To be honest, Hem had always thought of himself
as the brains of the pair. Haw was a fine Littleperson and a good
companion, with a cheery disposition and a good sense of humor. More of
a copilot than pilot, though. That's what Hem always thought. Now he
wasn't so sure. "Why didn't I go with Haw when I had the chance?" he
murmured to himself. Was it because he was stubborn? Or just plain
foolish? Or, was he just a bad Littleperson? Hem thought about that as
he walked through corridor after corridor. "Maybe this is punishment for
something I did," he said out loud. The worse he felt about himself, the
more his energy dropped, though he did not notice this. He was not even
aware of the thoughts he was having about himself as they ran through
his mind, like little mice in a maze. Then he had a thought so terrible
it froze him in his tracks. "Maybe it's my destiny to run in circles in
the Maze forever." Hem felt his legs about to give out. He leaned
against the corridor wall and slid to the ground. On the opposite wall
was one of Haw's notes:

Hem just shook his head. "Oh, Haw," he murmured. "What were you
thinking? Cheese is either there or it's not. Beliefs have nothing to do
with it!" For the first time, he wondered if Haw might have gotten too
weak to go on, and simply given up. He wondered if that's what was
happening to himself right now. All at once he felt alone and afraid.
Nothing was the way it used to be. Before, the Maze was where Hem and
Haw had worked and had a social life. They both grew up there and built
their lives there. The Maze was Hem's world. But the Maze had changed.
Now, it seemed as if everything was different. Haw was gone, Sniff and
Scurry were gone, the Cheese was gone, and he was out wandering the
corridors, getting weaker and weaker. Hem didn't understand why all this
was happening. The Maze had become a dark and scary place. He curled up
on the floor and fell into a troubled sleep.

HEM STIRRED AND felt his foot bump up against something on the floor
where

he lay. A few somethings. He sat up and looked at them. They were round
little rocks, about the size of one of his fists. He picked one up and
felt its smooth, shiny red surface. It wasn't a rock at all. It smelled
good. In fact it smelled so good, Hem wanted to take a bite. He shook
himself. What was he thinking? Whatever this was, it certainly wasn't
Cheese. It might be dangerous. He looked around and almost jumped. There
was another Littleperson sitting nearby, watching him! It wasn't Haw,
and not any of their old friends, either. Hem had never seen this
Littleperson before. He didn't know whether to smile and say hello, or
to be afraid. The Littleperson lifted up one of the little red not-rocks
and held it out toward Hem. "You looked hungry," she said. "But I can't
eat this," said Hem. "It isn't Cheese!" "Isn't what?" "Cheese," Hem
repeated. "It isn't Cheese." She didn't say anything, just looked
bemused. "Cheese is another word for 'food,'" Hem explained patiently.
"Everyone eats Cheese. Even the mice." "Ah," said the other
Littleperson. They were both quiet for a moment. Then she said, "I
don't. I've never even seen 'cheese.'" Hem found this hard to believe. A
Littleperson who didn't eat Cheese? Impossible! The Stranger was still
holding the little rock out toward Hem. He looked at it and shook his
head. "Whatever it is, I can't eat it," he said. "I only eat Cheese." He
lay back down again, feeling hopeless. After a few moments, he halfheard
the Stranger say: "I'll bet you can do a lot more than you think you
can..." But Hem had already drifted off again. When Hem opened his eyes
a few hours later, he felt hungrier than he'd ever felt in his life.
"It's dinnertime!" he thought. And then the reality of his situation
came rushing back. No Cheese. No dinner.

He sat up. The Stranger was gone, but the little red rocks were still
there. He picked one up and smelled it again. It smelled sweet. Before
he had time to think about what he was doing, he took a bite. It was
crispy, but also juicy! Sweet... but tart! It tasted like no Cheese he
had ever eaten. He ate the whole thing. He couldn't help it. He lay back
and groaned. "What have I done?" he said. "I ate a rock!" He was sure he
was going to die. He drifted off to sleep once again. And for the first
time in days, he slept all through the night. When he awoke the next
morning, the Stranger was there again, sitting on her haunches with her
arms wrapped around her knees, watching him. "You're not dead," she
said. "No," said Hem. "I'm not, am I." In fact, he felt a little
stronger. The Stranger was holding out another rock to him. Hem took it
and ate it. It certainly wasn't Cheese, but it was tasty, and as he ate
he felt his energy returning, ever so slightly. The Stranger talked to
him while he ate his rock. Her name was Hope, and she lived nearby, at a
place called Fruit Station A. "Fruit," she said, was what the rocks were
called. She also said they were called "Apples." By this time, Hem was
on his third Apple. Hope told Hem that the fruit had been getting scarce
lately, and that for the past few days she had been exploring different
parts of the Maze, looking for new supplies. "It used to be that every
day when I woke up, there would be more apples," she said. "But that's
been happening less and less. "Actually," she said, pointing to the
piece of fruit Hem was now eating, "that's my last one." Hem stopped
mid-bite and looked at her. "You mean, they're gone?" She nodded. "They
just stopped showing up. I don't know why." Hem looked at his mostly
eaten Apple, then at Hope again. "You gave me your last Apple?" Hope
shrugged. "You looked hungry." "I was," said Hem. "But aren't you
hungry, too?" "A little," she admitted. Hem thought about all the Apples
she had given him to eat, and realized he'd never thanked her. "Thank
you," he said. "You're welcome," she said.

Hem shook his head, amazed. "Eating these things actually made me feel
better," he said. "I can't believe it!" Hope smiled and said, "Sure you
can. It's not hard, if you just let go and try." This confused Hem. Just
let go and try what? He had no idea what she was talking about. He knew
one thing, though: He was still hungry. All this talk about eating
reminded Hem why he was out here in the Maze in the first place. Now
that his strength was starting to return from eating the strange new
food, it was time to go looking for Cheese again. So far he had failed
in his quest---and he knew exactly why that was. "I just haven't tried
hard enough," he explained. "What I need to do," he said, "is go explore
the parts of the Maze I haven't tried yet." Hope shrugged. "I'll go,
too. If that's okay with you." (Hope didn't yet see just how they were
going to get out of their jam, but she had no doubt at all that they
would.) Hem nodded grudgingly. It couldn't hurt to have some company. As
he got to his feet, he noticed again the curious note that his friend
Haw had scratched on the wall:

"Maybe not," he said to the note on the wall. "But I'll tell you what
does lead to New Cheese: Trying harder!" So saying, Hem slung his bag of
tools over his shoulder and the two set off, trundling down corridor
after corridor, poking their heads into chamber after chamber, and
carefully avoiding the dark corners and blind alleys. Every chamber they
found was empty, but Hem had resolved not to give up. As they walked,
Hem told Hope about the old days. About how he and Haw and their friends
Sniff and Scurry would go looking for Cheese every day, and how it used
to be abundant and easy to find. There for the taking. All they had to
do was look up and down a few nearby corridors, and there it would be.
"Simpler times," he said. And he fell silent as they walked on. Times
had changed. Hem was not the same Littleperson he used to be. He once
was strong and proud, someone other Littlepeople looked up to because he
was so sure of himself. But the disappearance of the Cheese had changed
all that. Events had taken their toll. He was no longer strong, and no
longer so proud. As he reflected on all this, it occurred to Hem that he
felt less sure of himself than he used to. He could see that his usual
confidence had been shaken. This was something new for Hem. He had never
really noticed his own thoughts before, or taken a step back to consider
how he looked at things. To him, how he saw things was just the way
things were. As they walked the corridors, the two found a few crumbs of
Cheese here and there, enough to nibble on and slow the gnawing in Hem's
stomach. Hope tried a few bits of cheese, too, and she liked it just
fine. Every now and then they found an Apple, just sitting on the ground
by the wall, which they split between them. Between the nibbles of
Cheese and the occasional Apple, it was just enough to get them back to
their starting point, where they would rest up for the next day's
search. Every day when they set out, Hem felt he had less energy than
the day before. When they returned to the same spot again after hours of
fruitless search, Hem would drop his bag of tools and slump down against
the corridor wall, feeling even more exhausted.

One day as they returned, Hem felt so discouraged he didn't know if he
could keep going much longer. All he could think about was how heavy his
tool bag was. "That must weigh a lot," said Hope. "It's not that bad,"
said Hem. He didn't want to admit how much it weighed or how drained he
felt. "Why do you bring it with you every day?" she asked. "It's for us
to make holes in the wall," said Hem. He explained that if they found
the right wall, he would ask Hope to hold the chisel, the way he used to
do, and he would swing the hammer, the way Haw used to do. "Ah," said
Hope. Then she said, "Has that worked for you before?" "Of course it
has," said Hem, though what he was thinking was, She asks a lot of
questions. "This is the finest chisel money can buy!" "What I mean is,"
said Hope, "does making holes in the wall actually find you more
cheese?" Hem didn't answer. He felt offended. These were good tools! He
put down the heavy bag with a loud clunk! and sat back against the wall.
Hem missed Haw. He didn't like being way out here in the Maze, so far
from home. He wanted things to go back to the way they were. "You miss
your friend," said Hope. It was a little unnerving, how she always
seemed to know what he was thinking. Hem shrugged. "I just wish things
would go back to the way they were." Hope sat down next to him and
leaned back against the wall, too. "I know," she said. She glanced over
at Hem. "But I'm not sure that's how it works." "What do you mean?"
snapped Hem. He was getting a little annoyed. "I don't think things ever
go back to how they were," said Hope. "Here's my thought, though: Maybe
they can turn out better than they were." Hem didn't see how. "Our
trying harder plan isn't working out, is it," said Hope softly. Hem
didn't answer. He felt too miserable. "Maybe we need a different
strategy?" she added. Hem glanced over and saw that she was looking up
at Haw's sign, the one that said, "Old Beliefs Do Not Lead You To New
Cheese." "What if we tried a new belief?" said Hope. Hem shook his head.
"You don't try a belief. Your beliefs are just... there!" Hope glanced
back over at Haw and cocked her head. "But what if you decided to change
one?"

"That's not how it works," Hem explained. "Besides, I like my beliefs
just the way they are! If I changed them, who would I be? I wouldn't be
Hem!" He did not want to change or let go of his beliefs, because he
thought they were what made him who he was. "Bet you'll change your
mind," she murmured. "Why would I do that?" Now Hem was getting
irritated. "I like my mind just the way it is!" Hope shrugged again. "I
like it, too. But we still haven't found any cheese." Hem didn't have an
answer for that. They were both silent for a minute. Finally Hope got to
her feet and said, "Well, good night, Hem. Sweet dreams. I'll see you in
the morning." Hem sat against the wall, frowning. He was thinking about
what Hope had said about his hammer and chisel. Of course putting holes
in the wall wouldn't do them any good. Hadn't he already known that? So
why was he lugging around these old tools? Because he didn't know what
else to do, that's why. They would never find Cheese. He would never
find his friend Haw. He would die here in this corridor, with his
useless bag of tools. Hem let out a very big, very long sigh, and then
he asked himself the question that had nagged at him ever since his
quest began: "Why didn't I go with Haw?" And with that, Hem began to
cry. Before long, he fell asleep.

THAT NIGHT HEM had a dream.

In his dream, he saw himself back in his home by Cheese Station C,
pacing and fussing and fretting and fuming. Something was different. But
what? Then he saw what it was. There were bars on the windows! It looked
like he was in a prison. Looking in at himself through the bars, he saw
how unhappy he was. In his sleep, he cried a little more. He woke up in
the middle of the night, thinking about the dream. It baffled him. Why
was he like that, a prisoner in his own home, missing his friend yet
refusing to go with him? Hem lay awake on his back for hours, thinking
about this. He thought about it until dawn came. In the early light, he
could just make out Haw's scratched note on the wall, about old beliefs
and New Cheese. "Maybe Haw was right," he said quietly. (Thinking out
loud helped him to make his thoughts clearer, especially the more
difficult thoughts, like the ones he was having now.) He thought about
the day Haw left, so long ago now. Haw had tried to talk to Hem about
what he thought they needed to do, and Hem had refused to listen. "I was
sure I was right, and Haw was wrong," he said. "But maybe I wasn't
right. I didn't trust Haw, but I did trust my own thoughts." All at
once, Hem sat up straight. Old beliefs. That's what Haw's note was
about. But Hem had never stopped to think about what a "belief" was. Now
he thought he knew. He clambered to his feet, picked up a sharp stone,
and wrote his own new thought on the wall, next to Haw's. When he was
finished, he drew a picture of one of Hope's Apples around it, so he
would remember that it was his note and not Haw's.

That's all a belief was. A thought. But look at how much power it held!
Why didn't he go with Haw to look for New Cheese? Because Haw was
looking at things differently---and Hem couldn't see what Haw saw. His
own thoughts had kept him there in Cheese Station C, because he trusted
that they were true. He had believed that if he stayed and stood his
ground, things would turn around. He had believed that Haw was going off
on a fool's errand, and that he, Hem, knew better. His beliefs were
keeping him trapped in his way of seeing things. That was why he didn't
go with Haw. Suddenly he understood his dream. The bars on his windows
were his old thoughts, thoughts he trusted were true, but which actually
prevented him from venturing out into the Maze. His beliefs were holding
him prisoner! He scratched out another new note on the wall, and
surrounded this one, too, with a drawing of an Apple.

He pictured himself pacing back at home in Cheese Station C, and how he
kept thinking that if he just waited, the Cheese would start appearing
again, and things would go back to the way they were. That was another
thought he trusted, wasn't it. Another belief that held him prisoner!
So, did all beliefs do that? He thought back to the day he woke up and
first saw Hope, and how she had held out an Apple for him to eat. At
first he was afraid to eat it, but then he ate it anyway. He had trusted
her. And she gave him her last Apple! She was a good friend to him. Hem
thought that was a belief that served him well. He wrote another note on
the wall:

He thought back to Hope saying, "What if we tried a new belief?" What
had he replied? "You don't try a belief. That's not how it works!" Maybe
Hope was right, though. Maybe you could change an old belief, and choose
a new one. He tried to think of an old belief right now, but he couldn't
come up with one. This whole "belief" business was still a new way of
thinking for Hem, and he wasn't sure how it all worked. He looked up at
the notes he had just made, with the drawing of the Apple around each
one. He remembered the first time Hope had tried to offer him a piece of
fruit, and how he'd said, "Whatever it is, I can't eat it. I only eat
Cheese." That was what he'd thought, and he'd trusted that thought---but
it turned out it wasn't true at all! Because he ate the Apple and felt
better. So Cheese wasn't the only kind of food he could eat. And now he
thought differently. What did Hope say? "I bet you'll change your mind."
And she was right. He had! He wrote quickly on the wall again:

Hem noticed that he felt totally energized, and this surprised him. In
the past, Hem did not like it when someone challenged his beliefs. He
resisted changing his mind, and felt offended when anyone suggested that
what he was thinking or saying might not be true. But now, instead of
feeling bad that he'd been wrong, he felt excited by what he was
discovering. He realized that before, he had resisted changing his mind
because he felt threatened. He had not wanted to change his beliefs,
because he liked his beliefs. He had thought they made him who he was.
But now he saw that wasn't so. He could choose a different thought. He
could choose a different belief. And he was still Hem!

"So here's the real question," he said, pacing back and forth as he
thought out loud. "Now that I know what a belief is, and how much power
it holds, and how easily I can choose a new belief... what should I do?"
He stopped pacing. The answer was obvious. He should use this new
knowledge to help him finish their mission. He should go find more
Cheese and Apples. The problem was, they'd already tried everything.
There wasn't anywhere else to look. There weren't any more Apples or
Cheese to be found. They were out of options. It was an impossible
quest. And if that was the case, then there wasn't really any point in
trying. But... what if the "impossible" part was just another belief?
Could he change it? He felt a tingle run up his spine.

"Hang on, though," Hem told himself. "Let's be reasonable." This belief
business could go only so far. After all, there were limits here. Right?
Hem held that thought for just a moment. Then he took a breath, let
go--- and felt it begin to change! He looked at the sharp stone in his
hand, and wrote once more on his wall of notes:

WHEN HOPE SHOWED up a few hours after dawn she found Hem sitting up,

polishing his running shoes and humming to himself. She hardly
recognized this new Hem! When she left him the evening before, he was
tired, defeated, and grumpy. Now he looked more refreshed than she'd
ever seen him. She looked at the series of new notes on the wall, each
one surrounded by the outline of an apple. "My, my," she said. "You've
been a busy Littleperson." Hem nodded. "Yup." "What happened?" she said.
He looked up at her. "I changed my mind," he said. "Good," she said. She
looked at all his notes again, then back at him. "About what?" Hem put
his shoes down and got slowly to his feet. (He was still stiff and sore
from dragging around that heavy bag of tools.) "I haven't figured that
part out yet," he said. Hem knew that what he'd been doing before wasn't
working. He needed to do something completely different. And that meant
he needed to look at things completely differently. He needed to change
his mind and choose a new belief. But what belief, exactly? He didn't
know. Hope came over and sat down next to him again. "Mind if I ask you
something?" she said. (She could see Hem was deep in thought and
probably didn't want her to disturb his concentration, but this was
something he needed to hear.) "You said your cheese just stopped showing
up? Like my apples?" "That's right," said Hem. "Here's what I'm
wondering: Before, when your cheese was still appearing fresh every
day---where did it come from?" Hem started feeling annoyed again. Hope
asked so many questions! And what did it matter where the Cheese came
from? It was gone now. He stopped. Hem looked over at Hope and thought
about the question she had just posed. Where did the Cheese come from?
Had he ever asked that question before? Had Haw? He thought back,
sorting through all the memories of times they had spent together,
looking for

Cheese, finding Cheese, and enjoying Cheese. Had they ever, even once,
asked themselves this question? They hadn't! He was sure of it. Hem felt
his pulse quicken. He didn't know why, but this felt important. He
looked at Hope again, all traces of irritation gone now. "Where... did
the Cheese... come from?" he repeated slowly. "You know, I think that
might be a very good question." Hope's eyes sparkled. "Does that mean
you've got the answer?" "Well, no," said Hem. "But it still seems like a
good question. If we keep asking it, maybe we'll find a good answer!"
They were both quiet for a moment. Then Hope looked over at Hem and
said: "I wonder what's outside the Maze." Hem stared at her. "What's
outside the Maze?" He shook his head in disbelief. "There's nothing
outside the Maze." What a thought! Outside the Maze? That made no sense
at all. The Maze was all there was. There wasn't any "outside." "Ah,"
said Hope. She paused, then looked again at Hem and said, "Are you
sure?" "Of course I'm sure!" said Hem. They looked at each other, and
then they both burst out with the same words at the same time: "A
thought you trust is true!" Another belief! And it seemed to Hem that
this might be the kind that held him down, rather than lifting him up.
Could he change his mind about this one, too? Hem shut his eyes and
tried to imagine a place outside the Maze. In his imagination, though,
all he could see was the Maze itself, just as he had always known it. He
opened his eyes again and shook his head. "It's no good. I'm not seeing
it." He looked at Hope. "All I can see is what's in the Maze. I can't
picture anything outside it." The Maze, after all, was all Hem knew. He
had been hemmed in all his life. Hope looked at him thoughtfully. Then
she said, "What if you just believe it first? Maybe then you'll see it."
"That's---" That's crazy! was what Hem was about to say. Instead, he
said, "That's... a great idea." If there really were no limits to what
he could believe, then why not give it a try? He closed his eyes again
and began to think: There is something amazing outside the Maze.

Hem took a big breath and felt the new thought fill up his mind, and as
he did, he felt himself trusting it. He opened his eyes and wrote
another note:

He looked at Hope and said: "Let's go find out what's outside the Maze."
She smiled. "Sounds good to me. Maybe we'll learn where your cheese
comes from." He nodded, excited at this thought. "And your Apples, too!"
Hope got to her feet. "I'm in," she said. "How are we going to do it?"
"I have no idea," said Hem. And he truly didn't. Where would they look?
He couldn't imagine. They'd already looked everywhere. Hem remembered
when he and Haw used to go looking for Cheese. They always avoided the
dark corners and blind alleys. He explained this to Hope, then waited to
see if she would come up with another good question. And of course, she
did. She said, "What if those dark corners are not all dark?" "How can
they not be dark?" said Hem. "After all, that's why they're called dark
corners!" Hope reached up and took down a thick candle from a sconce on
the wall. "Not if we bring a candle." Hem was already up and starting
down the corridor when he noticed Hope hadn't moved. She was looking
down at his sack of tools. "Are you bringing your hammer and chisel?"
Hem looked down at the tools, then slowly shook his head. "I don't think
so." "Good," said Hope. She smiled. "I don't think it works to launch a
new quest with old baggage." They went back into the corridors they had
already explored many times, only now they went looking for dark corners
instead of steering clear of them. It felt strange to Hem, seeking out
the very thing he had always avoided, but he decided that feeling
strange was probably part of the process. Soon they came to an
impossibly dark corner, and stopped. They turned into the darkness, and
Hope lifted her candle to light up the little passageway. Hem's heart
sank. The candle's light shone just far enough to reveal that the
passageway ended in nothing but darkness and a flat brick wall. "Another
blind alley," he said. Hope looked thoughtful. "That's what I'm
thinking, too," she said. "But what if that is not a thought we should
trust? After all," she added, "not all dark corners are dark. Maybe not
all blind alleys are blind." Hem liked that thought. He decided to see
if he could hold on to it and trust it enough that it would turn into a
belief.

He closed his eyes and tried once more to use his imagination. For
several long moments, nothing happened... until, just as he was about to
give up, he caught a glimpse of something flickering at the edge of his
thoughts---as if he were seeing, if not a light, at least the
possibility of a light. He felt his heart give a leap. Hem opened his
eyes again and looked at Hope. "Let's try it," he said. The two walked
slowly into the passageway, both feeling nervous as they walked. Hem
couldn't help thinking, "The Maze is a dangerous place." He had known
this all his life, ever since he was a young boy. The Maze is a
dangerous place... The thought kept whispering in his mind. But what if
that was not a thought he should trust was true? He stopped walking, and
Hope stopped, too, waiting to see what he would say. "Just because you
think it," he murmured to himself, "doesn't mean you have to believe
it."

Hope didn't say anything. She understood what was going through his
mind. They continued walking. Sure enough, as they got closer Hem saw
there was a tiny light at the very end of the alley. It was the candle
itself, reflected in a small window set into a door! They opened the
door and stepped inside a small chamber, much like the many chambers
they had already explored. In the dim light of Hope's candle, they
looked all around the bleak little room. Four corners. Four walls.
Nothing else. It was completely empty. Disappointed, Hem turned to go,
but Hope stood still, watching him, as if waiting for him to say
something. "What," he said. "It's empty." "Looks that way," she said,
and she waited some more. So Hem thought about it---and then he asked
himself a question: If not all dark corners were dark, and not all blind
alleys were blind, then could it possibly be that not all empty chambers
were empty? "On second thought," he said, "shall we take a second look?"
Hope smiled and took his hand. "Let's!" she said. They walked along the
first blank wall, turned the corner and walked the second blank wall,
turned another corner, walked halfway along the third wall ---and
stopped. "Do you feel that?" whispered Hem. "I feel it," Hope whispered
back. Cool air wafted across their legs. Hem bent down and sniffed at
it. It smelled incredibly fresh. They got down on their hands and knees,
and down at knee level they found an opening in the wall, just big
enough for a Littleperson to pass through. Hem glanced over at Hope and
gestured with one hand. After you. Hope crawled into the tunnel. Hem
followed. With Hope leading the way, they crawled and crawled, until
they both began to see a light at the end of the tunnel. The light grew
brighter and brighter... and then all at once---

HOPE AND HEM emerged into a brilliant light, so dazzling that at first
they

couldn't see a thing. They stood upright, blinking, and inhaled the
clean, fresh air. As their eyes got used to the light, they looked
around. They were standing in a beautiful green meadow, with a cool,
gentle breeze blowing. Hem had never seen or felt anything like it
before. He looked up at the ceiling, if that's what you could call it.
It was so blue, and so high up! And there was a dazzling golden light up
there, brighter and warmer than any light he had ever known, too intense
to look at directly. Hem was speechless. He took a deep breath, put his
hands in his pockets, closed his eyes, and turned his face up to feel
the warmth. His fingertips felt something in his pocket. He pulled it
out and looked at it. It was a piece of paper. At the top it said, "The
Facts of the Matter." He began to read. And then he began to laugh. Hope
smiled, puzzled. She had never seen Hem laugh before. She didn't think
she'd ever seen him even smile. "What," she said. "What does it say?"
Hem showed Hope the piece of paper. "It says, I have to find more
Cheese, and if I don't, I'll die." He looked at Hope. "But I found
Apples instead, and ate those, and I didn't die." She looked at him.
"No, you didn't. I knew you wouldn't." "It also says, the Maze is a
dangerous place, full of dark corners and blind alleys." She nodded.
"And it was a dark corner that led to the blind alley that brought us
here." "The last thing it says," added Hem, "is that it's all up to me.
That I'm on my own." Hope smiled. "Well that one certainly isn't true,
is it." She held out a little piece of cheese she had just found. He
took it and nibbled at it gratefully. "No," he said. "It's not." As they
explored the new world they were in, outside the Maze, they found Apples
and Cheese everywhere. They tried eating Apples and Cheese together. It
was delicious. And everything was so bright! They had never realized
just how dim and poorly lit things were inside the Maze. It occurred to
Hem that getting out of the Maze felt just like getting out of the
prison of his old beliefs.

Maybe that's all the Maze really was. One thing was for sure: The air
here smelled so much sweeter! Hem looked down once more at his little
piece of paper. "The Facts of the Matter," he said, and he laughed
again. "They seemed like facts at the time." Hope nodded. "But they
weren't." "No," said Hem. "Not a single one." He turned the piece of
paper over, and on the back of The Facts of the Matter he wrote down a
summary of what he'd discovered over the past few days.

THE WAY OUT OF THE MAZE Notice Your Beliefs A Belief Is a Thought That
You Trust Is True

Don't Believe Everything You Think Sometimes "Facts" Are Just How You
See Things

Let Go of What Isn't Working You Can't Launch a New Quest with Old
Baggage

Look Outside the Maze Consider the Unlikely---Explore the Impossible

Choose a New Belief Changing What You Think Doesn't Change Who You Are

There Are No Limits to What You Can Believe You Can Do, Experience, and
Enjoy A Lot More Than You Think You Can

As they sat on the grass, enjoying the sunlight and cool breeze, Hem
thought again of his friend Haw. He'd be enjoying this all even more, he
thought, if Haw were with them. "You're thinking of Haw," said Hope. Hem
nodded. As usual, she knew what he was thinking. He wondered how she did
that. "We have to go find him," she said. "And your friends Sniff and
Scurry, too." Hem looked at her, and nodded again. "That's exactly what
I was thinking," he said. "All right," said Hope. She smiled at him.
"Let's go." They both stood up, and Hope took Hem's hand once more, when
suddenly --- "Hem! HEM!" Astonished at hearing his name being called in
this unfamiliar place, Hem turned and stared at the figure striding
briskly toward him. It was Haw! "You're here!" cried Haw as he embraced
Hem and thumped him on the back with both hands. "And so are you!" said
Hem. He glanced all around. "And Sniff and Scurry?" Hem laughed. "Oh,
you know them---they were the first ones out! But you, Hem... I was
worried you'd never find your way out of the Maze." "I almost didn't,"
admitted Hem. "I thought I was trapped in there. I thought I was going
to die." He sighed. "I was wrong, but I couldn't see it. I was stuck in
my old beliefs." "So what happened?" said Haw quietly. Hem reflected for
a moment. "First I got angry. Then I got hungry. Then, I found Hope." He
turned to look at Hope, and smiled. "Hope, this is---" "I'm very happy
to meet you, Haw," said Hope as she shook Haw's hand. "Charmed!" Haw
laughed and gave a little bow, then said to Hem: "And after you found
Hope?" "Then, I changed my mind!" Haw gave a warm smile and embraced Hem
once again. "I've missed you, my friend. I'm so glad you found your way
out of the Maze. And I'm even happier that you found how to change your
beliefs." "Beliefs are powerful things, aren't they?" said Hem. The
three stood silently together, contemplating the awesome ability beliefs
have to hold you down, or to lift you up---and the thrilling discovery
that you

can change them, and still be you. A thought occurred to Hem. "Hang on a
second!" He fished in his pocket, took out an Apple he had picked up,
and offered it to Haw. "Have you tried one of these?" Haw nodded
gleefully. "Apples," he said. "Love'em." "And they go really well with
Cheese!" said the two friends in unison. Hope cocked her head. "You know
what, though?" The two turned to look at her. "I'll bet there are all
kinds of other delicious things to eat here," she said. "Things we've
never thought of before. Things we've never even imagined." Hem and Haw
looked at each other. Was that possible? Of course it was! And the three
set off to explore. The End... or is it another beginning?

A Discussion

WHEN DENNIS FINISHED the story, he stopped talking and looked around the

room. Everyone was deep in thought. He waited. "Wow," said Alex. Dennis
turned to him and smiled. "Wow?" "Good for Hem," said Alex. "He did it.
He made it out of the Maze." "Just like Andy Dufresne, in The Shawshank
Redemption," said Ben. The rest of the group laughed. By now Ben had a
well-established reputation as the class entertainer. "I had a boss once
who wasn't so lucky," said Brooke. "Really," said Dennis. "What
happened?" "When I first got out of journalism school, I worked for a
city newspaper. Nobody could convince the publisher we needed to get
online. He believed print advertising would keep paying the bills, even
when our biggest accounts switched over to advertising on the web. He
insisted that paid circulation would pick up again soon, even as more
and more readers left us to get their news online. A year after I
arrived, the whole operation shut down." "Never found its way out of the
Maze," murmured Alex. "Beliefs are powerful things," said Dennis. "A
single stubborn belief can take down an entire company. People believe
that how things have always been is how they'll always be. But it never
is." "You know what Mark Twain said," Ben commented. "It ain't what you
don't know that gets you in trouble. It's what you know for sure that
just ain't so." The class laughed again. Dennis smiled, and said, "Twain
had it right, as usual, and here's an example: When the Titanic made its
maiden voyage in 1912, people described the vessel with a single word."
"Unsinkable!" said Brooke. "Exactly. Unsinkable. That's what everyone
believed. And because they believed it, they didn't bother loading on
enough lifeboats." "And more than fifteen hundred people died," said
Brooke. "All because of a thought people trusted was true," added Mia.

"The Facts of the Matter," murmured Alex. The class was silent for a
moment. "Oh, man," said Ben. "I'm starting to get the sense that all
beliefs are bad," said Mia. "Narrow viewpoints that just get us in
trouble. But that can't be true. I mean, even Hem found some beliefs
that served him, right?" "Absolutely," said Dennis. "All beliefs are
worth examining. The key is to notice your beliefs, and test them---not
necessarily discard them. "Some just get in our way and stop us from
being our best selves, or even drive wedges between us. But some beliefs
are powerful truths, beacons that lift us up and help us keep moving
forward, even in the toughest times." "Like the idea that all people are
created equal," suggested Ben. "Endowed by their Creator with the
unalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." "Or
like Hem's belief that Hope was a good friend," offered Brooke. "Or
believing in our kids," added Mia. "Or in yourself," said Dennis.
"Believing in the idea that you were put here for a reason, that you
have unique value to offer the world. For example: Mia, why did you
become a doctor?" "To help ease people's suffering," said Mia without
hesitation. Dennis turned to the group. "You can see that's not just a
thought she thinks is true. That desire to heal? That's the essence of
Mia showing through. Like Brooke's passion for truth and excellence in
the printed word. These are core values, things that simply are true and
never change." "But fer cryin' out loud, everything else does!" put in
Ben. "Also true," said Dennis, smiling. "And that's where Hem got stuck.
Circumstances change. The world turns. And things that may have been
true yesterday suddenly are no longer true today. "Blockbuster Video was
positive we would all go on watching movies on videotape forever.
Polaroid was absolutely sure people would always snap their photos on
little paper squares. Just like bookstores in the early nineties knew
for a fact that an online bookstore could never possibly amount to much.
"They all built their futures based on beliefs that turned out not to be
true. And it sank them." "Just like the Titanic," added Ben. "Just like
the Titanic," Dennis agreed. He glanced around the classroom and noticed
the quiet young man in the last row, frowning. "Tim?" he said. "Anything
you wanted to share?"

All eyes turned to Tim, who'd gotten the whole ball rolling the week
before by asking his question, "What about Hem?" "Yeah, I guess," said
Tim. "Actually my work situation is okay. It's more a personal thing."
Dennis said quietly, "If you're comfortable." "Sure. So, earlier this
year, I found out that my parents are separating. Already separated,
actually. Past tense." Everyone looked back at Dennis, who said, "And
that's been hard for you." "Hard? It's impossible. All my life they were
this constant, this bedrock. The one sure thing in my world. And they
just gave up!" "You sound angry about it," said Dennis. "I'm furious
about it," said Tim. "I mean, I still love them, but right now I kind of
hate them, too. I just can't accept what they're doing. And what does it
say about my whole childhood, is that all a lie now?" "You know," said
Dennis, "people change." Tim shook his head. "Not like this." Dennis
considered that. "How do you think they see the situation?" he said. Tim
seemed startled by that thought. "I have no idea." "What do they say?"
"They say they tried their best, and that this was the right decision
for them, and that in time I'll grow to accept it. Which I totally don't
believe." Dennis paused, then said, "What if you tried... believing
differently?" "It doesn't work that way!" Tim blurted out. There was a
silence in the room, and then he said, "Oh, wow." He looked at Dennis
again. "That's exactly what Hem said, isn't it?" He gave a thin smile.
Dennis shrugged and smiled back. "Pretty much." "So what are you
saying?" said Tim. "That they made the right decision? And that it
wouldn't have been more right for them to stick together and work things
out?" Dennis shook his head. "That's not for me to say. When looking at
a belief, though, I like to use Hem's question: Does it lift you up, or
hold you down? Does it get you out of the Maze, or keep you running in
circles?" Tim looked down at the table, thinking hard. "Just remember
this, Tim," said Dennis. "Changing what you think doesn't change who you
are." Tim looked up and met Dennis's eyes, then nodded slowly. "Yeah,"
he said. "Okay. I'll think about that." He paused, then added, "Maybe
I'll take a crawl through Hem's tunnel, see if there's anything bright
out there." Dennis broke into a grin. "That's great, Tim." He glanced up
at the wall clock. The class was just about over. "Last week," he said,
"we touched on how confusing it can be when there's so much change
happening all at once. And I'm paraphrasing here, but a few

of you asked the same excellent question: 'Where do I start?'" He looked
around the room. "Alex?" The others realized that Alex, who had been so
vocal the week before, had been nearly silent ever since Dennis finished
telling this new story. Alex paused for a long moment, thinking hard. He
began speaking, slowly at first. "Seems to me," he said, "that it starts
with me." Dennis nodded, as if to say, Go on. "Well," said Alex. "I've
been so focused on the problems. On my changing industry, how confusing
it is, how hard it is to keep up and know what to do next." "You said
you'd 'Move With the Cheese' if you could," put in Brooke, reading from
her notes, "but half the time you don't even know where it went."
"Right," said Alex. "And that's exactly what Hem was trying to do,
right? Roaming all over the Maze, trying to find the solution. But where
he needed to start wasn't anywhere in the Maze. It was right in his own
head. "When you said, 'Get out of the Maze,' it hit me---the maze I'm
stuck in isn't my job, or my company, or even my industry. It's my own
approach. The Maze I need to get out of? I think it's my own thinking."
"Maybe it's time to let go of some old beliefs," said Brooke. "No
kidding," replied Alex. "And choose some new ones!" Ben grinned and
added, "Don't forget what Hem had to say about that. There is something
amazing outside the Maze!" The group laughed again and broke into
applause. Ben stood and took a bow. "Well put," said Dennis, with a
thoughtful smile. "When you allow yourself to believe it, an entire
world of new possibilities opens its doors to you. Which is quite an
amazing thing indeed. "And on that note, my friends, our seminar comes
to a close. I want to thank you all for the great discussion and wish
you the very best, in your careers and in your lives. "And I'll leave
you with this thought: If you feel you got anything of value from this
little story, then I hope you will...

Share It With Others

The following is a letter Spencer composed in the final stages of his
illness, showing just how much he had embraced the principles in this
book:

Afterword by Ken Blanchard, co-author of The New One Minute Manager

Now that you've read Out of the Maze, I hope you realize the power of
your beliefs and the impact they can have on your behavior and the
results you get. A question you might have is, "Did Spencer Johnson only
write about the power of choosing your beliefs, or did he also live by
that principle himself?" I'm happy to say that he did indeed walk his
talk, but sad to give you a vivid example. I lost my co-author and
friend to pancreatic cancer in July 2017. As you might know, when you're
diagnosed with that form of cancer, it's usually bad news, as very few
people survive for long. When Spencer got the word, he decided he could
approach the rest of his life from a belief system based on fear or one
based on love. If he chose fear, the focus would be on himself. If he
chose love, the focus would be on others. I was overjoyed with his
choice to live in love. He reached out not only to close family members
and friends, but also to people with whom, for various reasons, he'd
lost contact, some of whom he hadn't spoken to in years. The people I
met during our visits with him were all struck by the way Spencer
focused on them and their feelings rather than on his own medical
condition. During my last visit with Spencer, we were joined by Margret
McBride, who had been our literary agent for The One Minute Manager. We
called Larry Hughes, the former president of William Morrow, who had
published our books, to tell him how much we appreciated his role in our
lives. It was a memorable, heartwarming conversation. As I was leaving,
I gave Spencer a hug and told him how proud I was of him and the
positive beliefs he had chosen. Moved by how Spencer's choice resulted
in such a loving departure, I and Spencer's sons---Emerson, Austin, and
Christian---were more committed than ever to making sure this book,
which was so important to Spencer, got published. Even now, we can feel
a big One Minute Praising coming from Spencer.

If you have enjoyed this little story as much as I have, you can carry
on Spencer's legacy by sharing the book with others. I certainly intend
to! Ken Blanchard San Diego, June 2018

Acknowledgments

What a unique contribution Dr. Spencer Johnson made to the world! One of
the most beloved and influential authors of our time, Spencer shunned
the spotlight, preferring to let the words of his eloquently simple
fables speak for themselves. It is an honor to be able to offer Out of
the Maze as his parting gift to the world, and we want to thank all
those who made this publication possible. Our gratitude especially goes
out: To Spencer's sons, Emerson, Austin, and Christian, for their
special roles in Spencer's life and for helping make this new book a
part of his enduring legacy. We and Spencer's millions of readers share
their loss, and are grateful for the many gifts their father left us. To
Ken Blanchard, Spencer's good friend and One Minute Manager coauthor; it
was Ken who first encouraged Spencer to put his story down on paper so
others could benefit from its simple wisdom, and who, once the book was
published, became its most enthusiastic advocate. To Hyrum W. Smith,
whose long-time collaboration and invaluable contributions helped make
this book possible. To our early readers for helping this book become
its best self. To Robert Barnett, of Williams & Connolly, LLP; Kathryn
Newnham, of the Spencer Johnson Trust; Angela Rinaldi, of the Angela
Rinaldi Literary Agency; and Nancy Casey, Spencer's executive assistant,
for their invaluable support and assistance. To Tom Dussel, Tara
Gilbride, Ashley McClay, Madeline Montgomery, Chris Sergio, Merry Sun,
Will Weisser, and the rest of the team at Putnam's and Portfolio for
their devoted dedication to the project. To John David Mann, for his
thoughtful and respectful touch in helping prepare this manuscript for
publication; and to Margret McBride, of the Margret McBride Literary
Agency, for her support. To you, the reader, and to the millions of
readers and fans, advocates and ambassadors of the original Who Moved My
Cheese? story. And finally, to Spencer himself. To call him "a master of
deep truths in simple packages" would be true, yet only part of the
truth. It is no accident that the future creator of best-selling fables
served as both a medical doctor and a children's book author. His
fondest hope was not simply to put wisdom

on the page, but to give people practical tools to improve their lives,
and in so doing, to help make the world a healthier, happier, and more
richly fulfilling place. Ivan Held, G.P. Putnam's Sons Adrian Zackheim,
Portfolio

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author's and publisher's rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly. Epub ISBN: 9781473562240
Version 1.0 1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2 Ebury Press, an imprint of Ebury
Publishing 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 2SA Ebury Press is part
of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose addresses can be
found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com

Copyright © Dr Spencer Johnson 2018 Cover design by Two Associates. Dr
Spencer Johnson has asserted his right to be identified as the author of
this Work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
Published in the United Kingdom by Vermilion in 2018 Published by
arrangement with Portfolio, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a
division of Penguin Random House LLC www.penguin.co.uk A CIP catalogue
record for this book is available from The British Library ISBN
9781785042119


