In Praise of Retreat Finding Sanctuary in the Modern World Kirsteen
MacLeod

Contents Dedication Epigraph Mapping the Ground: Of Sacred Groves, Inner
Mountains and the Art of Retreat An Introduction Green Cathedral The Art
of Retreat

The Old Ways: Of Hermit Caves, Monasteries and Pilgrim Paths A Hut of
One's Own Monasticism for Moderns Pilgrim Ways

The New Deities: Nature and Culture: Of Forest Cabins, National Parks
and Creative Sanctuaries I Will Go to the Wild Woods Artists, Writers,
Creative Thinkers, Dreamers

Light of the East: Of Yoga Ashrams, Meditation Halls and Body as Temple
The Inner Temple

In Conclusion: Of Hermitages of the Heart White Rooms, Unified Hearts
and Empty Fields

Epilogue: June 8, 2020 The Lake Isle of Innisfree Acknowledgements Notes

Selected Bibliography Image Credits Permissions About the Author
Copyright

Dedication For Marco

Epigraph I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree, And a small cabin
build there, of clay and wattles made; Nine bean-rows will I have there,
a hive for the honey-bee, And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
---William Butler Yeats

Mapping the Ground Of Sacred Groves, Inner Mountains and the Art of
Retreat

An Introduction If you let yourself be blown to and fro, you lose touch
with your root. ---Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching; transl. by Stephen Mitchell

I'm sitting on the old footbridge that leads to my cabin in the woods.
Beaver Creek passes silently below. Ducks fly overhead. Ferns, cardinal
flowers and moss grow amid grey rocks at the water's edge. Spiders
wander over my notebooks, which are spread out on the bridge's rough
planks, pages held open by stones.

This is the place that inspired this book. By the creek and in the
forest, I discovered a rich inner dimension I didn't know existed. Far
from my city life and work-obsessed routines, I began to see what gives
my life meaning. I recognized the value of protecting a divine spark,
though I'm not religious, and of amplifying the extraordinary---nature,
spirit, art, creative thinking---in impoverished times. A retreat means
removing yourself from society, to a quiet place where moments are
strung like pearls, and after long days apart spent in inspiring
surroundings, you return home refreshed and with a new sense of what you
want to do with your life. In the fraught modern era, you'd think our
timeless human desire to retreat would feel more urgent than ever. Yet
taking a step back has become an act of 21st-century rebellion when
disengaging, even briefly, is seen by many as self-indulgent,
unproductive and anti-social. But to retreat is as basic a human need as
being with others. To withdraw from the everyday is about making
breathing space for what illuminates a life. For millennia, people have
retreated from human concerns as a corrective, spiritual and otherwise.
This is a universal impulse, evident in all times, in all cultures.
Throughout history, opinion has swung between two poles on the question
of how to find fulfillment in life---in solitude, or in society? In the
sixth century BC, when early philosophies for a good life dawned in
China, Confucius said the key was to meet one's social obligations.
Lao-Tzu said the key was to avoid them---though his teachings show that
he cared deeply for fellow humans, and for the natural world. Lao-Tzu
left few traces, and even his name is uncertain; likely translations
include "the Old Master" or "the Old Boy." He fled corrupt court life,
legend has it, through the western mountain passes of China, disguised
as a farmer and riding a water buffalo, or a blue ox, or a black ox,
depending on the source. The sage was supposedly recognized by a border
guard and asked to share his wisdom before he departed. Lao-Tzu dictated

the Tao Te Ching and then disappeared, likely to become a hermit. The
Book of the Way, as it's known in English, imparts its lucid counsel
about living a self-directed life and has inspired kindred spirits ever
since, including the "Sage of Concord," Henry David Thoreau. In the 21st
century, when we over-venerate the active and the social, I find myself
in deep sympathy with the Taoist philosophers of antiquity, who viewed
the universe as a flux of paradoxical opposites. Early terms they used
to describe this were "the firm" and "the yielding"---later referred to
as yang and yin. Visually, this indivisible unity is represented by a
circle, half light and half dark, each containing a dot of the other
shade. The idea is that energies are in interchange, universal energies
from which everything emerges, and their dynamic balance brings cosmic
harmony. Contrary to Western dualism these opposites are not at war but
hold equal importance, permeate one another, and create a whole. The
world of being "arises out of their change and interplay," explains
Richard Wilhelm, who translated the I Ching, or Book of Changes, into
German in 1924, thus opening up the spiritual heritage of China to the
West. The I Ching is the common source for both Taoist and Confucian
philosophy and was first published in English in 1950. Westerners may
consider such concepts esoteric or mystifying, but they are common in
the East. And common sense, I believe. It seems logical that we need
action and engagement, yang energy, and also the complementary yin,
which is solitary, reflective and receptive. This does not mean passive,
as it's often misinterpreted in the West. Wei wu wei, or "effortless
effort," describes yin's power, observable in the action of a river on
rock. To quote the Tao Te Ching, written between 300 and 600 BC:
"Nothing in the world/is as soft and yielding as water./Yet for
dissolving the hard and inflexible,/nothing can surpass it."

Similarly, to retreat is about widening our perspective, about the
pursuit of the whole, developing yin attributes rather than rejecting
them. In a historical time when solitude and silence are conflated with
boredom, and no one wants to be seen as a weird "loner," retreat has
become a countercultural notion. I admit to being irritable about this.
I believe independent people like solitude, and retreating is healthy
for everyone at particular times of life, for particular reasons. A
retreat is different from a holiday: it's a temporary, voluntary
withdrawal from everyday life for a purpose---for personal, social,
environmental, spiritual, artistic or even professional reasons. It's
about deep engagement and, often, dissidence. Granted, not everyone
wants to flee permanently through the Han-Ku Pass as Lao-Tzu did, or has
the means to do so, including me. That's why over the past 20-plus years
I became a serial retreater, creating islands of space and time, a week
here, a month there, to answer a faint call, barely heard above the din
of the everyday: "There must be something more--- where can I find it?"
One good retreat led to another, and slowly, my life transformed.
Retreat is an adventure, and it involves uncertainty. Whether we go to
the quiet woods to rest or make art, walk a pilgrim path or sit in
silent meditation, we're in some way seeking a new way to be. We're
creating space for change. I'm not dismissing ordinary, active, social
life and its routines: that's how we keep the lights on, the dog fed and
the world turning. No one needs reminding of the value of the everyday,
or of relationships and work. But I believe we have mistaken this half
of reality for the whole. As modern times sweep away the extraordinary,
the transcendent and our attention, retreat offers a way to reclaim
what's being lost. Like many people, I don't want to be blown about by
the wind, always in company. I have other priorities, which is where
retreat comes in.

I have often wondered why I am so interested in retreat and its yin
companions, solitude and silence. This book is my chance to consider the
question, for myself and everyone else who wants to inhabit a slower,
quieter, more thoughtful world than the 21st century usually offers.
Drawing on my own experiences, and the wisdom of hermits, monks,
pilgrims, naturalists, writers and artists, solitary thinkers and other
independent spirits, living and dead, I will explore the art of retreat
and how it can reconnect us to our essence---and why this is a matter of
urgency for personal and planetary health in modern times. Here, beside
the creek in the forest, it's time to concentrate my thoughts and write
down what I've discovered. I'll begin with the story of my retreat to
Beaver Creek, where this journey began . . .

Green Cathedral

The cabin is a mile down a winding logging road, deep in the green
forest. There's no running water, unless you count the creek, and no
electricity. It's far from everyone and everything.

The bumpy road in is overgrown with weeds and wildflowers, and ends at
Beaver Creek. A rough footbridge spans the water, planks nailed between
two tree trunks that were pulled into place by a neighbour's horse. We
fill our arms with supplies from the truck and walk over: drinking
water, wine, cooler, bags of food, bedding and towels, maybe a
saxophone, the stories of Chekhov---"the hockey player" my husband,
Marco, deadpans---or fat yoga and philosophy tomes we don't have time
for in the city. Stepping onto the bridge's weathered boards, I feel
something lift and wash away in the rush of water and wind in trees.
It's the sensation of a gorgeous absence, as when a pain that had been
constant suddenly vanishes or when a noise unheard for always being
heard disappears. All the cells of my body relax. Below, the creek pours
on without beginning or end. At the far shore I step between the tall
poplar and the woodpecker-riddled cedars and onto the land. Up ahead the
cabin, shaped like a tiny barn with cedar-plank siding and a blue steel
roof, rests amid tall trees. On the front porch, I peer into the
mud-and-moss nest in the eaves while two adult phoebes peep in alarm
from a nearby maple sapling. Four upturned beaks. This means we'll be
using the back door again this spring, until the babies fly. I pull out
my keychain, a blue globe, and open up the front door. Of all the places
on this planet, this is where I feel most at peace. A retreat in the
woods is the last thing I expected to have, or even desire. For 20 years
I lived in Toronto. I loved cities. I had zero interest in wilderness. I
thought it anti-social to spend time alone and would never have
considered leaving the smoggy, edgy metropolis for a place where biting
insects likely outnumbered people. No culture, no clubs, no
cappuccino---I got uneasy at the very idea of being "miles from a
lemon," just like Reverend Sydney Smith, an English writer who once
remarked of

his new country parish, "My living in Yorkshire was so out of the way
that it was actually 12 miles from a lemon." Then one summer, quite
suddenly, I got fed up. I'd been working on contract for the provincial
government, wondering how my journalism career as the next Oriana
Fallaci had come to this. My boss was in a constant state of panic about
legislation we were working on and she paced, spritzing peppermint
essence into the air. My friend and I, two lapsed magazine writers with
no clue about how laws are made, lived in perpetual fear of getting
fired. Each evening we'd ride the streetcar home together, limp from
tension and amazed to still be employed. The money was stellar, but the
days were consumed by absurd dramas and counterfeit crises. About the
same time, home became inhospitable. Marco and I were renting a
three-bedroom brick semi with a small yard near St. Clair and Oakwood.
Mighty Q107 rock blared nonstop in the yard next door. Out back, our
neighbours kept their tiny city lots pristine by sticking all their junk
out of sight behind their sheds---the view from our rear door. They
hacked down trees, which they considered a messy nuisance that blocked
sun from their tomatoes. Then a dead body was found in the trunk of a
car that had been parked outside our house for a week. Much later, Marco
told me he never corrected the rumour that we were brother and sister;
thus the hostile stares whenever we walked down the street holding
hands. Worst of all, many bored kids lived nearby. They called to me,
"K, what are you doing?" I longed to read in peace, so Marco constructed
me a hideout in the back corner by our shed. He used the springs of a
bed frame and let green beans grow all over it, an aesthetic not
appreciated by our neighbours. They went more for garden gnomes and had
a back-gate sign that said "Garden of Earthly Delights"---I guarantee
they weren't familiar with the painting.

In my leafy retreat there was just enough space for a chair. It was so
pleasant in the dark green shade. Before long, the kids discovered me
and their calls became ever more plaintive. One day, exasperated, I
stood in the yard with my arms spread wide and shouted to the skies,
"All I want is me squared of peace!" I'm inside the cabin, gazing out
and up into the green cathedral. Boughs of balsam, maple, white pine,
birch and cedar fill the windows. The phoebe chicks cheep in their porch
nest. I hear the rush of wind in the trees, the nearby whir of
hummingbird wings, a woodpecker's knock. Green chiaroscuro light dapples
the forest floor down the short slope to the creek. At the water's edge,
two white birches and a tall cedar, the trunks enmeshed, arc up, leaning
on one another. At intervals ducks, beavers and muskrats coast silently
by. The cabin's main floor is 12 by 24 feet, with two rooms up steep
wooden stairs for sleeping. In this space is a tiny washroom, a kitchen
with our luxuries---a full-sized propane stove and pine cabinets---a
retro grey table and chair set from the '50s, and a tall bookshelf
loaded with nature books, childhood classics such as Black Beauty and
The Black Stallion, plus volumes of fiction and poetry. A daybed piled
with pillows sits beside the Atlanta Homesteader woodstove. Everything
one needs in life, all within sight. At night, we pull down random books
and read to one another by candlelight. This excerpt---from The Lonely
Forest Dweller by Prince Tissa Kumara, the youngest brother of King
Ashoka, who spread Buddhism through his vast realms in 250
BC---resonates with us across time: "If nobody is to be found,/In front
of one or behind one,/That is exceedingly pleasant/For the lonely forest
dweller."

We repeat the next stanza, laughing and substituting deer or moose:
"Pleasing, and joyful to sages,/Haunted by rutting elephants,/Seeking my
goal alone, quickly/Will I go to the wild forest." This morning it's
raining. Drops ping on the metal roof, treetops rustle in the wind and
the fire makes burning sounds---not crackling, but the roar of
combustion. A log shifts in the woodstove and Marco's hard rubber boots
tap outside on the deck. I finish my coffee, pull on rainwear and step
out the sliding door to the small deck that looks down toward the creek.
My favourite walk loops around the edge of our 47 acres, skirting the
central "Unknown Regions"---swampy, dense bush where branches poke and
bruise and shadowy animals glide by in the half-light. Up the path in
the field, wildflowers have taken over from hay. This was once part of
the Old MacKay Farm. There's now a clearing where the pioneers' house
had been. The barn's old stone foundation and apple trees still stand.
Fresh water still bubbles from an artesian spring in the woods nearby.
At the end of the field is Moose Point, marked by a patch of scrubby
cedars and a pile of fieldstones. Black bears fling the heavy rocks
around, looking for insects. I find the overgrown path in the bush and
then teeter over the top of the beaver dams. Pushing aside cruel
raspberry canes with my beaver-whittled walking stick, I wend past the
fiddlehead patch and veer slowly right, clapping, watching for bear scat
and continuing on the path's curve until the hardwood forest. Here,
under the tall maples and cherry trees, there's a hush. My thoughts
become quiet. I pass the rocky hummock, the highest point on the
property, and soon hear the gurgle of water. From the creek I wander
downstream, past the wide pond where wild rice grows, and along the
deeryard path, moss inlaid with white quartz underfoot. At the end, the
path emerges back beside the footbridge and the cabin. The land's
intricacies, traced into memory by years of my footfalls here.

Free of everyday concerns I follow the rhythms of the body: eat, walk,
swim, walk, sleep. I do yoga on the bridge and the red squirrel scolds,
his claws scrabbling toward me along the branch that serves as a
railing. He loses his nerve at the last moment and makes an angry
about-face. How can I tell him I won't hurt him? More and more, I want
to protect the peace here. We don't allow hunting, so this is a safe
haven for fish, deer, elk, moose, mink, grouse, ducks. In the solitude
and safety of this place I feel relief from life's rushing and chafing.
"We are driven to distraction by the pursuit of the fragmentary," writes
Bengali writer Rabindranath Tagore in his essay, The Religion of the
Poet. Never more true than in our technological age, which for all its
benefits exacts a steep cost. We have constant connectivity; yet our
gadgets untether us from reality in deeply disturbing ways. Shortly
after my "me squared of peace" plea, Marco and I started to tag along
with friends on their house-hunting expeditions up north, dreaming that
perhaps we could afford a summer place even though a city house was out
of reach. We met Merv, a stocky man in his fifties with a boyish face
and a deep laugh, who became our real estate agent and rural decoder. He
introduced us to blackflies, bug jackets and properties around Bancroft.
By late fall we had resolved to buy a mouse-infested cottage near
Maynooth that teetered beside a raging torrent and had only a rickety
bridge for access. Some other impractical souls beat us to it. We were
sad and resolved to keep looking in spring. To our surprise in February,
Merv rang. "Guess what, kids---I have something to show you." The
property had more going for it than the other place, he promised. "And
I'd be your neighbour." That week we met him in Bancroft on a cold,
sunny day. Merv told us his plan: we'd hike in the back way over a
neighbour's property---the man had made paths while logging with his
horse---and then cut across a frozen

beaver pond. Merv wound duct tape around the tops of our boots to keep
out the deep drifts, and we began the long slog in. An hour later, out
of breath and shivering, we paused on the crest of a hill. We spotted
the cabin below: a charming blue steel roof amid snowy pines. Hastening
our steps we slid-bounded down the slope. Inside the little cabin Merv
fired up the ancient woodstove and invited us to sit on the godawful
orange sofa, where snow from our boots melted onto an old braid rug. He
lounged in the matching orange grandfather chair and told us the
details. The beavers would build at the low point in the access road
"once in a while." Our right-of-way ran over a logging company's land.
"They're the kind of neighbours you want---they'll come to cut a few
trees every 12 years or so." The right-of-way was shared by a
neighbouring property---the access road ran right through the creek and
past the cabin's front door. But this wasn't a problem: the owner lived
in Alberta, Merv explained, and the only person we'd see was Doug, a
friend of "Alberta's" who kept an eye on the place and who had
permission to hunt next door. Once we'd warmed up, Marco and I went back
out to stand on the little bridge over the creek, which led to the
logging road, the fair-weather way in. Blue sky above, sun sparkling on
snowy boughs and the frozen creek, still flowing fast in the centre. "I
wonder what's under all this," I said, waving my hand at deep
snowdrifts. We shrugged. Whatever it was, a graveyard for rusting Chevys
perhaps, we both knew it was for us. The deal for our "nature-lovers'
paradise," as the real estate listing had read, was done by April,
shortly after my fortieth birthday. I was working on another government
contract and life on Bay Street was a speedy grind, driven by "the sky
is falling!" panic---about volunteerism awards. I stayed marginally sane
by sneaking out with a friend to do yoga at Trinity Church at lunch,
writing poems with titles like "Bored Brain," and reciting

Theodore Roethke's "Dolor," about the tedium of office life, with its
"misery of manilla folders and mucilage." Now new vistas were opening
up. We had a retreat in the woods, far from noise, speed and stultifying
routines. The snow had finally melted, the logging road was passable and
the cabin beckoned. We rode through the mud on Merv's ATV and he walked
us around the property, pointing out landmarks: the secret spring, the
foundations of an old house and barn, the corner post in the beaver
pond, cherry trees in the forest. Merv knew and loved every corner, as
he'd grown up here. There were no rusting hulks--- just trees, water and
sky, the vast wilderness at our backs. Today it's sunny, and the
weathered boards of the dock warm my bare feet. I look into the sun-lit
water at cedar reflections. Fallen trees---so many lose their footing
and topple into the creek---appear as wavy lines, while the live trees
are green rectangles that ripple when the wind touches the surface. The
creek widens and deepens here in front of the cabin, before turning the
corner and flowing down over a waterfall. Curious black bass come and
hover. I step into the cool water, down three natural steps in the rock
until I'm submerged. When the sun's up I can see right to the bottom as
I swim: brown-gold water, companionable fish following me---Are you
food?---and the stem of a water lily growing up from the muck. I never
feel so clean. The creek is the liquid heart of this retreat. I can
think of no greater gift than clean water and spend hours swimming in
its everlasting rush and clarity. All that's negative, depleting, gets
washed away. The cold shock of water on my warm body, the joy of being
immersed in the new element, the beaver's-eye view of water, the grey
shore festive with green ferns and water irises or cardinal flowers,
woody cedars rising from the banks, white and yellow birches that guide
the eye up to the sky. I encounter other

creatures of the creek made light by the waters---a beaver, a curious
watersnake, a bass protecting her nest---all of us persuaded by the
currents, baptized here. I've always loved water best, its constant flow
and movement. The way it reflects the truth of change both within us and
around us. On it goes, running downhill, powerful, yet taking the path
of least resistance. Limerick Lake to Beaver Creek to Crowe Lake to Lake
Ontario to the St. Lawrence to the sea to the sky to the earth, perfect
cycles of fall and flow. At first, kneeling by the creek, I'd cup my
palms and try to drink the sparkling water quickly, before it escaped.
Now I experience the cascading water as a deep, unending source that
always finds its way. In the early days, all I wanted was me squared of
peace. I didn't quite know what to do with 47 acres. Sometimes I felt
compelled to tidy up the messy sticks in the woods. Or I hid indoors,
persecuted by deer flies, thinking, "This is not what I signed up for."
I couldn't have told you the name of a wildflower or the differences
between evergreen tree species. One evening, having a drink by the dock
after our four-hour drive from Toronto, Marco and I were startled when,
after half an hour, what our blind eyes had mistaken for a rock started
to swim away---a giant snapping turtle. I liked the natural world
vaguely, but it was more what was absent than what was present that
appealed to me. Asked to explain this to my urban friends, I'd quote
Dorothy Parker's poem, "Sanctuary": "My land is bare of chattering
folk;/The clouds are low along the ridges,/And sweet's the air with
curly smoke/From all my burning bridges." Even just for weekends it felt
wonderful to escape the accumulated scandals, failures and baggage of 20
years of living in Toronto. Led away by the cabin, after two years of
being stuck in traffic with all the other cranky Torontonians going home
on Sunday nights, we moved to Kingston

---two and half hours closer to Beaver Creek. In "The Country North of
Belleville," poet Al Purdy calls the cabin's region "the land of our
defeat," where settlers worked the thin veneer of earth on top of the
ancient rock. Up in our field, the farmers had grown hay and taken it
out by horse wagon to Sutton Road, following an old track. Snake fences
and cairns of fieldstones in the woods remain, testament to their
backbreaking labour. As our nature enthusiasm grew, it became evident
that few people in our circle shared it. My dad surprised us by liking
the place---it's good to have a "bolt hole" to run to when the
apocalypse comes, he said. My friend's druggie brother was excited to
hear we had a remote property with an open field and a good water
supply. He sidled up at a funeral and asked, "Would you like an
opportunity to augment your income?" My sister Kath and Talisker, her
dog, were the only ones who loved the cabin as much as we did. Most
everyone else visited once and never returned. They were, as I was at
first, annoyed by bugs, the outhouse, the small indoor space, the lack
of running water, electricity and cell signal. How could they not be won
over by the solitude, open space, natural beauty, trees, wildflowers and
the ever-flowing creek? Clinging to familiar comforts separates us from
reality, like the seasons changing and the rhythms of the natural world,
leaving us in a fake fantasy world of our own creation, I'd opine to
their eyeball rolls. At first I was sad that the place was too "rustic"
for everyone. Soon, however, I appreciated the peace, first as a guilty
pleasure, and then as a luxury I revelled in. Gradually my desire for
peace became a deepening hunger for solitude. Before long I rarely
invited anyone up to the cabin by the creek. Occasionally someone would
arrive unexpectedly. One afternoon I looked up from my book to see an
elderly woman clinging to the bridge, legs kicking. "Grab my canoe!" she
shouted. I jumped into the water and

caught it, noticing a rod and reel and many large, dead frogs. Maggie
from St. Ola was 82, she told us as she climbed back in her canoe, and
liked to make fires on islands in the stream and do some fishing. As
well, a local man injured in a chainsaw accident, who often left his
carvings on people's porches and window ledges, would suddenly walk past
and wave. As Merv had predicted, we seldom saw anyone except Alberta's
friend Doug, who was a pest but kept a good eye on the place. His
presence only became unrelenting in September as hunting season
approached. Walking in the field one day, I saw him leaving apples out
for the deer on the neighbouring property so they'd make easy prey when
he returned with his shotgun. One November, we met Doug and his friends
on the road. Six men with guns, all of them likely doused in deer pee so
the animals couldn't smell them. They asked if they could hunt at our
place. We told them emphatically no. Hunters, especially bear hunters,
make me edgy. When I'm in the woods, I don't fear black bears or wolves,
only hunters. One day, we walked up our logging road toward the main
road, speculating about where Doug had found the "IGA bag full of
morels" he always bragged about. Two big sweaty hounds, tongues
practically dragging on the ground with thirst, came bounding up to us
through our open gate. We poured water into an upturned shovel for them
to drink and noticed a phone number on their collars. Minutes later, a
white Toyota Tacoma came barrelling in past the gates and started to
roar up our road. We stepped out from the trees and it stopped. The
driver was clean cut, and beside him was a hairy guy with a long beard
wearing dungarees. "This your place?" asked the clean-cut man. We
nodded. "Have you all seen our other five dawwwggs?" he drawled, opening
the tailgate, allowing the two hounds to jump up into the kennel
custom-built onto the back of the truck. Tennessee plates.

Apparently more of their dogs were running free in the bush. How did the
dogs get away? we asked. "Pappy's been coming up to Coe Hill for 30
years to hunt bears," the clean-cut one replied. We looked puzzled. "We
let the dawgs loose, they tree 'em, and then we shoot 'em," he
explained. "Not the little ones though," Dungarees added, noting my look
of horror. "We'll call the number if we see them," I said. Reluctantly,
muttering "Pappy's gonna whup us sure," they turned around and roared
off. My heart beat erratically. Why can't people respect this place and
leave the wild animals alone? I thought about the few undisturbed places
left on Earth, of plants and creatures at risk, of the links to human
exploitation. Even here: footprints, ATV tracks in the meadow,
litter---chip bags, plastic bottles, tin cans, cigarette butts, spent
shotgun shell casings. Plastic washed downstream. The menacing black
military airplane that flew along the creek. People, always making
incursions. The nature of a sanctuary: it can be violated. Tea-hued
water passes under my feet. I glimpse it through the gaps between the
bridge's planks and see two little fish looking up. Cardinal flowers
flash red amid the green fern-ribs, and wild peppermint grows on the
grey rocks. Above the tall silver birch, protected from beavers with a
wire skirt, the sky is wide. The sentry trees, two cedars, are pecked
with holes, so their resin drips onto the bridge. Disturbances at the
cabin feel magnified, yet vanish quickly, like a stone thrown into
water. The quiet swallows them. They are overcome by the creek's fluent
voice, jays squawking, the great blue heron's silent shadow passing
overhead, the flitting of woodpeckers, warblers, chickadees in the
branches.

On the bridge I do what I'd have considered an inconceivable waste of
time in my old life: sit and stare. When I first arrive, the trees are a
welcoming green expanse, and the bird calls, a chorus. Soon, shades
appear, variegated trees, and birdsong becomes the phoebes' nervous
cheep, cheep, the barred owl calling who cooks for you, the mad cackle
of the pileated woodpecker. The longer I stay, the subtler my
perceptions become. Undisturbed, I can go inward, return to myself, and
notice the world around me. I write on the bridge, and my pen is stilled
when a dragonfly lands on the page to rest. It seems to say, "Look at
me. No, really look." Four blacklace wings, gilded red bubble eyes and
body. Then a spider crawls across the white page of my book. My knee is
a landing place for powder-blue dragonflies and metallic blue-green
ones---perhaps they've grown from the nymphs that practise flying,
dancing up and down high in the air at dusk. I have often felt out of
place, jangled, unable to truly relax into the moments. Peace is rare
and fleeting, soon to be broken. I always identified with birds, the way
they can't rest, their twitching motions, fear of cruel claws. But here,
where I feel safe, I'm learning to be present. Experiencing the beauty
of the dragonfly, or a blue-spotted black salamander asleep under a
plank, or the bright stars twinkling above, makes me, in that moment,
conscious of being part of it, not apart. In the quiet forest, I can
begin to see the patterns of reality. To retreat is to stop, gain
clarity and make space for change. Inspired by our experiences in taking
a step back to the cabin, Marco and I make plans to attend a month-long
yoga retreat in India, to fully immerse ourselves in study and practice.
I've been reading about India's ancient forest dwellers. They preached
that the perfect relation with this world is the relation of union. As
Tagore writes, the forest hermitage in classical Indian literature is
"the place where the chasm between man and

the rest of creation has been bridged." I read these words, seated on
the bridge with my back against a tall cedar tree, and heave a satisfied
sigh. Observing the complex unfolding in these woods, I've experienced
the truth of relatedness, so different from the duality of everyday
life. Not long ago, I'd felt that humans were somehow separate. We can
learn so much from our bodies, and from the book of nature. Some think
to retreat to the woods is to stick our heads in the sand in a time of
ecological crisis. I attended a reading where a poet spoke dismissively
of the poet Mary Oliver. "She lives in a national park," this poet said,
meaning, "She's out of touch with reality." But don't we first need to
recognize what we need to preserve? "I like to think of myself as a
praise poet," Oliver said in a rare magazine interview. Others write
well of the coming devastation, she added. "Yes, I try to praise. If I
have any lasting worth it will be because I have tried to make people
remember what the Earth is meant to look like." In this forest, I become
quiet, observe. Then I move back into the world, transformed by my new
respect for insects, plants, animals, seeing the interdependence of the
natural world and all creatures on this planet. "Attention is the
beginning of devotion," Oliver writes in Blue Iris. Ecology of the
spirit leads to ecology in the physical world. It's nearly autumn and
the crisp air feels urgent, vital. Beside Beaver Creek, rose-breasted
grosbeaks flit in the cedars as thrushes flute the sun to sleep. The
creek gurgles and the dog begins to snore on the rug as we sink into the
rapture: another quiet night deep in the forest. It was a warm February
evening on the spice coast of Malabar when I first realized our forest
retreat had inhabited me in unexpected ways. Marco and I had finished
our yoga studies and were dining at a guest house, set in a lush coconut
grove on a bluff by the sea. We sat with a couple from

London, UK---he was in tax law, she was a tourism executive---and a
dancer and a sociology professor from Paris. Urban professionals with
city concerns, like me in my Toronto days. We swapped stories. I found
myself talking not about our yoga retreat adventures, such as the
rampaging temple elephant that nearly trampled Marco and then picked up
its trainer and threw him against a tree (the mahoud lived but was taken
to hospital with serious injuries), or the passionate embrace we
received from Amma, India's most famous female guru. No, I talked about
the cabin. The others seemed receptive so I evoked some scenes. "In
spring, trilliums carpet the forest in white or deep purple; yellow and
purple violets peep out from under the dead leaves; and we forage for
edible plants coveted by chefs, such as fiddleheads and morels." The
French people nodded in approval. "And all the creatures have come back:
young deer feed in the fields; migrating warblers and white-throated
sparrows sing; woodpeckers chatter; and garter snakes hold orgies on the
warm rocks. By the way," I asked, "did you know that garter snakes have
two penises?" They exchanged incredulous looks and laughed openly as I
continued to regale them with stories about our cabin in the woods, and
how its influence had slowly transformed our lives, even acting as the
catalyst that led us to India. They looked puzzled. "A retreat is about
creating space for what's meaningful to you, but you don't have time for
in everyday life," I explained. The sun sank into the liquid gold of the
Arabian Sea, and as we clinked glasses, I was aglow in a warm vision of
Beaver Creek---how it flows, falls, loses itself. That spring, my friend
Wendy---a "naked yoga" teacher from New York whom I met during my first
yoga teacher training retreat in Bahamas--- visited us at the cabin. As
we got out of the truck, frightening clouds of

mosquitoes descended. She gamely pulled on a bug jacket that zipped over
her head, and then lit a cigarette. "These things have a design flaw,"
she noted, puffing through the mesh. That night by candlelight over
dinner I held forth about how landscape and divinity are closely linked
in India. She listened awhile and then said, "You've turned into a
nature freak." We laughed at the "life is a comedy" aspects of my tale:
I was yet another of India's disillusioned spiritual seekers, one who
went on a yoga retreat 5,000 miles away only to find peace at a small
cabin two hours from home. Despite shady gurus and other lively
disappointments, India was fascinating and provided new ideas about
sacred topography and the forest. In Vedic tradition, life is divided
into stages. When your hair is grey, you have wrinkles and
grandchildren, and your family and worldly duties are completed, you may
enter what's called the "forest dweller" phase. This is when a couple
may go to the forest to become hermits, to live simply but not grimly
(i.e., sex is allowed once a month), and have a spiritual life. While
the hedonism quotient at the cabin wildly exceeds Vedic guidelines, the
parallel seemed obvious: I came to the cabin when I was forty, and in
this place, began to explore the natural concerns that arise at middle
age and changed my trajectory. I moved to a smaller city, became a yoga
teacher and focused on literary writing, work long deferred. A forest
hermitage dominates Kalidasa's famous play, Shakuntala. The spirit of
the forest retreat he describes as "sharanyam sarva bhutanam" (where all
creatures find their protection of love). I read these words while
swinging in my hammock by the water and had to put the book down. An
epiphany: at this retreat, a missing inner dimension had been restored.
I was refreshed and now spilling over with my "protection of love."
Literally the next day everything changed. First we found out that our
absent neighbour, Alberta, had given his property to his son.
Inexplicably,

Alberta's old friend Doug suddenly became like a burr we couldn't
unstick. Nearly every time we visited that season, there he was:
examining the bridge and talking about building a bigger one, making
elaborate plans to improve the road, scoping out places he might park a
caravan. One dark night, the mystery of his constant presence was
solved. It was 10:30 p.m. and we were nearly asleep. A blaring car horn
shattered the quiet. We ran outside to find Doug standing on the far
side of the bridge. First, he launched into a rambling tale about how
he'd taken in a relative who'd suffered brain damage in a logging
accident. Always a sucker for a colourful story, I said, "Uh huh," at
the appropriate moments. Then he got to the point: he had permission
from Alberta's son to log the few remaining trees. In exchange, Doug was
to build him a road to the waterfront and clear a building site. The
next morning, a Saturday, Doug was planning to bring heavy logging
equipment over the stream---at 6 a.m. Marco and I looked at one another.
We shared the right-of-way with the neighbouring property and Doug had
permission, so there wasn't much we could do. We'd always known that the
right-of-way passed over the bridge or through the creek, a stone's
throw from where we swim, from the cabin's front door. We shrugged,
asked Doug to avoid early mornings and weekends in future, and told
ourselves it was temporary. Doug, who is a terrible listener, besieged
us for months: at all hours, he was chainsawing, machines and tree
torsos trundled in and out, and the new road---which snaked all over the
property next door where Doug cut trees, versus taking a direct route
that made sense---looked like a giant had come and uprooted everything.
A few stumps were uncomfortably close to our property line. Doug met
every protest at how inconsiderate he was being with an excuse. He was
like an old fire horse, his blood up, crazy to snuff

the trees. When I talked to Alberta's son about it he seemed
unconcerned, said he would likely sell the place instead of building
there. Walking in the field one day, I spotted Doug dozing in the cab of
his truck. As usual, he'd tossed his candy wrappers out the window. He
was diabetic and brought his treats here to savour far from his wife. I
was furious with his littering. But I always softened. He loved this
place, he was old and had a serious heart problem, and he likely did not
have many seasons left. Temporary, I told myself. I kept walking along
the loop trail, confused. How could this be? Just as I'd felt grateful
and at one with everything, chainsaws appeared in the sacred grove? As I
walked through the hardwood forest and to the creek, my mind turned over
something I'd never quite been able to grasp: the Buddhist concept of
attachment, and how it leads to suffering. With the cabin I'd always
wondered, "How can we not be attached to what feeds us?" Now I was
getting some insight. Everything changes. In consolation, and to mark
our ten-year anniversary at Beaver Creek, I resolved to write about our
beloved cabin in the woods. I packed up all my notes and naturalist
journals, ready to begin. We arrived to find a real estate sign nailed
to our front gate: "70 acres, waterfront, right-of-way, call for
details." A huge arrow pointed down the logging road toward the cabin.
Tracks from an ATV went around the gate, flattening the tall flowers and
grass. I saw tire imprints in the muddy spots all the way in, and just
past the cabin, a red marker tied to a tree, well within our boundaries.
Strangers---and soon, neighbours---in this space. ATVs in the temple.
"The retreat story is taking a new direction," I wrote in my journal in
consternation. We had known that change was in the air. Doug had died a
few weeks before of a heart attack. Also, Alberta's son had mentioned he
might sell the property---which we couldn't afford to buy anyway. But we
were still shocked.

A droning sound approached and then the real estate agent and his
clients rolled through the creek on their ATVs. I reasoned with myself,
"Really, is it so hard to coexist? Maybe all will be well and the new
people will be nice, even new friends." Or they could be noisy hunters.
Peace was suspended. I constantly thought I heard engines. Sometimes I
really did, and ATVs or pickups would appear and drive through the
creek. Feeling sick, frozen in my hammock, I hoped they'd get out
quickly. We had passive aggressive exchanges with the real estate
agents---two young guys with preppie haircuts. "Hope you brought your
bug jackets," we'd say, happy when the deer flies were truly awful.
They'd reply, "We know what to expect up here." Or "Is this your only
showing this weekend?" we'd ask, and they'd counter, "Are you here every
weekend?" We sent the dog to bark at them, were happy when they arrived
as Marco was looking his most eccentric, hair long and wild, wearing
pink shorts and sharpening his axe. When the people left looking
harried, we felt triumphant. It was an invasion of our privacy, our
peace, but we knew we couldn't win. New people arrived on ATVs. Marco
spoke to them: three guys from "Camp 40." Doug no longer held hunting
rights on the logging company land we cross over to get to our place,
and now these hunters were leasing it. The one who said he's "the
captain" told us we'd never see them, except maybe for two weeks in
November during deer season. Before long the real estate sign came down,
and the new neighbours--- two couples with many grown kids, extended
family members, friends and dogs---introduced themselves. They were
social, shared our feeling that this place was paradise. I struggled to
be civil despite how obviously sweet they were. I recognized that they
needed to get to their place somehow and couldn't just walk over the
bridge as we did. I recognized their right to be here and truly wanted
them to enjoy the place. And I loathed their presence.

Marco was gracious, while I hid and felt besieged whenever they cut
their engines outside and a booming voice called, "Howdy, neighbours!"
Or when they zoomed through the creek in the morning to get bacon,
disturbing my swimming. One night, after they dropped by to say hello
unexpectedly---ten of them and three dogs---I wept. Next, the logging
company came to cut the trees. I avoided Beaver Creek all that fall. I
had to regroup. The world had arrived. I'm at the cabin, sitting by the
creek and leaning back against my favourite cedar. A woodpecker raps on
the tall white birch and a grouse gains altitude, wings beating. A duck
quacks upstream in the pond. I watch the ever-changing flow of the
current. I dangle my fingers, create a temporary wave of resistance.
Where is the stream taking me? On. After years of peace here, it seems
I've taken it in, found a sanctuary of the heart. The cabin, the creek,
the woods: the outer reflection of my unconscious desire all those years
ago in Toronto to retreat and find a new way to live. Turns out it was I
who was the call. Now, the whole "ATVs in the temple" storyline seems
like a cosmic joke. Ten years of nearly perfect peace; I resolve to
write about retreating to a small cabin and within months, we have
scores of neighbours, hunters appear to lease the right-of-way land, and
the logging company cuts down the trees across the creek. Much else has
happened in the decade since. Before, these events would have made me
feel the peace and stability were being snatched back, another of life's
cynical tricks. But I've changed. I've been filled. Maybe events are
hinting at a new call---for community?--- that's arising now. The cabin
has gone from being something I thought I didn't need or want to a
guilty pleasure, to a luxury I drank in greedily, to a deep need met,

to an emotional geography, a quiet place I carry within. As ever, when
Marco and I arrive at Beaver Creek we make plans to build me a writing
hideout down the deeryard path beside the pond and discuss renovations
and solar panels that would make the cabin liveable if we wanted to
spend more time here. Then, the neighbours drive in and out to pick up
relatives, milk or more beer, and we wave and talk about perhaps finding
a new place, somewhere more private. In a way, it doesn't matter whether
we stay or go. After so long in this place, our strides are long, our
hearts light. We feel blessed on the Earth and open to the flow.
Whatever happens, just last night, I saw the stars go from white light
to variations of blue and red, and in the quiet, I returned to myself as
to some longed-for source. In the green cathedral, wind still ripples
the water, and most of all, the creek's steady pouring . . .

The Art of Retreat Now and again it is necessary to seclude yourself
among deep mountains and hidden valleys to restore your link to the
source of life. ---Morihei Ueshiba, founder of aikido

Mountain caves, sacred groves, purifying deserts, holy wells and
waterfalls ---wild places are where humans first went to contact divine
forces. Later we constructed new sanctums: hermitages, monasteries,
pilgrim paths,

forest cabins and other quiet havens for creativity, deep thinking and
introspection. These spaces are the tangible reflection of our timeless
human desire to retreat. Finding seclusion today among deep mountains,
or anywhere else, has become a feat of ingenuity. Even longstanding
cartoon tropes are getting a modern twist: the New Yorker recently
depicted a bearded monk meditating on a mountaintop, while on the next
peak, a second monk grinned beside a billboard: "Coming Soon:
Enlightenment and Pizza by the Slice." In times when a monk can't find a
quiet mountain and daily life makes the hellscapes of Hieronymous Bosch
feel eerily familiar, what of our corresponding inner spaces, our
psycho-geographies? Space for retreat, or lack thereof, has
consequences: for personal and spiritual fulfillment, for our connection
to nature, for culture and creativity and for clear thought.
Paradoxically, at a moment when taking a strategic step back would be of
particular benefit, we've forgotten how retreating fits into our busy,
lopsided lives. Retreat as an idea is rarely discussed except in terms
of its result: perhaps wisdom or art, a new scientific theory, clarity
or healing. In part the reason is that inner transformations are
devilishly hard to articulate. Retreat is also challenging to isolate as
a topic, because it crosses great shifts of time and space, diverse
spiritual and secular practices, and it overlaps with related subjects
such as silence, solitude and sanctuary. It's like a great river that
flows down the mountains and spreads widely and unpredictably across the
plains. This book is an adventure, an attempt to follow the tributaries
without getting lost, exploring yet keeping the focus on the fluid
phenomenon that is retreat. While retreat itself is undocumented in
scientific literature, solitude, one of its common elements, has been
widely studied. Once considered a virtue, solitude is "more devalued
than it has been in a long time," says Matthew

Bowker, a psychoanalytic political theorist at Medaille College in
Buffalo, New York, whose work on the collective beliefs that shape our
social and political landscapes includes research into being alone.
Departing from old ways, we moderns rarely see the need to withdraw for
a time and pay attention to what's holy to us---however secular that may
be. "Holy" is not to say religious---the words "healthy" and "whole"
derive from the same root, signifying wider meanings. As I begin this
exploration of our human retreats, I feel like someone who has made an
amazing discovery that no one is interested in. Perhaps it's as Albert
Einstein once said, "I live in that solitude which is painful in youth,
but delicious in the years of maturity." When we're young it's a torment
and we don't see why it's important, when we're middle-aged we're too
busy, and when we're older, we may realize the rich benefits and wish we
had started earlier. Is retreat passé, or is it part of our humanity?
I'm longing to get below the surface discourse to what I see as the
seriousness of retreat; people think it's a holiday when in my
experience, it's about what we value most deeply. Historically in the
West, retreat was religious, for divine and scholarly purposes,
practised by hermits, monks, nuns and pilgrims since the third century
AD. By the industrial age that began around 1760, under the influence of
the Romantics and the Transcendentalists, nature and culture gained on
scripture, and our revisionist retreats---focused on creation rather
than Creation---drew us to the forests, national parks and modern arts
temples for making culture, as well as to museums and galleries for
appreciating it. Since the 1950s, millions seeking a personal experience
of the divine without pews and pulpits have also embraced yoga and
meditation---two spiritual traditions that value retreats and have
radically changed the way modern people take a step back. Our retreats
link to what

we consider sacred, to what transports us beyond our small selves, our
ordinary sense of being in the world, to where the transcendent dwells.
The shift in our Western ways of retreat, away from religion and toward
spirit, nature and culture, was on my mind when one night, I had a vivid
dream. In it, I go to a cathedral with the manuscript for this book,
planning to lay out the chapters in an office just off the main church.
I stride up the wide stone steps, worn by many feet, and open the heavy
wooden door. In the spacious interior my eyes sweep over an expanse of
empty wooden pews, up to the vaulted ceilings and rest on exquisite
light that floods in through the stained-glass windows. I continue to
walk but find my way blocked by a golden chair. Thwarted, I decide to
leave, but find I can't get out: first I exit into a courtyard enclosed
by a black wrought-iron fence, and then into a sunken courtyard with
walls too high to climb. Uneasy now, I walk more quickly and the setting
transforms---into a windowless shopping mall of shining marble that goes
on and on and on. What stays with me now is the image of the church's
illuminated, empty space. And the strangeness that I couldn't find my
way out---is our religion perhaps not wholly deleted? The dream had a
wistful feeling that brings to mind Chen Chen's poem "I'm not a
religious person but": the speaker meets a rookie angel, and then God,
and they play a game of backgammon. When he asks about the afterlife,
the angel and God leave and never return. He misses them, "Like
creatures I made up or found in a book, then got to know a bit." To my
conscious self, the dream's literal-minded,
empty-cathedralstraight-to-the-mall aspect seems simplistic. People are
less religious today, but studies show we're not less spiritual---we're
simply finding new ways to seek meaning. And though religion continues
to decline many people still believe in God, which may or may not be an
omnipotent man with a beard.

Some believers identify as "spiritual but not religious" (SBNR), the
fastest growing faith group in the West, which includes many
millennials. No one actually knows how many Canadians self-identify as
SBNR, writes Anne Bokma in Broadview. Statistics Canada won't ask about
religion on a census until 2021, but about a quarter of Canadians,
nearly eight million, said in 2011 that they had no religious
affiliation, up by 50 percent in the decade since 2001. While in
previous centuries it was unimaginable not to believe in God, today
organized religion has become one possibility among many. In the near
past, when most Western people went to church or synagogue or its
equivalent, the weekly service was a short retreat---a sacred space was
held for us. We knew how to enter and rest in it, guided by rituals we
found meaningful. By studying sacred texts that expressed our faith we
knew how to contemplate greater forces and our own souls. But now
tradition---along with "holy days" away from work, school and everyday
life, outside of ordinary time---has largely vanished. In our more
secular world, retreats can recreate what organized religion offered,
but without the trappings or the traditional beliefs. People have always
needed to step away from their ordinary lives, so the question becomes,
How do we find this space for what's extraordinary ourselves? We've lost
the method, it seems, but not the need. One characteristic of our SBNR
times is we pick and choose what works from different traditions---even
in Christian retreat centres today, it's not unusual to find reiki, tai
chi, yoga or meditation on offer, and many former seminaries have been
repurposed into wellness hotels and ashrams for spiritual retreats.
There is criticism of this trend from many quarters as being
self-indulgent, flaky spiritual materialism. But where some see
spiritual shoppers, I see pioneers. If spirituality is, as I believe,
simply the desire to think deeply, seek meaning and acknowledge life
beyond the

mundane without involving a deity, perhaps a more compelling issue is:
How do we recreate sacred space outside organized religion? Architects
are grappling with a version of this question. "I have not experienced
the miracle of faith, but I have known the miracle of ineffable space,"
said Le Corbusier, whose famous Notre-Dame du Haut in Ronchamp, France,
completed in 1955, marked a watershed moment in the history of modern
religious architecture. The Catholic church had asked for a pure space
without extravagant detail and ornate religious figures. The sculptural
building he created heralded many qualities of contemporary sacred
spaces: ethereal, meditative, with reverence for natural materials and
adaptable for worship and community needs. Like our retreats, church
buildings are becoming more spiritual and less religious, yet they still
offer experiences of timelessness, awe, silence, solitude, devotion, a
place where humans can step closer to a higher power. These sanctuaries
of light, peace and beauty---and often, empty soaring space---correspond
to our own inner cathedrals. The word precedes the world, so our
vocabulary needs reinvention if we are to discuss retreat today. Many
secular people get a rash using the religious words, yet we have few
others to describe our attempts to touch Le Corbusier's "ineffable"
realm. Retreat is the most serviceable word I've found to name
modern-day sacred space. What can we say instead of sacred, divine, God?
Poetry is where language goes to renew itself. It excels at the
unsayable, what's beyond what we have words for, at dwelling in that
liminal space between the everyday and the transcendent. This is the
space retreat also occupies as we reach for something intangible,
greater than ourselves. For ideas I look to Marie Howe, the former poet
laureate of New York and author of Magdalene and other works that
attempt to bring the sacred back into the modern world. Howe, noting
that Shakespeare invented

hundreds of words, says we need a new, non-religious vocabulary. What is
god? she asks. "It doesn't mean anything anymore, how can we even
approach the power that is animating the universe, and all the universes
that might be? We must choose another word, find another way of
describing it that honours the vast unspeakable energy of it whatever it
is . . ." Retreat offers one time-tested and capacious way to link us to
spirit, the Muses, the natural world, and "whatever it is." This helps
us in changeable times, when it's hard to maintain a sense of personal
responsibility and connection to what's most important to us---another
of religion's useful functions that's being swept aside. Against the
backdrop of today's world, the art of retreat seems more relevant than
ever. What's unprecedented at this moment, I believe, and many agree, is
the unhealthy way the hard-wiring of our brains is being exploited by
contemporary forces---notably, technology and commerce. We've become
dangerouslydistracted, a word that comes from the Latin dis (apart) and
trahere (drag), signifying the effect on our thoughts. Silicon Valley
insiders admit that social media companies deliberately make their
products addictive, "like taking behavioural cocaine and just sprinkling
it all over your interface, and that's the thing that keeps you like
coming back and back and back," as former Mozilla and Jawbone employee
Aza Raskin, a leading technology engineer, told the BBC. As a result,
it's becoming easier than ever to confuse a busy life with a rich life,
to swap fleeting interactions for true connection and to squander our
downtime on screen time. There it is, the apple with the bite out of it,
the fall of humanity every time we turn on our computers. Retreat can be
an important way to push back, an act of dissidence that has social and
cultural importance. It's hard to convey to someone who hasn't
experienced it how different, how spacious and embodied, life felt
before we were always turned on.

Having lived roughly half of my life analogue and half digital, I can
tell you there's been a rapid decline in both the ability to find quiet
space and the value we accord it. The transformation has been swift and
decisive, and dates from when we got our first cellphones, intensified
by the arrival of social media. Expectations about solitude and inner
space, and the place of interiority in our lives, have undergone a sea
change. Collective amnesia about paying attention has swept over us with
incredible speed. The new age arrived for me one afternoon in the 1980s
when I heard a loud voice on my way home, near Barton Avenue in Toronto.
I glanced up to see a well-dressed man walking a large black dog. Was he
addressing Rex? The man held something about the size of a brick in his
hand, which was in fact a phone. I remember the scene clearly, my first
taste of an experience that's commonplace now that connectivity has
become our default: being held captive to one side of a conversation.
The ongoing invasion of my cognitive space that dates from this moment
on feels like an infringement on my freedom. It leaves me with a new
mood of anxiety, a destabilizing sense of permeability, like my windows
are stuck open and the wind is blowing in and disturbing my peace---or
often, extracting it. Rings, pings, yet another data breach warning or
phishing attempt, or emails about spray-on hair regrowth products and
nail fungus remover, vexatious dinner conversations punctuated by
cellphone calls, texts and searches for forgotten facts, or my
incredulity as people walk babies past my house in carriages, engrossed
by another new face we're always looking into---our screens. Not long
ago, knowledge seemed both pleasure and power, before a mind-numbing
flood of information made clear thinking elusive. This flood makes
my---our---limited attention a valuable commodity, one many are
aggressively monetizing, prompting calls for us to "Join the Attention
Resistance." For me, solutions like apps that block social media---on

smartphones specifically designed to be addictive---or short digital
detoxes aren't nearly enough to restore my cognitive quiet. I have to
close my windows, return to myself, and from time to time retreat
physically to allow my headspace to clear of sensory pollution.
Headspace: what I once thought was an inviolable sanctuary. Neurologist
Oliver Sacks wrote in his essay "The Machine Stops" that our gadgets
have "now immersed us in a virtual reality far denser, more absorbing,
and even more dehumanizing" than ever. Clutching a device every minute
means we have "given up, to a great extent, the amenities and
achievements of civilization: solitude and leisure, the sanction to be
oneself, truly absorbed, whether in contemplating a work of art, a
scientific theory, a sunset, or the face of one's beloved." This sounds
antique, even to me, though I agree wholeheartedly. Sacks, as a
scientist, feared what "being caught in a flutter of ephemeral,
everchanging sensations" is doing to people without a memory of "how
things were before, no immunity to the seductions of digital life. What
we are seeing---and bringing on ourselves---resembles a neurological
catastrophe on a gigantic scale." He wrote these words while facing his
own imminent death, from cancer, in 2015. With his dire warning, he also
dared to hope we'd get a grip, for the health of humankind and the
planet. Yet our new conditioning makes it acceptable that our solitude
is swept away, and our data harvested, as we gorge on Likes like rats in
an experiment gulping down reward pellets of food. Privacy is no longer
a "social norm," said Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg. We seem heedless to
the disturbing machinations of corporations that exploit how we are
hardwired to connect. That many computer executives bring up their
children technology-free, and founded organizations to educate about its
dark side, should be a warning. In China, there's now a state-organized
system of social credits, which rewards and punishes routine behaviours,

giving "good" people perks, such as discounts or the ability to jump
medical queues, and banning "bad" people from buying so much as an
airplane ticket. Add to the forces of conformity that our lives are more
and more virtual: in ways never experienced in human history, we're
losing touch with the material world, with experience and embodied life,
with what's real. As I said earlier, I do recognize that a busy, social
life can also be rich, full of enlightenment. Nothing can replace the
magic and meaning of friendship and familial love, and we are, after
all, social animals. But my subject is the ignored yin side of our
experience, without which life is incomplete. Unlike other animals, we
seek meaning. It's as though we're choosing to live in half of our
houses, just when the urgency of preserving a sacred precinct for
whatever we love is high, and new technology is penetrating every corner
of our lives. We rarely stop to consider the implications of giving up
control---of our time, and our attention. Addicted to gadgets and one
another, our inner lives wither, work blurs into free time, creativity
and new ideas are crowded out, and privacy disappears---we're the most
tracked and surveilled people in history now that we all have a computer
in our pockets. Google Earth easily invaded my sanctuary: anyone can go
online and see the bridge and the blue roof of my cabin. Your wi-fi
router could spy on you, watching you breathe and monitoring your
heartbeat. Worst of all, we're bombarded with information and confused,
unable to discern who is telling us what, and why. Given today's world,
to retreat may seem a counterintuitive response. People tend to dismiss
retreat as a way of escaping engagement. But why should social action
and taking a step back be mutually exclusive? In fact, they are
complementary. Activists, social workers and engaged others know the
importance of not burning out, and all of us benefit from a measured

response rather than a reaction---which only serves to make us feel
we're doing something. Reactiveness, in my view, is a more common form
of avoidance than retreating. It's often painful to be in reality, to
stay present. In poet Karen Solie's The Caiplie Caves, a seventh-century
Scottish hermit considers a question still relevant today, whether to
live a contemplative life or an active life. Solie writes, "To make our
own the righteous anger/that keeps some people alive/feels like doing
something/so grief and fear don't stir/under their blanket, don't open
their eyes." On retreat, we're challenged to look squarely at our
reactiveness and our vulnerability, charged with making sure life
doesn't escape us, and with taking a longer view. In doing so we're
likely to encounter the sublime, the nightmarish and everything in
between---in a word, totality. Retreat is far from the only remedy, or
the only way to push back against the life-diminishing aspects of our
age, and to make space for and amplify what has meaning. But in this
moment---when mystery, beauty, truth, sanity, independent thought and
even unmediated experiences are viewed as unimportant in a secular,
speedy, capitalistic and technologyobsessed world---its role, its
meaning and place in our lives is a pressing question. Our brains will
adapt to changes, but are we adapting in ways that are good for us, for
other people, and the planet? Along with sacred space---and not
unrelated, I believe---much that's precious is disappearing: ice is
melting, species are dying, silence is being swallowed by noise and even
dark skies are becoming a thing of the past. Unparalleled in human
history are the conditions of environmental peril, the desecration of
the sanctuary, for lack of non-religious words. These are high-stakes
times, yet we're more distracted, can't discern the difference between
what's new and what's important and fall prey to misuse of technology
and unreliable information in our post-truth age.

What's irreplaceable is vanishing. Once it's gone, will we ever remember
we needed it, or loved it? Will we be gone too? Under these conditions
retreat can be seen as both a space to cultivate vital peace and
perspective, and as a radical act of refusal. Poet Mary Oliver, known
for her lucid wisdom---when not being disparaged for her "accessible"
work, that is---reminded us of one of the greatest gifts of retreating.
"To pay attention," she wrote, "this is our endless and proper work."
For centuries, the retreat, which has its roots in Buddhist, Chinese,
Hindu and Western philosophies, has offered a way to cultivate an inner
life and wisdom. Tension has always existed between the social and the
solitary, action versus contemplation. And while the value of developing
inner calm in a world in crisis might seem evident, it now requires an
effort of conscious will to step out of the fast-moving stream. It also
requires time, and a place to go. Parents of young children, caregivers,
or those who can't afford time away from work can't easily retreat, but
that doesn't mean it is for only the privileged few. (Many places, such
as yoga ashrams and arts residencies, recognizing retreat's importance,
offer work-study programs, bursaries and scholarships.) Once our
survival needs are met, according to psychologist Abraham Maslow's
hierarchy of needs, other innate needs---for love, belonging and
meaning---begin to motivate our actions. We become "self-actualizing"
individuals, who experience "peak experiences" of the kind often found
on retreat, characterized by wonder, beauty, awe and the feeling of
being connected to the cosmos. These in turn give rise to a sense of
purpose and greater happiness. The desire to retreat is constant
throughout recorded history in all places and religions. Always for
nonconformists, it is, as ever, today being

embraced by those who want to reclaim freedom to just be, spend time
outdoors in nature, make art, think deeply, tend their spiritual life,
heal--- and often, marshal energies for future action. The link between
the history of retreat and seeking wisdom is clear: early exemplars
include Buddha meditating under the Bodhi tree alone, Jesus fasting in
the Sinai desert wilderness for 40 days and 40 nights being tempted by
the devil, and Muhammad, who withdrew periodically to his mountain cave
retreat near Mecca for Ramadan. All these retreats from the everyday
world brought revelations. China's hermits took to the mountains,
India's ancient rishis retired from society, the Christian desert
fathers and mothers lived in remote, solitary caves and intrepid Celtic
monks of antiquity in the British Isles withdrew to remote and wild
places. Countless other religious figures, ancient and contemporary---as
well as artists, thinkers, scientists, adventurers and anonymous
solitary spirits over the centuries who we know nothing about---have
taken a step back, recognizing that retreat leads to transformation.
Since time immemorial, people have consulted the man on the mountain, or
the wise woman healer---because we think they have wisdom to offer us,
perspective gained from their vantage point on the margin. Retreat, we
believe, is a tested approach for gaining insight in seclusion, which
can then be shared with society. Retreat. I wish there were another
word, free of the baggage of Western prejudice about passivity and
weakness. Nothing could be further from the truth. Retreat is an inner
adventure, a foray into the unknown. Loosening our habitual patterns
leads to change: we retreat to advance, returning with new ideas and
deliberate actions that enhance collective life. It's just the opposite
of turning a blind eye.

What exactly do I mean by retreat? Basically, it's a voluntary,
temporary step back from everyday life, either alone (a remote cabin),
or in a community of like-minded people (a yoga retreat), with a
purpose. But it's more nuanced than that. The Oxford English Dictionary
defines "retreat" as "a quiet or secluded place in which one can rest
and relax." The word originates from the Latin retrahere, to "draw back,
withdraw, call back," and the old French retret. Retreat as "a step
backward" is first recorded circa 1300, as "a military signal for
retiring from action or exercise" in the late 14th century, as a "place
of seclusion" from the early 15th century on, and as a "period of
retirement for religious self-examination" from 1756. Retreat as an
"establishment for mentally ill persons"---another word for an asylum---
appears in 1797. Also related is the word sanctuary, which derives from
the Old French sanctuaire, from Latin sanctuarium, from sanctus, or
"holy." Retreat has a double meaning: it is a place and also an act of
independence, linked to rest, seclusion and self-examination. The Greek
word temenos better captures the expanded idea of what I mean by
retreat: it's a sacred precinct set apart from common uses and life.
Temenos is a sanctuary, or holy grove, or enclosure dedicated to a
deity. For Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung, it was a sacred space and
container for your own inner work, a safe place for soul-making---in his
case, Bollingen Tower, where he spent several months each year and said
he felt "in the midst of my true life" and "most deeply myself." By
establishing a protected temenos, we can meet ourselves and, Jung
writes, "isolation, so uncanny before, is now endowed with meaning and
purpose, and thus robbed of its terrors." The fruits of inner work in
this extraordinary space are meant to be shared with the world. The
Chinese idea of retreat as a strategic step back is also valuable, and
runs counter to Western ideas---we tend to think of retreat as running
away.

The Chinese sense is described in the I Ching: in its conception of
reality, chance is immensely important, while the causality of Western
science is barely noticed. "Just as causality described the sequence of
events, so synchronicity to the Chinese mind deals with the coincidence
of events," wrote Jung in his introduction to this ancient book.
Intrigued, I decided to consult the I Ching Online about the best
approach to this book and tossed the virtual coins six times. Each toss
defines one line of a hexagram, built from the bottom up. In an example
of synchronicity, out of 64 possible hexagrams, the answer I received
was 33, Retreat, which relates to a balance of natural forces, the yin
and the yang of existence: "Mountain under heaven: the image of retreat.
Thus the superior man keeps the inferior man at a distance, not angrily
but with reserve. Unwavering will to remain persevering and not submit."
Retreat, then, is not a forced flight of the weak, but a tactical
withdrawal of the strong. "The power of the dark is ascending," the text
continues. "The light retreats to security, so that the dark cannot
encroach upon it. This retreat is a matter not of man's will but of
natural law. Therefore in this case withdrawal is proper; it is the
correct way to behave in order not to exhaust one's forces." Retreat as
a remedy in dark times is an ancient idea, which entails drawing back at
the right time and in the right way, not trying to force anything, but
"persevering in small matters," maintaining solidarity and resistance
until conditions change. Retreat lets us cultivate what sustains us,
focus on what we love, guard our flames of humanity and marshal our
forces with "unwavering will" to never submit---the essence of its
dissident power. More than just moving away from chaos, to retreat
expresses our human desire to connect to something larger: the
spiritual, the natural world or transcendence through arts and culture,
and often, an interweaving of all these.

I discovered the potential of retreat inadvertently, and over time. When
I was in my twenties, I holed up in a tiny cabin in the jungle in Costa
Rica for two weeks. I'd gone from being a keen journalism school
graduate to a bored fashion magazine freelancer in just over a year and
wanted a quiet time out for life strategizing. I chose the Cabañas
Escondidas purely for the name, flew to San José, and caught a packed
Easter-holiday bus over the Mountain of Death and down a dirt road along
the Pacific coast. Descending in a cloud of dust in front of a locked
gate, I sat on my suitcase smoking as I watched the red sun sink into
the sea. Eventually my host pulled up in her truck in the pitch dark and
said portentously, "I'll take you to the other side." We drove across
the road and up the mountain in the warm darkness. I had no company at
my lofty cabana, except for the hummingbird that woke me each morning
with a whir of wings as it investigated my stick of incense and searched
the upturned broom for bugs. Red crabs climbed up from the shore,
rustling in the dry leaves. My perch was wild and inspiring, with a
clear view of the sea below. I worked into the tropical nights on my
first fiction-writing project, wrote my earliest poems. I considered how
to jump the journalism tracks to do more of this once I got home. I
still have a photo of that cabana on the shelf in my study, framed like
a credential. It reminds me of a dreamspace I entered, alone and free to
imagine. Retreat is not an orderly progression, where you meet the
curriculum and get your PhD. Its benefits are deep and hard to measure,
and often things don't go as planned. I thought I was at Cabañas
Escondidas to consider my next move in journalism, but that wasn't quite
it. From that time on I valued solitude---though it took me decades to
really protect it--- and my notebook morphed: interviews in the front,
and new creative experiments in the back.

When I got home from my cabana my fashionista magazine colleagues were
mostly interested in my tan, how it improved my look, and my weight loss
plan (eating mangoes from the trees and little else). But they were also
curious about the solo nature of my trip. Weren't you afraid? they
asked. I certainly had moments: like when I heard a rustling and my
flashlight beam picked out a rearing snake that slithered back into the
dark jungle behind my cabin. I didn't know it then, but I'd planted the
seed of a life-changing discovery: time away from everyday life, alone
or with like-minded others, yields insights, clarity, inspiration and
agency. "The being one creates of oneself" is what Alice Koller calls
this in The Stations of Solitude, her book about the stopping places
where we make choices about the life we want and the person we want to
be. "In this, Sartre is surely right: persons are not born but made. The
choice lies inescapably within ourselves: we may let it wither away, or
we may take it and run." Koller, who has a doctorate of philosophy from
Harvard University, is author of An Unknown Woman, a surprise bestseller
in the '60s that was based on her three months on an island in
Nantucket, with her dog for company. Philosophers since Kant have
distinguished two aspects of freedom, she writes, "Not duplicitous
because of its two faces but rather whole like the moon, all of whose
sides we can at last see. Free: not only having no restraints but also
being self-governing according to laws of your own choosing." Being
alone well is something Koller describes as "luxuriously immersed in
doings of your own choice, aware of the fullness of your own presence
rather than of the absence of others." Solitude is an achievement, she
adds. "It is your distinctive way of embodying the purposes you have
chosen for your life, deciding on these rather than others after
deliberately

observing and reflecting on your own doing and inclinings, then
committing yourself to them for precisely these reasons." What has
inspired people, ancient and modern, to retreat? Conveniently, the three
most illuminating sources I found to answer this question approached it
from multiple perspectives: a philosopher, a Christian solitude seeker
and writer, and a psychologist. I was fascinated to see how much their
findings about solitude, a common element of a retreat, overlapped. At
its most basic, stepping back can be a simple break. "Escaping to such a
solitary place---often called a retreat---provides respite, relief, a
time for healing of wounds," writes Philip Koch in Solitude: A
Philosophical Encounter. But, he warns, it's not just a way to restore
ourselves so we may return to the frenetic lifestyles and social contact
that many think is the real meaning of human existence. Koch, having
read through 25 centuries of literary reflections on solitude---Lao-Tzu
to Sappho, Petrarch, Teresa of Ávila, Montaigne, Percy Shelley, Thoreau
and Proust---attributes to it five main virtues. These are tributaries
that flow through one another, and illustrate what retreat offers beyond
restoration of the spirit. These virtues, which apply equally to
retreat, are freedom, attunement to self, attunement to nature,
reflective perspective and creativity. In How to Be Alone, author Sara
Maitland, a self-described "AngloCatholic, socialist feminist," observes
that over the centuries, people who retreated gave surprisingly
consistent reports of its rewards. She describes the joys of solitude as
consciousness of the self, attunement to nature, creativity, freedom,
and in place of Koch's "reflective perspective," she puts "relationship
with the transcendent (the numinous, the divine, the spiritual)." For
psychologist Anthony Storr, imagination, individuality, healing, the
search for coherence and the desire and pursuit of the whole are the
main

reasons for retreat. "Removing oneself voluntarily from one's habitual
environment promotes self-understanding and contact with those inner
depths of being which elude one in the hurly burly of day-to-day life,"
he writes in Solitude: A Return to the Self. The value of time alone
increases for people later in life, he adds, and the capacity to be
alone is especially vital when changes of mental attitude are required,
such as bereavement, divorce or other calamities. Retreating from the
crowd has always been the way of outliers. Hermits, monks, pilgrims,
meditators and spiritual seekers aren't the only ones who withdrew into
silence and solitude; traditionally, artists, composers, writers,
philosophers and creative thinkers of all kinds have also been vocal
proponents of time alone, which is why they're overrepresented in all
explorations of the art of retreat. That's not to say retreat and
inspiration are limited to these exemplars---in my mind, they serve as
stand-ins for anyone who can benefit from taking a purposeful step back.
"We must reserve a little back-shop, all our own, entirely free, wherein
to establish our true liberty and principal retreat and solitude,"
advised 16th-century essayist Michel de Montaigne. "In solitude alone
can be known true freedom." Cultivating a well-stocked mind, he
believed, is also a protection, because all troubles can be endured if
you have rich inner resources. (On the frequent occasions when people
tell me they'd be bored on retreat I admit I wonder snarkily about their
well-stocked minds.) Goethe echoes this idea: "One can be instructed in
society, one is inspired only in solitude." This was true for him
personally: "Nothing will change the fact that I cannot produce the
least thing without absolute solitude." Mozart too: "When I am . . .
completely myself, entirely alone, and of good cheer . . . it is on such
occasions that ideas flow best and most abundantly." "The happiest of
all lives is a busy solitude," said Voltaire. Thoreau called solitude
"medicine to the soul."

Retreat can also be a powerful feminist statement. "A woman must have
money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction," famously wrote
Virginia Woolf. "I care for myself. The more solitary, the more
friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself,"
declares Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre. Emily Carr painted her most
powerful works in British Columbia's coastal forests while retreating in
an old caravan. Aviator and author Anne Lindbergh left family and career
obligations for a beachside cottage, where she penned the classic Gift
from the Sea, concluding, "Every person, especially every woman, should
be alone sometime during the year, some part of each week, and each
day." May Sarton, in her Journal of a Solitude, wrote: "I am here alone
for the first time in weeks, to take up my 'real' life again at last.
That is what is strange ---that friends, even passionate love, are not
my real life unless there is time alone in which to explore and to
discover what is happening or has happened." Anne LaBastille wrote of
her retreat in the Adirondacks her Woodswoman memoirs: "the cabin is the
wellspring, the source, the hub of my existence. It gives me
tranquility, a closeness of nature and wildlife, good health and
fitness, a sense of security, the opportunity for resourcefulness,
reflection and creative thinking. . . ." Running parallel to the long
history of enthusiastic retreaters is the other track: objectors who
view it with fear, loathing or ambivalence. Settling into silence,
solitude---alone or communal, for a weekend or a month---and its new
routines can be strange, even scary at first. Resistance arises: we get
bored, fear missing out or not having others to reinforce our sense of
self, feel upset about wasting time and not being productive, a sin in
our capitalist, Puritan-influenced reality, and ultimately, quiet and
emptiness make us anxious, being not unrelated to death---the only thing
many people fear more than being alone.

Humans are so contradictory: in our society we value independence, yet
we are either terrified of being by ourselves or we don't value solitude
or retreat. No wonder people today find themselves alone and
panic---it's unfamiliar. When was the last time you spent 24 hours alone
voluntarily? Solitude makes us uncomfortable so we don't retreat, and
because we never retreat, we lack the skill. French philosopher Blaise
Pascal famously wrote in the 15th century, "All of men's miseries derive
from not being able to sit quiet in a room alone." This was prescient:
noting that few studies had been done on "simply letting people go off
and think," researcher Timothy Wilson of the University of Virginia
tested 700-plus people in 11 experiments in 2014. His findings? Most
subjects would rather inflict a mild electric shock on themselves than
be alone with their thoughts for six to fifteen minutes. How Pascal
would cringe to see our agitation when the Internet is down or there's
no cell signal, and marvel to know that one-third of young people
surveyed said that marooned on a desert island, they would rather go
without sex than their smartphone. People's fear of boredom, other
studies demonstrated, is on par with their fear of cancer. Discoveries
like these make me want to institute conscription, so people are
required to retreat periodically and develop interiority, which steadies
and enriches. Of course I'd think that: for me, the need to withdraw
feels as strong as the need to be social. Over the years I've often felt
guilty about declining an invitation because I wanted to rest, or read,
or simply take a bath. It's akin to admitting you're a crank. Privately
though, I'd wonder how in the scheme of things time spent alone is
somehow vastly inferior to drinking downtown with friends, which is
social. I'd wonder, Am I weird, or just independent? Is it really always
better to be with others than by oneself? What about a healthy need to
be alone, to be self-reliant or to make space for individual
differences?

Meanings get blurry whenever we begin to talk about solitude and
silence---common elements of retreat, which are known to promote
clarity, inspiration and conversations with the self, the Muses or God.
"The state of being or living alone; solitariness," is how the Canadian
Oxford English Dictionary defines solitude. Yet even early hermits, the
most solitary and ascetic of retreaters, were not fully alone. They had
supporters to bring food, took time out from cave life to teach and even
had visitors---think of the many depictions of white-bearded friends
St. Anthony and St. Paul the Hermit, accompanied by the raven who
brought a loaf of bread to their cave each day. Nearer in time there's
that icon of solitude, the poet William Wordsworth, who "wandered lonely
as a cloud"---accompanied by his sister, Dorothy, with whom he saw the
"golden daffodils." Muddying the waters more we use often use solitude
interchangeably with related words such as loneliness, isolation,
privacy, and alienation, when they're not the same thing. Loneliness is
solitude with issues. In Koch's Solitude: A Philosophical Encounter, he
examines the unique characteristics of solitude, which he refers to as
voluntary time apart, and tries to define it. "A solitude is a stretch
of experience disengaged from other people in perception, thought,
emotion and action," he writes. Koch's emphasis on disengagement from
others, as opposed to complete isolation, takes in the truth that people
can be alone together. Later Koch adjusts "disengagement" to the idea of
"indirect engagement." In this way he recognizes a paradoxical truth
that applies equally to a retreat: even when we're alone, we're always
in relationship. Definitions of silence are similarly slippery. "The
absence of sound or noise," says the Canadian Oxford English Dictionary,
and "abstinence from, or renunciation of speech, especially as a
religious vow or payment of respect to a deceased person or group." So
an absence of sound or speech. Yet to me, and many others, silence is
the absence of human-made sounds,

like voices, or engines from airplanes flying over my cabin, but not
natural sounds, like wind in pines. Silence is always defined in
negative terms, of what it is not---when in my experience, there's rich
inner space, something in the void. To complicate matters further,
"There's no such thing as silence," says composer and Zen meditator John
Cage, who enacted this in his conceptual work "4'33"": a pianist sat
down and made no sound for four and a half minutes. "You could hear the
wind stirring outside during the first movement," Cage says, recalling
the 1952 premiere. "During the second, raindrops began pattering the
roof, and during the third people themselves made all kinds of
interesting sounds as they talked or walked out." Even in the deep
silence of an anechoic chamber, we hear the sounds of our own breathing
and digestion and heartbeat. And what about silence as the lack of a
response? Conflicting definitions aside, human beings tend to distrust
loners, a term usually reserved for serial killers, and stigma is a
given for anyone seeking interludes of solitude and silence---or
especially, a life of it. I come from a long line of Scottish
contrarians, which means I'm insulated from the sting of judgment about
my episodic retreats, but society does seem to hold that no one normal,
especially a woman, is alone on purpose. Spinster is an insult, though
in medieval times it meant someone, usually a woman, who was
self-supporting from spinning well. Maybe prejudices will change given
that living alone has actually become the Western norm, the biggest
demographic shift since the Baby Boom. In Canada for the first time in
our history, a phenomenon mirrored in Europe and the United States, more
people live in one-person households than in any other arrangement.
"Wherever there is affluence, and a welfare state, people use their
resources to get places of their own," says sociologist Eric Klinenberg,
author of Going Solo: The Extraordinary Rise and Surprising Appeal of

Living Alone. This trend is not negative, he says, nor is it the cause
of the terrible epidemic of loneliness in the West, a modern malady with
complex causes. "We need to make a distinction between living alone and
being alone, or being isolated, or feeling lonely. These are all
different things. In fact, people who live alone tend to spend more time
socializing with friends and neighbors than people who are married. So
one thing I learned is that living alone is not an entirely solitary
experience. It's generally a quite social one." And yet the ignominy of
going solo remains: Carmen Callil, 73, a British publisher who is
founder of the feminist Virago Press, told the Guardian about her
experiences, "Living alone means freedom, never being bored, going to
bed at eight if I feel like it." But, she adds, there are great tediums.
"Men---Auberon Waugh and Lord Longford spring to mind---have
occasionally insisted to my face that I was lesbian. I felt this to be
an insult to women who are lesbians as well as to myself. I hate getting
invitations addressed to 'Carmen Callil & Friend' and am often tempted
to bring my dog." In the same article, TV presenter Alex Zane, 33, said
that living alone balances his busy social and professional life: "It's
not about selfishness, just knowing what you like and doing what you
want without having to take another person into account." Then he added
apologetically, anticipating criticism, "I know how selfish this
sounds." Equating being alone with being selfish is a common objection
to solitude, and to retreat. But if time alone is simply a counterpoint
to everyday time spent with others, as I suspect, why the judgments? For
one thing, it's that confusion of loneliness, isolation and alienation,
which are painful states, with chosen aloneness, which is glorious. "The
cure for loneliness is solitude," observes poet Marianne Moore with
incision. Are there, perhaps, prerequisites for solitude to be
beneficial? Yes, says Kenneth Rubin, a developmental psychologist at the
University of

Maryland. His study found it must be voluntary, people have to be able
to regulate their emotions and join a social group when desired, and
they must have existing positive relationships. "Aloneness implies a
conscious choice by the individual for quiet solitude, and doesn't carry
with it the negative emotional conditions associated with loneliness,"
Rubin notes. Ancient fears about being alone, however, run deep. People
feel time alone is unnatural because humans evolved as social animals.
Evolutionary theory, social anthropology and archeology confirm that
we're a social species that survived by cooperating. So being banished
from the huntergatherer group on the savannah in equatorial Africa meant
death: no more group hunting, opportunities for reproduction or security
from predators. As the medieval French proverb clarifies, "Homme seul
est viande aux loups!" ("A man alone is meat for wolves!") Fear of being
ostracized may go back to our tribal origins, but philosophy and
theology have often reinforced the idea in our imaginations that
solitude---and by extension, retreat---is bad. In the ancient Greek
world, execution was the only punishment worse than exile. Think of
Prometheus chained to the side of a remote mountain for stealing fire
and giving it to mortals: having an eagle eat his liver every day only
for it to regrow would have been considered the secondary punishment.
Solitaries were occasionally praised but mostly frowned upon. Aristotle
said in the fourth century BC that the highest good is contemplation.
But he also maintained, "The man who is isolated, who is unable to share
in the benefits of political association, or has no need to share
because he is already selfsufficient, is no part of the polis, and
therefore must be either a beast or a god." Biblical sources exert a
strong influence. In the creation story in the Old Testament, God makes
the world and each time says it is good---until the sixth day, with
Adam: "And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man

should be alone: I will make him an help meet for him." So he creates
Eve. "Woe to him that is alone! For, if he falleth, there is none to
raise him up." But what if it's the case that just as we have an
instinct to herd together, we have a drive to seek time apart? Is
retreat just for outliers, or can everyone benefit? Psychologists pose a
similar question: Do humans need solitude as much as sociability? While
studies have led to different conclusions, there's agreement that
solitude has benefits, and that variables, such as personality traits
and stage of life, affect how much a person needs to be alone. Also
relevant to ideas around retreat, psychologists emphasize that in the
past, too much focus has been placed on relationships. Yes, love and
friendship make life worthwhile, but they are not the only source of
happiness. Solitude, which is about the relationship with oneself, is
the other side of the coin. Many modern scientists say solitude is as
basic a human need as being social, but that we give it short shrift. In
Koch's Solitude, a delightfully thoughtful book, he maintains that both
solitude and engagement are essential for becoming a fully developed
human. I was surprised to find a reproduction of the yin/yang diagram in
a chapter titled "Images of Solitude," which he used to portray "the
proper places of solitude and encounter in a human life." Solitude also
improves relationships, he writes, because even when alone, we often
focus on others. "In many ways the virtues of solitude find their
completion in encounter." Similarly, clinical psychologist Ester Schaler
Buchholz writes in The Call of Solitude: Alonetime in a World of
Attachment, "Aloneness is a biological and psychological essential and
just as important as the heavily documented need for attachment." This,
she says, has obscured the need for solitude for our development in both
children and adults. If we're unable to be alone or don't make room for
it in our lives, she adds, we hamper our "ability to find a sense of
inner ease, at best, or at worst, end up dependent on others or drugs in
unhealthy ways." Buchholz, like Koch, believes

solitude strengthens our attachments, and that everyone needs time
alone, not just the select few---though in different amounts.
"Regardless of the dosage, solitude is a deep, soothing, and persistent
call in life." Modern psychoanalysts have long focused solely on
relationships as a sign of emotional maturity, while ignoring the
ability to be alone. "The burden of value with which we are at present
loading interpersonal relationships is too heavy for those fragile craft
to carry," writes psychiatrist Storr in Solitude: A Return to the Self.
Many of history's greatest thinkers and artists spent most of their time
on work and not on relationships, he says, which is just as meaningful.
He examined the lives of artists to see what he could learn for all of
us, and notes that "a retreat from the crowds has always been necessary
for the formulation of brave new ideas." The need for solitude is
important for society, he adds, not just because it improves our
relationships with others, but so we can be at peace with ourselves. And
it's not just for artists and the gifted---all people need to realize
that love and friendship are not the only source of happiness. We have
been very slow to embrace these ideas. The first to identify the ability
to be alone as a vital sign of maturity in emotional development was
Donald Woods Winnicott, an English pediatrician who became a
psychoanalyst, in his 1958 classic paper, "The Capacity to Be Alone." He
called for investigation into the positive aspects of solitude---versus
the fear or wish to be alone, which was already well documented. An
infant's quiet time with all needs satisfied in the presence of the
mother, or mother surrogate, Winnicott suggested, is the origin of the
ability to be alone comfortably in adulthood. Without this the
experience of positive silence can't develop, which leads in later life
to a false self that complies with wishes of others, versus acting on
authentic feelings or instinctive needs. Some development of the
capacity to be alone, Storr echoes, "is necessary if the brain is to
function at its best, and for humans to fulfill their

highest potential. Human beings easily become alienated from their own
deepest needs and feelings. Learning, thinking, innovation, and
maintaining contact with one's own inner world are all facilitated by
solitude." A retreat is always both a step away from something---a noisy
world, perhaps---and a step toward something---a simple rest, or time to
focus on what's of passionate importance to us, like the hermits of old
who retreated to the desert to become "wholly aflame." I don't think it
is a coincidence that I began to retreat at more regular intervals when
digital technologies arrived and the world sped up. Or that I retreated
in greater earnest---alone, with my partner and as part of a
group---when I turned 40, the life stage at which it begins to hold
greater appeal. Midlife is when we typically realize we have not been
marching to our own drum. The long span of life after the reproductive
years has significance. "It is then that the impersonal comes to assume
a greater importance for the average person, although seeds of such
interests may have been present from the earliest years," Storr says. In
my case these seeds were present, though I wasn't aware of it.
Counter-culture millennials, it seems to me, discovered the benefits of
solitude and retreat early in life. With a reputation for being
hyperconnected, many also know the value of unplugging, even prompting
talk of "the rise of millennial hermits." As well, youthful "rubber
tramps," who live in vans and cars, and cloud-connected millennial
"hobos" are leaving society behind for a time. Swedish environmental
activist Greta Thunberg, 16, surprised me with her reply when asked by a
reporter what she would miss about being on the water, having sailed
from England to New York for a climate summit. "To not have contact with
anyone, and to just literally sit for hours and stare at the ocean, not
doing anything," she said. "To be in this wilderness, the ocean, and see
the beauty of it."

Myself, I stepped back at times in my twenties and thirties, mostly to
consider career dissatisfaction. I tried meditation retreats too, which
made some impression, though my life remained chaotic. In my forties I
went on nature and yoga retreats and got calmer, and in my fifties, I
widened my repertoire to include artistic retreats, sometimes in
religious places that welcomed outsiders. Like many people, for years my
work was not my vocation. Retreats helped me to keep my inner flames
alive, and gradually provided needed oxygen for the shift toward a more
spacious and passionate life. Given the evidence that we can all
benefit, I began to wonder about an optimal dosage. What influences how
much is right for each of us? "The events of early childhood, inherited
gifts and capacities, temperamental differences, and a host of other
factors may influence where individuals turn predominantly toward others
or toward solitude to find the meaning of their lives," according to
Storr. Temperament is a well-studied aspect of personality that
influences our need for time apart. The idea that psychological types,
introverts and extraverts, shape our individual needs for solitude is
well accepted by psychologists. Recent research shows that the types
relate to one's sensitivity to stimulation. Extraverts are motivated
from the outside and directed by external, objective factors and
relationships. Introverts, on the contrary, are motivated from within
and directed by inner, subjective factors. For extraverts, psychic
energy flows outwards toward the world, while for introverts, energy is
withdrawn from the world. Jung believed these tendencies coexist in us,
and when either is exaggerated, it leads to neurosis. "Extreme
extraversion led to the individual losing his own identity in the press
of people and events," Storr explains. "Extreme introversion threatened
the subjectively preoccupied individual with loss of contact with
external reality."

It's fascinating how our societal preferences swing. Especially in the
1950s and 1960s it was deemed more desirable to be an introvert, notes
Merve Emre, the author of The Personality Brokers: The Strange History
of Myers-Briggs and the Birth of Personality Testing, who taught English
at McGill University in Montreal. "There was something very suspicious
about the extravert," Emre writes. "The extravert is the people-pleaser,
the social man, the superficial one. And the introvert is the serious,
creative intellectual who commands respect because he or she will not
change herself to meet the demands of others." This flipped in the
1970s, Emre believes, and since then we've lived in the age of the
extravert "with a strong bias towards a person who is incredibly
flexible with their personality and who can change themselves to meet
the demands of any given situation. In some ways it is because that's
what is utterly necessary to succeed in today's economy, right? You have
to be a kind of constantly flexible labourer." Notably, not all cultures
have an extravert ideal: one study compared eight- and ten-year-olds in
Shanghai and Southern Ontario and found that shy and sensitive children
are shunned by their peers in Canada, but are sought-after playmates in
China. Today, with modern scientists saying we all benefit from time
alone to dip our toes into our imaginary Ganges or withdraw for a
mountain interlude, retreat has much to offer modern people---religious,
spiritual and secular. Even Superman had the Fortress of Solitude, where
he went to take a break from saving the planet. The fortress's existence
was secret from all but his closest allies, such as Lois Lane and
Batman. Originally, his refuge was depicted as being built into a
mountain on the edge of Metropolis. It was also styled as a castle in a
wasteland, and located in the Arctic, though it appeared in other wild
places---Antarctica, the Andes, the Amazon rainforest. The Fortress of
Solitude was the only place Superman could

truly be himself: only there could he openly display statues of his
parents holding kryptonite. In one way we all experience retreat every
day. Nature insists we enter the solitude and silence of sleep for a
third of our lives. Though we know more about it than ever, no one can
say with certainty why we sleep, except that it has to do with
restoration. It's the yin element of life, without which we're wakeful,
exhausted, impoverished---which hints at the role of retreat in our
modern lives. "Were there no darkness to restore the soul," writes Czech
philosopher Erazim Kohák, "humans would quickly burn out their finite
store of dreams." So how in the 21st century can we take a temporary
step back? Where do we find the seclusion of deep mountains and hidden
valleys--- geographies both inner and outer?

The Old Ways Of Hermit Caves, Monasteries and Pilgrim Paths

A Hut of One's Own To live as a hermit is to be untrammelled by the
things of the world; it is like drawing a length of bamboo out from a
dense thicket. ---Kyobutsu, 13th-century hijiri (Japanese wandering
monk)

I'm looking out the window of my rented hermitage in Scotland's
northwest Highlands, a place apart. Open sky, the round-shouldered
mountain and the shining loch appear in painterly swathes of blue and
brown. Sheep and

lambs dot the dun spring fields, and in the hermitage's small garden,
high winds are blasting the daffodils. The Scottish Gaelic word cuilidh
means a retreat, or a quiet place that affords privacy. The way of the
hermit is solitary---or more accurately, on the solitary end of the
spectrum. Hermits are less alone than we usually imagine: even the most
ascetic in desert caves had social interactions, and communities of
hermits have long been the norm. Myself, I plan to experience full days
of hermit time in this small stone cottage, sharing meals and evenings
with Marco, my like-minded companion, with whom I have often retreated
over our long marriage. Of all the "old ways" of retreat, being a hermit
is the most rarefied, more rigorous than the monk's or pilgrim's way.
Far from being an escape for the weak as we tend to stigmatize it, this
most solitary path has always been a training ground for the strong.
Hermits were the original outsiders, living in edgelands and on the
fringes of social acceptability. The earliest Western hermits were
religious, seeking God, and braving the hostile desert to wage spiritual
warfare with the devil. In modern times, we often use the word "hermit"
to describe anyone living a life apart from society, or spending
interludes of time away. These dauntless rebels, regardless of
motivation, are at ease with being alone. As I gaze out at the old
mountain, I get an inkling about why the Celtic hermits, the early
Christians they emulated and hermits from the East were all drawn to
caves---our most primordial shelters, they are made of solid rock, which
surely steadies the mind. I hope my quiet stone hermitage will do the
same. The previous winter I'd doubted that being a hermit of any
description, even for a time, was possible in the modern day. Christian
settings don't allow for amateur hermits---to be an official hermit
takes years of probation and advanced training; you have to prove your
mettle in the monastery first. This was a huge relief. Not being a

person of religious faith, nature, art and yoga retreats are more my
style. And yet exploring the earliest Western ways of retreat appealed
strongly. I'm interested in the metaphysical and consciousness, and feel
we're influenced far more than we realize by our religious past. Of all
the old ways, hermit life fascinates me most. Many people have a
negative impression of the solitary retreat, preferring communal ways,
but I feel a strong affinity for these singular figures. I was curious
to learn why hermits retreat---and why and how I might too. My search
for a place to become a self-directed hermit brought a fascinating array
of nonconformists to light. In the mountains of Europe, sociable
professionals still practise the hermit's vocation. "Are you an
idealistic, religious person who enjoys meeting people?" read a job ad
placed by the small Swiss city of Solothurn in 2014. The town's
hermitage, built into the rock face of a gorge, has been occupied for
600 years, and the successful applicant was a German expoliceman with a
bushy beard who studied meditation and theology. He took up residence in
2016, beating out 22 hopefuls. His duties? Caring for the chapels,
taking part in baptisms and weddings, and counselling a steady stream of
day-tripping tourists. For this he gets about \$24,000 per year, plus
paid vacation and a rent-free mountain cottage. A 350-year-old hermitage
in Austria advertised for a replacement in 2017 after its hermit, former
priest and psychotherapist Thomas Fieglmueller, returned to Vienna after
just one season. "Life in the hermit's cell is spartan, but the nature
is very beautiful. I met lots of nice people and had good
conversations," he told the Salzburger Nachrichten of his hermit
experience. "But there was also criticism from apparently
arch-conservative Catholics because I didn't have a cowl or a beard . .
. Maybe I was the wrong person." The last thing I expected to find was a
throwback to ancient times, a stylite living atop a pillar---not to be
confused with a tree-dwelling dendrite.

Twenty-five years ago Eastern Orthodox Father Maxime Qavtaradze climbed
up the 40-metre Katshki pillar in a remote part of the Caucasus. Asked
why he chose to live an isolated hermit's life, he said: "I need the
silence. It is up here in the silence that you can feel God's presence."
For the first two years on his eagle's nest that overlooks the
mountainous region, he had only the bones of the last stylite, thought
to have died 600 years ago, for company, and slept in an old fridge to
keep warm. Now there's a small church on top of the limestone monolith
and a tiny stone cottage with one shade tree. Up there Father Maxime
prays, reads and prepares to meet God. Predictably, he isn't completely
alone: a religious community has gathered at the foot of his pillar, and
he has a phone to speak to the monks below. Father Maxime is a former
crane operator and unafraid of heights, and he can still do the
20-minute climb up and down the rickety iron ladder. But once he can't,
he plans to pray atop the pillar and die there, adding his bones to his
predecessor's now buried in a crypt under the church. Seeking something
a little less radical for myself, I came across two hermits with a
peculiar role: they act as spokespeople for hermits. Karen Karper
Fredette, who led a solitary life for six years in a tumbledown cabin in
the West Virginian woods before she met and married hermit Paul
Fredette, defines a hermit as someone who "chooses to live in solitude
for spiritual reasons." The couple publish a quarterly hermit
newsletter, Raven's Bread: Food for Those in Solitude, which has more
than 1,000 subscribers, about half urban and half country hermits.
Raven's Bread is named for the bird that fed the prophet Elijah during
his desert retreat, and aims to give "nourishment to seekers of solitude
and to assure them they are not alone in their search for quiet in a
noisy, busy world." While expressions of the hermit lifestyle vary, the
reasons people choose this life "classically involve silence, solitude,
simplicity of life, and

prayer," the couple explain. "A necessary degree of interaction with
others allows a religious solitary to earn a living and maintain a
simple lifestyle in the modern world," they add. Their book Consider the
Ravens: On Contemporary Hermit Life examines "a vocation as old as
spirituality itself." The couple also mentor people seeking a solitary
life and offer a secluded mountain retreat, Raven's Rest in Western
North Carolina, for people to try out hermit life. I wanted to inhabit
an ancient hermit landscape, so my search continued. I discovered many
secular hermits improvising on ancient traditions, mainly bearded white
guys who value solitude and selfsufficiency. Writers and photographers
curious to know what solitary life is like had rooted them out on all
continents and a few islands. We don't tend to take secular hermits as
seriously as the religious ones---they aren't institutionalized, so
perhaps they're easier to dismiss as cranks? But many were far from
being dilettantes. Take Pete, "one of New Zealand's last hermits," who
lives in the bush near the rocky Kaikoura coast in a small hut and
survives off the land and his garden. He had been in Asia for years and
couldn't adjust once he returned to New Zealand. He lived in a
Cistercian monastery for a year, and then "kind of wandered, living in
old churches and under bridges and stuff." Tiring of his itinerant ways
he retreated to a cave right beside the sea and to a surfers' hut, where
the authorities told him to move on. Then a kindly sheep farmer gave him
a piece of land to live on. "This has been home for the past 30 years.
I've always loved solitude," Pete says. Asked what it's like to be a
hermit, Pete proves his secular solitary wisdom credentials, in my
opinion: "A lot of people ask me if I get lonely. But loneliness is just
a feeling. It's no big deal. For a lot of people, it's as if loneliness
is some sort of fearful creature, but it's not. One time when someone
asked me that, I had this image of temples in Thailand. At the

entrance there'll be creatures that look incredibly demonic and fearful,
but they're just the guardians of the temple. And I think loneliness is
a bit like that---one of the guardians that has to be encountered and
then, gradually, it turns into a friend---an extraordinary friend. It
doesn't have to be escaped from." A good hermitage is hard to find, I
soon realized. Now, watching the lambs outside frolic in the fields, I
feel grateful to have stumbled across the leaseholder of this stone
retreat. Sara Maitland is a well-known author and an unlikely hermit.
She grew up in a loquacious upper-class Scottish family, danced with
Prince Charles once at a debutante ball, and in 1970 was introduced to
feminism by her close friend Bill Clinton, also a student in Oxford, who
"invited her to accompany him to a lecture by Germaine Greer, whom he
had heard had great legs." Maitland's debut novel, Daughter of
Jerusalem, won the UK's Somerset Maugham Award and established her as a
leading feminist thinker, and since then, she's written about 30 books.
Maitland, variously, married an Anglican vicar, had two children, got
divorced, became a Catholic, wrote a screenplay with Stanley Kubrick and
became a hermit when she fell in love---with silence. Her fascinating A
Book of Silence explores a subject that's inherently difficult to write
about. A wonderful storyteller who by her own admission loves to talk,
she chronicles personal experiments into silence and solitude, and those
of many historical figures. Among her quests, the intrepid Maitland
retreats to an isolated Scottish cottage on Skye and spends 40 days and
40 nights alone---"It seemed possible but substantial, as well as
ironic," she writes---to understand silence better. Vile weather, deep
fear, ecstatic bliss and auditory hallucinations are among her
experiences. Ultimately, after experiencing its "good" and "bad"
varieties, she falls for silence. "It was interesting, demanding,
exciting, good fun and deeply joyful. It has informed my choices for my
life ever since."

There are few female hermits as guides, and Maitland intrigues me.
Reading about her enviable experiences is what first got me thinking
about retreat as an adventure, with as many peaks and valleys as any
mountain expedition---except you go inward. If you announce you're going
to sail a boat around the world for two years, Maitland observes with
exasperation, people get excited, whereas if you say you're going to
stay home and talk to no one for two years, it makes people think you've
lost your mind. "We declare that personal freedom and autonomy is both a
right and good, but we think anyone who exercises that freedom
autonomously is 'sad, mad or bad.' Or all three at once," Maitland
notes. If you're not in a relationship, you're considered sad:
tragically lonely and deficient, possibly with mental health issues, or
sociopathic---mad. If you say you actually like being alone, that
solitude is your ideal of happiness, you're bad: selfish, or
reprehensible. Social unacceptability be damned, Maitland has lived a
self-styled hermit's life of isolation and self-denial in a shepherd's
cottage in southern Scotland for the past 20-plus years, in a place she
calls the "Huge Nothing," amid miles of wild and empty space. Her chosen
terrain of silence, the moors where she grew up, has "high hills with
enormous views, rough waterfalls and tiny lochs, roofless castles and
abandoned farmsteads." She doesn't, however, live in complete
isolation---she sees the postman most days, has a phone; the Internet
and a car; and goes to Mass and shopping on Sundays. "What I want to do
is live in as much silence as is possible at this moment in our
history," she explains. Why has she chosen a hermit's life, so out of
step with the times? "Silence makes me happy," Maitland says simply.
Long periods alone in silence yield rewards, she thinks, for religious
and secular explorers alike. "Silence is a place in which I can find
ecstasy. I only get it in silence and most people I know only get it in
silence. It is just a fabulous feeling. You

know, you're walking along and quite suddenly you just say, 'Yes!' It's
an extraordinarily intense response. Totally joyful." In A Book of
Silence Maitland diagnoses the need for silence and how we may not know
we need it. A surprise bestseller in 2009, the book generated widespread
media attention. Maitland began to receive many letters from people
asking how to experience silence and solitude. The cottage is her
answer. Not surprisingly holiday rentals catering to hermits are scarce,
so she offers this place to people who want to experience a measure of
the hermit's life. For the past decade she, and a previous leaseholder,
have made it available to rent or borrow, depending on means. The
cottage is that rare place where an aspiring modern-day hermit can
withdraw without the framework provided by a religious or other
community. It has everything that's required: it's simple yet
comfortable, accessible yet isolated, peaceful, with dramatic scenery
and many wild creatures---pine martens, deer, wildcats, ospreys and
eagles---to inspire awe. So far, Maitland told me, the main hermits have
been Buddhist and Christian meditators, and writers---people
self-emptying, and filling the creative well. Maitland has inspired many
others to explore the joys of hermit life, even temporarily. Like most
hermits she is drawn to deserts, moors and other wild places. The wise
old person who lives in the wilderness or on the outskirts of town,
outside convention, is a universal archetype. Present in all ages and
cultures, archetypes are charged with a sense of the sacred, unconscious
reality shared by humans, our ancient psychic structures. Through
history we have been called to consult the wise sage on the mountaintop,
or the crone or grandmother in the woods---or to seek wisdom by being in
solitude or living alone for a time ourselves. The wise one personifies
our higher self, whose knowledge transcends the mind and comes from
experience.

In modern times one common place we see the archetypes is the RiderWaite
tarot deck, published originally in 1909. The card for the hermit shows
a cowled man with a lantern, suggesting Diogenes the Cynic, who famously
shone a light in broad daylight searching for an honest man. Diogenes,
who lived as a beggar and often slept in a wine barrel, does not
represent isolation or idleness, but the active cultivation of
introspection, wisdom and spiritual maturity. While people often scorn
hermits as eccentrics, or consider them misanthropic, there's a part of
many people that fantasizes about their positive aspect. Whenever I
mention hermits, certain friends get starry-eyed, say things like,
"Oooh, a little mountain hut . . . with maybe just a little bonsai to
water." To be alone for a time, or to live alone, free, self-sufficient
in a simple, wild place---this has enduring appeal. The hermit impulse
has roots in Eastern and Western philosophies: from Lao-Tzu's rejection
of the social ideal of Confucius, to Japan's wandering monks, to the
ancient sadhus of India and bhikkhus of Tibet, to the Greek pre-hermits
such as Diogenes, to the Christian desert hermits---considered the first
true Western hermits, who retreated to caves in the third century and
valued asceticism as a path to knowledge and a meaningful life. As for
me, I've come to this rugged place of moors and mountains to taste the
experience of being a hermit, to use the time to study the history of
hermits and what modern people can learn from these outsiders. The
Highlands is a suitable locale for such an inquiry, with eremitic
traditions recorded since the fifth century. Not only is the land here
rich in the artifacts of the hermit traditions of northern Scotland, but
it's also a place I'm connected to. I was born in Glasgow, came to
Toronto when I was three, and my ancestors are from the Highlands and
the Inner Hebrides. People who inhabit a landscape are also created by
it. Perhaps I'll also learn something of my own wild, solitude-loving,
transplanted self?

The Rough Bounds, or Na Garbh Chriochan in Scottish Gaelic, describes
the mountainous coastal lands where I am, which have attracted
solitaries for centuries. The hermitage is on the Ardnamurchan
Peninsula, which juts into the sea, the most westerly point of Britain.
Jagged sea lochs run mainly east to west, making travel by water
obligatory except in places where a single-track road snakes along the
shorelines. Daunted by the prospect of driving in this rugged place,
Marco and I hired a local driver to pick us up from the train station in
Fort William. Ewen navigated his van for an hour and half down winding
roads in the rain, the scenery a dramatic blur of mountains and lochs.
Finally we slowed for a hairpin turn and rolled down a steep, narrow
road past a farm. Ewen said Bonnie Prince Charlie once slept there when
he was a fugitive, hidden by loyal supporters after the battle of
Culloden in 1746, which ended his hopes of claiming the thrones of
Scotland and England. We passed a jetty, opened a gate and headed down a
muddy track that wound through tall Scots pines beside the long, narrow
loch. I felt disconcerted when Ewen said he was familiar with my
Scottish family, from a small community on the Isle of Skye. Likely he
knew more than I did, because my father never spoke of them, to me
anyway. Like many here, Ewen has family in Canada, where he'd visited
many times. In the merchant navy for years, he now stayed home, playing
the bagpipes and driving for a living. "Why have you come here?" he
asked, emphasizing the final word. "To be hermits," I replied. "Och,
well," Ewen said with his lilting laugh. "The most exciting thing that's
liable to happen to you here is a funeral on the Green Isle." Since
ancient times, he explained, burials have taken place on a tiny island
in the nearby loch, the most recent just two weeks before. "The old
coffin route

comes over the hill," Ewen said, pointing left, "and then mourners take
the dead across from the jetty," he added, pointing right, "to bury
them." "I'd hate to miss that," I said, meaning it. My immediate family
shares a peculiar enthusiasm for cemeteries, and my backyard borders one
back home in Kingston. "Don't worry," Ewen said. "You'd hear the
bagpipes." We pulled up to the muddy entrance of the property, marked by
a riot of rhododendrons. The small stone hermitage sat on a small square
of land cut out from the farmer's fields, beside a collapsing byre, and
with a few fruit trees and a small garden. We fished the old mortise key
from its hiding place and opened the door. Ewen helped us in with our
bags, and with a wave and a grin, he left. A note from the previous
hermits, another couple, greeted us. "There are mice and bats in the
ceiling, the fire's ready to go, and we hope you enjoy the chocolate
biscuits---our favourites." On our first night as hermits we saw a spill
of stars in the dark, black sky. This morning we're already on familiar
terms with the cranky stove and fridge, the touchy CO alarm, the saggy,
comfy couch and the spirited little Morso woodstove with squirrel
designs on its iron sides, which heats the house. Luxury of luxuries,
the woodstove also heats water for a bath. Each day here I plan to read,
to walk and to sink into the silence. I am the fixed hermit, the cottage
my cave. Marco is the wandering hermitmonk: he's already out in the
hills this morning taking photos. Historically, hermits and wandering
monks were the more solitary renegades, in contrast to regulated monks
or nuns and their regulated hermit brothers or sisters, who lived the
other model of contemplative life, in communal monasteries. I go
outside, stand in the weak morning sun and breathe a sigh of relief.
I've been longing to shed the activities of ordinary life awhile, to
explore hermit life. I've spent enough time in quiet places to know that
silences differ, and I'm curious about the qualities of this one. Ben
Resipol still has

snow on top, and the old mountain, the most westerly of the big Highland
peaks, commands the windswept hills below. Its ancient rock is the
physical manifestation of this silence, which has grandeur, spaciousness
and solidity. It brings to mind the words of Orkney Island poet George
Mackay Brown: "Stone is an enduring material." Landscapes have long been
of vital importance for solitaries in both Eastern and Western
traditions. Hermits and wandering monks are especially drawn to
wilderness---mountains, forests and extreme places. Like the first
Christian hermits who heard the call of the desert, they are summoned to
live on the uninhabited edges. The Rough Bounds is among the emptiest
parts of Scotland, though it once had a sizeable rural population.
During the Highland Clearances from the 1780s to 1880s, half a million
Gaelic-speaking Highlanders were violently driven and burned out of
their homes---to make way for sheep. The quiet here is tinged with
melancholy, the residue, perhaps, of a cultural collapse. I know that
wild and not wild land is a false distinction: early hunters and
farmers, as well as modern miners and crofters, all worked here. But
those seeking the wild are still drawn to edgelands, as much idea as
physical place. About a thousand years ago, the landscape from the
Middle Eastern deserts to the furthest corners of the known world,
Ireland and Scotland, was full of hermits in cells and caves---and
later, in hermitages within convents and monasteries, apart from the
other nuns and monks. Ancient Christian saints on the edge of darkness,
of civilization, settled this particular wild place. Thousands of Irish
monks and hermits, an influx of devout pilgrims called peregrine,
arrived between 500 and 1000 AD. They sailed their fragile boats across
treacherous seas, leaving the familiar behind forever for wild terrain
that reflected their inner asceticism. These adventurers founded the
Celtic Christian culture of retreat. Matching the austerities of the
earliest desert hermits they emulated, they

waged spiritual warfare in the harshest conditions, studying scripture
and communing with God. The holy wanderers travelled on foot once they
arrived in Scotland, believing that the spiritual journey of life
requires putting oneself in God's hands without knowing where it will
lead. Citizens of heaven passing through life like strangers, they
carved hermit cells for prayer into rock cliffs facing the fierce
Atlantic storms, built beehive stone huts for shelter, erected
monasteries made of stone, driftwood and peat for worship on windswept
islands. They built tombs and dug cemeteries for their dead, raised
Celtic crosses on headlands and braved the wild mountains and forests.
To this day several place names in the Rough Bounds begin with "Kil,"
meaning "cell," which indicates that a hermit or missionary once lived
there---Kilchoan in Knoydart and on Ardnamurchan, Kilcumin in Morar and
Kilmory in Arisaig. I take in the sweep of space around me: moor, water,
forest, mountain, sky. To the Celtic Christians, and the Druids before
them, all creation was sacred. The given world---this was their sanctum
sanctorum. Excited to begin my hermit meditations in this auspicious
place, I go back inside and find that the solar panel isn't functioning.
This means I have one battery charge of about eight hours for my
computer, unless I can fix the invertor or find a new power source. Pens
and notebooks it is. I begin to write longhand and fight a regular
impulse to check the Internet: for email, for the weather and, for some
reason, to find out whether there's a laundromat nearby. Every thought I
have, I react to, seeking an answer instead of concentrating on the task
at hand. I had no idea I was afflicted with this irritating habit. A
phrase from a Douglas Coupland show I'd seen at the Art Gallery of
Ontario pops into my mind: "I miss my pre-Internet brain."

My mind compulsively spins on, uneasy about being cut off from data.
When I finally realize that despite no cell signal there's a landline
and more important, that retro accompaniment, a phone book full of
numbers I could call, I'm strangely elated. With no wireless or
cellphone, and no electricity either, this hermitage is going to be the
ideal setting to explore whether being a self-imposed hermit is possible
in the modern world. Along with the early Celtic hermits, and me, I was
surprised to learn that the scouts for a reality show called Eden had
also selected this stark, boggy landscape for an experiment in leaving
society behind. Months later I read a dark, often-hilarious article in
the New Yorker and discovered that filming for Eden had wrapped up just
down the loch the week before I arrived. "A group of 23 skilled
strangers would live in the wilderness, isolated from the world, for a
year. . . . The cast members would build their own shelters and hunt and
grow their own food while a small embedded crew and a rig of remote
cameras observed every moment of the embryonic society." Two doctors, a
paramedic, a vet, a carpenter, a shepherd, a gardening expert, a
gamekeeper, a chef and a Canadian life coach were chosen out of the
2,000 who applied. No utopia, it was a cautionary tale about a dark side
of stepping away from society: the community quickly descended into
infighting, bullying, breakdowns and hunger---cast members were
supposedly spotted at the dentist in town getting their teeth treated
after eating chicken grit. Worse perhaps than the biting midges,
terrible gales, brutal cold and other dreadful conditions they'd have
endured, the producers had left the cast in the wilds even after the
show had been taken off the air. (Many, traumatized, had already escaped
by then.) Later, new episodes aired, rebranded as Eden: Paradise Lost,
prompting the media to pronounce it "the reality show that no one
watched."

As for my own hermit experiment, it feels surprisingly good to write by
hand at the square oak table, sun falling on my pages. After a few hours
I stop to wolf down cheese and bread and then pull random volumes off
the hermitage's tantalizing bookshelves. I flop on the sofa with a
luxurious pile and read interrupted only by the need to throw the
shrieking---and, I hope, malfunctioning---CO detector outside. First I
untangle hermit terminology, or more correctly, eremetic terminology,
which is tricky. In the early Christian era, the words hermit, monk and
anchorite, all from the Greek, were used interchangeably. Hermit derives
from eremia---desert; monk from monos---alone; and anchorite from
anachorein---to withdraw. Early traditions were diverse, and travel was
a key feature of monastic life, so it's hard to separate the hermits
from the monks, who were sometimes also pilgrims. By the Middle Ages,
meanings and models for contemplative life had changed and the words had
come to specify distinct vocations. For the most part, hermit came to
mean the independent solitary, itinerant or otherwise, and monk came to
mean someone living in a settled, regulated community. The meaning of
anchorite changed too, and became associated with a particular kind of
solitary--- usually a woman, bricked into a small cell called an
anchorhold on the side of a church for life, "closyd in an hows of
ston." In our day we add to the confusion of terms by using the words
hermit and recluse interchangeably. I'm in agreement with anonymous
hermitblogger "Meng-hu, resident of the Hermitary," who has gathered a
wealth of hermit lore and resources: "Strictly speaking, with a few
technical exceptions, a recluse has a psychological fear of people,
whereas the hermit does not." The so-called North Pond hermit of Maine,
he continues, is "a classic recluse who dared not encounter people,
though his fear of them was because he stole from them, and is certainly
not a hermit."

To the list of non-hermits I'd add haters, and the unsound of mind---
Unabombers, misanthropes, the mentally ill or dangerously obsessed.
Controversial figures like Christopher McCandless, a young man who
starved to death in an abandoned bus while living "in retreat" in
Alaska, a tragedy made famous by the book and film Into the Wild, are
not hermits by my definition. Nor are the hikikomori of Japan: an
estimated half a million social recluses, mainly men, stay home and
refuse to interact with others, often for years. One hypothesis is that
conformity may promote mental health issues, and it's more acceptable in
Japan to withdraw than act out. Ornamental hermits, who lived in grottos
and ruins on country estates in Britain in the 1800s, don't count
either. These faux hermits appeared as part of a craze among the
Georgian gentry that resulted from a fashion for "pleasing melancholy."
They were paid £600, enough that they never had to work again, provided
they engage with guests and not cut their hair or wash for six years.
The living symbol of rural retreat, they survive in our garden gnomes.
Serious retreaters, such as religious hermits and hermit-meditators
exploring deeper realities, tend to train for solitude, the way an
athlete trains for a triathlon. Building stability and strength are
self-protective prerequisites because extreme solitude and silence are
challenging, even destabilizing. The idea is to prepare and gain
wisdom---not to deny the world or go unprepared, risking psychological
wildfires. Hermits are known to experience altered states of
consciousness. Accidie, "spiritual or mental sloth, apathy," as the
Oxford English Dictionary defines it, is one danger, also called "the
noonday demon" and known to afflict monks and hermits. Accidie was one
of the eight deadly thoughts before the seven deadly sins were developed
in the sixth century, and means "not-caring" in Greek. For ancient
ascetics it was a specific, afflictive spiritual condition akin to
depression. There may also be wild ecstasies, spiritual visions, hearing

voices, elation, self-transcendence and feelings of union with the
divine---as experienced by mystics such as Persian poets Hafiz and Rumi,
and centuries of Christian mystics such as Saint Teresa of Ávila and
Julian of Norwich, an anchorite who wrote the first work in English that
was certainly authored by a woman, Revelations of Divine Love. Secular
retreaters also report altered states of time and other unusual
perceptions. While the Greeks are considered their ideological
precursors, the early Christian desert fathers and mothers are the first
true Western hermits. Radicals who lived for years in silence in remote
caves in the wilds of Egypt, Syria, Palestine and Arabia, often
considered a dangerous cult, they were not simply leaving society, they
were actively moving toward God. Wrestling with their demons---with no
map, as there were no written rules ---they prized a life of
contemplation consecrated to God more than they did applying their
religious experiences to human relationships. The hermit's ascetic
spiritual life was traditionally regarded as the purest form of
religious life in Christianity. I admire the desert hermits' discipline,
their determination and courage ---it's like they were preparing for the
spiritual Olympics. And I admire their unlikely founding of a long
tradition that continues to support modernday solitude-seekers. We still
draw from their ideas and their infrastructures ---hermitages,
monasteries, convents, abbeys, pilgrim paths. But the more I learned,
the more mystified I became about one aspect of desert hermit life.
Mortifications. Why? Why wear animal skin shirts in the scorching sun?
Why the scourging and bloody self-flagellation? Why extinguish lust with
pain? Why drink muddy water and eat hard bread, why fast to kill
appetites, why near-starvation? Why pillars, why harsh deserts and
barren wastelands ---why the desertum of the Celts, bricked into
freezing caves that faced the wild Atlantic storms?

I suppose that like us, they were people grappling with eternal
quandaries and questions of meaning---only they believed that the world,
the flesh and the devil were the three sources of temptation. Fasting
and flagellation were thought to quench desires, while prayer and psalms
drove away evil thoughts. Wearing hair shirts was just part of what free
hermits, monks and anchorites did to fight for salvation, Earth their
purgatory. It wasn't mere penance, but a practical solution to cleanse
sin. By mortifying the flesh and praying, the desert hermits, people
believed, were transformed and could act as intercessors with God.
Perhaps a hermit's most important mission was to fight demons, those
invisible agents of darkness. Demons lurked especially in old temples
and on remote hillsides, and to sin was to be overcome by their power.
St. Anthony, the first desert ascetic, gave a pithy explanation of what
hermits do all day: "Let your heart be silent, then God will speak."
St. Anthony fought a demon or two. His trials are one of the most
repeated subjects in Western literature and art. He moved to a mountain
cave and resisted a series of temptations by the devil and demons who
mocked him, assaulted him physically and tortured him with horrible or
seductive visions: monks bringing bread when he was fasting, wild
beasts, sexy dancing girls. To puncture his lustful desires he'd throw
himself into the thorn bushes outside his cave. The hermit's fame grew
as he withstood these assaults, and his ideals spread far and wide from
Egypt. The Christians of Europe under Rome's influence embraced living
in communal monasteries. But in Scotland and Ireland the Celtic hermits
and monks, whose territories hadn't ever been conquered by the Romans,
drew inspiration directly from the desert fathers. (As for the Druidic
tradition they were supplanting, little is known about these
oak-venerating ancient priests, renowned for wisdom. They had an oral
tradition, leaving no written record, and little archeological evidence
exists. The Christians were

known to bless the holy wells and other sites of Druidic worship thus
claiming them for the new faith.) The Celtic Christians, in their
desertum of the coastal wilderness, matched Byzantine extremes of
asceticism. They "deliberately sought out the most wild and deserted
places---the isolation of lonely bogs and forests, the bare crags and
islands off the Atlantic coast---where they could find the solitude that
they believed would lead them to God," writes William Dalrymple in From
the Holy Mountain. "The proudest boast of Celtic monasticism was that,
in the words of the seventh-century Antiphonary of the Irish monastery
of Bangor: 'This house full of delight/Is built on the rock/And indeed
the true vine/Transplanted out of Egypt.'" The fringe-dwelling Celtic
holy men found further inspiration for their ascetic feats in books,
notably Life of St. Anthony of Egypt by Athanasius of Alexandria. It was
likely the most-read volume in Europe after the Bible, and the model for
early Irish and Northumbrian gospel books. These amazing books were
"portals of prayer," writes Michelle Brown, curator of illuminated
manuscripts at the British Library, and the "act of copying and
transmitting the Gospels was to glimpse the divine." Just as
St. Cuthbert, a monk, bishop and hermit, one of the revered saints of
early Christianity, struggled with his demons on the Farne Islands on
behalf of all humanity, she adds, so the monks who produced the gospel
books "performed a sustained feat of spiritual and physical endurance as
part of the mission of bringing the word of God to the furthest outposts
of the known world and enshrining it there within the new temple of the
word and embodiment of Christ---the Book." Unlike the desert fathers,
who eschewed anything they saw as a distraction, the Celtic monks and
hermits loved learning, poetry and art, as evidenced by their elaborate
carvings, Celtic crosses and manuscripts, such as the exquisite Book of
Kells. Created on the holy island of Iona, the book

was saved, though many monks were slaughtered and their work destroyed
during Viking attacks in 806 AD. In spirit, the Celtic Christians remind
me of Asia's wandering hermitmonks---independent, art-loving wilderness
itinerants. The ancient Japanese hijiri gained power through austerities
in the mountains. Seeking the world beyond, they believed, must entail a
journey. By medieval times, the plain robe and bare feet of Japan's
wandering monks reflected commitment to a life of poverty, and the staff
to a roving existence without a fixed dwelling. Similarly, the wandering
monks of China abandoned worldly ambitions and joined the ranks of
fugitives and outsiders, living in the mountains, practising shan shui
painting, which translates literally as "mountain-waterpicture," and
poetry as vehicles for philosophy. The earliest hermits of China left
the settled world for secular and philosophical reasons, rather than
religious ones, and though disillusioned with life in society and its
constraints, they often kept ties with friends. I love the passion and
rigour of the Celtic hermits, who travelled from Ireland to remote
places in northern Scotland and the islands, and of the early desert
hermits they emulated. But I don't understand their body-hating
asceticism, the harsh idea that humans are programmed for sin. This much
I do know: we're all solitary wanderers in the wilderness. By
mid-afternoon what's wandering is my mind---to the maps on the shelf
beside me, and the world outside. I pick up a booklet, Exploring Sunart,
Ardnamurchan, Moidart and Morar, which tells me that much of the early
history of this area stems from the arrival from Ireland in the sixth
century AD of St. Finnan, "who established a holy cille on tiny Eilean
Uaine, the beautiful Green Isle. The sanctity of this was such that for
centuries it rivaled even that of Columba's Iona as a place of
pilgrimage and internment."

I can't believe my luck---a holy hermit's cell just down at the loch? We
are not that far from windswept Iona, the island where St. Columba, the
earliest hermit saint, chose to settle for his desertum, uninhabited
even by the rugged Scots and Picts when he arrived in 532. Columba seems
capricious to me: he banished women and cows from the island insisting
that "where there is a cow there is a woman, and where there is a woman
there is mischief." The builders of his abbey had to leave their wives
and daughters on the nearby Eilean nam Ban (Woman's Island). He also
banished frogs and snakes, though how he accomplished that is not
documented. Today Christian ecumenical retreats are offered there, and
the Findhorn Foundation---a famous eco-village, holistic education
centre and spiritual community in northeastern Scotland, which
incidentally has a Canadian cofounder---owns an Iona retreat house where
participants join with community members for worship, meals and
education, social activities and chores. I'm loath to winkle myself out
of the shell of this hermitage to visit Iona, and resolve instead to
seek out St. Finnan down at the loch. I pull on my boots and walk in
silence down the muddy sheep's path to the water. Scotland's landscape
is embedded with ancient sacred places: hermits' caves, stone huts, holy
wells and shrines. Ontario too is encrypted with ancient places sacred
to Indigenous peoples. Always in-between, I feel I can't fully read
either landscape. I've always had a sense of inner homelessness. Being
here is making me question a long-held, unconscious conviction: that
it's always better to go than to stay, like the Irish monks in their
resolute self-exile. But is this really true? The light waxes and wanes
with the passing clouds, blue sky one moment and then sudden gloom, as
though a dark wing is passing overhead. The freshwater loch was sealed
off from the ocean by a passing glacier eons

ago. Along the shore, pebbled beaches backed by wind-sculpted oaks and
holly trees are linked by meandering sheep paths. A large bird with a
white tail flies above---a sea eagle? When the wind intermittently dies
down, the silence feels active, not an absence but a presence. The old
rocks of Resipol emanate solidity, and there's that unique, elemental
clarity I only feel in northern places near the sea. Just ahead the old
grey stones of the rock jetty to Green Isle, known also as
St. Finnan's---the burial place Ewen had told us about---lead into the
blue water. St. Finnan died in 575 AD but his ruined chapel survives,
built on the site of his devotional cell. The island is a few hundred
yards across, and from this angle, I can see a tall, slender Celtic
cross that tilts skyward. Finnan had been a disciple of St. Columba,
who, with his travelling monks of Iona, visited this place. I'd found a
1950 book on the hermitage bookshelf, Moidart and Morar, by local author
Wendy Wood. She writes of Columba's miracle: he told the people, "Cast
your net again in the river, and immediately you will find a large fish
which the Lord has prepared for you." Wood, who often got the unpleasant
job of gutting, wonders whether God really prepared the fish, and then
adds, "They drew up salmon of wonderful size." Her wry humour is in
evidence in describing a visit to the island's medieval chapel on the
saint's day, March 18: "It is still something of a penance to visit the
ruins of this church because of the nettles, and not having a stick, I
was very properly stung." The Green Isle cemetery was Catholic until the
Reformation, when Protestants began being buried on the south end,
likely over top of the Catholic dead. Given their reverence for nature
this may have once been a sacred site for the Druids---though their
stone circles were most often placed beside a stream, in the shadow of
sacred oaks, or in high places, such as the summit of a hill, where
cairns (large stones) still mark their places of worship.

To dispel the cold I begin to flap my arms and walk quickly on,
wondering how I can get over to the Green Isle. Marco is up ahead,
stretched on his belly on the stones taking photos, vivid in his red
raincoat. When my boot gets sucked off in a peat bog, I cling to a woody
gorse branch on one leg until he notices and silently retrieves it. We
walk the sheep paths and find spring's emissaries---one yellow violet,
one white violet and three ferns. Darkness is gathering as we return to
the hermitage, light candles and fire up the Morso. After a simple
supper of beans, rice and kale, I boil water and fill the hot water
bottle, defence against the heavy, damp blankets. I shiver to think of
St. Finnan and his cold stone cell on the island as I tuck the bottles
into their hand-knitted covers and into the bed. I've always had hermit
sympathies---which I considered a quirk of temperament, or a streak of
romanticism. I've never been a loner, exactly, but I have always liked
ample solitude amid my social routines. Now I've begun to wonder, Is it
bred in the bone? Do my roots in this place explain the default
attraction to solitude-seekers, rebels, edgelands, outskirts, wild
people and places? I adore the margins. And suspect that outliers know
something the rest of us don't. I have the utmost respect for resolute,
valiant people who assert their independence and seek new wisdom and new
ways. I climb into bed and lie wide awake, listening to the fierce wind
howl in the chimney. Many today think that being a hermit, even
temporarily, smacks of the utopian. From where I stand, the way we live
now, our assumption that we can continue to consume the world without
disastrous results, is the capitalist impracticable fantasy, the
unrealistic path that will never lead to happiness. Ancient hermits,
though extreme, valued selfsacrifice over self-interest, renunciation
over consumption, independence over conformity. Do these early explorers
have something to teach us? Or have we become insensible to their
wisdom, to the call of the desert, the wilds?

Each day spent at the hermitage is a version of the last. Mornings,
Marco heads off to take photos and search for an abandoned village Ewen
had mentioned, which involves skirting bogs, tramping up and down
hillsides, fighting his way through dense forest and rhododendron
thickets, taking "shortcuts" and, inevitably, getting lost. Later we
read about two experienced hillwalkers in Ireland who were trapped in an
impenetrable rhodo-forest and were finally freed after a dangerous,
five-hour rescue mission. For my part, I read, write, sit and often just
stare out the window. And wonder how the hermits managed to cross the
dangerous seas to here, while I still can't figure out how to get over
to Green Isle. I'm enjoying being alone and all that happens. And things
do happen. In the deepening quiet, my senses are getting sharper, for
one thing. I've started to notice the subtle, complex beauty of the
soundscape. Days with sun, sweet brown birds and yellow birds sing
outside at the feeder. When it's overcast, there's just the wind, and
the meehh of the sheep. In the rare lulls, no sound at all, pure
possibility. Evenings we walk by the loch to flutelike nightingale
songs. Inside the hermitage at night the fire soughs like a sigh of
relief, and when the wind picks up, there's ghostly moaning in the
chimney. Only the shrieks of the CO detector bring me back into regular
time, which has begun to lose its linear, forward-motion feeling. I feel
part of, though apart from, the world. My companions? The steadying
expanse of Ben Resipol, the narrow loch, sheep moving on the yellowy but
greening tableau of fields, and the farmer, who bounces up the lane in
his tractor or quad at 9:30 a.m. on his hay delivery or moves livestock
to one pasture or another, busy with spring calving. And Marco. For me,
being a hermit is less about being completely alone than about being
able to follow my internal rhythms unimpeded, which solitary days
provide. Chosen solitude is about agency, self-reliance and gaining
clarity.

When the churning mind-waters settle, I can begin to dip into the
wellspring of my life. If I stay quiet long enough I begin to forget
myself. My daily hermit readings lead to unexpected places. I begin to
realize that most of what we think about them is wrong. There's this
popular idea, for instance, that hermits withdraw from people because
they hate them. On the contrary, for solitary religious hermits, others
are the whole point. As an intercessor to God, a hermit's purpose is to
pray for the salvation of humanity. Thomas Merton, the 20th century's
most famous author-monk, a Trappist and peace activist, writes: "The
hermit's whole life is a life of silent adoration. His very solitude
keeps him ever in the presence of God . . . His whole day, in the
silence of his cell, or his garden looking out upon the forest, is a
prolonged communion." This is the power of the hermit's way: we can
focus fully on whatever we want to commune with. As for the durable
misconception that hermits are always alone, Merton struggled to
reconcile his celebrity and his longing for a life of silence and
contemplation as a hermit. By the time he'd been at Gethsemane in
Kentucky for a decade he'd grown impatient with conventional monastic
life. Desperate to escape the monastery's togetherness, he even
considered "exclaustration," revoking his vows, so he could be a hermit.
Allowed only three-day private retreats, he spent time reading, writing
and meditating in a forest woodshed "hermitage," named in honour of
St. Anne. Eventually, Merton was allowed to move to Mount Olivet, a
combination of hermitage and retreat centre, where he was briefly a
hermit. He then decided to travel and died in Thailand, likely
electrocuted by a faulty fan. Just as St. Anthony depended on friends to
bring him food when he locked himself away, here at this hermitage I am
supported by a web of others who supply propane, wood and necessities.
Typically hermits have also connected to society through work: the
desert hermits wove rush

baskets to trade for bread, while modern-day hermits often earn daily
bread online, by teaching, for example, or offering calligraphy
services. Hermits cultivate solitude, yet people seek them out. As a
rule, hermits are actively prevented from privacy. When St. Anthony
retreated to the desert to dedicate his life to prayer, he had to move
numerous times to get away from people seeking his advice. The struggle
to protect solitude has been the common lot of hermits ever since. I
find it a wonderful irony that even hermits have had to make a conscious
effort of will to get away, even temporarily, from society. For
modern-day hermits, the media are typically the ones in hot pursuit, as
a proxy for curious readers. Even today, in these parts, a hermit isn't
hard to find---though I later discover that Canadians are better at
their vocation, and thus more difficult to track down. Our most famous
hermit is not even a hermit but a recluse, and like many others who
moved to the backwoods to avoid combat, he's American born. Willard
Kitchener MacDonald, the "Hermit of Gully Lake," who died in 2004, lived
in the forests of northern Nova Scotia for 60 years, ever since he
jumped a troop train during the Second World War. In the Scotsman I came
across an article about "Hermits who have called Scotland Home," that
featured those "who have shunned it all and whose stories of survival,
endurance and solitude linger on." Note the admiring tone---in North
America, this would more likely read, "Meet some weirdo recluses." I
read hungrily, fascinated by their beliefs and why they chose the
hermit's life. Their responses remind me of Federico Fellini's reply
when asked why he made films. "You might as well ask a hen why she lays
eggs," he said---it is just what he did. Three of the article's five
solitaries, unsurprisingly, are from northern Scotland. Though these
hermits are sociable enough to talk to the media, the urge to live a
life apart is clearly still with us. Jake Williams has lived alone in
the nearby Cairngorm Mountains since the 1980s. Tired of the rat

race, the former teacher moved to a ramshackle hut in the middle of the
forest. "It's perfectly conventional to me---nothing startling at all.
As far as I'm concerned I'm just a normal homeowner. It's everyone
else's lives that are strange," he says. James McRory Smith, the
"Highland Hermit," who lived for 30 years in a remote bothy (a rough
hut) in northwest Scotland, died in 1999 at 73 and said he'd walked
probably "thousands of miles" to collect his messages and pension from
the nearest post office. And media darling Tom Leppard, "the Leopard man
of Skye," who had spots tattooed over 99 percent of his body, lived as a
hermit in a lochside bothy for more than two decades. "I'm never
lonely," said the former soldier, whose derelict croft had an earthen
floor, no windows or electricity, metal sheet roofing and a bed made
from polystyrene board. Leppard paddled his kayak across the
fast-flowing waters to collect supplies and his pension for years, and
died at 80 in 2016---a matter for personal regret, as I'd hoped to meet
him. Sara Maitland is usually the only woman in articles like this, or
Emma Orbach appears---strangely, she's another Oxford graduate turned
hermit. Orbach lives in the Welsh wilderness in a mud and horse-dung
roundhouse she's constructed, without electricity or running water. She
grows her own food and keeps chickens and goats, and plays her Celtic
harp at night. "This is how I want to live. This lifestyle makes me feel
really happy and at peace and this is my ideal home," she says. The
Scotsman journalist writes of Maitland that she "shuns television and
social media in favour of sewing and praying for several hours a day.
She likes to say as little as possible and at one point did not speak a
word every Tuesday and Thursday. She described mobile phones as 'a major
breakthrough for the powers of hell' although she does have a landline
for essential communication." One afternoon I walk in the woods above
the house, keeping my eyes open for another solitary: the ferocious
Scottish wildcat, which prowls on

the fringes of woodland and moorlands, making its home in boulders, tree
roots, disused dens and open moorland. Only 100 are left in the wild. I
wander until the wind picks up suddenly, and I'm propelled back downhill
as though pushed by a strong hand. Inside the hermitage it's warm, and
we make a dinner of chickpeas and rice and kale, followed by the
biscuits left by the previous hermits. I take a glorious bath, and we
drink whiskey on the couch by candlelight, listening to the forlorn
sound of wind in the chimney. Earlier, Marco had found the abandoned
village. A waterfall was gushing between the walls of old dwellings
subsiding back into the stony ground. I tell him about the threatened
wildcats. When we encounter a wild place, it's also an encounter with
the wild inside, with untamed forces. So what happens when the wild is
pushed into extinction? Do we lose touch with our selves, and all that
lies beyond our safe, secure lives? How will the world be if
edge-dwellers, both human and animal, disappear? Our last morning is
silent, without wind or even birdsong. The sheep are lined up at the
feeder as usual, woolly backsides providing scale in the vast landscape.
The winter-beaten grass is greener each day, and the loch, mountains and
sky are composed into new layers by weather. My only regret is that I
never made it to the Green Isle to visit St. Finnan's hermit cell. The
farmer, too busy with the spring calves to take us across, apologized
and offered us his boat. As two landlubbers unaccustomed to driving
speedboats in wild winds, we decided against it. I sit at the oak table,
turn on the computer and give it a reflexive click, as I've done every
day, and then remember about lack of electricity and turn it off again.
I can't get used to not checking email, my biggest compulsion, though my
resistance to being offline is gone. Away from society's thicket and its
techno-gadgets, in the open spaces of the trackless moor, I feel

uncluttered. My concentration is better. In the fullness of the silence
I can think. The early religious hermits chose solitude to get closer to
God. Perhaps for modern, secular people, God, or gods, can serve as a
metaphor for the mystery of existence? For all that puts us in touch
with the deepest part of ourselves, and our human need to belong to
something larger? For the wilderness that calls us, which is the call of
the desert? Merton describes the freedom and peace of a wilderness
existence as "a return to the desert that is also a recovery of (inner)
paradise. This is the secret of monastic renunciation of the world. Not
a denunciation, not a denigration, not a precipitous flight, a resentful
withdrawal, but a liberation, a kind of permanent 'vacation' in the
original sense of 'emptying.'" Similarly, being a hermit, even
temporarily, is about freedom. Wondering about the experiences of the
modern hermits who have stayed here before me, alone or with another, I
spend the hour before we depart reading the hermitage's guest book. I
open it at random and smile to read a previous resident's entry, about a
hermit seated in his hut, not wanting for anything, while streams
meander and red flowers bloom red on their own. Many write that their
time of silence sharpened their senses: honeysuckle smells sweeter, bat
shit more horrible, food more delicious. One man rhapsodizes about
breakfast, joking that he's no ascetic. Others say time feels fluid;
that escaping Brexit and politics temporarily is a balm; how the
simplicity and ability to "just be" is deeply refreshing. Others
worry---about being selfish for taking time alone, or about feeling
lonely or nervous about being out of touch, or they're scared of wild
animals, bats and ghosts. Other hermits express gratitude for the chance
to explore solitude in this safe space, building on solo camping trips,
borrowed cottages and crofts, and other previous tastes of being alone.
One hardy

hermit stayed a whole winter, saying he welcomed the privations and joys
and left feeling energized. The hermit diaries are interspersed with
photographs: the cottage with its roof missing, and later replaced, in
all seasons. To my delight there are images of the Green Isle: mist
lifting, mossy rocks and gravestones on a sunny spring day, blue flowers
in the green grass and the tilted Celtic cross, a stone altar, a carved
wall-crucifix and an old bronze bell. And what I'd most wanted to see:
the old stone chapel, and below it, St. Finnan's ancient stone cell. I
feel a thrill to imagine these passionate hermits, responding with body
and soul to the urgent questions of their times. For me, this hermit
retreat has been a chance to work at the oak table undisturbed and
plunder the shelf of books and its bounty of hermits, monastics,
silence, solitude, zen, wild places and local history. Held in this
conducive, private place, I effortlessly worked five hours a day,
exercised for two and sat quietly for one. Usually, when I also teach
yoga, write paid assignments, buy groceries, do taxes, fix the holes in
my sock and so on and on, my attention is scattered and I'm fatigued by
the day's end. This is one of the most marked differences between the
everyday world and going on a retreat: "A hermit is one who renounces
the world of fragments that he may enjoy the world wholly and without
interruption," writes Kahlil Gibran. For the ancients this meant a focus
on God; for many of us it means whatever is meaningful that we choose to
devote time and attention to. Like hermits, the fierce attention of our
wild and most exacting selves. My imagination has loved the gaps, the
open spaces, how the empty landscape evokes free thinking and dreaming.
I had begun to see things differently, my mind a clean slate for
insights, new thoughts, ideas, creative connections, which naturally
arise in silence. The peaks of Ben Resipol evoke solidity and the heft
of earth, providing a steady, immovable silence in which to think and
feel deeply. My purposes are a far cry from the

Christian hermit's religious goal of getting closer to God. But I'm
getting closer to something. I feel I'm restoring to its rightful place
what's being lost---darkness, silence, wildness---and all that
corresponds within me. It's odd to find that I feel more connected, not
less, during my hermitlude. To the mountain, to the farmer, to the
hermit benefactors who make this space available, to the other hermits
who shared parallel experiences like the shrieking CO alarm, nightingale
songs---Marco says one lives in the byre. And to the Morso, its heat and
light dispelling the cold and darkness. I feel connected to the ancient
hermits, fellow travellers who came to the northwest, like St. Finnan.
The wild winds that blew through me brought new thoughts and
perspectives, my imagination and spirit free to roam in the gaps and
open spaces. I've learned something of my own rough bounds: I feel
kinship with the hermit-monks, who thought life was a journey, one of
trust, of voluntary inner homelessness. Even in the modern world, I've
discovered, it's not as hard as we may think to trade a cellphone for a
hermit's cell, of sorts---though it's the least accessible of the old,
religious-rooted ways for contemporary people. But the very existence of
this hermitage, and the sheer number of modern hermits, tell me people
are enduringly fascinated by this life. Many are choosing to live on the
edge, even briefly, themselves, to become the single length of bamboo
drawn from the dense thicket. As with retreat in general we don't always
value the hermit's gifts, in part because we mistake silence and
solitude for a lack, for emptiness. As poet Adrienne Rich writes so
beautifully, silence is more like a plan, a presence, a "blueprint to a
life"---not to be confused "with any kind of absence."

Monasticism for Moderns There are hundreds of ways to kneel and kiss the
ground. ---Rumi; transl. by Coleman Barks

My cell is white and austere. It has thick walls of stone and a high
ceiling supported by rough wood beams, and silvery light waves filter in
through the irregular old windowpanes. I kick off my shoes, unfold the
bright, handmade quilt and lie on top of the single bed. Unlike on the
highway--- I've just driven for six hours from Kingston---it's tranquil
here. I feel safely enclosed, like I'm inside a honeycomb. This is
reassuring. I'd been nervous about exploring what monastic places have
to offer moderns, having experienced an acute attack of

cloisterphobia six months before. I'd been at a Christian religious
centre for the first time, for a writing retreat. My uneasiness began
right away, after one of the lovely, welcoming sisters showed me to my
room, named for Agnes. I read a booklet about the saint's history.
St. Agnes was either hanged or burned to death at the age of 12, it
said, for "being bold with a pagan king" ---she had refused to marry his
son or renounce her faith. That night I slept poorly, a rare thing for
me. I tossed and awakened in my cot from a terrible nightmare: I'd been
pinned on the cross, but upside down. As the retreat got underway,
participants began to read their work, with many "dear Lords" and
passages about obedience to a father and a son. The room felt suddenly
unbearably hot and stuffy. Despite my efforts to think of God as a
universal field of potential, or Being itself rather than a being, my
oppression-o-meter steadily rose. When it was finally time to go, I ran
down the path as fast as I could to catch the bus, propelled by a
mysterious religious recoil reaction. Thankfully I don't sense that
anything of the sort will befall me in this place, for nearly 400 years
the convent of the Augustinian Sisters of the Mercy of Jesus, set in the
heart of Old Quebec City. As I sink deeper into my sinfully comfy bed I
imagine generations of ghostly nuns, habits rustling as they walk the
wide hallways, issuing forth from identical cells for work and prayer.
The few nuns who remain now still follow the Rule of St. Augustine, a
guide for living in religious community written in the year 400. As well
as poverty, chastity and obedience, their vows include service to the
poor and the sick. After long days of saving bodies and souls, the
sisters would have returned from the hospital to white rooms like this
one. Removed their shoes. Knelt to pray. Hung their veils on
round-topped hooks, designed to prevent wrinkles. Fallen into an
exhausted sleep.

I think of the bravery of the convent's three founding sisters, only in
their twenties when they left France in 1639, sent to the new colony by
King Louis XIII to alleviate spiritual and physical suffering. Among the
earliest female missionaries, these young nuns belonged to an order that
had been nursing in the seaport of Dieppe, Normandy, since about the
year 1200. The perilous sea crossing took three months. "The travellers
slipped past enemy British ships and pirate ships, went through severe
storms, grazed an iceberg 'as big as a city' and survived infectious
diseases," writes Canada's History Society about their voyage. The
sisters arrived on the shore of the St. Lawrence River below the fort in
September, and clambered up through the woods to get a first view of the
hospital site up on the cliff. "Great was their disappointment after
they reached it through a pathless tangle of stumps, dry branches, and
brush. Only the foundation had been laid and not a drop of water was to
be found on this high promontory," an article in the journal of the
Canadian Catholic Historical Association notes. The sisters faced many
hardships. They'd only just set up a temporary ward in an unfinished
house when a terrible smallpox epidemic broke out among the Algonquins
and Montagnais, and the nuns rapidly used up medical supplies meant to
last two years. Shortages of food and water, exhaustion and overwork,
threats from Iroquois and British raiders and long, cold, cruel winters
were among the trials of their new lives. The hardy nuns prevailed and
founded Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, a grey stone complex I passed on my way
here, and the first hospital in North America north of Mexico. Over time
more nuns arrived to help care for sick and wounded European settlers,
as well as the Indigenous people, who taught them their languages and
the properties of local healing plants. For centuries the nuns worked as
pharmacists, growing herbs in the Hôtel-Dieu garden, and as nurses and
administrators. Eventually they established and ran 11 other Quebec
monastery-hospitals, all of which were integrated into

the province's public health care system in 1962. To this day, doors
lead directly from the old convent's chapel into the adjoining
Hôtel-Dieu de Quebec, now a 15-storey teaching hospital and a national
historic site. The convent's walled cloister, cemetery and garden are
enclosed once more within Quebec's old walled city. While the nuns'
legacy is visible for all to see, what's disappearing is the Augustinian
sisters themselves. From their heyday, when 200 lived at the convent,
just 12 remain. Like ancient religious orders worldwide, the sisters,
faced with an aging community and few new recruits in the 1980s, had
urgent decisions to make. The radical change they decided on altered
their lives, perhaps as deeply as when they left the cloister in 1965,
no longer confined to the convent and hospital. This time the nuns were
embarking on a \$40 million makeover of their precious heritage
building, transforming it into a 65-room secular wellness hotel. Le
Monastère des Augustines opened its doors in 2015, with new architecture
to symbolize the sisters' reinvention for the modern age: a glass and
exposed steel beam addition meets the old 17th-century stone structure,
preserving its façade. This modern section houses a light-filled
reception area and serves as a hub for various wings of the old convent,
both religious and secular. The beautiful, light-filled space was dubbed
the "Cool Cloister" by National Geographic Traveler in 2016, when Le
Monastère was featured as a top locale internationally for "a mental and
physical reboot." There are no in-room TVs or telephones here, though
the hotel does have wi-fi. The front desk will babysit your cellphone,
slipping it into a wool case made by the staff's knitting club. For
centuries, the sisters' days have alternated between contemplation and
action. This is reflected in the hotel's activities---yoga, meditation,
chi kung, offered morning, noon and late afternoon. Wellness classes
take place in a studio in the cellar vaults, where British cannonballs,
found by the nuns

while gardening, are displayed. In another nod to the nuns'
contemplative ways, Le Monastère has communal spaces for quiet
reflection and a healthy food restaurant where breakfast is eaten in
silence. Beyond the cloister's gate is Rue des Remparts, with a view
over the river, and cobblestoned streets that lead to the nearby shops
and restaurants of Rue Saint-Paul. Visitors to this urban retreat are
encouraged to engage with the healing values and history of the nuns,
but in a secular way. My room on the third floor is part of the
"monastic package" nun's cells that have been "reimagined" for
modern-day visitors, with shared washrooms down an old hallway lined
with religious paintings. My head brushes the lintel above the crooked
wooden door of my room each time I go in or out. It's a reminder that
people were smaller in times past---and of how we inhabit the same
spaces through the ages. We relate to one another in ways we rarely
think about, human beings struggling to lead meaningful lives. A feeling
of protected silence permeates the convent---created by centuries of
prayer? Contemporary rooms are up a crooked wooden staircase from 1757,
and an original ascetic room has been preserved for visitors to see,
that of a Sister Brigitte: a simple bed, dresser, a place to kneel and
pray, the special veil hook, a water pitcher and bowl, a candle. On the
first floor is the museum, which traces the order's history and how it
intertwines with the history of health care in Quebec. Where the front
doors to the old convent once stood there is a spinning shelf marked
"Tour." Families once placed sugar pies or presents inside for their
cloistered relatives, and then rotated it for no-contact delivery inside
the convent. Besides family gifts, the nuns also received many
surprises, including abandoned babies with notes pinned to their
diapers---1,375 of them during tough times between 1801 and 1845. The
museum features an array of medical paraphernalia, including a full
apothecary with mortars and pestles, ceramic jars for creams and
ointments and an impressive-looking

tin and linen mask for use with chloroform anesthesia that was designed
by the nuns in 1848. A 12-piece nun's habit and a white "bride of
Christ" dress give me the willies. I learn that in the 17th century if a
young French girl dreamed of becoming a nurse, she had to become a nun
first. Who knows how many independent spirits became nuns, a career as
their main motivation? Old photographs depict the nuns skating outside
the convent, young and numerous. A poignant film plays on repeat, giving
testament to the sisters' diminishing numbers, image by image, over the
years. Like an oldfashioned TV screen that's gone off the air, at the
end the images fade to "snow." Believers and nonbelievers alike are
retreating in droves to places like Le Monastère to escape the
information-barraged, materialistic modern world for peaceful
sanctuaries where silence, beauty, history and a sense of the sacred are
preserved. Is it progress when a convent transforms into a hotel and
museum? How much can---and should---religious organizations change for
the modern age? The Augustine sisters considered these questions
carefully. They see their wellness hotel as a modern way of continuing
their mission, delicate given the backdrop of Quebec's Quiet Revolution
and scandals rocking the church. Hospitality, health and the healing of
body, mind and spirit have always been part of the nuns' vocation.
Hôtel-Dieu literally means "hotel of God," where everyone is treated as
though they were Christ. Secular expressions of this strike a chord with
modern people, who are drawn to holistic health, to spirituality, and
who crave freedom from distractions. "It was the nuns' own initiative to
start the hotel," says Isabelle Duchesneau, Le Monastère's executive
director, who guided the transformation from convent to secular hotel
run by a nonprofit. Earnings

from paying guests, workshops, corporate retreats, massage treatments,
the gift shop and the restaurant support the nuns' healing and heritage
missions. The nuns know first-hand that for those in healing
professions, taking time out is vital so they may continue their work
without burning out. That's why Le Monastère gives reduced rates to
caregivers, whether professionals or family, who find respite to pray or
reflect or simply wander in the garden. Hotel earnings also support the
museum and archive centre. An entire floor was added above the sisters'
residence---they now live in an adjoining wing off the hotel---to house
a conservation facility for the collections of all the Augustinian
monasteries in Quebec, with 40,000 artifacts---proof that the thrifty
nuns never threw anything out. I enjoy seeing the sisters, who rub
shoulders with guests in the garden, gift shop, elevator and museum. I'd
come here thinking "out with the old and in with the new." The church is
rightly vilified for countless abuses of spiritual authority, but now I
see that doesn't mean these nuns aren't admirable. In fact, in many ways
they are women for our times: ambitious, capable, innovative, in service
to others. I confess to a great respect for nurses---my mother is a
retired nurse, which I think is a heroic and unsung profession. I ask
whether the sisters are surprised by the success of their monastic
retreat. "They're very touched by how people respond," Duchesneau says.
"They agreed this would be a nonreligious place. Religion was always an
answer in the past centuries, but now the churches are empty and people
are looking for meaning. Modern society needs this kind of place, where
people are free to live their own spirituality the way they wish." As
well as the peaceful infrastructure, the nuns have centuries of
expertise in balancing their spiritual and social mission. They have
much to share about how to retreat and keep our day jobs. Sister Sarah
MacDonald joined the Augustinian order in 2015 at 35, making her the
youngest nun by

decades---the closest in age back then was 73. She's smart, dynamic
despite having a head cold and funny. When I remark that not many young
women join convents these days, she quips, "Yeah, I feel like an animal
in the zoo. I tend to stand out." MacDonald has an exacting schedule: in
addition to nursing, she's a tour guide at the Catherine of
St. Augustine Centre, located on the second floor adjoining Le
Monastère; she manages the nuns' website; and she maintains a daily
regimen of morning and evening prayers and Mass, plus an hour in
personal prayer. Dressed in her white nursing shift and wearing a large
crucifix, Sister Sarah tells me in a hoarse voice that she caught the
cold from one of her patients. She works in long-term care with people
with Alzheimer's and dementia. Originally from Sudbury, she had been
baptized Catholic but rarely went to church, except for the occasional
Mass with her grandparents. She earned a degree in religious studies at
McMaster University, where she first met women who had dedicated
themselves to religious life. This planted a seed. After graduation she
worked for Revenue Canada. "I was a tax collector. Any biblical scholars
out there will understand the irony." Sister Sarah arrived on the
convent's doorstep seeking a place to stay while she worked at the 49th
International Eucharistic Congress, a gathering that attracted thousands
of Catholics. Before that she'd served in a Calcutta orphanage run by
the order founded by Mother Teresa and visited various North American
religious communities. But with the sisters she finally found what she
was looking for. It was like falling in love, she says. She took her
vows in 2015. While the sisters value prayer and seclusion, their vow to
serve the poor and the sick is also a priority. "We know how easy it is
to get caught up in the active world. We can't give what we don't have.
So we need to both give back to our community and society, and take care
of ourselves," Sister

Sarah explains. The sisters build silence into their days, but they also
retreat. "Here, our Fridays are always in silence. I also have one
retreat day per month, plus one week-long and one four-day retreat per
year." In fact monks and nuns from even the most silent orders take
retreats relieved of the responsibilities of everyday life to
concentrate on God. This also applies to the lives of busy secular
people, who benefit from learning to balance action with contemplation
and to touch on the sacred, she says. "It's a need we've had for
centuries: it's who we are as human beings to have spaces or times
reserved for something that's greater than we are." This has become
increasingly challenging. "We're surrounded by noise and stimulation. It
takes a conscious effort to disconnect from everything that's around us,
to really listen." Le Monastère aims to provide people with a taste of
healing and silence, a beginning. "Spaces like this allow us to have a
profound experience, a special experience of the sacred, but that's
really not limited to sacred space. You may experience a mountaintop
moment, an insight, a utopic moment, but we need to go down the mountain
later---to remember the experience and be able to bring it into daily
life, try and find ways to relive it. That's what we do when we retreat:
we renew, we remember and take the time. So you don't need a building to
create sacred space---you need to find that in your everyday life."
Visitors are welcomed to join the sisters for vespers at 5 p.m. in the
church, accessible from the hotel's second floor, and I can just make it
before chi kung. I take my place beside two others in a space with room
for hundreds in its wooden pews. The sisters file in. Most are slow and
bent. They glance up, waiting for one last sister to appear. Finally she
parks her walker and leans heavily on the pew backs as she makes her way
slowly down the long, empty row. Twelve sisters sit in two short lines
in the corner of the capacious church.

The elderly women raise their voices in praise and thanks for the day
just past, and it's elevating. The values of the nuns---simplicity,
silence, service and devotion---are timeless. I'm no longer certain how
I feel about the disappearance of the ancient order of Augustine sisters
here, or other such orders around the world. Who doesn't need more
prayers? Yet it's true that were the hotel not secular, I wouldn't be
here. Perhaps this is the new way, what ancient offers modern: a place
where a window is still open to the sacred, however we conceive it. The
nuns stop singing and sit a moment in silence, heads bowed. They stir,
and then stand up to leave. One walks over and says in French that I'm
very welcome. It's touching. We smile and shake hands. As she hobbles
away in her sturdy nursing shoes, joining the others in their white
shifts, it's as though they're ghosts already. What a paradox: churches
in the West face steep declines in numbers and are closing or
repurposing monasteries and convents, while modern-day people are
booking up retreats far in advance in these peaceful, spiritual
environments, often located in unique historic and natural places. Like
the world at large, the idea of retreat, even in religious
organizations, has been progressively secularized. Believers and
nonbelievers alike are seeking healing spaces and expert advice in
traditional religious communities now reinventing themselves---and in
the process, defining one of the main ways we retreat today. Modern
people have more retreats to choose from than ever: religious,
spiritual, wellness, nature, arts and culture, historical, taster
weekends, workshops, longer immersions or self-directed retreats in
secular accommodations. Like refugees from the modern world, we're
flocking to these places to remember---or discover---how to take a step
back. Religious organizations can still provide us with the geography
for retreat, and often expert guidance for frazzled souls wanting to
experience interiority. For

most of us, these communal retreats are far more accessible than finding
a hermit's hut, and they come with structure and routine already in
place, and gatekeepers who know how to do it. As noted, while organized
religion is in decline in the West, the "spiritual not religious"
grouping is growing dramatically. A strong but hidden spiritual pulse
was noted by philosopher Charles Taylor, author of A Secular Age and
professor emeritus of philosophy at Montreal's McGill University. Taylor
argues that in the West since the Reformation, traditional religion has
not been disappearing, but has become increasingly diversified and
personal---an opinion shared by many. What explains God's enduring
appeal? "Religion seems to give meaning to suffering---much more so than
any secular ideal or belief that we know of," says Ara Norenzayan, a
social psychologist at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver
and author of 2013's Big Gods. The search for meaning is attractive not
just for the traditionally religious, but for people in the "spiritual
not religious" category too. "We have one of the least religious
societies in North America---almost one in two Vancouverites say that
they do not belong to any religion. Yet, a growing number of the
nonreligious report having spiritual beliefs and inclinations." Many
anthropologists, neuroscientists, psychologists and philosophers suggest
that humans are predisposed to believe in a higher power. Whatever the
case, humans have a clear need to feel connected to something larger,
and religion and spirituality offer one channel. These two ideas---that
religion and spirituality are alive and well, and that they are vital to
understanding social, political and historical aspects of a complex
world---help explain the popularity of retreats to spiritual
environments. These notions, it seems to me, have much greater currency
in Europe than in North America. Britain's BBC offers myriad programs on
religious and spiritual topics that aim to improve spiritual literacy
and

explore whether ancient traditions have anything to offer modern people.
Filming what happens when we retreat, usually an experience that's
interior and private, makes for great television, both entertaining and
educational. In The Monastery, "Five men, ranging from an atheist in the
pornography trade to a former Protestant paramilitary, \[find\] their
lives unexpectedly transformed in the latest incarnation of reality
television." The men join a Benedictine community and retreat for 40
days and 40 nights. The edgiest moment isn't a spiritual crisis, though
they do occur--- it's the grim moment when the brother in charge
collects cellphones because everyone is so distracted. It's often
hilarious, as when one man says with a straight face, "Applying monastic
values to a job in the soft porn industry is particularly challenging."
He later changes his profession. In The Convent, four women spend 40
days and 40 nights on retreat with the Poor Clare nuns. There's a
disillusioned workaholic unfulfilled by success; a woman who is
terrified of God who wants to confront her fears; a soul singer and
former alcoholic who thinks God is calling her to be celibate; and a
free-spirited atheist who hopes to be more at peace. Among other
programs are The Retreat, The Big Silence, The Lost Gospels, Around the
World in 80 Faiths, Songs of Praise, Retreat: Meditations from the
Monastery and The Road to the Camino. There's also the incomparable
Extreme Pilgrim, a reality show/travelogue/documentary I've re-watched
many times. The show follows Peter Owen Jones, a former ad executive
turned Anglican vicar, as he embarks on three spiritual journeys. He
lives with the kung fu monks of central China, gets stoned with mystics
of the Himalayas at India's Kumbha Mela---"This is God in colour!" he
exclaims---and lives as an ascetic hermit in the Egyptian desert. As the
very title Extreme Pilgrim suggests, the show is absurd---but it's also
fascinating and illuminating. Owen Jones is a longhaired maverick who
chain-smokes and leaves behind his clerical collar; he

talks openly about the limitations of his church, which he says seeks to
actively suppress religious debate. He really does test his physical and
mental endurance, which is why the show so interests me. As he prepares
to follow in the footsteps of the ancient hermits of the Egyptian
desert, who left society to dedicate their lives to the love of God, he
admits that this three-week experiment scares him because there will be
no escape and no distraction---the most common struggle for modern
people on retreat. The desert hermits gave up mental and material
security and comfort to get closer to God. Owen Jones says he's always
believed this was an essential part of the religious experience, and
he's been waiting for 40 years to do it, to confront his own
demons---despite growing misgivings. "I know that their divine knowledge
was won by hardship, pain and privation and to learn from them I have to
become an extreme pilgrim," he intones over dramatic music. Owen Jones
was right to be afraid: even for someone with his experience in
contemplative life, who is taking part in a reality show, and stocked
with ample supplies, three weeks in a remote desert cave is no picnic.
His guide to spiritual warfare is Father Lazarus, an Australian who was
atheist for 40 years and now sports a long grey beard, black robe and
embroidered hat. At the Orthodox Coptic Christian Monastery of St.
Anthony, out of more than 100 monks, Father Lazarus is the only cave
hermit. He kindly lends Owen Jones his previous mountain cave, right
beside the last cave of St. Anthony. Father Lazarus and the crew leave
Owen Jones alone---with a camera so he can film his experiences. This is
a reality show after all, but in the modern day, is filming so different
from keeping a diary? His pseudo-retreat is nevertheless an illuminating
look at the usually private experiences people pass through in their
caves, real and metaphorical. At first Owen Jones prays piously. Then he
wanders in the rocky landscape. Then he performs push-ups and sit-ups,
saying he needs physical exercise:

"Otherwise I will go stark, raving mad." He makes friends with a lizard.
On day four, as he lights the propane stove, he says it's "like being
incarcerated in a French surrealist movie where every single echo, every
sound---where they stir their cup of coffee and it takes 15 seconds, all
you hear is sugar dissolving and the spoon going around---every sound,
especially at night, is utterly magnified, is sharp, sharp." Owen Jones
passes through various stages over three weeks: from boredom to
defiance---"Why is it always about you?" he complains to an image of
Christ on the cross---through abject terror and illness. Eventually, he
begins to appreciate the silence and the desert's visual austerity. Most
who inhabit a desert cave at a monastery, or in any isolated place, will
have trained first, preparing through prayers, practices and previous
retreats. The silence and solitude often start to bring insights only
later, after time to adjust. Extreme Pilgrim gives a unique glimpse into
how taking a step back, far from being nothing, is a transformative
experience. On day 21, Father Lazarus returns to give a goodbye blessing
and tells Owen Jones, thin but peaceful-looking, "You will go back to
the place of things; I want you to carry with you the full emptiness of
the desert." Lazarus, incidentally, and ironically, is yet another media
celebrity hermit: his fans created a webpage, and he is the subject of
various documentaries and articles. The modern media is simply a
stand-in for curious audiences. A celebrity hermit may seem
contradictory, but I'd argue this is the modernday equivalent of word of
mouth, which led thousands of pilgrims to chase St. Anthony into this
very desert, followers so numerous that hermit communities eventually
evolved to become the first settled monasteries in the West. For most of
us today a monk's retreat will be gentler, comfortably communal as
opposed to the more advanced retreat to a hermit's cave by

the monastery, or alone on a mountain. As more and more people retreat
in their hermitages and convents, monks and nuns often say it's because
laypeople are sensing the inner void in a materialistic world. Laypeople
range from those who think they need to rest, or who want to stay in an
affordable natural or historic place and perhaps find something more, to
those who are actively seeking meaning in the footsteps of the ancients.
In any case it's an exchange made in heaven: with church attendance
down, aging communities and bills to pay, the monasteries can earn money
while serving society. The idea of monks and nuns being self-sufficient
and making money is nothing new in the Christian monastic tradition.
They are not driven by greed or ambition. Their humble work is done to
sustain the abbeys where they live and often relates to the environment
they live in, and their products and services are sold both online and
in monastery-based shops. In Provence monks and nuns sell lavender and
honey products; at de St. Benoît du Lac in Quebec, the only monk-run
dairy in North America, they make cheese, and at Oka, more cheese is
made from the milk of well-loved cows. Kentuckian monks sell fudge
soaked in bourbon. The Sisters of the Valley in California sell
cannabis, which they grow following the lunar cycle, and meditate while
they prepare medical tinctures, oils and salves in the abbey kitchen.
Iowan monks make caskets using premium woods from their forest. Other
monastic products include fine beer, wine and spirits--- think Trappist
ales and Benedictine liqueur---musical CDs; butter; brownies; the Pope's
cologne, which uses the same essential oils as Pope Pius's with violet
and citrus notes; fine soaps and shampoos; and gourmet mushrooms. The
Orthodox monks at New Skete, New York, have raised and trained German
shepherds for more than 40 years. With their organic, artisanal products
made with care and simplicity, and services provided with love and
attention, the monks and nuns are

preserving old ways, drawing on expert knowledge gained over hundreds of
years. We can enjoy these products whether we agree with Christianity or
not, and we can benefit from monastic retreats. Monks and nuns have
developed similar patterns and practices the world over for finding God,
or Nirvana, or joy and liberation, or peace. Routine, silence and living
in community can help us transcend distractions and ego, and experience
an alternative state of being, and an "ekstasis, a 'stepping outside'
the confines of self," writes author and renowned comparative religion
scholar Karen Armstrong, a former nun. Many Western religious orders
still follow St. Benedict's sixth-century rule, ora et labora (Latin for
pray and work). Benedict, disillusioned with the city and its
licentiousness, retreated to a cave in the Sabine Hills near Rome, where
for three years he lived as a hermit, wore a hair shirt and rolled in
thistles to subdue his flesh. But he rejected this path and went on to
found monasteries that became the centre of Christian monasticism,
redefining it as stable, enclosed and isolated. He condemned asceticism
and wandering and wrote his influential rule for "regulated" monks
living communally under an abbot's authority. It's amazing to me that
Benedict's values and ways have remained constant as the world
kaleidoscopes through change. The Benedictines have long recognized that
non-monastics need to retreat as well. One of the order's rules is that
"all guests who present themselves are to be welcomed as Christ, for him
himself will say: I was a stranger and you welcomed me." At St. Peter's
Abbey in central Saskatchewan, the oldest Benedictine order in Canada,
founded in 1903, the monks give people a glimpse of monastic life,
providing an oasis for prayer and silence to nourish body, soul and
spirit, and to help people refocus. They grow their own produce and tend
the gardens, orchards, pastures and greenhouses on their 2,800acre
organic farm near Muenster. Nature for the Benedictines is the second

book, after the Bible. Aside from offering what's in short supply today,
a slow pace, simplicity and natural beauty, the monks' green ways often
draw modern people interested in sustainable agriculture and healthy
food. At one point there were 60 monks; today there are 14. With aging
residents and a decline in people seeking vocations, St. Peter's adapted
for the 21st century by opening a school and later a college. The monks
also welcome retreaters and model how to balance prayer and work in
times when everyone's life is out of balance. Father Demetrius, the
guestmaster, is particularly skilled at this: in addition to five
prayers a day, doing prayers on request and working on the farm---he's
often in the honey hut, keeping bees---the father hosts 3,000 guests
each year, on religious and secular retreats. In this beautiful setting,
with its quiet spaces and quiet time, Sage Hill Writing hosts the
Saskatchewan Writers' Guild's most popular retreat. Poet Lorna Crozier
has said every book she has written over the last 20 years had its start
at St. Peter's Abbey: "For me, it's a sanctuary from the distractions of
daily life and a catalyst for writing." Seeking a quiet, affordable
place to write, Patrick Leigh Fermor found much more when he entered a
world more foreign than the ones he'd been chronicling in his famous
travel books. In A Time to Keep Silence, Fermor describes his sojourns
in some of France's most venerable monasteries in the 1950s, including
the Benedictine Abbeys of St. Wandrille, renowned for art and learning.
At first he found it hard to adjust, writing: "So much silence and
sobriety! The place assumed the character of an enormous tomb, a
necropolis of which I was the only living inhabitant." It was painful
even to get used to the unfamiliar---a secluded cell, silent meals and
solemn rituals, and the company of monks and nuns who seemed joyless and
unnatural. Soon this changes, and "the troubled waters of the mind grow
still and clear, and much that is hidden away and all that clouds it
floats to

the surface and can be skimmed away; and after a time one reaches a
state of peace that is unthought of in the ordinary world." A
sophisticated Brit who encounters monastic life inadvertently, Fermor
describes what we may still find in such settings. On his inward journey
his worries "slid away into some distant limbo," he writes. He calls the
abbey "the reverse of a tomb . . .a castle hanging in mid-air beyond the
reach of ordinary troubles and vexations." When he returns to Paris he
experiences this change of perspective in reverse: "The Abbey was at
first a graveyard; the outer world seemed afterwards, by contrast, an
inferno of noise and vulgarity." A convert of sorts, he wonders with
annoyance why we single out solitaries as selfish when social life is
not necessarily all service and joy, and solitaries are inoffensive. How
is it worse to live in God's presence than in never-ending useless
activity? he asks. Fermor comes to respect the monks. He is moved by
their kindness, gentleness, compassion and devotion to saving souls. He
admires their capacity for silence and solitude, and their learning,
science, beautiful buildings and unparalleled calm, the by-products of
their life. He adds that it's "risible" to accuse them of escapism---try
living this conviction, he says, confronting "the terrible problem of
eternity." When he asks one of monks to sum up his way of life, his
reply echoes something Sister Sarah told me at Le Monastère. The monk
pauses and then asks, "Have you ever been in love?" Offering divine
accommodation is a common way that abbeys, convents and monasteries
survive today, helping modern people to survive in the process.
Providing respite to travellers is a centuries-old tradition for many
religious communities, so it's not a huge next step for them to begin
welcoming secular tourists, or guests who want to retreat, or both.
Tourism was invented when religious people wanted to go to the Holy Land
and has

been big business ever since. Typically, you don't have to be
particularly religious, or religious at all, and tourists and pilgrims
appreciate the simple, serene, unique and sometimes budget-priced
lodging in lovely settings. Going on retreat to the quiet of a
monastery, abbey or retreat centre is a common global practice, and many
either provide a quiet space for personal reflection, or welcome people
to join the community's practices, or provide optional spiritual
counselling. I find the sheer exuberant variety of retreats available to
support all manner of retreaters, regardless of slender means,
impressive. Worldwide retreats by the hundreds are easy to find: I've
spent countless hours combing published guidebooks to lodgings in
sanctuaries, monasteries and abbeys and surfing websites such as
monasteries.net, monasterystays.com, and the not-for-profit Good Night
and God Bless: A Guide to Convent and Monastery Accommodation in Europe
(goodnightandgodbless.com). I found Buddhist, Catholic, Hindu, Jewish,
Protestant, Quaker, Sufi and secular retreat centres of all
descriptions, some overlooking the sea, others high in the mountains,
some in mansions with gardens, others in spare Zen temples or simple
cabins in the woods. Scholarships, work-study opportunities and
discounts are often available for those in need. Armchair retreaters,
perhaps people in the throes of family life and counting the years until
they can leave the children for a day, a week or a month, will find
plenty of dreaming fodder. A few really stood out for me. New Camaldoli
Hermitage in Big Sur, California, founded in 1958 by two Italian hermits
and run by Camaldolese Benedictine monks, is built on cliffs with views
of the Pacific Ocean. Retreaters are welcome to join the monks for
services or not, and there is no proselytizing. Rooms have private
gardens, or there are hermitage cabins on the hillside, or for men,
repurposed monks' cells within the cloister. There's no cellphone
coverage, and no radio, TV or telephones in the rooms. Guests

observe silence, and can come for private self-guided retreats, for
"preached" retreats on religious subjects or for group retreats where
they get a taste of the lives of the monks. At Pluscarden Abbey in
northeast Scotland, guests of the Benedictines stay by donation and,
similarly, at the Trappist Abbey of Our Lady of the Snows in
south-central France, hikers and pilgrims can sleep for a donation in
the place where Robert Louis Stevenson stayed in 1878 and wrote Travels
with a Donkey in the Cevennes. At Nepal's Kopan Monastery in the
foothills of the Himalayas, 360 monks live and welcome outsiders for up
to a month for Buddhist study, meditation, retreat and practice for
about \$20 a day, including three meals. That a bountiful supply of
serene, sacred places already exists hasn't stopped religious orders
from constructing new buildings to attract visitors, more quiet oases in
a turbulent world. In the rolling green hills near Atlanta, Georgia, the
Monastery of the Holy Spirit's 40 Trappist monks took a \$7 million
calculated risk, breaking ground for a new gathering space and visitor
centre with a gift shop, garden centre and bonsai nursery and
greenhouse, which opened in 2011. By pulling in more tourists, the monks
hope to free themselves financially so they can focus more on living a
contemplative life, while offering a sacred space where people of all
faiths and no faith can retreat in nature and stillness on day trips,
mini-retreats and full retreats. Still others are inventing contemporary
traditions. One of the best reflections of our enslaved times is called
Prison Inside Me. In South Korea, hundreds of burned-out workaholics are
going to this "prison" retreat to relax. "The true prison is the world
outside," says the co-founder of the popular jail-themed retreatJi-hyang
Noh. The retreat was the idea of her husband, Yong-Seok Kwon, a lawyer
who was working 100-hour weeks and suffering the resulting physical and
mental toll. Dreaming of freedom, he asked a law-enforcement friend to
lock him in jail for therapeutic

reasons. "I thought I would feel better if I stayed in solitary
confinement. At least there are no people, no phone calls looking for
me, no smoking, no drinking," Kwon said. His friend refused so he built
his own "jail," a stress reduction centre in a mountain town near Seoul
where people can escape manic modern life and go inward. Paying guests
at Prison Inside Me, desperate to de-stress, had to give up their
cellphones completely. But the South Koreans, a notoriously connected
people, couldn't cope, and the rule was bent so they can check once a
day. "People seem nervous without a phone and simply worry too much
about an emergency, which seldom happens," said Kwon. "Inmates" put on a
regulation uniform and go to one of 28 identical cells. The
60square-foot solitary confinement lockups have a window, heated wood
floors, a tea set, a yoga mat, a toilet, sink and small table, and a
panic button. The doors lock, but people are shown how to undo the latch
from the inside. Meal delivery is through a slot in the door. Inmates
spend time in their rooms, meditating and reflecting in silence, or in
private meditation classes, spiritual classes and healing group
sessions---for about \$150 for two nights. Kwon says he wants guests to
pause and find freedom in confinement, safe behind doors locked to the
onslaught of modern life. "I only hope that this place offers a chance
for visitors to reflect on themselves," he said. The ancient desert
mindset lives on, but renegades leaving society today might head for
Slab City in California, which its residents call "the last free place
in America." Squatters in this transient desert community are an odd mix
of retirees stretching their budgets, snowbirds seeking a free place to
park their RVs in winter, and artists, addicts, free spirits, fugitives,
modernday ascetics seeking simplicity and aspiring hobos, young and old.
Some don't want, or can't afford, "sticks-and-bricks" living, and come
for

economic reasons. Here, like-minded souls here can avoid being
stigmatized for wanting to live differently or for being poor. Many of
these outsiders are seeking not spiritual revelation, but freedom. You
can camp with no rent, no landlords, no property tax and no one to
bother you. The community is an off-grid accumulation of RVs, yurts,
rusting old buses and makeshift homes of tents and pallets that sit in
the empty Sonoran desert among the concrete slabs from Camp Dunlap, an
abandoned Second World War military barracks that operated here until
the 1950s on 640 acres of public land. People eke out a life using
energy from generators, propane and solar power, burying their trash and
sewage in the ground, and bathing in a single communal shower, nearby
hot springs or the irrigation canals. They rely on their own or their
fellow Slabbers' ingenuity for most everything in limittesting desert
conditions. They endure shortages of the staples of modern life and
learn to live more simply and environmentally responsibly. Selfreliance,
sustainability and a "live and let live" ethos are the norm. Numbers can
reach 4,000 people in the winter when the temperature drops, but in
summer, when it's upwards of 120 degrees, there are only about 200
residents, plus the scorpions and rattlesnakes. Canadians are typically
well represented. "Last year, because of the falling exchange rate, a
lot of the snowbirds from Canada failed to make it down to Southern
California and Slab City's population dropped to under 2,000 for the
first time in years," a 2017 article in Britain's Independent noted. The
community may not have water and sanitation, but it does have a decent
library, a barbershop, churches, nightclubs and Solar Bob's successful
company for inexpensive solar-power conversions. There's an Avon Lady,
daily news on CB radio and a prom---because most of the people here
never went to their prom. There's a pet cemetery and Slab mart ---the
garbage dump/recycling centre. A tall fork in the road sticks up from

the sand beside a sign that explains it's "a replica of the fork in the
road that inspired Robert Frost to write the poem 'The Road Not Taken.'
The original fork is located in Lancaster, Vermont." There's another
sign to West Satan, located next to East Jesus (another way of saying
"out in the middle of nowhere"), a thriving artist community with a
sculpture garden and works made from trash. Biblical references abound.
Salvation Mountain is Slab City's most recognizable landmark, a massive
art installation made of adobe, straw, mud and bright paint, featured in
Into the Wild, among many other film and photography projects. It's the
life's work of Leonard Knight, one of Slab City's most famous residents,
who died in 2014. He found it the ideal place to practise his
philosophy, "Love Jesus and keep it simple." Slabbers also call the
outside world Babylon or, sometimes, the Beast. Nowadays many tourists
visit: you can even do Airbnb in an RV, living side by side with people
who like the simplicity and freedom or have fallen on hard times. Or you
can show up and take any unoccupied space. Many journalists visit and
some Slabbers won't speak to them, giving notice in printed signs in
trailer windows that say "Absolutely No Media." As with the Egyptian
desert, no one else wanted Slab City's desolate desert land, which is
why the squatters were long left alone here. But in 2015 the state said
it was considering selling the parcel, 140 miles east of San Diego and
about 50 miles north of the U.S.--Mexico border, so some residents
organized and applied to buy it. Builder Bill, who runs the Range, an
open-air nightclub, and one of the leaders of the application, worries
about displacing the displaced. Many residents have nowhere else to go,
he says. Bill himself had been working construction in San Diego when
employment dried up. Soon he was living out of a van, with police
constantly telling him to move on. "When it's time to get out of Dodge,
you have to go somewhere right?" he told a reporter

from KBPS, a public broadcaster in San Diego. "You know you can retreat,
retreat and retreat, and there's one last little knot on the end of the
rope," he said. "That's Slab City." Builder Bill said the Slabbers
embrace radical freedom. "At Slab City you can just sit down and occupy
a spot on the planet without any indebtedness or persecution." To
prevent outside development and encroachment, the Slab City Community
Group and Salvation Mountain Inc. have applied to purchase the public
land, while the Chasterus Foundation of East Jesus bought a 30-acre
parcel. Before more land can be sold, complex issues, such as a possible
chemical clean-up or disposal of unexploded ordnance, have to be
resolved by the state. For this most enduring of temporary spaces, seven
decades old, the future remains uncertain. Along with its positive
aspects---simplicity, self-reliance, camaraderie, freedom---Slab City
has an apocalyptic feel, with its rusting metal and derelict buses and
sometimes extreme poverty. Adding to the end-of-theworld ambience, Slab
City is by the toxic Salton Sea that once rivaled nearby Palm Springs
and attracted more tourists than Yosemite National Park. The "sea" was
created in 1905 by mistake when the Colorado River breached a dike and
flooded the desert valley. Now it's dried up again and is lined with
abandoned resorts and dead fish, and artists use the derelict Bombay
Beach for installations. On the other side of Slab City is the Chocolate
Mountain artillery range and a landfill. In the Anthropocene, rebels who
step out of the mainstream---or are pushed out---live not in the
pristine desert, but in dystopian ecological wastelands on the edge of
commerce. Like the ancients before them, the countercultural Slabbers
are seeking a better, more meaningful life. Maybe even waiting for the
coming of a new age.

Pilgrim Ways Traveller, there is no path. Paths are made by walking.
---Antonio Machado

Since before recorded time human beings have embarked on pilgrimages,
travel as transcendence. We're propelled to action by the conviction
that larger forces---God, or Shakespeare's lingering presence, depending
on

your devotion---can influence our lives, and we can touch this power in
special places. Pilgrimage is an ancient quest, and I am on a
pilgrimage. I heft my pack onto my back and step onto the sandy trail
with a mix of relief and irritation. Relief because it has been a long
journey to here, a penance even. For a year and a half I've been trying
to enact a walking pilgrimage. Each time, something has gone wrong. I
feel cosmically afflicted, yet determined: of all our ways of retreat,
literally stepping away from the everyday is one that most beguiles
21st-century people. This is why I want the experience. Yet I am a
reluctant pilgrim. I feel I'm just not a pilgrimage person, though I
know journeys have long been foundational practices in most world
religions and are still very much in evidence, holding mythic resonance.
There's the Hajj to Mecca for Muslims, pilgrimages to Varanasi and
sacred rivers and mountains for Hindus, to Jerusalem for Jews and the
other Abrahamic religions, to Bodh Gaya and holy sites in northern India
and the Himalayas for Buddhists, to shrines across Europe and the
Americas for Christians, and for Indigenous cultures worldwide, sacred
journeys linked to the seasons, to places of reverence and to rites of
initiation. Pilgrimage mirrors the universal human journey---birth,
transformation, death. A red-tailed hawk soars in circles above the
clearing at the trailhead, reminding me of how this ancient phenomenon
has circled around and revived itself. Modern-day Western pilgrims are
flocking to medieval paths in record numbers, for both spiritual and
secular reasons. Whatever the stated purpose, on pilgrimage, we're in
pursuit of the ineffable, experiences of awe and wonder that can't
really be put into words, which are rare in our everyday lives. Though
the sky is grey and the rain is spitting, I feel cautiously optimistic.
I'd nearly called off my pilgrim walk yet again---this time because of a
domestic tragedy with our backyard chickens. Yet here I am,

the air fresh on my face. I've even received an auspicious sign. On the
halfhour drive up from Bancroft the taxi driver said that the hunters
are depressed because the black bears, fat on abundant berries and
crabapples, aren't taking their bait. I'm happy to hear this---partly
because I'm rooting for the bears, but mostly because I forgot to buy
bear spray. Being eaten, or shot: however unlikely, such are the
considerations for a walking pilgrimage on the Hastings Heritage Trail.
This rugged, forested route along abandoned train tracks could hardly be
less like the well-worn path of the Camino de Santiago de Compostela,
the way of St. James in Spain. That's what I had assumed was the model
for a pilgrimage: a traditional route that arrives at a set shrine,
involving a long physical journey. We can be forgiven for thinking that
the Camino equals pilgrimage: this medieval path has been exceeding
historical pilgrim totals each year, and its success has sparked a
resurgence of old pilgrim routes around the world. Hostelries closed for
hundreds of years are reopening and, to meet demand, ancient routes are
being improved, long-neglected ones waymarked and new shrines
consecrated. Not only are the devout taking to the road in record
numbers, but secular pilgrims on quests outside what's officially sacred
have been reframing pilgrimage, improvising on age-old religious
journeys and inventing new paths. In reality only some pilgrimages, such
as the Camino, are made on foot. The journey is the vital point, and
walking is just one means of personal transformation. Anthropologist
Edith Turner calls pilgrimage a "kinetic ritual" in 1978's seminal Image
and Pilgrimage in Christian Culture, cowritten with her husband Victor.
We depart "in search of something intangible," writes Rebecca Solnit in
Wanderlust. Then there are the destination pilgrimages, such as the Hajj
to Mecca, or travelling to Rome to visit Keats's apartment because we
love Keats or visiting a site related to a

hero or tragedy. This may mean taking an airplane or metro to the holy
site. Though the essence is the same as when we walk, the emphasis is on
a transformational encounter with sacred energies at a specific place,
which elevates and empowers us. Whether we walk, draw power from the
"shrine" at the destination, or both, the pilgrim's journey changes us.
Moving through spiritual geography, we travel, and that "travail," that
effort, makes us deserving. We advance toward the sacred, or whatever
inspires us---the saint's relics, the artist's home, the mountain,
Memphis. Then we culminate our journey in arrival, and return home---or
in some cases, keep wandering---transformed. Pilgrimage is the physical
expression of the intense human desire for meaning, for contact with
ultimate reality. During its medieval peak in the West, pilgrimage was
Christian and the destination was holy sites and shrines---and
ultimately, heaven. "Europe was born in pilgrimage, and its mother
tongue is Christianity," wrote Goethe. After a long post-Reformation
gap, the tradition stirred again in the 1960s, when it also began to
emerge as a new academic field. Pilgrimage exploded quite recently, in
the past 30 years: in 1986, the first year statistics were kept, just
2,491 pilgrim certificates of completion were issued on the
Camino---though more may have walked all or part of the route without
registering; now records show upwards of 300,000 pilgrims a year. Each
time my walking pilgrimage failed to work out, I became more annoyed,
though my knowledge grew. Now, on this journey along the Hastings
Heritage Trail, I hope to better understand what compels so many
pilgrims to walk away from ordinary life. My "immigrant feeling," which
keeps me restless and full of questions, is another motivation. I was
born in Scotland and left when I was three. After living most of my life
in Ontario, the wild, dramatic lands bordering my cabin are my most
beloved geography. Yet I still don't feel I quite belong on either side
of the Atlantic.

I simply want to walk, touch the land with my feet and consider my
relationship to here. The trail under my feet is the former railbed of
the Central Ontario Railway. My route from Maynooth Station, once the
railway's northerly terminus, will run about 20 kilometres south to
Bancroft, where I left the car. I will walk, sleep overnight near the
trail and walk again to the former train station in "Bankies," now a
tourist information centre. That a pilgrimage has to involve walking
long distances is a postmodern idea, and a misconception: people walk
short and long distances, sometimes choosing to visit the shrine only,
and they also bike, ride horses, use wheelchairs, and even drive. The
walking pilgrim's path unfolds slowly over days, weeks, months, so we
can't see the whole road or know what we will find. Given today's mania
for productivity, you'd think this would be a hard sell. Yet worldwide,
pilgrims are taking to the road, from vagrants to explorers, religious
and spiritual questers, the newly wed or divorced, the grieving,
creative spirits, scientists, dissidents, bankers, all walking in search
of something. Beauty, spiritual clarity, a relationship, an epiphany; in
rebellion, remembrance or penance; or taking a new direction---the
purposes are as varied as the people. Scholars today no longer consider
pilgrimage solely religious or historical: it has evolved to mean any
transformative journey to a place, or for a purpose, that matters to us
deeply. It's a more fluid experience that's open to all regardless of
beliefs, and could be to the Ganges or Graceland. It's wonderfully
all-encompassing: a voodoo pilgrimage to Haiti brings together Catholic
and African practices, a reggae pilgrimage to Bob Marley's birthplace
and mausoleum offers optional smoking of sacramental herbs, and virtual
pilgrimage is possible for those whose health may not permit a physical
journey.

I even found an enviable film pilgrimage curated by Tilda Swinton that
gathered together 50 pilgrims from all over the world to pull a blue
truck, the mobile 80-seat Screen Machine cinema, from town to town
across the Scottish Highlands for eight and half days, showing films
about journeys. Pilgrimage is one way of finding meaning while in motion
that can be religious, or personal and self-invented. The common notion
that religious pilgrims are serious while secular ones are frivolous is
one I reject. All of us have beliefs that are unverifiable, and who is
to say what's sacred for someone else? The rain is still spitting, my
new hikers are laced up---I know, new boots are a mistake and I've been
turning my ankle in these for a couple of days now---and my water-laden
pack is strapped to my back---really, one litre every two hours? I'm
wearing neon orange, the very shade of Don't shoot. I take out a packet
of sacred ash I received years ago from Amma, India's Hugging Saint,
whose message is unconditional love. I rip open the brown paper and
sprinkle half the ash into the sandy soil, asking for a blessing for my
journey. I tuck it back into the bright cloth bag with a shiny black
feather, which I then return to my breast pocket. If all goes well---I'm
still not confident given my record so far---I'll use the rest of the
contents to mark the end of my journey. Taking a deep breath and
summoning all my equipoise I start to walk, worrying about new
obstacles, like a sprained ankle. Just as I think this, my foot comes
down on round stones that pock the sandy trail and I nearly fall.
Cursing, I remember that this will be an easy day, Maynooth Station to
Hybla, roughly four hours of slow and digressive walking, based on my
estimate of 3.5 kilometres an hour. I intend to take my time. The next
day will be longer. Though I couldn't get accurate information on the
part of the trail to Bancroft, I'm guessing it will take five hours.

I step and stumble onward with care. It's a vulnerable feeling to head
out alone with your pack, carrying all your food and water and clothes
and sunscreen and bug spray on your back. The road opens beneath my
feet, and I have an anxious yet excited feeling of moving into the
unknown. Pilgrimage is a quest over meaningful terrain, both outer and
inner. John Muir understood this: "I only went out for a walk, and
finally concluded to stay out till sundown, for going out, I found, was
really going in." Pilgrimage involves encountering uncertainty and risk,
is unpredictable, and unlikely to be a pleasure trip. Typically when we
move away from comfort, we're as likely to encounter awfulness as awe.
The deer flies, dreadful all summer and which I expected to make my walk
hell, have disappeared, so I wear my bug cap with the mesh tucked up
over the visor, resolving to stay receptive to the unknown and to
"spirit." I pass the ruin of Maynooth Station, with its caved-in roof.
The station was built in 1907 for a railway line that was decommissioned
nearly 40 years ago. My pilgrim route, it occurs to me, reverses the
original pillaging trajectory: this area was cut up by railways that
removed resources, such as then-abundant red pine and white pine, and by
north-south colonization roads. In the 1850s the roads sparked the
movement of settlers northward. Most became farmers, cultivating small
acreages, enticed north by free land. They found themselves stranded in
a rocky wilderness. By 1925, the Hastings Colonization Road was
described by a land surveyor as "a long trail of abandoned farms,
adversity, blasted hopes, broken hearts, and blasted ambition." Today's
maps and histories reveal little of the land's original inhabitants, the
Algonquin people, giving the distorted impression that history began
with the settlers. This is changing, thankfully: at Eagles Nest, near
Bancroft, a sacred place for vision quests, a new interpretative trail
and site run by the Algonquins of Ontario tells of early history. Signs
along the

trail, meant as "an example of meaningful engagement and a step forward
in the spirit of truth and reconciliation," explain how the Algonquin in
the Shawashkong watershed---the York River---travelled between various
encampments by canoe based on seasonal needs, hunting and fishing, and
describe the long history of Algonquin families who still live in the
area. Further, in the Algonquin Park region a young archeologist,
researcher and cultural heritage consultant, Christine Luckasavitch of
the Madawaska River Algonquin people, who belongs to the Crane Clan, has
been giving sold-out talks and writing about the roughly 12,000 years of
the land's heritage. She covers everything from glaciation to the
history of her people ---who were displaced by the fur trade, lumber
industry, and when the park was created in 1893---to the arrival of
European explorers, to logging and the infamous lumber and railway baron
J.R. Booth, and the arrival of artists and adventurers. It's heartening
that these histories are being restored; it's better for us all to live
in reality. The section of the trail I'm walking is in unceded
traditional Algonquin territory and part of a massive land claim
process. I know that many of the early settlers who displaced the
Indigenous people came from Scotland, my birth country, after being
forced off their lands during the Highland Clearances. A pilgrimage here
is complex. The trail is like a ghost railway, with traces of previous
lives. Up ahead, an old tree, laden with shining apples, beckons. I pick
one, admire its bold red stripes and bite into it. The taste is
refreshing, so I pluck two more and stuff them in my pockets. The idea
of living off the fat of the land is so delightful that I smile. I tuck
a few apple seeds into my breast pocket before hurling the core into the
woods. Apples will be my scallop shells, I decide, my pilgrim's badges.
The path winds into the forest, and I feel I've entered a green tunnel.
It leads along a raised trestle that must have been pure hell for the
old-time

surveyors and labourers to build. I'm walking near the treetops of
maple, birch, white pine and balsam. Down the steep embankment, streams
gurgle. Once in a while I hear an ATV's buzzing approach and stand to
the side until it passes. Mostly I begin to get into a rhythm: steps,
breath, thoughts. The path slopes gradually downhill---no more uphill
road to transformation for this walking pilgrim?---and descends into the
regular landscape, where the earth is more compacted and easier to walk
on. As I tromp along, grey clouds morph into white clouds with
intermittent sun. Along the way I collect rusty nails, nuts and bolts,
relics from the old railway. My mind and body gradually settle and fall
into step. Amid recent the busyness, I've had no pause for breath or
time to metabolize recent events. The night before I'd left Kingston to
come here, a fox had attacked our hens. Marco heard squawking and ran
out to find Princess on the ground, her white feathers torn off and
gashes on her neck. The fox was still waiting in the bushes so he put
the wounded bird in the house. Hearing a cry he ran out to find Mel, our
stylish black Harco, dead on the neighbours' lawn. The next morning as I
was about to depart for my pilgrimage, the fox returned, bold in broad
daylight. I chased it, squawking chickens in their coop, dogs barking,
people pointing. The fox ran up the six-foot back fence like it was a
chain-link ladder, leapt into the cemetery and flopped down on a grassy,
raised gravesite to look at me, red and elegant in the sunlight. I threw
an apple to scare it away, and it jumped up and sniffed as if to say, Is
this food? Vixens, I know, make their kits begin to hunt for themselves
in fall. Now as I walk I reflect on the fox's hunger and on why you
should never name your pet after a dear friend. Walking and autumn makes
me meditative, and I think a long while about what it means when a fox
enters your life.

The mid-September trees are tinged with red and my body goes on
autopilot, my uptight breath slows and deepens, and my mind gradually
empties. By the time I step off the trail to eat lunch, sitting down on
a fallen birch looking over a small lake, I'm not thinking of anything.
It's as though the logjam in my head has cleared and the thought stream
is flowing freely. ATVs periodically whip around the corner, causing a
great wind. The peanut butter and banana sandwich tastes divine, and
water is extra delicious, quenching thirst while also making my pack
lighter. I continue walking slowly and steadily, hurrying only while I
roar at a pack of six dogs, hoping to scare them off. I'd first spotted
a little mutt rolling on his back in a shaft of sunlight, legs waving in
the air, so it's unlikely they're dangerous. They chase me
halfheartedly, barking like mad fiends. Times passes and soon the green
tunnel begins to alternate with open swampy areas, where turtle shells
are scattered in the sandy soil, and narcotic peppermint scent wafts on
the breeze. The slap of a beaver's tail jolts me out of my reverie. "How
long have I got to go?" I wonder. I'm starting to feel tired. Back home
I walk most days for an hour or two, but the farthest I've ever gone on
foot before today was in elementary school when I was 12 years old. It
was a walkathon, terrible---scorching day, blisters, endless tarmac,
sticky cream soda for refreshment. I've always been out of alignment on
my left side. Like a bicycle with a crooked wheel, one leg doesn't move
forward smoothly: I had to stop running at 30, which is why I took up
yoga. Long walks and dynamic movement remain difficult. Fortunately so
far, the walking has been pleasant, though my pack feels heavier all the
time. Jays squawk like squabbling families, and I startle a grouse---a
whoop, whoop, whoop of slow wingbeats in the bush. Animal shit full of
berries is a hazard on the path. Coyote? Wolf? At Graphite Road I find a
screwdriver---a fork would have been easier to interpret. I stand at

the trail's edge as a side-by-side ATV passes, the driver in a creepy
Joker mask and the passenger holding a radio that blasts loud rock and
roll. On this peaceful path they seem a study in incongruity. Though as
a pilgrim here, I suppose I'm the one most out of place. Whether it's
the gorgeous trees or the fresh, fragrant air, it suddenly strikes me as
odd and wonderful to be on a walking pilgrimage. For months friends have
been asking with sly grins about my "pilgrim's lack of progress." Among
my many attempts that didn't pan out are two religious walking
pilgrimages, three modern ones including a water walk, and a number of
self-directed treks prevented by unusual obstacles---in one case, a
whole road was closed for resurfacing. My quest was under an ill star,
everyone agreed. But in my heart I suspected I knew what the problem
was: my secret aversion to the walking pilgrimage. One reason for my
antipathy was severe pilgrim fatigue. Pilgrimage is everywhere, and my
oppositional nature means I dislike anything that's popular, on
principle. As well I've read countless books, from the tedious Pilgrim's
Progress, incredibly once as popular as the Bible, an allegory of a
Christian everyman's struggle for salvation as he leaves the City of
Destruction for the Celestial City, to Shirley MacLaine's dippy
bestseller The Camino: A Journey of the Spirit---okay, skimmed those
two. I have enjoyed a great many pilgrim's tales, including Hilaire
Belloc's The Path to Rome, the chronicle of his Victorian-era pilgrimage
from central France across the Alps, with chapters like "The Astounding
Wine," "The Erroneous Anarchist" and "The Mount Terrible." I've read
poignant novels such as The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry, and many
contemporary true-Camino books, which I loved. But now I feel as though
I experienced blisters, sunburn, snoring people in hostels and the
desire to put a pillow over their faces. That I stayed one glorious
night in the glorious hotel with white sheets and towels and had a
perfect meal, struggled with my religion

or my past, shared the camaraderie of other pilgrims, made fast
friendships and saw the censer swinging at the end in the cathedral. My
main complaint, however, had more do with the set route to a set
destination, with rote walking pilgrims wearing scallop shells, the
symbol of St. James, and carrying credentials, little passports stamped
in each village. It seemed to me, in my peevishness, to be overly pious
and lacking in imagination. Further, ego-pilgrims get on my nerves,
those people in competition to walk the farthest, the fastest, ready to
die before sending luggage ahead in a cab, even in dire circumstances.
Once, I quietly admitted my lack of enthusiasm for the walking
pilgrimage to a friend, griping that it was akin to checking things off
a "bucket list," a term I find annoyingly goal-oriented for an
adventure. "But why can't it be more like 'a funny thing happened to me
on the prearranged path to the preordained destination'?" he protested.
We laughed, and though I knew he was right, my obstinacy remained. Now
at least I know I was being unreasonable: I've discovered there are as
many ways to walk a modern pilgrimage as people. Up ahead I spot the
Hybla crossroads. From there I will call my hosts for a ride to the bed
and breakfast. This is another difficulty in doing a Canadian
pilgrimage: no convenient refugios to stay in. I had considered a tent
by the trailside but didn't feel safe---hunters, bears---and doubted I
could carry more gear anyway. I arrive at the road and let my pack slide
to the ground with a satisfying thud, have a luxurious stretch and then
call for pickup. Predictably, pain now radiates from my left foot up to
my sacroiliac joint. "So what," I think to myself, feeling unfettered
and alive, and looking down the trail I'll walk tomorrow, which curves
off into the enticing woods. To travel purposefully through the
countryside on foot is beautiful, pleasing. I have a 15-minute wait so I
wander down the road a ways to see whether I can find the abandoned
Hybla Gospel Tabernacle that I'd read

about on a ghost town website. I spot the church nearly hidden by trees,
subsumed into the forest. The railway came to Hybla in 1907 to serve a
nearby feldspar mine. George Augustus Bartlett founded the once-busy
hamlet and "noticing the number of bees around, named the place after
the classic Roman town of Hybla which he recalled was famous for its
honey." Grasshoppers hop and the odd deer fly circles my head lazily,
and a second red-tailed hawk circumnavigates the sky. Basking in the
late-afternoon warmth, I look forward to my evening: a hot shower, yoga
to straighten my crooked body out, read a bit if I can find a book, eat
the beans and rice I'm carrying in my pack for dinner and have a
blissful sleep to rest up for day two. My epic journey toward the
Hastings Heritage Trail had begun long before my feet touched the sandy
path. It was in the spring of the previous year, when Scottish hermit
and author Sara Maitland invited me to explore the pilgrimage route of
St. Ninian with her. I jumped at the chance: the medieval era was the
heyday of pilgrimage in the West, when fervent pilgrims walked all over
the United Kingdom and Europe and to the Holy Land. I wanted to learn
about the origins of pilgrimage in southern Scotland's ancient
landscape. This, I felt sure, would help me better understand the role
of pilgrimage in our lives today. Maitland and I planned to visit
Whithorn and the shrine of Ninian, an early Christian saint who began
converting Scotland to Christianity in 397 AD, and walk a popular
pilgrim path to St. Ninian's Cave by the sea. Ever since this famous
pilgrimage has attracted the faithful from the British Isles and beyond
who believed in the saint's power to cure illness and perform miracles.
Maitland lives in Galloway, a place of moors and forests and seacoasts.
The train from Glasgow Central made a pleasant clacking sound as it

passed towns with daffodils and cherry trees in bloom, and then entered
expansive, rolling hills that seemed to call out for you to enter them
and walk. The word pilgrimage comes from two roots: per ager (through
the field)---and peregrinus (stranger). For centuries, Christian
strangers walked through the very fields I saw out my window. Chaucer's
famous The Canterbury Tales, written in the 14th century, follows the
journey of a group of pilgrims who each tell a story to entertain the
others along the way as they walk to the shrine of St. Thomas Becket in
Canterbury Cathedral, one of the top destinations of late medieval
Europe. This was before his tomb was smashed to bits, and his bones
taken to prevent pilgrims from venerating them, an act considered
idolatrous during Cromwell's violent Protestant Reformation. Pilgrimage
disappeared for centuries, but it was never quite expunged. Here, the
one-track railway south of Girvan begins to shadow the old Whithorn Way,
the ancient pilgrimage route from Glasgow. It joins up with the
now-signposted Pilgrim's Way, which can be walked, ridden or cycled, and
runs from Glenluce Abbey 25 miles south to the sea at the Isle of
Whithorn---part of the path Maitland and I plan to travel in our one-day
pilgrimage trip to see the "sites" by car. At Barrhill Station,
confusingly not in the village of Barrhill, the train stopped briefly
and I leapt off. Maitland and her spirited terrier, Zoe, waited on the
platform. Rangy and wild-haired, with red glasses and trousers and
wearing black sneakers, Maitland looked like a teenager, though she was
in her sixties. We hopped into her gold Suzuki and the dog kindly gave
up the passenger seat and curled at my feet. We roared off down the
narrow road in pursuit. "I am indefatigable in relation to St. Ninian
and much looking forward to this jaunt!" she said as we bumped along.
When the Romans were still in Britain, Ninian was converting the locals,
the southern Picts, in Whithorn. He was a healer whose miracles are

rooted in the land. For one, during a bad harvest, a monk lamented that
nothing was growing in the garden and went outside to find armloads of
plants. Whithorn Priory, the oldest recorded church in Scotland, was
later built to house Ninian's remains. The town fast became a popular
pilgrim destination for those seeking spiritual salvation and healing,
and it was also a centre for medieval learning, visited in particular by
Irish saints and scholars. The church actively encouraged the creation
of cults of the saints to bolster the faith of the newly converted
people of Scotland---with a focus on places, on saint's relics and on
materials such as holy water, bread, salt and white pebbles. As we
zipped along toward Whithorn, I imagined pilgrims of yore tramping these
hills, dressed in rough tunics and heavy cloaks, wearing broad-brimmed
hats, carrying walking sticks, a water skin or gourd and a small satchel
for food, known as a scrip. In "The Passionate Man's Pilgrimage," Sir
Walter Raleigh, wrote: "Give my scallop-shell of quiet,/My staff of
faith to walk upon,/My scrip of joy, immortal diet/My bottle of
salvation,/My gown of glory, hope's true gage;/And thus I'll take my
pilgrimage." This stanza, written in 1618, is remarkably upbeat
considering Ralegh, a renowned explorer, is said to have written it in
the Tower of London as he awaited execution for treason. Some medieval
pilgrims on their way to Whithorn would have carried shoes tied around
their necks to make the walk a penance---the harder the journey, the
better for the soul. Pilgrims believed the fiery pit of hell awaited
unless they did something to wash away their sins. By walking, they
enacted the desire for heaven and bound the intangible, their faith,
with the material of land, body and holy sites. They'd have been full of
wonder and uncertainty. For centuries this was the biggest possible
adventure: travel was slow, difficult and dangerous, and they might
never return home. Leaving everything familiar and travelling light is
certainly a good

reminder of what's important. "We brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain we can carry nothing out," as the Bible says. Prehistoric
sites, standing stones, cairns and barrows, as well as pilgrim places
including holy wells and abbeys: this landscape is richly embedded with
traces of the lives of ancient ancestors. We pulled over at the ruins of
Glenluce Abbey, where Cistercian monks provided hospitality for pilgrims
for 400 years until the Reformation---when Glenluce, which means "valley
of light," fell into disuse. Set in a peaceful valley close to the River
Luce and Luce Bay, it was a convenient stop for pilgrims visiting
St. Ninian's shrine. Lepers here were treated with less hospitality,
Maitland said: they were driven away to be cared for by nuns in a local
place whose name translates as "the women's hill." We raced on through
the glorious early spring afternoon, veering hard left whenever a
vehicle appeared suddenly round the blind corners, while Maitland
regaled me with pilgrim and other local lore. I'd never met anyone so
erudite and energetic---not to mention funny. Not how I'd imagine a
hermit at all. The hills soon gave way to pastures and we arrived in
Whithorn, where St. Ninian built the Candida Casa, the White House---
reflected in the town's name, Whit-horn. Over many centuries, the fame
of Ninian and Whithorn spread. The streets would have been packed with
pilgrims, and the town full of inns, cobblers mending worn-out shoes and
blacksmiths repairing carts. In the Whithorn Priory and Museum we saw
early Christian carved stones found in St. Ninian's Cave---which was
perhaps the saint's hermitage, or a retreat from the monastery at
Whithorn---and the beautiful Latinus Stone, raised soon after Ninian
built his church, and Scotland's earliest Christian monument.
Dedications to the saint are still seen in southern Scotland, Orkney and
Shetland Islands, Ireland and at St. Ninian's Cathedral in Antigonish,
Nova Scotia.

Outside we strolled around the ruined priory, which dates from the 12th
century and is still a place of pilgrimage for the faithful, and for
those drawn to its long sacred history. My Canadian brain struggled to
grasp that Scotland's earliest Christians worshipped here about 1,500
years ago. And that pilgrims, seeking miracles and cures, commoners and
kings alike, had been coming here since the seventh century. I was a
little disappointed though: I didn't feel anything special at the site,
aside from historical interest. The afternoon evaporating quickly, we
sped toward the sea to the Isle of Whithorn, now linked by a causeway to
the mainland. Pilgrims would have arrived by water from England, Ireland
and the Isle of Man on this rocky headland where the now-roofless,
13th-century chapel was a stop on the way to the shrine. Further along
the shore is the cave, featured in the "Miracula Nynie Episcopi," a poem
written by an eighth-century monk from Whithorn: "Ninian studied
heavenly wisdom with a devoted mind in a cave of horrible blackness." A
well-trodden pathway through woods leads to the sea and along the stony
shore to the cave. Pilgrims from all over the world are drawn here, some
leaving messages scratched in the rock. Medieval pilgrims did this too,
carving votive crosses into the walls. I asked Maitland whether people
now are on faith pilgrimages, or walk just for recreation, tourists
enjoying a walk. She shrugged and asked, "Perhaps they're the same
thing?" True, who is to say that recreation isn't spiritual? Old-time
pilgrims weren't only penitents, they were also humans who enjoyed
stretching their legs and getting outside, as we do. The world's first
tourists, in fact, were pilgrims journeying to the Holy Land to see
where Jesus and the Apostles had lived, and today, religious tourism
remains big business. Even in early times, religious motives mixed with
other aims: to go on an adventure, see the sights and collect souvenirs
such as reliquaries, metal badges worn on

clothing to prove where you'd been, or even vials of breast milk,
supposedly from the Virgin Mary. It wasn't all piety. London was a
gateway for British pilgrims, full of bars, brothels and other
temptations outside the city walls, rife with danger from pickpockets
and robbers. With night approaching, we had to concede we were out of
time to hike 45 minutes each way to the saint's cave, especially given
the spring mud. Darkness fell as we retired to the pub to eat and talk
about St. Ninian. I sipped my pint, exhausted by the day's riches. I
felt sorry that my miniwalking pilgrimage didn't work out---not yet
knowing this was to become a theme---and that the shrine turned out to
be more museum than place of power for me. But I had learned more about
the historical foundations of our current fascination, the medieval
pilgrimage. And I'd seen how ancient pilgrim routes offer tradition and
infrastructure to modern pilgrims. Though I couldn't relate to the God
motivation, meaningful rituals do attract me--- and obviously many
others too. In my imagination everything began to criss-cross: the
landscape, old overlaid with new, the interplay between pilgrims' and
hikers' paths, the holy places and natural wonders that have so long
inspired pilgrims and lovers of the outdoors, the blurry lines between
pilgrims, tourists and travellers. Pilgrimage, I saw, is a thread that
connects us with our medieval ancestors: we sense more of their lives
and what joins us when we walk old paths and visit holy wells, sacred
trees and sites such as Whithorn. This was the medieval end of the
unbroken thread. What was happening at our temporal end? The ancient
pilgrim route of St. Ninian had been historically illuminating--- and
comical, given the high-speed contemporary pace and my longing to get
out and walk. Once I walked a labyrinth in Toronto. Instead of stepping
meditatively, I found myself running in case I couldn't finish before
dark, a

metaphor for how I---and we---operate. Despite pushing ourselves ever
faster and more forgetfully, despite our disembodied, virtual times, we
yearn to reconnect with our bodies, and landscape and nature, and the
unmediated world. Many of us spend countless hours commuting and cooped
up in cubicles or offices in front of screens, we find it gives rise to
a longing: to feel the earth beneath our feet, the wind in our faces, to
be untethered and alive, on the path and with a higher purpose. After a
while, a walk around the park at lunch or after work just won't
suffice---we crave more. This is surely part of the reason for the
phenomenal upsurge in walking pilgrimage in modern times. Our earliest
ancestors were nomads, roaming hunter-gatherers; perhaps it is simply in
our nature. We've always been going on quests in search of meaning and
our gods. "For in their hearts doth Nature stir them so, Then people
long on pilgrimage to go," writes Chaucer in The Canterbury Tales.
Another famous chronicler of the nomadic urge, writer Bruce Chatwin
believed settled civilization was a mistake, and we are bipedal for a
reason: "Man's real home is not a house, but the road, and that life
itself is a journey to be walked on foot." In The Songlines, he
describes how Australian Aborigines are called to go "walkabout,"
dropping everything to head to the outback and visit ancestors, tracing
the holy ground of invisible pathways that meander all over Australia.
Walking has far more than evolutionary benefits for humans---as worship,
for example, and sacrifice. Freedom of physical movement and freedom of
thought and spirit go together, appealing whether it's a religious
pilgrimage, or the "Free and Easy Wandering" espoused by Taoist
philosopher Chuang-tzu around 300 BC. Also translated as "Going Rambling
without a Destination," the aim is to bring people spontaneously into
harmony with the natural world. The phrase also implies a going beyond,
or wandering beyond, leaving behind

the familiar---social roles, values, assumptions---to explore the
unknown. Doing this spontaneously is meant to attune us to the natural
unfolding of things, of which we are a part. The primal act of walking
connects us with our essential wildness, a wellspring of spiritual
energy that's drying up in our technology-addicted, stressful, sedentary
society. In his 1861 treatise, "Walking," Henry David Thoreau discusses
"sauntering," derived from a word for pilgrims of the Middle Ages.
"Children exclaimed, 'There goes a Sainte-Terrer,' a saunterer---a
Holy-Lander," he writes. "Some, however, would derive the word from sans
terre, without land or a home, which, therefore, in the good sense, will
mean, having no particular home, but equally at home everywhere." The
saunterer, he emphasizes, "is no more vagrant than the meandering river,
which is all the while sedulously seeking the shortest course to the
sea." For sauntering humans, life is a journey, and we walk outer
terrain that mirrors inner terrain. We move toward our higher selves,
find community and feed the part of us that hungers for the sacred,
however we define that. We humans have a foot in two worlds, and as
pilgrims bring our embodied, physical selves to meet the other world,
the spiritual realm. Further, pilgrimage holds great appeal in our times
of being between narratives---neither religion nor scientific
rationalism nor neoliberalism are going to save us, so what now? Being a
pilgrim is a simple way to show devotion, do penance, find healing or
pursue a personal purpose---without doctrine. Existential questions have
not gone away as traditional religion declines. They trouble us as much
as ever, and many seek simpler spirituality, often at sites where the
sacred existed in the past. In these otherworldly places out of
time---islands, abbeys, holy wells---the material and spiritual come
together.

Even for secular Westerners, sacred places retain their allure; though
more than in medieval times, pilgrimage today emphasizes the shrine
within. "Every pilgrimage to the desert is a pilgrimage to the self,"
observes Terry Tempest Williams. As with other types of retreat,
pilgrimage is about personal agency and communion. "Pilgrimage to the
place of the wise is to find escape from the flame of separateness,"
Rumi writes. Recognizing that some things are simply better understood
on foot at about three miles an hour, I redoubled my efforts to find
myself a journey to embody. In an attempt to overcome my lingering
ambivalence I asked myself what appealed, rather than what annoyed,
about the walking pilgrimage. My mind leapt immediately to W.G. Sebald's
The Rings of Saturn, subtitled "An English Pilgrimage" in its original
German. The haunting, exquisite book is about a walk through East
Anglia---and ultimately, through history and the ruins of civilization
after the wars of the 20th century. Saturn is the planet that rules over
melancholy, and the work is imbued with a feeling of loss, of living in
the aftermath of catastrophe. This is pilgrimage as a deeper form of
engagement to map the importance of a particular place, and shows that
nothing truly disappears. In our age of displacement, Sebald's
pilgrimage is particularly moving. "Any man may be called a pilgrim,"
wrote Dante Gabriel Rossetti in 1874, "who leaveth the place of his
birth"---a definition that encompasses today's migrants, the greatest
numbers the world has ever seen, even after the fractures of the Second
World War. As well all of us are pilgrims, life to death. The idea that
there can be different cultural purposes for pilgrimage also fascinated
me. In a documentary about The Rings of Saturn, called Patience (After
Sebald), British writer Robert Macfarlane posits a theory. "The British
tradition is of walking as recovery and the American tradition is of
walking as discovery," he says. The British Romantic tradition is "to
strip away the accretions of civilization" while the American tradition,

exemplified in the road movie, is "the sense that we travel to liberate
ourselves, to discover new ways of being, to acquire methods of life
that may become new habits, but don't begin as them." Pilgrims
themselves I did respect: the purposeful journey often appeals to people
who resist the barriers and constraints of our consumerist age, who
feel, as Robert Frost did, "Something there is that doesn't love a wall,
That wants it down." In Wanderlust, Rebecca Solnit writes: "Walking
focuses not on the boundary lines of ownership that break the land into
pieces but on the paths that function as a kind of circulatory system
connecting the whole organism. Walking is, in this way, the antithesis
of owning." I admire also literary pilgrims such as Frost's friend,
writer and poet Edward Thomas---the two were devoted walkers---who
notes, "Much has been written of travel, far less of the road," and "The
long, white roads . . . are a temptation. What quests they propose! They
take us away to the thin air of the future or to the underworld of the
past." As I kept searching for my own walking pilgrimage, I discovered
organizations worldwide that are renewing the tradition. Ancient paths
in Scotland, England and Wales drew me most. The founders of the British
Pilgrimage Trust (BPT), William Parsons and Guy Hayward, are among those
leading the resurgence in the United Kingdom. They have much of interest
to say about "why pilgrimage?" Two passionate pilgrims, they are part of
a grassroots boom that is seeing ancient routes revived and growing
participation by people ranging from religiously devout to committedly
atheistic. The BPT website reads: "Rediscover the old way of travelling
on foot to holy places in Britain. An ancient tradition refreshed. Open
to all (bring your own beliefs)." Whether modern pilgrims' purposes are
spiritual, recreational or other is immaterial, Parsons and Hayward say:
"Our core goal is to advance British pilgrimage as a form of cultural
heritage that promotes holistic well-being,

for the public benefit." Parsons is a wandering minstrel and author who
worked to revive wandering minstrelsy in Britain, but found pilgrimage
more feasible. Hayward, who confesses to having a "terrible
restlessness, physical and mental" all his life, needed release after
completing his PhD on how singing forms community: "I was behind a
laptop for many years and wanted to get out from \[behind a\] 13-inch
screen and into the world." The BPT has a wide range of supporters, from
regular people to the powerful---duchesses, politicians, equity
managers, scientists, musicians, artists, literary lights, and reverends
and vicars. An infrastructure of footpath networks already exists in
Britain, where the law, the "right to roam," assures passage for
walkers, unlike in North America and on the Continent. The BPT is
working to rejoin the pilgrimage dots: wells, springs, ancient trees,
prehistoric sites, churches and chapels mark the way. What's missing in
Britain and many other global centres is the presence of inexpensive
accommodation for the walkers. The trust is working with the Church of
England to open churches to pilgrims at night. Once, pilgrimage was
Britain's most popular expression of leisure and spirituality, for all
classes. The British are inveterate walkers and enthusiastic pilgrims.
"For most of our evolutionary history, we were travellers. This is the
yoga of the West, about connecting with our spiritual traditions. It's
our way to find higher truth, our lineage," Hayward says. Asked why he
thinks pilgrimage is so popular, Parsons replies: "Nothing's really
changed in terms of peoples' need to connect with themselves, the
communities they pass through, with the land, with the spiritual world.
Walking to a holy place is and always has been a brilliant way to do
this." The two say they arrived at a definition of pilgrimage, though
with difficulty: an unbroken journey on foot to holy places. It's a
simple thing most people can do, and it needs to be unbroken as it's
about dedication to a destination. "On foot is also essential: it's
slower, you see strawberries

growing, or stop and talk, get to know the people of the land, find a
herb to help your sore feet and learn ways that can help you connect
more deeply to your self. You connect with your back and legs: physical
things happen, emotional things happen, and it's a way of connecting
with forgotten bits of your self," says Hayward. As for holy, we all
have a special place we go to when we need to feel better, Parsons says.
Holy derives from the old English halig, meaning wholesome or healthy,
though it is not religious specifically. In the 14th century haligdæg
meant both "religious festival" and "day of recreation," until these
senses diverged in the 16th century. Pilgrimage is more than just going
for a walk. "It's a journey into the unknown," says Hayward. "It's a
chance to connect to one's self and others and engage big questions,
such as, Is there something greater than all of us?---existential
questions that are the same whether you are religious or not, human
questions." Setting my quest for a walking pilgrimage aside, I went to
visit family in Brazil for Christmas. It turned out I had a tough
research call to make: attend an ayahuasca retreat, where you ingest a
plant medicine used in Amazonia for centuries for healing and spiritual
experiences; or walk as a pilgrim on the Passarela da Fé---the passage
of faith---and visit the shrine of Aparecida, Brazil's patron saint.
Call me a coward but I decided my hallucinogenic days are long past and
opted for the holiest site in the world's most populous Catholic
country. European pilgrim traditions are mainly Catholic, and I was
curious to see how they transplanted in the Americas. Brazil is studded
with pilgrimage shrines, the most popular being the neo-Romanesque
Basilica of Our Lady of Aparecida, Our Lady Who Appeared, the Black
Madonna. Not only is this the world's largest shrine dedicated to Mary,
the mother of God, it's the world's second biggest

church, only slightly smaller than St. Peter's in Rome. Each year, about
12 million Brazilian and global pilgrims descend to venerate "the Black
Virgin Mary." Some arrive on foot, but most arrive by car. Even in
medieval times in Europe, a pilgrim would hop on a hay wagon if at all
possible. A pilgrimage on foot is a transformative process, but so is
coming into contact with a destination, such as a saint at a shrine. On
a rainy Sunday morning after New Year's, my sister-in-law Maira at the
wheel, we set out from São Paulo for the 170-kilometre drive to
Aparecida. A site of pilgrimage for more than 300 years, it's located on
the Paraíba do Sul River at the spot where three fishermen had reputedly
pulled a statue of the saint from the water. Porto Itaguaçu is marked by
a cross and a viewing platform and gets its name from the Tupi-Guarani
language: Itaguaçu means big rock, fertile valley or favoured land. As
we passed the Tropic of Capricorn sign the city's concrete began to give
way to misty mountains and cows grazing in green fields dotted with
red-earth ant mounds. The drive into the Paraíba Valley is pleasant, and
we laughed about billboards along the way. One for its odd diction: it
featured the photo of a popular country singer with the message
"Imprudence causes accidents." The other advertised "Pastelão de
Maluf"---Maluf, the ex-mayor and ex--state governor, in jail for
corruption, was unlikely to be eating pastelão, which are jumbo-sized
fast-food pies. I read aloud from printouts I'd made from the shrine's
elaborate website, available in Portuguese, Spanish and English. The
story of the saint began in 1717, when Brazil was still a Portuguese
colony. According to legend, when the plentiful river was empty of fish
for 12 hours, all but three fishermen gave up and went home. One who
stayed caught a headless statue of the Virgin Mary in his net. The next
cast yielded the statue's head. Suddenly, the fish became wildly
abundant. More miracles were soon attributed to the Virgin, including
the freeing of a runaway slave, candles

that lit by themselves and, my personal favourite, "the hunter attacked
by an ounce." (The translator meant onça---a panther.) People started to
venerate the statue, and a chapel was made in 1745. A larger baroque
church was built between 1824 and 1888, the old basilica. Construction
of the new basilica, which holds 45,000 people, began in 1955, and it
became a Pope magnet: it was inaugurated by Pope John Paul in 1980, Pope
Benedict came in 2007 and Pope Francis made it a priority to visit in
2013. In less than two hours we arrived at the giant basilica city,
which loomed on a scale sure to impress any pilgrim, part spaceship and
part stadium. There was a small fair with old-fashioned rides, a cable
car running overhead and a long footbridge. We circled to find parking,
passing hotels---Hotel do Papa, Divino Pai Eterno and Sanctuário
Palace---as well as tour buses, vendors selling T-shirts, keychains,
tote bags. The town had sprung up around the site and relies heavily on
tourism. It was a slow day and we tried to imagine it busy, as when up
to 215,000 people attend services to commemorate Aparecida on October
12, a Brazilian national holiday. The parking lot held 10,000 vehicles
and was organized by the names of Jesus's Disciples. Somewhere there was
a heliport and Cruzeiro Hill, where millions of devotees perform the Way
of the Cross. The size of the parking lot told me most pilgrims no
longer come only on foot. People have been walking here for 300 years,
but only recently a formalized network, the Caminho da Fé, was
established. The Way of Faith, one of the newest and longest Catholic
pilgrimage routes in the world, stretches 500 kilometres (310 miles)
across southeastern Brazil, has various branches, and foot and bicycle
traffic is increasing. In 2003 Almiro Grings, who twice walked the
Camino de Santiago in Spain, set about establishing a network of
hostels, hotels and homestays catering to pilgrims on the path to
Aparecida. Of the 12 million pilgrims who visited in 2014, it's thought
that more than 30,000 walked or

cycled there along the Caminho da Fé, crossing the endless sugar cane
and coffee plantations and making challenging climbs in the Mantiqueira
Mountains. One pilgrim, the aptly named Bob Walker, had walked the
Camino de Santiago and found most people he met were not doing it for
religious reasons. "But in Brazil it was different," he writes. "I saw
macho Lycra-clad cyclists gather in a circle to say morning prayers. And
a recently retired policeman from São Paulo told me he was making the
pilgrimage to thank God he ended his career without getting shot."
Walker, who walked 965 kilometres (600 miles) across Spain without
issues, said the hard-packed earth track in Brazil took its toll. He did
make it to Aparecida "despite the hills, blisters, and tarantula
spiders." "These same sights greeted Walker," I thought, strolling past
the Pilgrim Support Centre with its 400 stores---religious souvenirs and
trinkets, pharmacies, a food court with McDonald's. I didn't see the
Sanctuary of the Apostles Barbecue and Beer I'd heard about, and somehow
missed the aquarium too. The place is its own city, run by 2,000
workers, plus volunteers. People wandered around the perfectly
landscaped and organized grounds, unusual for chaotic Brazil---parents
with kids in strollers, children, teens, elderly people with canes,
everyone with umbrellas. The impressive pink-hued main complex had a
high clocktower and many domes. As a sacred place, surrounded by green
hills and mist, it looked suitably mysterious. We passed various
chapels. At the sight of one my breath caught; hundreds of tall votive
candles flared, reflecting light onto an intricate metal cross that hung
from the high ceiling. Ten tons of melted wax, I read, are removed on
the average busy weekend. We passed more shops, where you could buy
souvenirs and ex-votos to adorn the shrine. Piled up in bins, these body
parts made from wax represent what needs healing, or has been healed:
hands, arms, feet, livers, left and right breasts,

heads. We passed the Aparecida radio and TV stations and magazine
offices. Everything attested to the church's evangelizing success. When
it comes to the commercialism of shrines, little has changed in
centuries, since pilgrims first went to the Holy Land. Pilgrims have
always been tourists too, carrying back souvenirs such as holy water and
pieces of sacred ground ---believed to hold magic that touches us when
we touch them. I was impressed by the Sala das Promessas, the Hall of
Promises, where people leave objects and ex-votos at a long counter to
ask for the saint's help with hardships or give thanks. Clerks stand at
what looks like the coat check at a large museum and accept 25,000
objects a month. The hall, like an underground shopping mall, spoke of
miraculous cures, with photos plastered over the ceilings and glass
cases overflowing with offerings. The "work" case held a miniature taxi,
a shoeshine kit, cameras and uniforms. Dolls represented babies; piles
of gold rings, crosses, antique watches and fine china expressed thanks
for marriages and other miracles. I noticed in passing Ayrton Senna's
helmet and gloves, Julio Iglesias's outfits and guitars and a plaque
with Canada and the CN Tower giving thanks for "one more dream realized"
in Toronto in 2015. Back upstairs in the new basilica we slid into a
back pew for Mass, as the huge church was nearly full. Soaring ceilings,
gold and works of art--- striking blue stained-glass windows, and
mosaics of Brazilian scenes: a turtle, armadillo, snake, colourful birds
and butterflies, flowering yellow and pink trees, the sea and a child in
utero above the door. The basilica was built with donations from the
faithful and fitted out with gold, Italian mosaics and fabulous works by
sacred artist Cláudio Pastro. We listened awhile and then slipped out to
join other pilgrims and walk the Passarela da Fé. I was bemused to find
that the passarela was just a long

footbridge that connected the new and old basilicas, the latter located
in a souvenir town. Ten minutes later we'd arrived at the old Basilica,
with its ornate marble altar and pretty tile floor. Aparecida, it was
now obvious, was all about the pilgrimage to the shrine, not about
walking the path, as I'd expected. We lined up to see the statue of
Nossa Senhora. When my turn came I looked up at the Virgin's image. She
was just over a foot tall, a Black Madonna, wearing a blue cape and
crown, her hands in prayer. I stopped a long moment, but I felt no
thrill of contact, only a bit let down, as I had in Whithorn. On the
walk back I stopped in one of the tiny shops to buy a saint souvenir
from a sweet-faced, elderly vendor who sat surrounded by saint merch and
statues of all sizes. I chose one, and asked her about Nossa Senhora.
"God is important, clearly. But She is everything to me," the vendor
said with feeling, wrapping my saint in paper. "Each thing I've asked
for I received, because of her. She helps people to move ahead." It's
necessary to give thanks, she told me, not just ask for things all the
time. Looking intently into my eyes she made me promise that I'd go
visit the saint's shrine in the new basilica too. I promised, and on my
way back there, I had this strange feeling, as though I was swimming in
the waters of an alternative reality, one where believers drew power
from Aparecida. Lining up again, this time for the new shrine, I
shuffled forward with the others, admiring the main basilica's mosaics
of biblical women. The saint was tiny in her golden shrine, and this
time she wore a gold crown and a black cape with gold trim. Again, I
felt no connection. What struck me most was that for a Marian shrine,
there was so little sacred feminine presence. Yet this Black Madonna
clearly meant so much to people here, especially to the working poor and
women. She's revered in Brazil and has another syncretized face as the
goddess of love and

maternity in an Afro-Brazilian religion. Aparecida is known for her
power to bridge divisions of race, class, region and religion, and bring
people together. As I stood there it hit me---the power of pilgrimage
begins with human ideas. There's little more potent than imagination,
which precedes our actions. We go on pilgrimage to a place that
represents certain qualities that inspire us, holding the energy of the
deity or person we relate to. Mary, anthropologist Edith Turner wrote,
is "the most sought-after pilgrimage goal in all Christendom, including
God." I gave up my place in front of the shrine, thinking about the
throngs of pilgrims who have come here over the centuries, attracted to
the ideals embodied by the Madonna. A sudden thought broke in---we have
no idea who is driving this bus, so what's wrong with drawing strength
from a benevolent figure? I felt less judgy and glad I had bought a
statue of the saint from the sweet vendor. What we believe, what's
sacred to us, whether it's bound to traditional religion or not, I
realized, is what makes pilgrimage possible. Back home, I was happy to
have gained insight in Aparecida into the power of the "destination
pilgrimage" to a shrine. As with the walking variety, the origins of
this second main type of pilgrimage predate antiquity. Humans have
always been drawn to visit sacred sites as an expression of spirit, as
evidenced by Stonehenge (3000 BC)---some archeologists believe it to be
a prehistoric Lourdes, a place of healing---and by Indigenous
pictographs across the Americas. Ancient Greek pilgrims travelled from
near and far to consult the Oracle of Delphi, built around a sacred
spring in 1400 BC. Humans thought the border between this world and the
next was thinner there so they could communicate with the gods. For the
Celtic Christians, a thin place is where heaven and earth are barely
separate, a portal where we

can draw near and catch a glimpse of the divine. This idea is like that
of India's holy tirtha, which in Sanskrit means "crossing place" and
refers in particular to pilgrimage sites, though it can be any holy
place, text or person. There's the axis mundi of the shaman, the place
that is holy above all. Even for modern nonbelievers, these thresholds,
doorways and bridges provide a place where we can be jolted out of
everyday perceptions and habitual ways of seeing the world and be
transformed. As for my elusive walking pilgrimage, I decided on a new
tack: find something closer to home. I was gratified to learn that
Canada has many varieties of pilgrim experience. The Catholic shrines of
Quebec, founded by French settlers, are our most popular pilgrim sites.
More promising for me, I also found new-style journeys that harness the
age-old practice of walking for education and social change. On the
traditional pilgrim circuit, more than a million faithful each year
visit the national shrine at the church of Ste-Anne-de-Beaupré, about 20
minutes' drive northeast of Quebec City. French pioneers and
missionaries brought over a statue of the mother of the Virgin Mary,
Anne, the patron saint of sailors, and built a wooden church in her
honour on the shores of the St. Lawrence, where they'd established a
community. The first shrine was constructed in 1658. When a worker laid
the first three foundation stones, his terrible back pain was
miraculously cured. Word spread about this and other miracles. Even
those who couldn't come in person, such as Anne of Austria, mother of
Louis XIV of France, patronized the shrine from abroad. "There, the
paralytics walk, the blind can see, and the sick are healed of every
kind of illness," an Ursuline nun named Marie de l'Incarnation wrote in
1665. Now it's become a healing place of Catholic pilgrimage for French
Canadians and Indigenous people alike, especially in July, when
believers come to the stone basilica to venerate St. Anne, often leaving
behind

abandoned wheelchairs, walking sticks and crutches. In The Art of
Pilgrimage, Phil Cousineau writes about his mother's 1946 pilgrimage to
Ste-Anne-de-Beaupré, when she was 16. She accompanied her sister and
brother-in-law from Detroit to Quebec and at the shrine saw many lame
and crippled pilgrims walking and prostrating themselves up a road and
the basilica steps. "It was the place to go if you were desperate," she
told him, "where Americans and Canadians came for hope and miracles."
Long before Catholic pilgrimages arrived in the Americas, Indigenous
people journeyed to their sacred sites, which were often later co-opted
or suppressed by colonizers. Given history, and potential
turkey-and-genocide associations with the word pilgrim, as in the early
settlers in New England, I hesitate to call Indigenous sacred journeys
pilgrimages---though both journeys share universal aspects. Edith Turner
writes about "substitution shrines, that is, pilgrimage shrines located
on ancient Native American sites," which often retain syncretic features
from pre-Christian devotions. This is the case at a special place in
north-central Alberta, a small lake believed to have healing powers,
where for centuries the region's mostly nomadic Indigenous peoples
assembled. Each summer they would come before the buffalo hunt, or
gather for fishing, trade and ceremony. The Alexis Nakota Sioux Nation
called the lake Wakamne, Holy Lake, while the area's Cree people called
it Manito Sahkahigan, Lake of the Spirit. In July 1889 Catholic
missionaries founded the mission of St. Anne, named after the
grandmother of Jesus Christ---a conversion tactic, as honouring
grandmothers is a strong tradition in First Nations and Métis cultures.
As elsewhere, the Christian missionaries grafted their beliefs onto an
existing sacred place, renaming the waters Lac Ste-Anne, and marking the
beginning of the complex relationship of Indigenous Nations, including
the Métis Nation, with Catholicism in the surrounding territory. Each
July for 132 years Indigenous people from many Indigenous Peoples across
Canada

and the northwestern United States have made their way to the lake,
often in search of healing and spiritual renewal. They arrive every
third week in July, when the weather is best, and the journey is part of
the tradition. Some walk barefoot. Members of the Driftpile First Nation
often arrive in a horse-drawn wagon caravan, spending about 11 days on
the road. The six-day pilgrimage culminates on July 26, the saint's day,
and as many as 50,000 people---few nonIndigenous, though it is open to
all---come to pray and bathe in the lake. Given colonization and the
harms that followed, I wonder whether there are troubled waters at
Ste-Anne. Is there resentment, a sense that Indigenous spiritual
traditions and cultures were undermined on this sacred spot, where
ceremonies once took place, and people gathered to trade medicinal roots
and herbs? In 1995's Healing Waters: The Pilgrimage to Lac Ste. Anne,
photojournalist Steve Simon found harmony---though perhaps dissenters
stay away, their opinions unrecorded. "The modern pilgrimage is an event
in which Native spiritual traditions of many nations coexist within the
Catholic faith," Simon writes. Some people go for spiritual tradition
and to connect to the past, he adds, and others go because of religious
beliefs. Still others combine Catholicism with their traditional
spirituality and practices. The book features striking photos of the
gathering---people praying, the elderly wading into the shallow water
for healing, a beautiful candlelight procession by the shore---as well
as many stories. "The cross and the pipe can come together," says
Johnsen Sewepegaham, who was then Little Red River Cree Nation Chief.
Others in the book echo his idea, that there is only one God for
everyone, and all that matters is that you pray. "I am not praying to a
different God, even though other people will say, 'Well, that is a White
man's God.' Well, to me, there is no such thing as a White man's God,"
he clarifies. For First Nations people, historian Dr. Olive Dickason is

quoted as saying, various systems, such as traditional beliefs in the
Creator and Catholicism, can exist side by side. It may be heresy for
the church, but the old spirits endure. "We accept everyone's way," Eva
Janvier of the Janvier Reserve, part of the Chipewyan Prairie First
Nation in Alberta, says. "But by no means am I here because I am a
Catholic. I am here because of my own beliefs in the Earth . . ." There
are signs that the Catholic Church is being converted: Mass is now
performed in many languages, including Dene and Cree, and Indigenous
traditional practices, such as drumming and dancing, once banned, have
been added to the official schedule. Ownership of the pilgrimage site
was transferred to a nonprofit organization in 2003, when it shifted to
Indigenous control. There's representation from First Nations in
Alberta, Saskatchewan and the Northwest Territories and the Métis
Nation, as well as the Oblates and the Archdiocese of Edmonton. In 2004,
Lac SteAnne was designated a national historic site. Many non-Catholics
attend to connect to Indigenous spiritual traditions, or simply to meet
up with friends, but at the same time, the pilgrimage is the largest
annual Catholic gathering in Western Canada. Intuitively, all people
understand that places have power. This has been recognized even if the
places are not obviously marked---or when they have been erased or
overlaid. Whether the "dreaming tracks" in Australia or "destinations"
such as ancient pictographs and petroglyphs in the Americas, Indigenous
sacred places and paths embedded in landscapes are often linked to
helping spirits. Early people had waymarkers for their journeys on
foot---drawings on the bark of trees, inukshuk. And places of power, as
with Christian destination pilgrimages, are honoured in First Nations,
Métis and Inuit beliefs. In Manitoba there is a spiritual place known as
the Narrows of Lake Manitoba, writes Robert Houle, a Saulteaux First
Nations artist, curator,

critic and educator in his essay, "Where the Gods Are Present,"
published in The Good Lands: Canada Through the Eyes of Artists. He says
it's "where the water beating against the resonant limestone cliff and
pounding along the pebbled shore creates the sound . . . believed to be
the voice of Manitou." For the Saulteaux, "It was and still is a sacred
place, a power place," and they continue to live nearby and offer
tobacco. "Many travel to it seeking renewal, as a Muslim will travel to
Mecca. To the Saulteaux, the Narrows are known as the Manitowaban,
meaning the 'divine straits.'" Myself, I have no single obvious place of
connection, a feeling likely shared by many who change countries as
children. Perhaps this explains why modern, revisionist
pilgrimages---especially those that remap obscured histories and
paths---attract me the most. Religious pilgrimage was adapted to be
political, for change instead of miracles, for the first time in 1953
writes Rebecca Solnit in Wanderlust, when an American woman known only
as the Peace Pilgrim set out walking, giving up home and possessions,
"to remain a wanderer until mankind had learned the way of peace." Using
pilgrimage as a way to draw attention to issues is frequently a
female-led practice: witness the late Water Walker Grandmother Josephine
Mandamin, an Anishinaabe Elder who walked around all five of the Great
Lakes to raise awareness about the need to protect water, and the Border
Angels, women who walk into the Sonoran desert to leave gallon jugs of
water for migrants in the lands between Mexico and the United States.
I'm excited when I discover a walking pilgrimage from the Old City of
Montreal to the Mohawk territory of Kahnawà:ke---three days and 36
kilometres. It's the practicum for an annual pilgrimage course called
Pilgrim Bodies, Sacred Journeys, offered at Concordia University in
Montreal. Students embark on a meditative journey on foot that "connects
them with Indigenous culture, with Canada's history of colonization and
marginalization of Indigenous people, with their own life histories and
with

each other." Kahnawà:ke began as a Catholic mission, and Saint Kateri
(pronounced "Gateri") Tekakwitha, the first Indigenous woman to be
sainted, has her shrine there. "Sometimes the path to reconciliation is
a path," note the university lecturers who designed the pilgrimage
course, Matthew Anderson and Sara Terreault. "Because of its narrative
and spatial nature, journey (pilgrimage) is a useful and natural way to
re-map, re-member, and reinscribe relationships with oneself, one's
neighbours and one's physical and cultural environment," writes
Anderson. The course and walk, offered through the Department of
Theological Studies since 2014, is also a teaching tool. The idea was
sparked at a conference in the United Kingdom, when the two scholars
noticed that American and Canadian academics were presenting on European
walks. "Why were we not presenting on the pilgrimage routes from where
we live?" Andersen wondered. "This question soon led Sara, who is
Catholic, and me, as a Lutheran pastor, to grapple with relations
between Canada and the First Nations." Indigenous spiritual journey is
distinguished by attention to specific lands and seeking blessing before
entering land, from the Elders, the ancestors and the land itself, says
Anderson---though there is no tradition of European-like pilgrimage per
se, and in fact, as noted, many reject the word. A year after their
first class walk, Canada's Truth and Reconciliation Commission published
its report, and among its conclusions were that churches and
universities should do much more to seek reconciliation with First
Nations. Pilgrimage is one way for non-Indigenous people to step toward
this. I contacted Sara Terreault about joining the journey to Kahnawà:ke
and was disappointed to learn that for the first time, they wouldn't
walk that summer. Her class undertook personal journeys instead, and
Terreault, a devoted pilgrim who has travelled with her students to the
Camino in Spain,

across Ireland, as well as to the Kahnawà:ke Mohawk reservation, agreed
to tell me more over supper. How does modern pilgrimage work? I asked.
"When you walk long distances day after day, things happen. Your body
changes physiologically. Psychologically, the walk slows you down. When
you walk a pilgrimage, the journey becomes part of the point, and it
provokes existential questions and reflection." Or as her friend once
put it, Terreault adds, "Pilgrimage is really an interior journey but it
comes in through the feet." There's no one definition of pilgrimage,
Terrault explains, "it's a journey of meaning, or an intentional
journey." She asks her students to undertake a personal walk that's
meaningful to them, demanding enough to take them beyond their comfort
zone. They are to keep journals and afterwards revisit their earlier
understandings of pilgrimage based on their own experiences. "The bottom
line is pilgrimage is a practice," Terrault emphasizes. Finally, my
fixed idea of pilgrimage shifted. I don't know why I had been stuck in
thinking it had steps, was one size fits all, with set narratives and
purposes, which made me resistant. I realized it encompasses much more,
with key elements such as intentionality, mobility and the alchemy of
body and place that come together in fluid ways. One thought led to
another, and this was how I finally found myself, newly receptive and
walking my own pilgrimage on the Hastings Heritage Trail. It's day two,
walking pilgrimage, and I've just been dropped off back at the Hybla
crossroads. It's a relief to throw my imaginary pilgrim's cloak on once
more and walk. At breakfast, talk of community conflicts had intruded on
my contemplative mood. A pilgrimage is meant to be a transition from the
ordinary to the extraordinary, where, away from habits and outside your
usual place in the world, you inhabit the liminal space between setting
off

and arriving, and find something rare---freedom, perhaps, or new
perspective, challenge and self-reliance, simplicity, not knowing,
surrender, the feeling of approaching something larger, mysterious. As I
enter the green forest's shade I'm thinking of the words of Japanese
novelist Natsume Sōseki in The Three-Cornered World. The protagonist, an
artist on a pilgrimage to the mountains, desires an experience that
"abandons the commonplace and lifts me, at least for a short time, above
the dust and grime of the workaday world." The book obsessed Glenn
Gould---he thought it was the greatest novel of the 20th century, and a
copy was found along with the Bible by his deathbed. He described it as
being about "meditation versus action, detachment versus duty, Western
versus Eastern value systems." A more recent translator changed the
title to Kusamakura, meaning grass pillow---a traditional literary term
in Japan for a journey, a digressive wander rather than a predestined
path. That the path itself can be the destination seems revelatory. Why
had I never considered this as a possibility for my own walking
pilgrimage? I'd known that for 17th-century poet Matsuo Bashō, the path
was the goal, a metaphor for the well-lived life. Off I go down the
trail, enjoying this idea, typical of Eastern pilgrimages, which seem to
me the best kind. In nonWestern cultures, "the ideas of footfall as
knowledge and walking as a mode of thinking are widespread, often
operating in particular as a metaphor for recollection---history as a
region one walks back into," writes Robert Macfarlane in The Old Ways.
This is also a Scottish way: "the Scots stravaig," he notes, "means to
ramble without set goals or destination." No wonder this pilgrim's way
calls to me. While pilgrimage is the universal quest for the self, the
path changes in various eras and cultures. The linear paths to Rome, or
Mecca, can give way to spiral paths up mountains; or encircling them, as
with Mount Kailash in Tibet, where it's considered a sin to set foot on
the holy

mountain; or also labyrinths, such as the one in Chartres in France. I
care little about the clocking of miles or arriving at a particular
destination. Maybe one day I'll do an aimless journey myself, I decide,
a mashup of the early Celtic and Eastern wandering monks, Sōseki's
artist and Bashō. "To wander is the Taoist code word for becoming
ecstatic, writes a scholar, but arriving was sometimes regarded with
ambiguity," Rebecca Solnit notes in Wanderlust. The sun is hot so I stop
to slather on sunscreen, which makes dust stick to my face and arms. I
feel dirty, yet strong, and self-reliant. Every conceivable place along
the trail there is to rest, every clearing or lake, sports a big No
Trespassing sign. Last night I read an old copy of A Sand County Almanac
by Aldo Leopold, one of the leading thinkers of the conservation
movement. He talks of the "trophy recreationist" who to enjoy "must
possess, invade, appropriate." Leopold riffs on ideas that apply not
just to wilderness, but to our simplistic attitudes about everything on
the yin spectrum---emptiness, absence, solitude, silence. "Hence the
wilderness that he cannot see has no value to him. Hence the universal
assumption that an unused hinterland is rending no service to society .
. . to those devoid of imagination, a blank place on a map is a useless
waste; to others the most valuable part." What better way to bring
receptivity "into the still unlovely human mind," as he terms it, than
walking in the world? Mapping the trail with my feet I repeat a mantra,
"arrive home," and feel each step on the earth. I notice each
footfall---swing, heel down, forefoot down, push off---and feel the
weight transfer up my body. A pilgrim path seems perfect for moving away
from wherever we're seized up: physically at a desk, or in an illfitting
job, or in a constricted family life. When life chafes, or we are
disrespected and chained, it's an appropriate response to hit the road,
to

match our steps to our heartbeat, align the self and the soul's desires
as we walk. I begin to kick a rock along the trail, feeling how
different life is when you walk through it with real attention. The
land, the sky, the trees, me moving through the scene---I feel like part
of a bigger picture. Kilometre by kilometre, however, my erstwhile
pilgrim's paradise grows infernal. I catch myself thinking how much
nicer it would be to ride the old steam train, just gazing out the
window. I pull the big iron railway nails, nuts and bolts from my pack
and throw them back on the ground---too heavy. The downhill part of the
trail ends and I cross a sunny road, where I'm delighted to find an old
apple tree, more evidence of the past. The apples are the red-striped
ones I'd found yesterday. A search I did last night on my phone makes me
think they're St. Lawrence apples, an heirloom variety from Montreal. I
pick a few and notice they taste sweeter---perhaps because I'm further
south? I munch down three apples in a row as I limp along the path. For
ages I keep on going, expecting to reach the highway, the point at which
I'll have walked the same distance as yesterday, and where the unmapped
part of my journey begins. My feet up to my sacroiliac joints hurt on
both sides now, and my steps are minuscule. I keep going, with no more
exultations or even thoughts, just one foot after another. I pass a
weird nightmare tableau with six gory, life-sized figures, one chained
by the neck to a tree, another with a chainsaw, and I barely look up. By
the time I reach the hard-earned highway I've developed a sudden
interest in all I'd scoffed at before, clocking miles and arriving at my
destination. It's 11:30 in the morning so I've been walking four hours.
I'm guessing I have seven kilometres, or two hours, to go. I use
much-needed energy to sprint across the highway and avoid speeding
vehicles. The flat trail begins to wend behind businesses and houses and
then parallel to the highway in the unpleasant midday heat. It's

then I enter the piney Sahara: hot, dry, dusty, endless sand. This
stretch is the worst yet. I put one foot doggedly in front of the other,
stupefied by boredom, hating the soft sand, hating it all utterly, and
walking. Time passes and I become fixated on the York River, where I
plan to stop to eat. But it never appears. Periodically I throw myself
on the ground in the shade of a tree. I begin to walk on my heels and
the sides of feet to avoid my pounded metatarsals, and to alleviate the
pain in my hips and back. My hikers weren't broken in after all. I'd
probably make more progress crawling on all fours. The Camino, which I'd
equated with boilerplate lack of imagination, begins to make sense: no
bears, no need to wear a lurid orange jacket because of hunters or jump
out of the way of racing ATVs, many handy refugios to sleep in,
bathrooms, gorgeous historical places, kindred spirits, cafés and bars
so you can stop to eat and drink and don't have to carry everything on
your back. I'm sustained a long while by a fantasy about drinking cava
on a patio with new friends and reciting Hafiz: "I fill my glass for
you, dear pilgrim/Beneath the luminous leaking barrel." Flying to Spain
now seems ideal: there's an infrastructure, a welltravelled path, which
allows you to concentrate on your inner pilgrimage. And there's beauty
in the ritual of walking in the centuries-old footsteps of others,
something I won't experience, at least not in the same way, on my
personal pilgrimage. I'd been wrong about another thing too. I thought I
knew all about blisters, sunburn and the other challenges on the path,
based on copious readings. It's now painfully clear I knew them only as
intellectual concepts, not as the embodied, unmediated experience of
sore, hungry, tired, hot, exposed. As life can't be previewed, neither
can pilgrimage. And as with all retreats, a pilgrimage is never the way
you imagine---because you can't imagine, you have step into uncertainty
and give yourself over to the experience.

I do my best to surrender to the long, hellish stretch as part of the
transformative experience of walking the path. There's nothing else I
can do. Calling a cab does occur to me, but I don't know where I am,
only lost in the piney Sahara. I think of those Middle Ages pilgrims,
some barefoot. Sore feet and sunburn are nothing compared to old-school
forms of penitence, such as self-flagellation, a medieval disciplinary
or devotional practice that involved lashing yourself with a whip. Or
what about pilgrims in Tibet's high mountains, doing hundreds of miles
of prostrations---kneel, lie face down hands pressing the earth, get up,
step to your finger marks and repeat, all the while praying. We humans
will suffer to approach our places of sacred power. On a pilgrimage,
effort and asceticism can be a means of spiritual development. I'm no
renunciator, so this is little consolation as my stagger through the
sands continues to take far, far longer than expected. I have no idea
whether the distance is further than I'd guessed, or my pace is to
blame. Eventually when I glimpse the river I feel startled. I'm not
approaching my lunch stop, I realize, but my destination. Bancroft.
Thank God! The same sentiment must escape the lips of all pilgrims,
religious and secular alike. I limp to a picnic table, pull off my pack
and lie down flat, eyes closed. Once I've recovered a little I take out
my chickpea stew and water and eat and drink with relish. I'm shocked to
see it's just 1:30 p.m.: the past two hours felt like days. The river's
smooth surface reflects the green, red and gold of the trees. Beside the
path, near the old train station, three tall white pines have survived
generations of loggers. A miracle! I hobble over, sit on the ground with
my back against one massive trunk and pull out my cloth bag. At the foot
of the big tree I give thanks for my pilgrim journey. I dig a small hole
in the earth and tuck in a black feather from my deceased pet chicken. I
sprinkle in the rest of the sacred ash and

lay a sprig of pine needles over top. I'm happy to end my pilgrimage in
this rugged place of forest and rock. And I'm grateful to have tasted
the power and possibilities of the walking pilgrimage, which I recognize
now is a stellar way to work through our deeper questions as humans. For
someone with such low expectations, and on a short, two-day pilgrimage,
the wealth of fresh insight I've received amazes me. Insight through
experience--- pilgrimage lets you touch the things you know in your
bones. I see how pilgrimage is a practice, the symbolic acting out of an
inner journey. The path really is the way. This is perhaps why it's so
popular a method for retreat: we just step away from the everyday and
learn what we need to learn by going where we need to go. On pilgrimage,
the hunger for ritual and personal spiritual experience is met in a
world that gives little space for either. My "failed" walking
pilgrimages, I see now, weren't a curse but a pilgrimage in themselves,
widening my conception of pilgrimage until I hit upon the right path to
echo my inner purposes. I walked to connect with here. On one of my
perennial immigrant's questions, Who is better off, those who stay, or
those who go?, I feel more certain that for me, the answer is those who
go. While I love Scotland, this place feels most like home, where I've
lived most of my life, where my beloveds are buried and scattered, as I
will likely be. On some level I feel less like a displaced
interloper---and more as though we all belong on Earth, our home. I've
emerged from my journey with new questions, such as how to "belong" in
contested lands. We're all here. If what we feel is what's most
important---for me, steadfast love and gratitude for the living
world---is that a hopeful common ground? Respectful relationships
between people and the land, which shapes us all, is a value central to
traditional Algonquin ways . . .

Just as I arrive at this thought I glimpse a movement out of the corner
of my eye. Ripe apples are dropping from three old trees beside the
trail and rolling downhill, the image of abundance. I limp over and pick
up a greenyyellow apple with red stripes, just like the others. At my
journey's end the fruit tastes sweeter than ever. If these are
St. Lawrences, how did they get here from Montreal? I imagine long-dead
travellers picking fruit from trees to eat on their journey and hurling
the cores from the train windows miles away. Maybe I too planted an
inadvertent tree along the trail? I rummage in my pocket for apple seeds
I'd tucked in there, back in Maynooth at the outset of my pilgrimage,
and bury them in the ground just south of the wizened old trees. Fatigue
and my aching body mean I'm ecstatic to have reached my journey's end.
And yet I sense that tomorrow, my awakened inner pilgrim will have a
longing, to walk south along the ghost railway, apples all the way down
. . .

The New Deities: Nature and Culture Of Forest Cabins, National Parks and
Creative Sanctuaries

I Will Go to the Wild Woods In Wildness is the preservation of the
world. ---Henry David Thoreau

One frigid midwinter afternoon I look onto the frozen lake, early for a
performance of the Kingston symphony. Unseasonable cold, I worry.
Climate change. A huge bird glides past the window. Slow motion, long
neck outstretched, black bill, wings extended, body a downy white, with
a

light tracery of rusty-brown. I've never seen a trumpeter swan before.
It's like a mythical creature, dreamed to life by a Cape Dorset artist.
Inside the concert hall, beautiful music swirls, yet my attention stays
with the thrill of the swan. Why had this fleeting moment felt so
charged? Something resonated, a reminder I was part of the wild world,
an animal too. In our times, when humans are in active retreat from
embodied life, perhaps this is what the swan offers us---a rare and
precious encounter with what is real? Trumpeter swans were nearly
extinct. With conservation efforts they recovered. We think we protected
them, but they protect us too. They save us from the impoverishment of a
world without trumpeter swans, are a wild reminder of the winged, given
world. On Independence Day in 1845, a young radical philosopher
retreated to a one-room pine cabin in the woods near Concord,
Massachusetts. At 28 years of age, he was asserting his own
independence, stepping back for a time from a society he found offensive
and unethical---in its subjugation of enslaved people and Indigenous
peoples, and its degradation of the natural world. "I went to the woods
because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts
of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not,
when I came to die, discover that I had not lived," wrote Henry David
Thoreau in Walden, the chronicle of his experiment. "I wanted to live
deep and suck out all the marrow of life." Thoreau, a principled rebel,
was in pursuit of truth. "Be it life or death, we crave only reality."
By the pond and in the forest at Walden, Thoreau came to believe that
the path to understanding was to know the natural world we are a part
of. "We need the tonic of wildness . . . We can never have enough of
nature. We must be refreshed by the sight of inexhaustible

vigour, vast and Titanic features." Here Thoreau picks up an eternal
thread in the history of retreat: the human desire to connect with
what's beyond us, in this case, nature's elemental power, so utterly
past our comprehension and control. "We need to witness our own limits
transgressed, and some life pasturing freely where we never wander."
Thoreau's writings about his time in the woods---for two years and two
months and two days---illuminate the role of nature retreats in our
lives even today. Walden has been looked at in many ways: as a work of
art, as a societal critique, as a manual for a simple life, and as a
lyrical love letter to nature. As biographer Laura Dassow Walls writes
in Henry David Thoreau: A Life, "Thoreau has never been captured between
covers; he was too quixotic, mischievous, many-sided." To me, Walden is
a brilliant account of a consequential nature retreat by an
unconventional thinker who continues to inspire us. Far from being an
escape, Thoreau's time apart was a deep exploration of how to live with
integrity and how to wake up. "We must learn to reawaken and keep
ourselves awake. . . . I know of no more encouraging fact than the
unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious
endeavor." Cultivating oneself, he believed, is what leads to reform in
society. "The millions are awake enough for physical labor; but only one
in a million is awake enough for effective intellectual exertion, only
one in a hundred million to a poetic or divine life. To be awake is to
be alive." Walden was published in 1854, seven years after Thoreau left
the woods. It's the story of his own awakening while living in a small
forest cabin of white pine he built with his own hands, with the natural
world as his teacher. The pioneering naturalist used his five senses and
recorded personal responses in communion with the divine, realizing that
he was a part, not the centre, of creation. Watching bugs hiding on the
forest floor he

observed, "I am reminded of the greater Benefactor and Intelligence that
stands over me the human insect." Thoreau's profound gift to us, and his
main influence on the history of retreat, is that he inspired us to
appreciate the natural world. Giving flora and fauna our reverent
attention, he believed, was the basis for loving and protecting it, and
for recognizing it as sacred. It's hard to overstate how revolutionary
an idea this was: while around him settlers were busy subjugating the
natural world, Thoreau was thinking deeply and expressing relational
beliefs, ones that sound contemporary. His work endures as a persuasive
and prescient voice for the preservation of wild places. "I think that
the genius of Henry David Thoreau is he saw the world whole, even holy,"
author Terry Tempest Williams said in a radio interview. Though there
was no word for ecology in Thoreau's time, Walden expresses the
understanding that nature is everywhere and not just in "pristine"
places. And that humans are part of the natural world, in relationship
with it, and not its overlords. While a retreat can be an act of
refusal, it is also a place. Thoreau's mark is obvious here as well. At
Walden Woods, the philosophical became the physical: the small cabin has
become our proto-nature retreat, the Western version of the ancient
Chinese hermit's hut. While there's no evidence Thoreau was familiar
with poet Lao-Tzu---though he certainly read many Asian holy books on
his mentor Ralph Waldo Emerson's urging ---Thoreau's thoughts, about
contemplation for example, echo those of this early antecedent. By
Thoreau's time a radical shift in ideas about nature was gaining speed.
Wilderness had been for much of history a terrifying and bewildering
place, considered "deserted," "savage," "desolate," or "barren," notes
environmental historian William Cronon. It was "the antithesis of all
that was orderly and good---it had been the darkness, one might say, on
the far

side of the garden wall---and yet now it was frequently likened to Eden
itself." This shift began with the Europeans whom Thoreau is
alchemically related to: the metaphysical writers of the 17th
century---Donne, Hebert, Marvell and Browne---visionary German
naturalist Alexander von Humboldt, and the Romantics of the 19th
century---philosopher Kant, and poets Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley and
Coleridge, who wrote of "the one life within us and abroad." While some
scholars argue the Romantics were more interested in their own minds and
pretty landscapes than the objective stuff of nature and the living
planet, modern environmental consciousness in the West begins with them.
They conveyed a sense of the unity of living things, and they idealized
nature, made it sacred. They believed that the best place to glimpse God
was in sublime landscapes---mountaintops, rivers, forests, waterfalls,
watching the sunset---places where humans experience awe and fear. They
encouraged people to retreat to nature. This was the start of the modern
era, when retreat became more relatable, more like our retreats of
today. The Romantic withdrawal from human society to commune with nature
led us away from the religious retreats of the past, from penance toward
joy. Seeking a taste of eternity in the given world, the Romantics
believed, educated us in higher spiritual realities, and the imagination
could access higher truths than pure reason. The Romantics' retreats
were foundational to their new ideas about individualism and political
freedom, and as part of this, a startling idea took root: that retreats
were not just for the special few, the religious and scholars, but were
an essential part of a fulfilled life for all humans. As well, these
nonconformists rejected any mediation of the search for truth by the
church, the state or the academy---by retreating, they were seeking
beyond received wisdom. The quest was picked up by the
Transcendentalists, who drew a line separating religion from
spirituality. For his part, Thoreau rejected organized religion,
writing, "I suppose that

what in other men is religion is in me love of nature." His eclectic
spirituality, and personal, experiential sojourn in nature feel modern.
"I do not prefer one religion or philosophy to another. I have no
sympathy with the bigotry and ignorance which make transient and partial
and puerile distinctions between one man's faith or form of faith &
another's . . . To the philosopher all sects, all nations, are alike. I
like Brahma, Hari, Buddha, the Great Spirit, as well as God." Thoreau's
ideas reflect the philosophy of the American Transcendentalists, which
drew on elements of Eastern thought, emphasizing that nature, humanity
and God are unified. Poet and essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson founded the
Transcendental Club in 1836. Group member Margaret Fuller, a journalist
and one of America's first feminists, wrote, "Disgusted with the
vulgarity of a commercial aristocracy, they become radicals; disgusted
with the materialistic workings of rational religion, they become
mystics." When Emerson gave a lecture to Harvard seniors, among them was
Thoreau, who became a major contributor to the movement. Thoreau's
background was humble---his father was a not-verysuccessful pencil
maker---but his parents economized to send their intelligent son to
private schools, including Harvard. Emerson, his neighbour and mentor,
owned Walden, and allowed Thoreau to build his cabin by the pond. By the
1850s the new philosophy, a reaction against the rationalism of the
Unitarian Church, had a strong following in Massachusetts, and it
influenced intellectuals and writers for generations to come. The
Transcendentalists saw God as both transcendent---or beyond the limits
of human experience---and immanent, in every blade of grass and every
living thing. This was a fascinating departure for 1830s Puritanical New
England. The Hindu and Transcendentalist belief that God resides in

each individual leads to the idea that each person can experience the
divine within. And, consequentially, they believed one of the best ways
to find this unity was to observe nature, in a direct, intuitive
way---an idea that encouraged people to retreat. Thoreau's retreat to
live in the natural world at Walden Pond allowed him to attain the
Transcendentalist goal, to experience God within. Over and over he
writes about this unity of nature, humans and the divine: "I was
suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent society in Nature, in the
very pattering of the drops, and in every sound and sight around my
house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at once like an
atmosphere sustaining me." Elsewhere he observes, "I was so distinctly
made aware of the presence of something kindred to me, even in scenes
which we are accustomed to call wild." In "The Bean Field" chapter,
Thoreau describes feeling at one with all living things as he works the
soil, of fusing with the nonhuman world: "It was no longer the beans
that I hoed, or that I hoed beans." Under the influence of Thoreau,
Yeats, often called the last Romantic poet, writes of "nine bean rows"
in his most famous poem, "The Lake Isle of Innisfree." Predictably,
critiques of the poem call it escapist---which, just as predictably,
infuriates me, given it's one of the most enduring and beautiful
evocations ever written of the pleasures and powers of retreat. "When I
was a young lad in the town of Sligo I read Thoreau's essays and wanted
to live in a hut on an island in Lough Gill called Innisfree, which
means 'Heather Island,'" Yeats explained once, speaking of the poem
before a reading. Thoreau shares insights, practical and philosophical,
about his seven miles of beans. He details his earnings from selling the
crop. He also notes that the sun and the rain are the true bean
cultivators, and says other creatures have as much right to the harvest
as he does---an idea that earned him the scorn of the townsfolk, who
thought him eccentric. Thoreau lived

simply, growing his own food and following a vegetarian diet---though he
sometimes ate fish from the pond and, once, an unfortunate woodchuck.
Later he regretted this act, and wrote: "The beans have results, which
are not harvested by me. Do they not grow for woodchucks partly?" His
ecocentric beliefs that humans are part of nature, and that the world is
interconnected, animate Walden, make it relevant to our nature retreats
in the modern world. For millennia humans have venerated holy places in
nature: springs, wells, waterfalls, rivers, forests, valleys, caves,
mountains and monolithic rocks. Of sacred geographies the Dalai Lama
writes, "Taken together they represent the common need in the human
quest for happiness to preserve certain places as sanctuaries,
reflecting perhaps each individual's wish for inner peace." And while
humans have long been drawn back to wild edgelands for perspective,
Thoreau added a modern-day geography of retreat to our repertoire: a
wasteland on the outskirts of commerce. "Walden's general lack of
utility made it an 'outback' with an ascetic remoteness that would
attract the Transcendentalists, beginning in the 1830s," writes Robert
M. Thorson in The Guide to Walden Pond. With amazing prescience Thoreau
saw the false distinction between "wild" land ---uninhabited land and
exalted, sweeping landscapes---and "non-wild" land, a way of thinking
that has disconnected us from reality, and the natural world. "Far from
being the one place on Earth that stands apart from humanity, wilderness
is quite profoundly a human creation," Cronon notes in his 1995 essay
"The Trouble with Wilderness." Without us to set it apart, of course,
there is no wilderness. He elaborates, "Wilderness is not a pristine
sanctuary where the last remnant of an untouched, endangered, but still
transcendent nature can for at least a little while longer be
encountered without the contaminating taint of civilization." Nor is it,
I might add, a

consumerist "wilderness experience," with its high peaks and endangered
animals. Thoreau's ecological view, that humans are part of nature,
meant he rejected the biblical idea---still prevalent today in Western
civilization---that humans have dominion over the natural world, which
he saw as a kind of hatred for life. In Genesis, humans are told, "And
the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the
earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the
earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they
delivered . . . even as the green herb have I given you all things."
Thoreau's step back to the woods, where he noticed the small and
particular in nature, was a refusal of this idea, coinciding with
rampant industrialization and violent attacks on Indigenous people to
force them off their lands. Battles between the army and Sitting Bull,
Crazy Horse and Geronimo were daily news in Thoreau's time: he
recognized also that lands are contested spaces. Walden was a new kind
of margin for the age, outside the urban and industrial. Before Thoreau
came to Walden, when a new road had been built, it bypassed the area. An
impoverished village grew up there, where formerly enslaved people,
immigrants and day labourers squatted, and no one stopped them because
the land was rocky and the soil was poor. Thoreau describes resident
Zilpha White, once enslaved, who built a oneroom house and lived as a
hermit, spinning cloth, for more than 40 years. "She led a hard life,
and somewhat inhumane," he writes. White was long gone by Thoreau's
time: English soldiers burned her small home and all her animals during
the War of 1812. Thoreau saw the interconnections between nature and
historic struggles and inequalities, and his thinking about social
reforms considered those who came before: Indigenous people who had
lived there for 11,000 years, and the formerly enslaved people and
others who had once made Walden

Woods their home. In Henry David Thoreau: A Life, biographer Laura
Dassow Walls observes that the Thoreau who speaks for nature and the one
who speaks for social justice grew from the same root: from his
recognition of the truth of interdependence. He went to Walden because
he didn't understand why people thought they had no options and resigned
themselves to lives of "quiet desperation." He wanted to think deeply
about the choices we make and how we live. These choices, however small,
he believed, are reflected in the world around us. Now there's a
sobering thought. Simplifying life, he believed, frees us to see more
clearly, breaking normal habits of perception, which can lead to new
ideas and connections. Thoreau wasn't saying we all needed to move to
the woods: he aimed to bring us to our own awakenings, which would lead
us to act with integrity according to our inner dictates. Before Walden,
Thoreau was already a reformer who fought slavery, and also against
enslavement to the capitalist economy that alienates us from ourselves,
from others and from the land. His solution was to live intentionally,
which can be done anywhere. His retreat was not in the old style of a
religious hermit in the wilds, but a middle way: a move to the margin, a
retreat to the outskirts of town. Beyond his ideas about nature Thoreau
anticipated our modern embrace of Eastern ways of retreat, with yoga and
meditation. His readings and dialogue with classical Indian writing
influenced much of his work---some scholars even link his desire to go
to Walden with these ancient books. The Vedic literature of ancient
India reinforced the Transcendentalists in their critique of society's
rationalism and materialism, while providing new ideas about love for
nature, interdependence and the search for truth. Thoreau used the holy
books selectively as instruction manuals and found the Bhagavad Gita
meaningful. "Depend upon it that rude and careless as I am, I would fain
practise the yoga faithfully," he wrote in a letter to his friend

H.G.O. Blake in 1849. "To some extent, and at rare intervals, even I am
a yogin." Thoreau, part forest sage, understood the value of
contemplation. "I did not read books the first summer; I hoed beans.
Nay, I often did better than this. There were times when I could not
afford to sacrifice the bloom of the present moment to any work, whether
of the head or hands. I love a broad margin to my life." Often he bathed
in the pond on summer mornings and then sat in the cabin doorway, "rapt
in a revery, amid the pines and hickories and sumachs, in undisturbed
solitude and stillness." He only ended his meditation, he said, when the
sun shone through his west window or he heard a distant traveller's
wagon. I love what Thoreau writes next, because he explains the
imperceptible change, so difficult to describe, that is a hallmark of a
retreat to nature. "I grew in those seasons like corn in the night, and
they were far better than any work of the hands would have been. They
were not time subtracted from my life, but so much over and above my
usual allowance. I realized what the Orientals mean by contemplation and
the forsaking of works." Like contemplatives in all ages, Thoreau became
a magnet for curious people. Deliberate at first, and solitary---"I love
to be alone. I never found the companion that was so companionable as
solitude"---he soon saw his chance to be an educator on a public stage
and took to sermonizing. He was very conspicuous, and as many people
came to Walden to fish or swim, passersby often saw him from road.
People would yell, "Beans, so late?" and family and friends visited
often. As well, he sometimes lectured and worked as a gardener, fence
builder, stone mason, surveyor and handyman, often for Emerson, but only
enough to support himself. He became a celebrity, which led to charges
of hypocrisy, because he went home to his mother's to do laundry and eat
dinner and, sometimes, to catch up on gossip. In the "Visitors" chapter,
Thoreau clearly says he's "no hermit" and

describes his three chairs---"one for solitude, two for friendship,
three for society"---and marvels that he's had as many as "twenty-five
or thirty souls, with their bodies, at once under my roof." Even in his
own circle of iconoclasts Thoreau's act of retreat was too radical to be
understood. In 1842 writer Nathaniel Hawthorne began by calling Thoreau
"a young man with much of wild original nature still remaining in him .
. . He is as ugly as sin, long-nosed, queer-mouthed, and with uncouth
and somewhat rustic, though courteous manners." And then, reflecting
both the racism of the times and incomprehension about Thoreau's
experiment, "\[He\] seems inclined to lead a sort of Indian life among
civilised men---an Indian life, I mean, as respects the absence of any
systematic effort for a livelihood." In the introduction to the 150-year
edition of Walden in 2004, John Updike writes: "Emerson, like other
respectable citizens of Concord, was skeptical of enterprise so personal
and quizzical, confiding to his journal that 'Thoreau wants a little
ambition in his mixture . . . Instead of being the head of American
engineers, he is captain of a huckleberry party.'" Then, as now in many
quarters, paying deep attention to the natural world---being present
versus being productive---didn't qualify as an acceptable way to spend
one's time. Thoreau, unlike many of the initial Western retreaters, the
religious hermits and monks, never planned to leave society forever. He
was a social reformer, not a retiring recluse. His political side was
expressed in the 1849 essay on protest, "Civil Disobedience," which he
also worked on in the woods, a work that influenced Gandhi's nonviolent
resistance in India, Martin Luther King Jr.'s during the '60s civil
rights movement and countless other dissidents. In the long tradition of
those who retire in order to return, Thoreau's experiment in the woods
came to an end and he rejoined society, going first

to live with Emerson's family while his friend was away lecturing, and
after that, staying mostly at his parents' home. Thoreau turned from
questioning everything and observing nature to sharing his findings. He
spent seven years on Walden. For the rest of his life he was an amateur
naturalist, and his formative time at Walden fed his future work. He
wrote every morning and evening and walked every afternoon until his
early death at 44 of tuberculosis. In our era of information overload
and environmental emergency, Thoreau's wisdom reverberates. That a
better life results from cultivating simplicity, solitude and
independent thought, and observing nature to gain a holistic view, is an
idea that grows in weight with each passing generation. In Walden's
conclusion, Thoreau's discoveries from a small cabin in the woods by the
pond evoke how a retreat is always an experiment. "If one advances
confidently in the direction of his dreams, and endeavors to live the
life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in
common hours," Thoreau writes. It's about cultivating higher laws and
our higher selves. "He will put some things behind, will pass an
invisible boundary; new, universal, and more liberal laws will begin to
establish themselves around and within him; or the old laws be expanded,
and interpreted in his favour in a more liberal sense, and he will live
with the license of a higher order of beings. . . ." It's also about
action. "If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be
lost; that is where they should be. Now put the foundations under them."
Walden was a reflection of the wild inside, and when Thoreau's time by
the pond ends, he looks to the future. "There is more day to dawn. The
sun is but a morning star," he writes. A deeply philosophical book,
Walden urges us to apply its findings to our own lives: to explore our
interiority in nature, to step back to spark new, ecological ways of
thinking and to make the world better.

A retreat to nature helps us fall in love with the living world in times
when our most pressing problems are ecological, and we have caused them
ourselves. What could be more urgent? Thoreau inspired generations of
literary naturalists and writers who saw Earth as a living temple, and
they shaped our ideas about the natural world ---in turn, influencing
our ways of retreating to nature. Among them, Emily Dickinson, John
Muir, Aldo Leopold, Louise de Kiriline Lawrence, Rachel Carson, Wendell
Berry, Annie Dillard, Terry Tempest Williams, and Mary Oliver all took a
step back from society to the natural world in order to see clearly and
think deeply and independently. Literature has long challenged and
transformed cultural narratives related to humanity's complex
relationship to nature. From Thoreau's time to now, there's been a
continuing shift toward a personal spirituality in nature, which may or
may not include God. Many modern people find their sanctuary in the wild
world. As well, in the past, with the exception of anchorites bricked
into their cells, retreat had been almost exclusively for men. In 2008
Scottish poet and essayist Kathleen Jamie wrote of the tradition of
literate monks and hermits, which she says is "largely uninterrogated:
the association of literature, remoteness, wildness and spiritually
uplifted men." From Thoreau's time on, pioneering, self-sufficient and
mainly secular women---poets, artists, explorers and scientists---began
to retreat, ignoring traditional roles. In 1935 Megan Boyd, a famous
salmon fly dresser, moved to a small cottage in northern Scotland at 20
and lived alone by the sea for 60 years. In 1933 Christiane Ritter, a
painter from Austria, travelled to Spitsbergen, an Arctic island north
of Norway, to join her husband, and wrote A Woman in the Polar Night.
Explorer Anne Morrow Lindbergh withdrew from her busy family life and
career to Florida's Captiva Island in

1955, where she wrote Gift from the Sea, feeling in harmony with "the
universe, lost in it, as one is lost in a canticle of praise, swelling
from an unknown crowd in a cathedral." Anne LaBastille, a wildlife
ecologist and advocate, moved to a remote cabin by a lake in her forties
and wrote books, the most famous being Woodswoman, from 1976, about
living alone in the Adirondacks. Women's historical contributions to our
ideas about nature, and about retreat, are slowly coming to light. One
morning, walking the dog at the lakeside park, I'm startled when my
friend tells me she's visited the spacious gardens where poet Emily
Dickinson liked to wander. I had thought Dickinson was a recluse shut up
in her room, based on a gossipy description I'd read, written by her
neighbour whose letter described her as "the climax of all the family
oddity. She has not been outside her own house in fifteen years. She
dresses wholly in white, and her mind is said to be perfectly
wonderful." In reality, at least for a time, she roamed freely over 14
acres of gardens, woods and fields. An avid gardener, she spent
countless hours outside at the family homestead in Amherst,
Massachusetts, observing and working and taking long walks with her big
brown Newfoundland dog, Carlo---whom she called "my shaggy ally" and "my
mute confederate." Dickinson was younger than Thoreau, but familiar with
his work and that of the other Transcendentalists. Like him, she was a
solitude- and nature-loving rebel who refused to conform to society's
narrow expectations. Her view of a woman's fate is declared in this
terse line: "Born---Bridalled---Shrouded." Knowing "There is another
loneliness," Dickinson retreated. Called "Queen Recluse" by family
friend and editor of the Springfield Republican Samuel Bowles and "The
Myth" by townsfolk in Amherst, Dickinson wrote 1,775 poems she never
intended to publish.

Few people, even in her inner circle, knew anything about them before
her death at 55 in 1886. Dickinson, like Thoreau, was an early
ecologist. Her legacy is that she taught us to see the world. Her
subjects were nature, art and spirituality, and she rejected
conventional religion for a more personal faith. For her, nature was
sacred: "The gentian weaves her fringes . . . /In the name of the Bee
---/And of the Butterfly---/And of the breeze---Amen!" Dickinson had an
original mind and a strong will. Even though one by one, her family and
schoolmates publicly professed their belief in Christ, necessary to
become a full member of the church, Dickinson refrained, instead
declaring her loyalty to the Earth in a letter to a friend: "the world
allured me and in an unguarded moment I listened to her siren voice.
From that moment I seemed to lose my interest in heavenly things by
degrees." In a letter to another friend Dickinson writes that God's
paradise is redundant: "If roses had not faded, and frosts had never
come, and one had not fallen here and there who I could not waken, there
were no need of other Heaven than the one below---and if God had been
here this summer, and seen the things that I have seen---I guess that He
would think His paradise superfluous." For her, "Earth is Heaven," and
the house of prayer is her garden: "Some keep the Sabbath going to
Church---/I keep it, staying at Home---/With a Bobolink for a
Chorister---/And an Orchard, for a Dome." From Dickinson's time to ours,
there's been much speculation about her seclusion. Did she have an
illness? Why the nun-like white dress? Why didn't she marry? Did she
have a lover? The Emily Dickinson Museum website says vaguely: "As she
grew older, she saw people less and less but remained open to visits
from close friends and family. Whether she suffered from a medical
condition that made her uncomfortable around people or whether she chose
to separate herself from society is not known."

This highly unsatisfying explanation fuels much speculation on morning
walks with my human friend and our canine confederate in the lakeside
forests and fields. Ultimately we decide that Dickinson was simply an
uncompromising woman who used retreat as a strategy to live an artist's
life ---which she then spent mainly out of doors. Her gender meant
finding peace to write was hard won. In times when women were expected
to marry, and even if single, endure endless rounds of social calls,
refusing visitors and invitations sounds to us like a practical
decision. She embraced solitude to go deep to explore "\[t\]hat polar
privacy,/A Soul admitted to Itself:/Finite Infinity." The clear-eyed
vision, the passionate, original mind, the blazing intelligence, so
obvious from her poems, is at odds with the image of an eccentric
recluse---which clings to anyone who retreats, as though stepping out of
bounds can't be tolerated by society, and especially not when it's done
by a woman. In the light of retreat, I imagine Dickinson differently
now: artistically productive, socializing in her own small circle and
through letters, giving marriage the slip, walking with Carlo and
lowering baskets of homemade gingerbread from her upstairs window to
neighbour children below (which she actually did). Dickinson had an
excellent education. She studied botany and was "more widely known as a
gardener" than a poet by family and friends, according to author Judith
Farr. The family garden and small greenhouse were her paradise, where
even in winter she could linger. According to the Emily Dickinson
International Society's newsletter, she "cultivated buttercups, ferns,
wood sorrel, heliotropes and jasmine, which she quenched with 'a long,
slender spout like the antennae of insects,'" recalled her niece Martha
Bianchi. During a New York Botanical Garden show on Dickinson's garden,
exhibits director Karen Daubmann described it thus: "Lush, filled with

flowers, and fragrant; it includes layered plantings of trees, shrubs,
perennials, annuals, vegetables, and bulbs, with a woodland path,
meadow, orchard, vegetable garden, cutting garden, and conservatory."
Nature was the sanctuary where Dickinson safeguarded her muse. And the
garden was the source of her original and profound insights into the
natural world, and of her verse. Her work reflects the relational ethic
of today's ecological thinking. A brilliant naturalist, Dickinson not
only showed us how to see, but she expressed contemporary ideas---such
as extending rights to the non-human world. Reflecting her
nonanthropocentric understanding of nature, she writes: "I robbed the
Woods---/The trusting Woods./The unsuspecting Trees/Brought out their
Burs and mosses/ My fantasy to please./I scanned their trinkets
curious---I grasped---I bore away---/What will the solemn
Hemlock---/What will the Oak tree say?" Dickinson requested that before
her funeral, her coffin be carried around her flower garden, in and out
of the family's barn and through fields of buttercups to the nearby town
cemetery. She provided a new model for nature retreat: the artist as a
woman who steps back to create---not to a room, but to a garden. The
idea of whom nature retreats were for morphed gradually: no longer just
for hermits, monks, artists, philosophers or the privileged, the notion
grew that it was necessary and beneficial for everyone. Early outliers
who took up this idea of democratic access to natural places forever and
for all sparked efforts to protect the natural world in the first wave
of the conservation movement. Scottish-American John Muir was a
pioneering figure in the preservation of wilderness for the common good
and helped create another institution in the way we retreat: the
national park. Inspired by Thoreau, his

spiritual and literary mentor, Muir lived in a small cabin beside
Yosemite Creek in 1869 and wrote a journal that became My First Summer
in the Sierra. Muir's writing often reflects Thoreau's, such as in the
shared belief that in "wildness lies the hope of the world." Muir saw
evidence of the divine everywhere in nature. His religion was rooted in
wildness and the worship of God's creation. "If St. Anthony is the
prototype of the Christian hermit, John Muir must be the apotheosis of
the solitary whose God is nature," writes Isabel Colgate in A Pelican in
the Wilderness. He had a religious fervour about national parks at the
turn of the century, when the word conservation was first coined, a
force against industrialization and settlement. Also known as "John of
the Mountains," Muir was instrumental in having Yosemite designated a
national park, among other acts of preservation, and wrote that it was
"by far the grandest of all the special temples of Nature I was ever
permitted to enter . . . the sanctum sanctorum of the Sierra." Muir
became an influential naturalist and conservationist, and his ideas
spread around the world through his writings: he believed there should
be places set aside free from private ownership for all time, so
everyone can experience nature and beauty. "Thousands of tired,
nerve-shaken, overcivilized people are beginning to find out that going
to the mountains is going home; that wildness is a necessity," he wrote.
By the 1860s the American side of Niagara Falls (now public) had been
bought by a private landowner who charged people to see this natural
wonder. To prevent this happening elsewhere, and to stop development,
the public park was born. The Yosemite land grant in 1864 designated the
first parkland, protected by the state of California, while Yellowstone,
which straddles three states, became the first national park in 1872.
Twenty years later Muir founded the Sierra Club for those who wanted to
"explore, enjoy, and protect the wild places of the earth," especially
those in the Sierra

Nevada mountain range. Muir's great influence on the way we retreat is
the idea of a preserved park, where the public can step back to the
wilds. "Everybody needs beauty as well as bread, places to play in and
pray in, where nature may heal and give strength to body and soul
alike," he declared. Before this, Muir's taste for wild country had been
whetted in Canada, where he spent two formative years. In 1864, aged 26,
he came north with the purpose of "botanizing"---looking for flowers and
trees. He spent spring, summer and fall wandering through the woods and
swamps of what later became Ontario. Describing it as his "first grand
excursion," Muir found a tiny, rare native orchid, the Calypso borealis
(also called fairy slipper or Venus's slipper). The discovery, captured
in The Life and Letters of John Muir, is like a religious experience: "I
found beautiful Calypso on the mossy bank of a stream, growing not in
the ground but on a bed of yellow mosses in which its small white bulb
had found a soft nest and from which its one leaf and one flower sprung.
The flower was white and made the impression of the utmost simple purity
like a snowflower. No other bloom was near it, for the bog a short
distance below the surface was still frozen, and the water was ice
cold." And then, surprisingly for a nononsense Scot of the mountains, he
added: "It seemed the most spiritual of all the flower people I had ever
met. I sat down beside it and fairly cried for joy. It seems wonderful
that so frail and lovely a plant has such power over human hearts." That
autumn Muir met his brother Daniel and the two set to work at Trout's
sawmill and factory, south of Meaford, Ontario. Muir wrote: "When I came
to the Georgian Bay of Lake Huron, whose waters are so transparent and
beautiful, and the forests about its shores with their ferny, mossy
dells and deposits of boulder clay, it seemed to be a most favorable
place for study . . . In a beautiful dell, only a mile or two from the
magnificent bay, I

fortunately found work in a factory where there was a sawmill and lathes
for turning out rakes, broom, and fork handles, etc." At Trout Hollow on
the Bighead River, Muir lived in a small cabin for nearly two years,
working until the sawmill and factory burned down in 1866. Today the
Trout Hollow Trail leads to where John Muir lived 155 years ago, and
there's a commemorative plaque at Epping Lookout near Meaford. Muir
walked much of what is now the Bruce Trail. Though Muir had studied
botany and geology at the University of Wisconsin, he was also known as
an ingenious industrial inventor. Obsessed with clocks, he famously made
a hybrid alarm clock/study desk that slid him out of bed to the floor in
the morning, lit a lamp and gave him a few minutes to dress before it
began to pull books out at set intervals so he could study. He also
designed water wheels, barometers and an automatic horse-feeding
machine. In 1867 when he was working at an Indianapolis carriage factory
a sharp file pierced his eye, blinding him temporarily in both eyes. He
said if he recovered his sight he was "determined to get away into the
flowery wilderness to enjoy and lay in as large a stock as possible of
God's wild beauty before the coming on of the times of darkness." After
six months, his sight restored, he left his old life behind and set off
walking to Florida---carrying only a little money, a compass, a bar of
soap and a towel, and a few reading materials, including the poems of
Robert Burns, the New Testament and a botany textbook. The future patron
saint of national parks was headed for South America, studying plants
and flowers and starting the journal he kept for the rest of his life
along the way. He contracted malaria, decided to turn westward instead
and walked from San Francisco to Yosemite in 1868. Captivated, he took
local jobs---as a ranch hand, at a sawmill and then as a guide---so he
could wander and study and explore. He built a cabin over the stream so
he could listen to the sound of running water. Later he left in search
of

glaciers, with no gun and no blankets: he'd make a fire from scraps of
wood and sleep beside it in the cold snow of the high Sierra, like some
biblical hermit seeking transcendence. Photos reveal a man with long
curly hair and a long beard, very hermit chic: he once called himself a
"poetico-trampo-geologist-botanist and ornithologist-naturalist etc.
etc. !!!!" and he looks the part. Comically, Muir thought Thoreau and
Emerson not "wild" enough: "Even open-eyed Thoreau would perhaps have
done well had he extended his walks westward to see what God had to show
in the lofty sunset mountains." Muir retreated to the Yosemite cabin for
only a few years, but his time in the Sierra marked him forever.
Afterwards he dedicated his life to protecting the natural world, which
he saw was disappearing as quickly as the Californian redwoods. A voice
in the wilderness, he encouraged others to retreat as he had, and he
often went back to recharge in nature. Viewed from the 21st century,
national parks---a modern institution for retreat---are both cause for
celebration and change. Muir's desire to preserve natural places has
inspired millions, and the preservation of public land from
industrialization means these precious sanctuaries endure today. Muir
thought of nature as sacred and wrote, "When we try to pick out anything
by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the Universe." And
yet he spared no thought for the inhabitants who were driven off these
pristine "wild" lands. Muir's descriptions of Yosemite as a "pure
wilderness" where "no mark of man is visible upon it" obscures the long
history of those who had lived there for millennia. Back in the 1850s
few settlers had even seen Yosemite, but with the California gold rush,
explorers and prospectors began bringing back tales of its beauty.
Later, military men from the Mariposa Battalion came to dispossess the
Indigenous residents and wrongly thought Yosemite was the tribe's name.
Scholars learned that the people "called the valley

Ahwahnee, meaning 'the place of a gaping mouth,' and that they called
themselves the Ahwahneechees." In Canada Indigenous peoples were forced
off their lands to create parks and wildlife preserves, prompting one
writer to call them "colonial crime scenes" in a 2017 article. Beginning
with the creation of Banff in 1885, early government agencies banned
Indigenous peoples, and other authorities had similar policies---Ontario
outlawed hunting in Algonquin Park when it was established in 1893, and
First Nations people were displaced by the creation of Vancouver's
Stanley Park. Muir's legacy is fraught in many ways: the history of
dispossession; problematic "management" practices, such as killing off
all the predators in supposedly wild places; and recently overcrowding.
Yosemite has more than four million visitors a year. Tourism puts a
strain on environments and leads to development, even when it's
ecotourism focused on conservation. Terry Tempest Williams, a writer in
Thoreau's lineage, writes passionately about America's national parks in
The Hour of the Land. "We don't need to denounce John Muir's legacy, we
need to broaden it," she maintains. Parks are places to fight back
against the rapaciousness and ignorance that characterize our
relationship to the natural world, she says, and are "the closest we
have to sacred space." They "are so much more than a federally
constructed reservation for recreation and retail," Williams writes.
"They are places of recognition---where we can renew and revive our
understanding of what makes us human in relationship to the life that
surrounds us." Parks began as refuges for wildlife, but now they've
evolved into refuges for urban, technology-habituated humans for whom
placelessness has become a reality. Pollution and climate change don't
stop at park boundaries, of course, and yet the natural beauty remains.
Muir's words about protected places still ring true and encourage us to
go: "Nature's

peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will
blow their own freshness into you, and the storms their energy, while
cares will drop off like autumn leaves." What exactly are we seeking,
and what are we finding, when we retreat to nature? Peace, perhaps, and
awe at meeting forces beyond our understanding, where we can lose our
small selves and our sense of separation? For me, being away from
society in an environment with trees and water enables me to feel how
I'm related to the more-than-human world. This idea clearly animated the
life of ornithologist and conservationist Louise de Kiriline Lawrence,
whose first words, according to her mother, were kraa kraa kraa, spoken
to crows. Lawrence, born in 1894 to a wealthy Swedish family---her
godmother, whom she is named after, was Princess Louise of
Denmark---grew up on a country estate. She reconnected to nature after
she moved to Canada, a new chapter in a tumultuous life. Though her
family resisted, Lawrence trained as a nurse. During the First World War
she worked for the Red Cross in Denmark, caring for wounded prisoners of
war. That's where she met and married a Russian army officer. In 1919 he
returned to northern Russia to fight in the Russian Revolution; she
followed, working as a nurse. The Bolsheviks imprisoned them both. Later
they were separated and he disappeared, while she, a Swedish national,
was released. Lawrence spent four years during a terrible Russian famine
searching for him while working as a delegate for Red Cross. She was to
learn years later that her husband had been shot. The epigraph for her
book about these experiences, Another Winter, Another Spring, is from
Luis de León, a Spanish lyric poet, Augustinian friar, theologian and
academic, and it suits her perfectly: "The beauty of life is nothing but
this: that each should act in conformity with his nature and business."

Lawrence, inured to hardship, came to Canada in 1927 to work as a Red
Cross outpost nurse near North Bay, Ontario. She was on the front lines
caring for injured farmers, loggers and miners, as well as delivering
babies and sharing health education. "Depending on the weather and
geography, Louise made her rounds by foot, Model A Ford, open boat or
dog sled," the Canadian Encyclopedia says. She was head nurse to the
Dionne quintuplets for a year---and detested how they were removed from
their parents and made a spectacle of. In the 1930s Lawrence wrote a
series of articles for Chatelaine. "I chose Canada, because she, I knew,
possessed the unspoiled soil, the life-giving space, the fresh winds
that promote spontaneous growth." In Russia Lawrence had nursed a young
Englishman with terrible burns. "He spoke of the small log cabin hidden
among the snow-heavy pines in the woods. It squats close to the ground,
trustfully and humbly. . . . I caught but a vision of unlimited space
and open fresh air, of freedom of movement and freedom of mind." In the
prison camp, she and her husband had dreamed of living in Canada. After
she retired from nursing Lawrence married a local carpenter and moved to
the woods. She provided another pioneering model of nature retreat for
women---as a scientist. She studied and wrote, mainly about birds, when
her husband went overseas during the Second World War. He returned from
army service in 1945, the same year her first natural history book, The
Loghouse Nest, came out. Lawrence "retreated to her cabin, a decision
that represented the beginning of a remarkable life dedicated to her
observations of the everyday in the natural world," writes Amy Wallace
in "Barefoot in Sapphires," an essay that accompanied a 2010 exhibition
about her life and work in North Bay. Lawrence became a renowned
ornithologist and writer, working from her log cabin on a six-acre
wilderness plot on Pimisi Bay near Rutherglen, Ontario, where she
recorded, banded and

collected bird species. "Swedish aristocrat, Bolshevik concentration
camp survivor, revolutionary widow, world-renowned nurse, gifted
linguist, strict atheist, prolific writer, dedicated conservationist,
and friend of the birds, \[she\] defeats any attempt at categorization,"
Wallace writes. Lawrence authored several books, including The Lovely
and the Wild, which won the John Burroughs Medal in 1969. "She watched
the woodland songbirds come, the orioles and ovenbirds, cardinals and
cuckoos, finches and crossbills and pine siskins," Kirkus Reviews wrote.
"She banded birds, fed them by hand, observed mating and nesting habits,
fight and flight patterns." About her evolution as a naturalist, the
book also registers absences. "Woodland birds still inhabit our forest,
but their former profusion is no more," Lawrence writes. "Here is the
emptiness. Here and in all parts of the forest marvellous woodland
habitats now lie silent and lifeless each spring after the migration of
the birds has come to an end, because not enough of these feathered
elves still exist to fill the empty spaces." In a line heartbreaking to
read now, when bird populations in North America are down 29 percent
since 1970, roughly the time she wrote these words, she adds: "Silent
spring! Has Rachel Carson's prevision really come true?" One April,
Lawrence finds the first nests of red crossbills, inspiring her to
remark that there's nothing better than observing the natural world: "I
am aware of new dimensions extending far beyond the limits of the usual
familiar very narrow sphere within which I was conscious only of the
things directly connected with myself. . . . My own shrinkage brings a
touch of illuminating humility that prevents me from meddling with
things and from destroying the natural with my clumsy contact." Early
dawns, biting blackflies and deer flies, muscle cramps from staying
still, spending the whole day counting the exact number of songs emitted
by a red-eyed vireo (22,197) and following birds for hours to find

their nests: she was unstoppable. She banded and recorded more than
25,000 birds. Lawrence was an unusual woman for her day, hunting with a
gun, living for a time alone in the bush and conducting science. "The
backwoods of northern Ontario allowed her the space to transcend
traditional gender norms of her time," note the authors of "She of the
Loghouse Nest: Gendering Historical Ecological Reconstructions in
Northern Ontario." They add that expertise in "the breeding behaviours
of birds, such as courtship, nesting habits, and rearing of the young,
\[were\] areas deemed suitable for women in the first half of the 20th
century." Lawrence was the first Canadian woman elected to the American
Ornithologists' Union and is renowned internationally for her rich
nature observations and her writing. As well as her books, she wrote
many scientific papers and articles for publications such as Audubon.
Dr. Robert Nero, a noted ornithologist, made her a tribute with his 1990
book of poetry, Woman by the Shore. Lawrence died in 1992, and her
records, bird skins and nests are held in the Canadian Museum of Nature
in Ottawa and the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto. Since 2014, the
Nipissing Naturalists Club has held an annual Louise de Kiriline
Lawrence Nature Festival, and Ontario Library Service--North awards a
non-fiction book prize in her honour. She continues to inspire us to
step back and experience life in the natural world. Like hermits of old,
generations of literary naturalists considered places ---forests,
mountains, lakeshores---holy. For Rachel Louise Carson, marine biologist
and author, nature was both sacred temple and science laboratory.
"Undersea," an early essay in the Atlantic in 1937, exhibits the
gorgeous writing she became famous for: "Who has known the ocean?
Neither you nor I, with our earth-bound senses, know the foam and surge
of the tide that beats over the crab hiding under the seaweed of his
tide-pool home; or the

lilt of the long, slow swells of mid-ocean, where shoals of wandering
fish prey and are preyed upon, and the dolphin breaks the waves to
breathe the upper atmosphere." Carson wrote three books about the ocean,
and with the earnings from 1951's bestselling The Sea Around Us, she
bought a small piece of land on a picturesque island in Maine. There she
built a small cottage retreat amid the pines, spruces and birches, with
windows that looked toward the sea. In this spot on the Atlantic
seaboard where the tides rise highest, what was underwater at high tide
was revealed at low tide---the pools and the creatures of the intertidal
zone she most loved. I've seen photos of Carson at her Walden by the
sea, dressed in a loose shirt and rolled up trousers, puttering along
the shore. Amid the periwinkles and eel grass is where she was most
content, carrying her magnifying glass, or filling jars with water and
creatures to look at under the cottage microscope. "I can't think of any
more exciting place to be than down in the low-tide world, when the ebb
tide falls very early in the morning, and the world is full of salt
smell, and the sound of water, and the softness of fog," she writes.
Carson called her retreat Silverledges, and it was an essential staging
ground, says environmental scientist Robert K. Musil, who since 2014 has
been president and CEO of the Rachel Carson Council. "She identifies
with the creatures who live on the edge, this borderland between the
power of water that could also crush you and also release life and
create new life. . . . Rachel wanted to be still, to feel and to
imagine, and this was the place that would allow her to do that."
Carson's contribution to the way we see nature, and the way we retreat,
is that she taught us everything is part of life's larger pattern, that
each element is connected, and deserves our reverence. Following her sea
books, she wrote the work she's best known for in the safe space of her
retreat. Silent Spring took her four years and dealt with synthetic
chemical

pesticides, or what she called "elixirs of death," which were
contaminating the Earth, killing wildlife and hurting human health. As a
storyteller and a scientist, she showed how these chemicals were
dangerous and also illuminated larger ideas, such as how ecological
systems work, creating a huge shift. All her life, Carson said, was a
preparation to write Silent Spring. Far from privileged, she grew up
poor in Springdale, a town northeast of Pittsburgh that was set between
two huge coal-fired electrical plants. An old photo shows her as a
freckled child sitting in the grass, reading to the dog. Carson loved
reading, writing and the outdoors: her mother thought children should
study nature, so the forest was her main classroom. Learn to love the
natural world, the theory went, and you will want to protect it. At age
ten Carson was a published author; at fourteen, she was selling work to
magazines. When she earned a scholarship for university, her mother sold
the family china to support her. Upon graduation she got a research job
as a marine biologist and saw the sea for the first time. It taught her
that everything is connected. Carson loved the sea, which seemed beyond
the hand of humans. As the sole breadwinner for various
dependents---five during the Depression, though she supported some
family members for the rest of her adult life---she didn't go on to do a
PhD as a marine biologist, and instead went to work in conservation in
the fisheries and began to write articles. By the time Carson quit her
job to write full-time she was wholly devoted to ensuring justice for
the natural world. From the small pine desk of her seaside retreat, she
wrote one of the most consequential environmental books in history.
Carson wrote about the consequences of "the never-ending stream of
chemicals of which pesticides are a part, chemicals now pervading the
world in which we live, acting upon us directly and indirectly,
separately

and collectively." Silent Spring was released during the height of the
Cold War, when the idea that the balance of nature was important to the
living world's survival, including human survival, was scorned. People
thought human ingenuity had triumphed over nature, and chemicals
couldn't hurt anything but insects. At the time, DDT was being lauded as
one of the great scientific discoveries of the Second World War that had
helped to end the war---along with the atomic bomb---because it was a
miracle of public health that had cut down on malaria by killing all the
mosquitos. Further, the chemical, which was sprayed everywhere and even
available to consumers, was considered the solution to famine and
disease, two age-old problems finally brought under human control. What
Carson saw was the collateral damage to wildlife and people. She had
collected a dossier of what she called "poison spray material" over a
decade. In 1958 when she was told by an old friend that DDT spraying had
destroyed a local wildlife sanctuary, killing the birds in horrific
ways, she resolved to write about the harmful, often deadly effects of
toxic chemicals. "It was pleasant to believe that much of Nature was
forever beyond the tampering reach of man: but I have now opened my eyes
and my mind. I do not like what I see, but it does no good to ignore it,
and it's worse than useless to go on repeating the old eternal verities
that are no more eternal than the hills of the poets," Carson wrote.
Silent Spring prompted a revolutionary idea: regulation of pollution.
"The number of books that have done as much good in the world can be
counted on the arms of a starfish," a 2018 New Yorker article observes.
The book marked a new chapter in the environmental movement and helped
to provoke legislation to protect air, wilderness, water and endangered
species, which led to the Environmental Protection Agency's founding in
1970. Carson's retreat by the sea was a container for rest, renewal,
inspiration and deep concentration. "I write slowly, often in longhand,
and with

frequent revision. Being sensitive to interruption, I write most freely
at night." Without this refuge I wonder whether she'd have finished in
time. Carson had adopted Roger, the nine-year-old orphan son of her
niece, in 1957, when she was 50. She was single parenting, while writing
Silent Spring and also undergoing medical treatments. After she learned
she had breast cancer, Carson kept a sentence from Walden at her
bedside, to encourage her writing: "If thou art a writer, write as if
thy time were short, for it is indeed short at the longest." When Carson
completed Silent Spring she listened to her favourite violin concerto
and wept, alone in her study. She wrote to her beloved friend, Dorothy
Freeman, who had worried about the inevitable attacks on Carson by
powerful interests: "I think I let you see last summer what my deeper
feelings are about this when I said I could never again listen happily
to a thrush song if I had not done all I could." It's incredibly moving
to watch old footage of Carson speaking out, before Congress, and on
television. She's pale and obviously ill. On April 3, 1963, CBS Reports
presented "The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson." After the interview with
Carson was recorded, the reporter told his producer to air the program
fast, warning, "You've got a dead leading lady." Carson appears wearing
a dark wig---she'd lost her hair. She was seated: the cancer had
progressed to her vertebra and her spine was collapsing. She was dying
but she couldn't have been more lucid. "We still talk in terms of
conquest. We still haven't become mature enough to think of ourselves as
only a tiny part of a vast and incredible universe. Man's attitude
toward nature is today critically important simply because we have now
acquired a fateful power to alter and destroy nature . . . but man is a
part of nature, and his war against nature is inevitably a war against
himself," she said with dignity and assurance.

Her words still ring true. "Now, I truly believe, that we in this
generation, must come to terms with nature, and I think we're challenged
as mankind has never been challenged before to prove our maturity and
our mastery, not of nature, but of ourselves." Between Silent Spring's
release and Carson's death in spring 1964, she was granted one final
summer beside her beloved seashore. "We live in an age of rising seas,"
she once wrote. "In our own lifetime we are witnessing a startling
alteration of climate." This was Carson's idea for her next book, which
sadly for us all, she never had time to write. Carson made appreciation
of nature part of our culture and taught us about the truth of
interconnection. In her 1952 acceptance speech for the John Burroughs
Medal for natural history writing, she explains why we need to retreat
to nature: "It seems reasonable to believe---and I do believe ---that
the more clearly we can focus our attention on the wonders and realities
of the universe about us the less taste we shall have for the
destruction of our race. Wonder and humility are wholesome emotions, and
they do not exist side by side with a lust for destruction." The peace
that natural spaces and extended silences provide, and the role of
nature retreats for modern-day Thoreaus, the planet and deep ecology,
are matters of urgency. Poet Mary Oliver's work reminds us of the need
to reconnect to nature, and the sacred, in times of climate change. "I
could not be a poet without the natural world," she once wrote. "Someone
else could. But not me. For me the door to the woods is the door to the
temple." Oliver, born in 1935 in Ohio, lived much of her life in New
England, the setting of many of her poems. In part, her retreat to
nature was to get away from her dysfunctional family, and she often went
to the forest. "It was a very bad childhood for everybody, every member
of the household, not just myself I think. And I escaped it, barely.
With years of trouble," she told Krista

Tippett of On Being in 2015. "But I got saved by poetry. And I got saved
by the beauty of the world." How do we love a world that's at once
terrible and suffering and beautiful? The answer in her work is that we
must amplify the poetry, and the beauty. And that attention is the
beginning of devotion, and a way to repair our broken relationship with
the world. As I was writing this, I learned that Mary Oliver had died.
One of her poems seems to contain her epitaph: at life's end, the
obituaries noted, she'd always said she wanted to see herself as a bride
married to amazement. Why do we disconnect from nature when it's where
we evolved? I'm wondering this as I drive past the Little Cataraqui
Creek Conservation Area north of Kingston, where a sign outside says:
"Forest therapy walks." Later I explain to friends that I think this
refers to guided walks to reconnect with the woods. One friend's
eyebrows shoot up. "People have to be introduced to nature?" she scoffs.
Another finds the idea hilarious: "Yes, how will I--- be---in the
forest?" Unsure yet intrigued, I sign up. To me it sounds like an
excellent licence to lurk. I've always been a lurker, which I define as
lingering in a natural place to look awhile. One of my earliest
childhood memories is of lurking under a bush, belly in the cool earth,
nose in lily of the valley, watching three huge willow trees swaying in
sunlight on the lawn beyond the green leaves of the bush. Needless to
say, as an adult, there's never enough time, or opportunity, for this
kind of thing. The conservation area is a place I'm fond of, with
limestone and paths through the mixed forest, sugar bush, hemlock and
planted pine. I come here also to sit, or think, or write, often on the
picnic table by the windrippled reservoir. It was here I first began to
feel maybe I hadn't made a terrible mistake in moving to Kingston from
Toronto.

As the day for forest therapy approaches I start to have second
thoughts. Don't I already do forest therapy on my own when I walk in the
woods? I have a pile of work due, and I can't really justify three hours
to wander. Despite these misgivings I show up at 9:30 a.m., the first
cooler day after a scorching summer, though it's late September. At the
outdoor centre we meet the conservation educator who is going to lead
us. A petite, youthful woman with long dark hair, she wears outdoorsy
clothes and a loose-knit hat with a jaunty feather stuck in it, and
carries a large knapsack. I'm still fretting about deadlines and praying
the experience won't be flakey. We stand in a circle, ten of us, more
women than men, most 50-plus, perhaps because it's a workday, and three
people in their thirties. I'm impressed by how the leader moves us
quickly past awkwardness and irony and into the experience. She asks us
to say who we are and why we're there. A young woman says she's been
very poor for a long time, and now that finances have improved, she
wants to take better care of her health. Another young woman, a
newlywed, says she came because it sounded cool; her partner, a large
and loud man tethered to a cellphone, says he's there because his wife
dragged him. I need some quiet time, I say, breathing space. Another
woman, new to the area, says she's come to meet people and explore---and
also, intriguingly, that she doesn't like to touch things and hoped
forest therapy might help. The leader invites us to take a few moments
to just notice what we notice. After a while our guide asks us to share,
if we feel like it. We say: bird calls, the wind in pines, curious
chickadees, the shallow pond, the blue sky, the sound of construction
far away, the many shades of green. She recites a poem related to the
season, Mary Oliver's "Wild Geese," suggesting, "let the soft animal of
your body love what it loves." Touch anything you're drawn to, she says
as she begins to walk. I stroke the

cattails along the boardwalk. A duck lands with its ducklings, and we
all watch appreciatively. "Now pick up anything that speaks to you." I
find a sprig of oak leaves with acorns that's fallen on the ground. Soon
we stop and choose a place to sit. I lean against a pine, a relief after
a long, stiffness-inducing car ride the previous day. The leader, who
has taken off her boots to stand on the ground, asks us to look around
and then close our eyes for about ten minutes. At first I feel
impatient, tense, and the carrying construction noise matches my
headspace better than the forest. Gradually though, my breathing slows
and I start to feel the ground. I start thinking about what supports me.
We continue to walk slowly down the path, while we are given low-key
suggestions. One is "notice what's in motion." I go off the trail a
little, mostly to escape the young man's constant chatter. In a swampy
area I see a few last jewelweeds nodding in the breeze, notice the
playfulness of the wind around me. After a while I hear the "coyote
call" that's meant to gather us back together. I realize that I'd
crossed some familiar paths and didn't even notice, because we're
meandering, with no destination. Going slowly, and really looking, I am
experiencing the trail differently. Back together we share our
experiences. Many people say they feel surprisingly emotional, and some
talk about the person who taught them to love the natural
world---grandmothers, mothers mainly. Already I've resolved to
reschedule the rest of my packed day to not spoil this relaxed and
grounded feeling. Breathing space. Next we all pick up gifts for the
forest, a reminder that this is a relationship of reciprocity. Our
collage of birch and beech leaves and sticks and cones and pine needles
looks like some alternative alphabet, poetic land symbols. My
self-contained contribution is, of course, on the periphery. The big guy
says he's bored and yawns. This interests me: on every retreat,

nature, yoga, meditation, arts, it's common for people not habituated to
solitude or slowness or natural environments to get bored or suffer
other discomforts while the mind settles. If they can stick with it long
enough, they may pass to another state, like diving under the turbulent
surface waves to the quiet depths. Another woman looks at our collage on
the ground and says it reminds her of transformation. After everyone who
feels like it has spoken, the leader smiles and says, "We belong, we are
part of this." She invites us to choose a spot and sit for 15 minutes,
after which she will ring chimes to recall us. I wander down the trail
to a corner that calls my attention every time I walk by, a few times a
week in good weather. And yet I've never stopped before. I sit on a root
on a little slope and lean on a sapling. Here beside the marsh I feel at
home and sheltered. I notice tiny, delicate white fungus, a
companionable frog's eyes that stick out of the water and the wind. A
feeling of gratitude washes over me. It's lovely to settle in here,
undisturbed. Lurking. I could have stayed for ages, just taking it in.
No rush. The chimes surprise me when they sound; it's as though no time
had passed. We gather to sit in a circle under a huge maple tree and
speak with excitement. The young man calls his experience "epic," says
he'd just rested on a bench and looked at the sky. Others say,
variously, they felt grounded, nourished, able to let go. One woman
says, with feeling, that moss doesn't get enough credit. We sing a song
to the Earth, again without irony, and then we have a tea ceremony. Our
leader's large knapsack spills its contents: tea she brewed from foraged
plants, cold brewed staghorn sumach and hot white pine, and cups made
specially by her friend. The first cup, for the Earth, is poured into
the ground, and then our cups are filled. As I sip the warm white pine
tea, I'm conscious of taking in the forest.

On the walk back to the outdoor centre---it's 12:30 already?---
everything is vivid: the purple asters in tall bouquets, the white
asters with fumbling bumblebees, the high, swaying cattails edging the
ponds, the chickadees and nuthatches scolding the red squirrels, the
silvery blue-grey sky, a slight chill in the air. Milkweed pods---empty,
or fulfilled? I feel relaxed, having one thought at a time as opposed to
dozens firing off all at once. Breathing space. Wandering slowly in the
forest, awakening your senses, reconnecting with nature in a meaningful
way is more than just a walk, it's a small pilgrimage. You are here to
immerse yourself, slow down, notice and experience the forest magic with
a guide and companions. The experience reminds me we're all
interconnected, and of the generosity we experience every moment. When
was the last time I stopped to marvel in beautiful woods? How long do I
spend in front of a screen every day? The relief at using not just my
eyes and ears, but all my senses, is exquisite. Being in a beautiful
natural place feels good and makes me want to return. Now I get it: the
forest is the therapist. On my way home I hold the image of ten adults
sitting on the earth under the huge old maple. Humans are not
"stewards." The natural world is larger than us and did better for
millennia without our "management." We are part of the living world, a
small part, though our powers of destruction are outsized. Why do we
forget that we are animals in nature, that we are nature? My sister Kath
and I were wild little kids traversing our family's small country
property near Woodbridge, Ontario. On three sides were farmers' fields,
and out front a dirt road. Across the road was an Arabian horse farm,
where ethereal creatures cantered in green pastures. Kath and I trampled

down the alfalfa fields, making hideouts, tasted the sweetness of clover
and sour rhubarb on our tongues, fled from the loud buzzing of "the
Queen bee" in the shed, collected toads in a wheelbarrow, surprised when
they leapt out. We climbed the tree behind the shed, out of sight of the
kitchen window so our mother wouldn't see, and then slid down the
tarpaper roof. I once stole a robin's egg from a nest in a tree and was
puzzled when the bird swooped at me and again later to find
pocket-shards mixed with yellow when I went to show my blue treasure.
The pungent-sweet smell of manure on the dog. Yellow birds in the
willows, how a grasshopper looks like celery when you feed half of it to
the cat. Spring chortling sounds after the frozen creeks we'd skated on
in winter all melted. Later I forgot all about this and went to the
city, lived in an apartment like a filing cabinet for people and then a
house on a small Toronto lot, had a career, lost touch even with the
seasons unless they delayed my commute. One time I did drive north to
see our old place, near Woodbridge. I was shocked: even the lay of the
land was gone. I could find no reference point, not one tree or creek or
hill. The land had been bulldozed flat for a subdivision that was nearly
complete. We stared in amazement when we found our old house, now the
temporary construction office, adrift in this alien landscape. Today,
many of our old Edens have been replaced by "developments," the
cookie-cutter manifestations of human disassociation from the living
world. Placelessness, everywhere made to look the same. Younger folks
may never have experienced much of the natural world in the first place:
will they have nothing to reconnect to? Children in the West spend half
as much time outside as their parents did. And humans officially became
an urban species in 2011, with more people living in cities that outside
them, a trend that's accelerating. Cities are now the dominant habitat
of our species. Rich, exciting and with many efficiencies for housing
large numbers of people, they are also stressful places to live.

The World Health Organization calls stress the health epidemic of the
21st century. City soundscapes are part of the problem: noise increases
blood pressure and is bad for concentration and sleep. "Around 80
million Europeans live with noise levels that are judged too high. More
than 11 million Americans are exposed to traffic noise so high they risk
hearing loss," writes scientist Dr. Qing Li, a leading forest medicine
researcher, author of Forest Bathing and an environmental immunologist
at Tokyo's Nippon Medical School. Li's science was sparked by the desire
to discover what is behind the feeling sunlight through leaves gives us,
or a sunset, and how walking in the forest improves well-being. His
studies have found that natural killer immune cells, which attack
tumours and cells infected with viruses, increased significantly after
time spent in the forest. In later research he linked this to scents
such as pinenes, limonenes and aerosols emitted by evergreens and many
other trees. We all know how good being in nature can make us feel, he
writes, like an instinct deep in our bones that's sometimes hard to
describe. "In Japanese we have a word for those deep feelings too deep
for words---yūgen. Yūgen gives us a profound sense of the beauty and
mystery of the universe. It is about this world but suggests something
beyond it." Shinrin-yoku---shrinrin is forest, yoku is bath---is based
on ancient Buddhist and Shinto ideas that see the forest as the realm of
the divine. The modern practice began as part of a government campaign
to save the forests. The idea was that if people were encouraged to
visit forests for their health, they would be more likely to want to
protect and look after them. Now shinrin-yoku is a common preventative
practice in Japan, where many physicians certify in forest medicine,
prescribing the country's 48 forest therapy trails to reduce stress and
other health problems. The nature cure is an idea that's catching on
among doctors in the West.

For most of human existence we've had relative quiet, surrounded by
green and natural sounds. And we've known for millennia that nature is
good for us: Taoist monks wrote 2,000 years ago about the healing powers
of tending gardens. In Biophilia, contemporary American biologist Edward
O. Wilson wrote that we have a deep primal need to affiliate with nature
and the living world. Humans love nature, the hypothesis holds, because
we learn to love the things that help us to survive. Hardwired to
affiliate with the natural world, our health improves when we're in it
and suffers when we're divorced from it. Our nervous systems are built
to resonate with the outdoors---sunlight on water, the sights and sounds
of the forest and fresh air give us comfort, ease our worries, let us
think more clearly. It's where we feel most comfortable even if we don't
realize it, says Yoshifumi Miyazaki, a physiological anthropologist, the
vice director of the Center for Environment, Health and Field Sciences
at Chiba University near Tokyo and another influential proponent of
forest medicine. Our brains are only so plastic. "Throughout our
evolution, we've spent 99.9 percent of our time in nature. Our
physiology is still adapted to it. During everyday life, a feeling of
comfort can be achieved if our rhythms are synchronized with those of
the environment," he says. Being in nature is like going on a
mini-retreat---it provides the altered sense of time, a different way to
look at the spaces around you and reconnection to the living world. You
don't have to have the right gear or resources or go hiking in the
distant mountains: it's available to all of us in the park, conservation
area, by the lake, at the ocean. What I'm most interested in is the
benefits of full nature retreats---is longer better? Being in nature for
several consecutive days, studies show, does yield better health
benefits. Writers for centuries have been telling us to spend more time
in nature, and they're right, says David Strayer, a

cognitive neuroscientist at University of Utah. His "three-day effect"
theory holds that in nature the senses, perspective and cognition
sharpen over time. Li's advice is similar: "If you want to give your
immune system a powerful boost go for a three-day/two-night forest
bathing trip." The average American's screen time is ten hours a day,
Strayer says, with only 30 minutes a day spent outside. We multitask,
which in 98 percent of people is inefficient and which places many
demands on the prefrontal cortex. Our tired brains get worse at critical
thinking, strategic planning and impulse control, among other things.
Multi-day nature retreats, Strayer found, provide the antidote, so the
brain can rest and reset. "The research coming out of my laboratory
suggests there is more wisdom to Thoreau's 'why I went to the woods'
than most of us will ever know. His insights into the power of nature
stand in stark contrast to the exponential increase of screen time we
see in businesses, at home, and even schools." So if we know this, why
don't we go to the living world more? For one thing, we underestimate
how good it will make us feel. People may stay indoors, Trent University
psychologist Elizabeth Nisbet found in a study, "because a chronic
disconnection from nature causes them to underestimate its hedonic
benefits." Nisbet comments, "We evolved in nature. It's strange we'd be
so disconnected." Partially, perhaps, it's a chain effect: as we become
more urban and live more indoors, we lose touch, and the living, natural
world becomes abstract and seemingly dispensable. While it's innate for
humans to want to be in natural places, where we evolved, we also want
to forget that we're vulnerable animals and this world is our home.
Nature retreats are a reality check, reteaching us about the
interconnection of our health and the health of the living world. Why do
we have to relearn over and over the truth of interconnection, that we
are part of nature? Years ago performance artist Laurie Anderson
commented that people in poor countries are struggling to survive, while

people in the West are struggling not to become machines. This rings
true: we're in retreat from reality, in denial that we are animals
trying to survive like the rest. Machines are invulnerable. "We're
becoming unearthly, freed, we like to think, from the physical
imperatives of nature by technology, and exiled from its sensuality and
immediacy by our self awareness," writes English botanist and author
Richard Mabey in his 2005 book Nature Cure, about his own lost link and
reconnection to the natural world. As reality gets more virtual there
will surely be benefits: technologies can replace zoos, perhaps, or I
can experience mountain-climbing despite my dislike for heights. But
there's the risk of even further estrangement from reality. Technology
is marvellous, but it's dead. The world's alive, and in trouble. Retreat
to nature is the opposite of avoidance. It's ever more urgent as we
consume the Earth and become more divorced from it. Being in nature for
a time teaches us about relationship---with ourselves, others and the
planet. In our anthropocentric way, we tend to think nature needs our
protection, but not the other way around. Something important is
disappearing---the living world---and we need to restore it for our own
sakes, if not for the rest of the planet's. Spring, the season of
renewal, seems a fitting time to visit Walden. The Walden Pond State
Reservation is a protected 335-acre park with hiking trails and a
replica of Thoreau's cabin, and of Thoreau himself. More than a million
people a year visit this international pilgrimage site for
conservationists. In the century and a half since Walden was published,
Thoreau's work has inspired the minds and actions of generations of
creators, thinkers and naturalists. The deep pond remains and is still a
popular place to swim in the summer.

Thoreau's prescience extends to the meticulous journals he left, noting
the first flowering dates for 500 species of wildflowers, when trees
were in leaf and the migratory patterns of birds. An acute observer and
activist, his observations on Walden now serve as a baseline for current
scientific studies on climate change. So far, findings include 2.4°C
rise in temperatures and the discovery that plants are flowering ten
days earlier. Many species are gone or hard to find now. Researchers say
27 percent of the species recorded by Thoreau and other botanists are no
longer present in Concord, and 36 percent of species once common there
are now rare. In our complex and secular world, Thoreau's
messages---live deliberately and simply, use only what you need,
practise restraint, find spirituality in nature, seek reality---are far
more relevant than in his own day. As is his method in an age when
freedom to think and be are in short supply: retreat to a small cabin,
not necessarily in a so-called pristine wilderness, reconnect to the
natural world and repair a broken relationship with the Earth---a
disconnection that's killing the planet we depend on for life. Nowadays,
few visitors eat fish from the pond for fear of contamination or dare
drink from the pond, as Thoreau did. The shoreline has been transformed,
and the pond has been harmed by the effects of pollution and climate
change---and of hundreds of thousands of swimmers who flock there each
year and urinate in the water. Biology professor Curt Stager, the lead
researcher on a study of the pond, was asked, What are people are doing
to Walden Pond? "It seems like we may be on the verge of loving it to
death, if we're not careful. Thoreau loved it for its clarity and
beauty. People love it today for the same reasons, but we're changing
the lake." Not very transcendental. Like thousands of other pilgrims,
Stager himself went to Walden--- expecting to be disappointed: "Frankly,
I was not. It's still beautiful and

inspiring. Most of the crowds are on the far end of the lake, opposite
the one that Thoreau was on. But there's a footpath you can follow back
to the other end of this little secluded cove, called Thoreau's Cove,
and his cabin site is right there in a grove of trees. I found all kinds
of people enjoying Walden in all kinds of ways---from swimming and
fishing, to contemplating Thoreau and our place in nature." Now there is
no place untouched by human activity. At the Art Gallery of Ontario I
had the weird aesthetic experience of viewing the devastation in a
gallery with crowds of people at a show by the Anthropocene Project,
which aims to "evangelize" this term for a new geological age in which
humans are the biggest force shaping the planet. The images were
beautiful, disturbing and indelible: a mountain of burning elephant
tusks and rhino horns, a hell-green dying sea, massive landfills and the
people who subsist from them. Outside the exit, a sign anticipated my
reaction: "Stay off the Ledge." Thoreau saw the destruction of Walden
even in his own short life---the trees cut down for fuel in the cold
winters of 1851--1852, 20 trains a day rattling by, the common spaces of
woods, fields, ponds and huckleberry patches shrinking away due to
private ownership and development. What would he say to know there are
nearly eight billion of us, about the rate and scale of the destruction
and climate change? Writer E.B. White called Thoreau "that hair-shirt of
a man." He praised Walden, his favourite book, which inspired his own
retreat, a boathouse in Maine. Walden he described as "the report of a
man torn by two powerful and opposing drives---the desire to enjoy the
world (and not be derailed by a mosquito wing) and the urge to set the
world straight. One cannot join these two successfully, but sometimes,
in rare cases, something good or even great results from the attempt of
the tormented spirit to reconcile them."

I expect he's right: Thoreau would still try to enjoy the world while
setting it straight. To live in harmony with the natural world we must
be grounded in the rock of truth, he wrote. "Let us settle ourselves,
and work and wedge our feet downward through the mud and slush of
opinion, and prejudice, and tradition, and delusion, and appearance . .
. until we come to a hard bottom and rocks in place, which we call
reality." His purpose was "profoundly religious," says Laura Dassow
Walls, but his temple was made of wood. "He was writing a sacred book
for the modern age," she says, "for his age---an age of expanding
railroads, and global industrialism, rampant consumerism, mass migration
and the exploitation of workers . . . environmental destruction---in
others words, a world an awful lot like our own." Thoreau knew we each
urgently need to find our own Walden Pond, and he showed us the way.

Artists, Writers, Creative Thinkers, Dreamers Best of any song is bird
song in the quiet, but first you must have the quiet. ---Wendell Berry

E. Jean Carroll is famous for her impious advice column, Ask E. Jean.
From her small cabin in the woods, the former New Yorker dispenses
wisdom to society from the margins upstate on questions such as "How do
I find my dream job?" and "Can I sleep with my mother-in-law?" She cites
Thoreau as an influence. Carroll's funky retreat, christened the Mouse
House because many distinguished rodents live there, is painted with
black and white stripes.

Inside shelves spill over with all the letters she has ever received for
her long-running column, which appears in Elle magazine. Every day she
gets up around noon, staggers outside and says, "Thank god I don't have
children," and then staggers back in to her office to work. "I never
thought much went on in the morning anyway," she says drolly. Carroll,
who used to write for Saturday Night Live and was a contributing editor
to Esquire and Outside, is an elegant woman of the wilds, appearing at
home in an Elle video wearing a checked shirt with a striped skirt and
tossing her cherry-red hair. Outside, her garden shed is a canvas for
the names of writers who influenced her---Jane Austen is writ
large---and memorializing her deceased dogs. Rocks and trees are painted
blue near the creek from once when it went dry and, horrified, she
decided to restore the usual colour scheme and got carried away. Blue
dots of the same shade adorn her car. Every day Carroll hikes three
miles in the forests of her seven acres with her dogs. It keeps her
young in her seventies, she says. Located in the Wawayanda Mountains
near the Appalachian Trail, Carroll's retreat makes possible the clear
thinking crucial to her work. "I could not answer the questions coming
into the Ask E. Jean column if I was in New York City. You can't think
in New York, dating 16 people, which I would be doing if I were in New
York. You go to the woods to find out who you are, you find out who you
are, and you're even happier than when you came. It's wonderful!" she
says. Retreat is a practice familiar to writers and artists, in whose
fields the notion of protected time and space for creation is common and
has often been institutionalized---though what's true for artists'
retreats applies equally to all creative endeavours. For an advice
columnist, as for a sage of old, retreat provides vital perspective.
Each day the wise woman of Wawayanda gets 200 letters from readers,
asking advice on four main

topics: "They want love. They want to be a size six. They want their
children to do well. They want to have a purpose in life. They want
those same things and that has never changed." When Carroll needs advice
she consults Thoreau: Walden is her favourite book. She lives simply,
wrote a visiting reporter, describing her as "unmaterialistic and almost
transcendental in nature," adding that she stores sweaters and dog food
in her oven and shops for clothes at the local tackle shop. Explained
Carroll, "I don't need Bergdorf Goodman." Thoreau, who wrote up a storm
at Walden, has inspired all manner of writers, artists, performers,
scholars, thinkers and creative spirits to retreat, though not
necessarily to the woods, to immerse themselves in their work. These
days, when even hermits have websites, people in the arts are expected
to be part solitary genius and part self-promoter, and everyone is
distracted, a 21st-century stand-in for Walden Pond has become ever more
essential. Whether alone, or in community, a retreat offers silence,
solitude and simplicity, with few distractions, allowing us to reclaim
the extended, elusive peace that for many is a requirement to create,
ponder, plan and dream. From the time of the Romantics on, as religion
declined and the industrial age rose, people began to look to culture
and nature for meaning ---believing like Plotinus that "the soul that
beholds beauty becomes beautiful." This led us into the realm of art,
poetry and literature, a new focus for our sacred impulse, where we
could turn for higher truth. Imagination, people have long believed,
expands our sphere, makes us better, deeper, more human. And it consoles
and elevates us. "There is no wing like meaning," as poet Wallace
Stevens writes. Art can help make our human experience more
comprehensible.

While I focus mainly on culture in this chapter, where the idea of
retreat is most firmly entrenched, artists and writers here represent
anyone who can benefit from creative time apart---philosophers,
entrepreneurs, innovators, visionaries, women, scientists. Many today
face challenges in finding this space. In physics, for instance, modern
forces are working against retreating for "speculative contemplation,"
writes Felicity Mellor, a lecturer at Imperial College London, UK, who
runs the Silences of Science project. Isaac Newton, Albert Einstein (who
preferred "to think in apartness," according to a biographer), Henry
Cavendish and Paul Dirac, known as a man of very few words, all
retreated periodically, she notes in her 2014 article in Physics World.
"Silence, and its companion, solitude, seems to be a recurring feature
in the history of physics. Yet current research policy, in the UK at
least, emphasizes silence's opposite." A new focus on communication and
"enforced interaction" raises the danger that "an important precondition
for creativity in physics could be lost." Mellor provides highly
compelling examples. Peter Higgs, she notes, claimed that he would not
have been able to complete his Nobel Prize-- winning work in the current
research environment: "The peace and quiet that he enjoyed in the 1960s
is, he thinks, no longer a possibility." She adds that the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton was conceived in 1931 to provide "the
tranquillity and time requisite to fundamental inquiry into the
unknown," and "facilitated collaboration within a context of retreat."
However, today in the UK, advanced study centres, like universities, now
emphasize "collaboration and social impact over withdrawal and
speculative contemplation." In our busy, social, connected world, where
even "successful" professional artists often don't earn a living from
their work, threats to finding the time and space for creative practice
are multiplying. This makes supportive retreats for working artists more
important than ever. They serve

as oases, as reminders to culture-makers of Rilke's counsel: "The
necessary thing is great, inner solitude. What goes on inwardly is
worthy of your love." Artistic retreats, perhaps more than other types,
demonstrate the ways in which retreat is not a set path you follow to a
predetermined goal. There's a misconception that artists are in control
of the process and what happens on retreat, but it's more like an
off-road adventure, with unforeseen directions, risk, exhilaration, lost
weekends and unpredictable outcomes. "Negative capability," John Keats
wrote, is being "capable of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts
without any irritable reaching after fact and reason." It's like holding
space for something new to happen---challenging in our
productivity-obsessed world. Like God, or Nature, Art is a larger force
that can't be controlled. To be an artist you need to be open to this,
to be willing to be changed and to cultivate what Keats called "honeyed
indolence." Michel de Montaigne was an early extoller of the virtues of
retreat in the 16th century. Against the backdrop of brutal civil wars
in France, he wrote about himself in a bid to arrive at universal
truths. Of particular note for contemporary people, he reflected on the
question "how to live?" in times when the world seemed to have gone
insane. Writing what he called essais---attempts, or tries---he created
a new literary form, the essay. A nobleman, he had the luxury of leaving
politics---"the slavery of the court and of public duties"---at 38 to
write and cultivate his inner life. His library was in a tower in his
family chateau complex near Bordeaux "to be his allpurpose retreat and
centre of operations," writes Sarah Bakewell in How to Live: A Life of
Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer. The tower
library, both a vantage point and a haven, represented freedom. The roof
beams were inscribed with philosophy from the Greeks. Thousands of
books, papers and curiosities filled the space, which he called

his arrière-boutique, a "room behind the shop." This echoes his most
famous lines, which offer one key element of what's needed to live a
full, flourishing, honourable life: "We must reserve a back shop all our
own, entirely free, in which to establish our real liberty and our
principal retreat and solitude." For Montaigne, the front shop was for
meeting others; the back shop was a refuge for the private self. His
essais still influence the ways in which we take a step back to think
and write today. Many artists and creative thinkers value the ability to
take interludes away from their regular lives. If poet Mary Oliver is
correct that we all have three selves, it's the third self that goes on
retreat. The first two, always with us, she says, relate to the ordinary
world: the childhood self, and the social self, a "servant of the
hours," who has many obligations. The third is a different, more
capricious self, where our creative energy resides, and who is
"occasional in some of us, tyrant in others," Oliver notes. "This self
is out of love with the ordinary; it is out of love with time. It has a
hunger for eternity." Art, literature and other manifestations of
culture are for many people sacred, providing a way to touch those
larger forces and higher truths I spoke of earlier. Like Creation, human
creation is a place of beauty and truth and transcendence. Rufus
Wainwright expresses this idea, saying that opera now serves as his
"religion in many ways." He told the Guardian, "I've often gone into the
opera house in quite a state yet come out completely transfigured, so
when I gear up to work in that world, it is like I am going into the
clergy." For poet Eileen Myles, "Copying everything in words is a form
of loving the world," she says, explaining her devotion. "If I want to
sit here and copy all day, that might be the best option available. It's
not an antidepressant, and it's not exhilarating, and it's not aerobic,
but it's a form of chanting---for religious reasons. I mean, it's my
default position."

Impassioned people were moved to risk their lives to save irreplaceable
artistic treasures from the burning Notre Dame Cathedral. Religious
scholar Huston Smith says appreciating art can change us: "Art, when
it's great art and it's really working, what it does is transport us,
lift us to a different state or consciousness from which the world looks
very different." Listening to Bach, reading the poetry of Wordsworth,
visiting the Tate Modern's 21stcentury art temple, looking at the beyond
in the Rothko Chapel: for many, these are transformative, numinous
experiences. Every great work of art and all beauty has a quality of
mystery, and creativity is a force you have to give yourself over to.
Yet there's a modern expectation that all artists must pivot easily
between the sheltered place of deep reflection and surrender and the
limelight for a little self-promotion. Today, the Brontë sisters'
publicist would have insisted on a book tour, Emily Dickinson would
likely be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, and W.G. Sebald would have
been pressed to be a little more upbeat to promote The Rings of Saturn.
The whole idea of going deep, being vulnerable, becoming a receiver like
a plant to the sun's energy, and creating art seems out of date and at
risk in times that are all about speed, sociability and superficiality.
Though not everyone needs to withdraw to create, the idea that "solitude
is the school of genius" is well established, and for centuries, artists
and thinkers have retreated. While some may prefer to work at the
kitchen table like Kazuo Ishiguro, who wrote his first two novels there,
others, like painter Agnes Martin, require a studio without gadgets
where one is "to be disturbed only if the house is burning." Time apart
in retreat can be especially important to nourish developing artists,
thinkers and dreamers. In The Cloister Walk, poet and essayist Kathleen
Norris writes about two extended retreats, when she lived with the
Benedictines at St. John's Abbey, Minnesota. There are no prodigies, she
observes: "I have

come to see both writing and monasticism as vocations that require
periods of apprenticeship and formation." Religion is full of meaningful
rituals. I see retreat as an equivalent, a way of marking sacred time
and space for art, or deep thinking, or for any creative purpose. Poet
Meena Alexander was once asked at a public talk, "What use is poetry?"
She lamented the struggle in our times for the poetic voice to be
tolerated, much less fully heard. "Most of the forces in our ordinary
lives as we live them now conspire against the making of a poem. There
might be some space for the published poem, but not for its creation: no
ritualized space is given where one is allowed to sit and brood." A
retreat serves as this ritualized space, and its imaginative hallmarks
carry forward from the earliest retreaters in the West, the desert
hermits and monks. In Pilgrim at Tinker Creek Annie Dillard describes
her own step back. "I am no scientist," Dillard writes. "I am a wanderer
with a background in theology and a penchant for quirky facts." She
tells us she lives by a creek: "An anchorite's hermitage is called an
anchor-hold; some anchor-holds are simple sheds clamped to the side of a
church like a barnacle to a rock. I think of this house clamped to the
rock-bottom of the creek itself and it keeps me steadied in the current
as an anchor does, facing the stream of light pouring down." Dillard's
is a very contemporary-style retreat, characterized by purposes that
overlap rather than traditional religious ones---a time away for
focusing on spirit, nature and art, in various measures. For each kind
of retreat our spirits seek, humans either go solo, or to institutions
we've created so we may withdraw: hermitages and monasteries for the
spiritual and religious; small cabins and protected lands for those who
find divinity in nature; and arts colonies and residencies, which
reflect what we consider the optimal conditions for artistic production.
Many

residencies open their doors more widely in recognition that creative
people who aren't writers or artists also need to retreat. Artists and
thinkers have long engineered the degree of solitude that best suited
their needs. Many produced their greatest works in time apart from the
world, including notable self-directed retreater William Blake, who
wrote, "Great things are done when men and mountains meet/This is not
done by jostling in the street." He spent three artistically fertile
years at a patron's cottage retreat, writing of the haven near Bognor
Regis, where he and his wife stayed from 1800 to 1803: "Away to sweet
Felpham, for Heaven is there;/The Ladder of Angels descends thro' the
air." There he also wrote the timeless first words of "Jerusalem," "And
did those feet in ancient time," a poem that later became the first line
of the famous hymn that introduced the words "dark Satanic Mills" into
the English language. Ludwig Wittgenstein, one of the 20th century's
most influential philosophers, was an inveterate solo retreater. He
began to live in extreme isolation periodically in Skjolden, Norway, in
1913. His small cabin, halfway up a mountain and called "Little Austria"
after his native country, served as his retreat throughout his life.
Wittgenstein's longest stay was 13 months, when he went there to
confront his own thoughts. "Whoever is unwilling to descend into himself
because it is too painful," he wrote, "will of course remain superficial
in his writing.'" A remote farmhouse with no electricity on the island
of Jura in the Hebrides is where George Orwell retreated in 1946,
desperate to finish his novel. "Smothered under journalism," he told one
friend, "I have become more and more like a sucked orange." The success
of Animal Farm had added to the pressure. "Everyone keeps coming at me,"
he complained, "wanting me to lecture, to write commissioned booklets,
to join this and that, etc.---you don't know how I pine to be free of it
all and have time to think again." Already ill with tuberculosis, he
fled London for creative

freedom, accompanied by his young son and a nanny, to complete Nineteen
Eighty-Four. By all accounts, the effort killed him. Swedish filmmaker
Ingmar Bergman wrote and storyboarded most of his scripts on the small
island of Fårö. The year he released both The Seventh Seal and Wild
Strawberries, 1957, he ate only yogurt and Marie biscuits and drank
buttermilk---partly for simplicity's sake as he worked with great
intensity, and partly due to an ulcer. Bergman had found the island
while scouting for a film, and later retreated there for good, from the
'60s until his death in 2007. Recently a rich Norwegian inventor and
archeologist bought the house and turned it into the Bergman Estate on
Fårö, a retreat that welcomes artists, scholars and non-fiction writers
to come and work. North American artists, likewise, devised the means
for retreats of all descriptions. Painter Emily Carr bought the
Elephant, her "grey and lumbering" caravan, in 1933. She'd have her
moveable retreat hauled to a solitary place in the woods to work under
huge cedars, or by the Esquimalt Lagoon, with its "wide sweeps of sea
and sky, drifts galore, and hillside and trees, and great veteran
pines," she writes in Hundreds and Thousands. Accompanied by her four
dogs, Woo the monkey and her rat, she set the caravan down in a patch of
daisies and wrote in her journal, "It's fine here. Nobody pesters you.
The great wide beach is yours for the taking, its lapping waves and its
piles of drifts all yours. The roses on the bank, bursting in a riot of
cool pink from the piles of deep green leaves, toss out the most
heavenly perfume." Later Carr came to think of the Elephant as "a
motherly old hen. Towed out, she meekly squats, fluffs out her flaps on
all sides and encloses us. There's always room for another beast and we
never seem crowded." Though it wasn't all bliss: on wet days Carr
laments the primitive stove and having to lug water from the spring,
"this pattering through puddles in a

cotton nightgown and rain boots and pleading with the wet wood while
hunger and hot-drink longings gnaw your vitals." Carr's retreat allowed
her to step back to the woods for weeks at a time in the summer to paint
alone and explore her passion for the forest, like an ecstatic of old.
Her work was a spiritual quest, and her approach to these retreats,
writes Susan Crean in The Laughing One, "was to see them as both
liberating and demanding; demanding of serious discipline and some
physical hardship, and liberating spiritually as well as literally from
the oppressive domestic routine back home." Carr, a resilient fringe
dweller, had a passion for the woods and, like many artists of her time,
was influenced by Transcendentalist beliefs. Her success came later in
life, after the Group of Seven discovered her and encouraged her work in
1927. Against the odds she became a pre-eminent painter, one of few
major female artists working in North America or Europe. Before her
resurrection she had done little painting for 15 years, caught up in the
endless work of running a boarding house, breeding English sheepdogs and
rabbits and making rugs and pottery to earn a living. Though she had
produced a distinguished body of work, in conservative Victoria she was
viewed as an eccentric old spinster, a failed artist who had refused
marriage because painting was more important. Her newfound success
allowed her to buy the Elephant, to take to the woods and commune with
trees, and create some of her most powerful paintings. "What do these
forests make you feel? . . . How absolutely full of truth they are, how
full of reality," she writes in her journals. "Why is it that I feel
that things are clearer when I am away from people in the woods?
Whatever the reason, it explains my affection for the wild. If one's
place of worship is that place that allows you to draw nearest to the
universal spirit, then the forest is that for me. It is my church, my
tabernacle, my refuge."

Notably, in Places of Their Own, organized by the McMichael Canadian Art
Collection in 2001--2002, Carr's work was exhibited alongside that of
two artists who worked---and retreated---at roughly at the same time:
Georgia O'Keeffe, who withdrew to the Taos desert for part of each year,
and Frida Kahlo, who began painting in enforced solitude, rather than
voluntary retreat, after she was impaled in a tragic bus accident and
left bedridden. Among the most envy-inspiring retreats of all time is
the Group of Seven's railway boxcar, specially outfitted with bunks, a
stove and water tanks. Funded by Lawren Harris, scion of one of Canada's
wealthiest families, the boxcar enabled the painters to take off in
solitude together into the wilds of northern Ontario. "A car to live in,
eat in and work out of," Harris wrote with excitement to J.E.H.
MacDonald, imagining the train driver taking them to their muse. "They
will move us about as we desire and leave us on auspicious sidings that
we may proceed to biff the landscape out of a cocked hat at our sweet
will." Though I don't quite know what "biff the landscape out of a
cocked hat" means, his boxcar elation is unmistakable. For pianist Glenn
Gould retreat was more than a practical need to go deep into his
work---it was a compelling artistic theme. After retiring from the
concert stage at age 31, already an international virtuoso, Gould found
himself drawn to the North, its isolation and its creative
possibilities. He made the Solitude Trilogy, three hour-long
documentaries about "withdrawal from the world." Gould believed
"isolation is the indispensable component to human happiness," and that
the ultimate goal of art and creativity was "the gradual life-long
construction of a state of wonder and serenity." Gould's idea about
solitude and society makes perfect sense to me, though each artist, and
person, will have a different equation. "I've always had a sort of
intuition that for every hour you spend with other

human beings you need X number of hours alone," he says. "Now, what that
X represents I don't really know, whether it be two and seven-eighths or
seven and two-eighths, but it's a substantial ratio." Six acres of
boreal forest in Newfoundland is both retreat and subject for
environmental artist and poet Marlene Creates, who won a 2019 Governor
General's Awards in Visual and Media Arts. She says the ecosystem of the
patch of forest, where she has lived since 1985, "has become the basis
and the focus of all my work." At first she struggled to work in a
studio, thinking that's what artists do. Eventually she decided to work
outside. "Everything changed after that and the whole world became my
studio . . . then I found I could work anywhere. I could use the whole
planet and all its weather systems and celestial overhead---it all
became material that I could use for my work instead of just sort of
sitting in a room and trying to imagine something." While many artists
are aficionados of the self-directed solo retreat, akin to hermits,
others prefer to be "alone together," more like monks. Formal artistic
retreats gained favour in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when
progressive patrons sought ways to shelter high culture from the forces
of the marketplace. Many of today's retreat-offering arts institutions
in Europe and North America grew out of this notion, also influenced by
the Arts and Crafts movement that was led by architects, teachers and
craftspeople working with patrons in a reaction against the soulless,
machine-made products of the Industrial Revolution. The movement
promoted the idea that beautiful, handcrafted everyday objects related
to a good society and enhanced the lives of citizens and makers alike.
Places such as the Banff Centre for the Arts in Canada, the MacDowell
and Yaddo colonies in the United States, Tyrone Guthrie in Ireland, the
Arvon Foundation retreat centres in Britain and Skagen's
Klitgaarden---The Dune House---in Denmark are among long-established
residential arts

retreats. Much lore is associated with such places---sex, drugs,
clashing egos, wild imaginative flights---which I'll soon discuss. For
now I'll describe a recent writing retreat I attended, which in my
experience is more representative of the modern-day, cleaner-living
norm. For many of us, a retreat is the best way we can access the deep
privacy, free of family obligations, cooking, cleaning and juggling paid
gigs. What feels most voluptuous is simply to be left alone to work. In
a courtyard enclosed by a 15th-century ruin and perched on a limestone
crag above the River Esk, I admire the square tower of the castle's
ancient keep, which now houses a library. I've carried my Fortnum &
Mason wicker basket outside to eat lunch on the grass beside a deep well
that descends to Bronze Age caves in the cliff below, and to pore over
articles about my mysterious literary patron. Three short weeks ago, she
died here at the castle, at age 103. I'd hoped to thank Drue Heinz,
heiress to a vast ketchup fortune, in person. For three decades she'd
been married to tycoon Jack Heinz, who died in 1987---the same year she
transformed her estate into the Hawthornden International Retreat for
Writers. The castle, fittingly, was once the retreat of 17th-century
poet William Drummond, sometimes also referred to as Hawthornden.
Mrs. Heinz, as everyone here refers to her, had a special affinity for
literature: speaking about dying to a friend once, she'd remarked, "It's
rather disconcerting to realize you can't take even a book with you."
That friend, Darryl Pinckney, wrote about Mrs. Heinz in the New York
Review of Books. While she'd rallied at the end, he said, "this weird
and wonderful woman finally passed away, peacefully enough, they say,
after a few weeks of decline, of talking to the radio, asking for her
ski boots, and seeing a man

in a cloak. She died at Hawthornden, the lovely castle nestled in a glen
in Scotland that she was proud of having made into a writers' retreat."
The obituaries for Mrs. Heinz give me the impression of a fabulous yet
difficult woman, a figure from a bygone era. Apparently she could spin a
fiction herself: she told people she was an orphan cared for, variously,
by lawyers, at a girls' school in Ireland and by spinsters in Norfolk.
Other reports say her parents were from Norfolk, her birthplace. Doreen
Mary English was her original name, she didn't go to college, had a
brief film career under the names Drue English and Drue Mallory in 1950,
and then married Jack Heinz, her third husband, in 1953. She liked to
collect art and houses, lived in the United States and Europe and was
known for her lavish parties. Mrs. Heinz was also a chronic insomniac
who spent nights between the covers of books and used her riches to
become "the great literary philanthropist of our time," as Jonathan
Galassi, president of the publisher Farrar, Straus and Giroux, described
her. The publisher of the Paris Review for 14 years, Mrs. Heinz also
co-founded Ecco Books in 1971, named for a beloved dog. She was a
generous patron of the arts in both Britain and the United States.
Magnanimous, yes, but she could also be menacing. Writes Pinckney: "She
was a nightmare to work for, her friends observed. One story has a guest
at Hobe Sound, her house in Florida, opening the kitchen door to see
Drue hitting the cook over the head with a leg of lamb"---or a frozen
salmon depending on the source. Her husband called her writer friends
"your crazies," which became a social category---"Drue's crazies." She
loved writers though she rarely mixed with her creative guests at
Hawthornden. But you might bump into her literary friends, as one young
playwright did, starstruck to meet Tom Stoppard, who was just passing
by. I study the photographs of Mrs. Heinz: red hair, strong posture,
spirited looking. At her retreat writers receive the kind of care
usually only

bestowed by kindly friends and family. It's as though a rich comrade has
invited me to stay and work, giving me the run of her 120-acre estate
and all I need to fill the cup. In the lovely courtyard I thank the late
Mrs. Heinz vigorously for these 30 days to write without distraction:
for my sweet garret, three meals a day, laundry service, towels and a
dressing gown, three libraries, the expansive grounds. Anyone with a
published book can compete for a spot at Hawthornden. Learning in
November I'd been granted a spring fellowship, I dreamt about it all
winter long: a romantic castle, effortless writing, long walks, new
literary friends. The fellows' guide was especially delightful: "Sherry
is available for 50 p a glass in the Garden Room . . . fellows should
keep a tally of their own consumption and settle up with the Director
before leaving." Very notably, the guide also said there would be no
cellphone or wireless signal: "You are strongly advised to make
arrangements to forgo Internet access." Mrs. Heinz had specific ideas
about how the writers must work. No gadgets---she thought the Internet
was sinister---and silence from 9:30 a.m. till 6:30 p.m. This, my idea
of unimaginable bliss, is not for everyone. Not all writers, or people,
like the idea of retreat. Many wonder why go to a quiet place when
they're looking for stimulation and might prefer a writers' retreat in
Las Vegas, worry about getting bored or fear unravelling when faced with
no distractions. Hawthornden's unplugged aspect, in times when even yoga
retreats and national parks usually have wireless in main buildings,
doesn't suit everyone's work habits. I concede it makes research harder.
Such a short time ago we went everywhere without our technology. Now, it
seems impossible to manage one's life without it: opportunities missed
for not answering in time, annoyed friends and family, inability to find
your way without Google Maps. The idea of all-day silence is so
unfamiliar it makes people agitated. The fellows' guide explained, "The
idea is to provide a

refuge free from the distractions and duties of daily life, where people
can concentrate wholeheartedly on their writing," without obligation "to
be sociable or do anything that will interfere with the business of
writing." When the time came to head for Scotland I was horrified to
discover Mrs. Heinz's obituary in the New York Times. No one said
otherwise, so off I went to Edinburgh. On an unseasonably hot April
afternoon the director pulls up at Waverley Station, and hurriedly
heaves my bag into his blue Subaru---do I note a disapproving look? I
get in the back and a poet from Romania says hello from the front seat.
A Russian novelist, who lives in Berlin, smiles as I buckle my seatbelt.
Our questions to the director are met with extreme brevity, so we settle
into our thoughts. We pass Arthur's Seat, an extinct volcano that looms
over the city, and wend our way into the countryside. The director
provides need-to-know information: he points out the village, the Paper
Mill restaurant, which has Internet, and the bus stop in the small
former mining town that we can walk to. After about a half hour we pull
up in front of a metal gate. The director tells us to note the password:
magic, the keypad numbers to the kingdom. The gate swings open and we
sweep down a drive lined by mature trees. The tires crunch to an abrupt
stop on pebbles in front of the castle, our first sighting. It looks
like a smallish castle from this angle, where you can't see the sheer
drops to the river on three sides. An old door with a shield on it leads
through the archway into the courtyard. We pass life-sized roe deer
sculptures and enter a door into the modern house, attached to the ruins
of the old castle. I have an impression of lots of tartan and hunting
paintings as the director helps us drag our suitcases up three spiral
staircases, each one narrower as we go. Now I see why he may have looked
askance at my bag. On the top floor, the servants' quarters, the rug is
a shade of green I've only seen in photos of dying seas. Down at the end
of the hall, I'm in Jonson---named for Ben Jonson, a guest who
overstayed here, I later learn.

A fireplace! A hot water bottle. A pine desk and lamp. A tartan bag on
the doorknob. My laundry day is Monday, and I just leave my bag in the
hall for the housekeeper. A window that opens above the courtyard. The
other rooms are Boswell, Evelyn, Herrick, Brontë, Milos and Drummond,
poet and previous owner of the castle. I meet a novelist from Boston
coming out of Brontë, and take a quick walk along the steep, wooded
banks of the river. The small chapel cut in the rock, which Queen
Victoria visited in 1842 after stopping at nearby Rosslyn Chapel, of Da
Vinci Code fame, is now off-limits due to a landslide. That evening when
we gather for sherry before dinner, everyone else is dressed in finery,
especially the fifth writer, a poet from Israel who has just arrived. I
sport purple flip-flops. There are no sherry glasses, just wine glasses
of various sizes, some cracked, and the garden room, which opens into
the courtyard, is freezing cold. Next door in the dining room the décor
runs to old portraits, stag's horns and a chandelier. A fire roars in
the grate, rain patters against the window, and on the long wooden
sideboard there's vegetarian haggis, mashed potatoes and turnips, and
Gruyère soufflé for dessert and wine. The professional chef, a gem, has
worked in many big houses. The conversation feels curiously stilted, I
find, as though people are trying to score points and get one another's
measure. I snort mentally, for instance, when the Romanian fellow says
his favourite poet is Bukowski. We ask the director questions. We ask
when we can see the ancient Pictish caves under the castle. "Later---too
soon, and you'll become jaded." I ask about Scottish poets. "Oh, that's
not really my thing," he says vaguely. I ask about his poetry. He shakes
his head, says he doesn't "go in for that," though we all know he's
published, from our collective pre-arrival Internet searches. I ask
about Mrs. Heinz. "She was a very formidable woman," he says with the
practised delivery of a politician. After a little wine, he makes a Star
Wars reference---something about Darth Vader? And Gorgons?

The writers retire to the drawing room, where we poke around in the
adjoining library. It has a long, vertigo-inducing view down to the
river gorge, and contains volumes about the castle, books by Hawthornden
Prize winners, such as Tessa Hadley, Hilary Mantel and Graham Greene,
and works by and about William Drummond. After Drummond's fiancée died
on their wedding day in 1615 he spent years travelling, and then
successfully married and retreated to Hawthornden. It's been more than
400 years since his Poems Amorous, Funeral, Divine, Pastoral, in
Sonnets, Songs, Sextains, Madrigals was published. He addressed poems to
the woods and loved his retreat, called it "sweet, solitary place." He
rarely left until his death in 1649. It's beautiful to think that this
place has offered solitude and inspiration to writers since the 17th
century. (There was a gap---apparently the last Drummond died in 1970
and gave the castle to his butler-chauffeur on a whim, and eventually,
Mrs. Heinz bought it.) In the drawing room, portraits of Mrs. Heinz's
friends Truman Capote and Aldous Huxley gaze down. We notice coffee
stains on the reputedly Laura Ashley décor and worn and threadbare
patches, dust on lampshades, a plug-in fire. None of us could care less,
grateful for this gift of time and "decent ease." For 30 days, time
stretches ahead with nothing else to think about except writing. The
staff---the enigmatic director, plus the brilliant professional chef and
two kind housekeepers---support us in getting our work done. Over
breakfast, a simple buffet in the Hearth Room where we usually also eat
dinner, whoever shows up might talk about the relative merits of Pushkin
and Chekhov, or the delights of the Scottish Poetry Library and thrift
stores in Edinburgh, or the best walks by the river and along the old
railway tracks. Then we fill in our lunch menu slips, ticking off
choices so we can receive our baskets, left outside our room doors in
the attic. The housekeeper asks us to let her know if we won't be there,
as this

is also how they keep track of us, make sure we're okay given the
intensity of it all. They even know all about our staring into space
trying not to panic, the supercharged imaginative particles colliding in
our heads. Then for the day it's silence. I usually work upstairs in my
room until I hear my basket arrive around 12:30, a moment of huge
significance. I sometimes photograph my lunch and send the images to
friends, having discovered a cell signal on the driveway where the trees
were trimmed. Most days, I have vegetarian soup in a thermos with a cup,
a tuna sandwich with coleslaw, carrot sticks and Babybel cheese, which I
eat in the courtyard, or the drawing room when it rains. I borrow boots
and walking sticks and umbrellas as needed and walk along river paths
above a gorge, with its spectacular views---one leads to Rosslyn Chapel,
though now it's too muddy. Or I hike the old railway line path, or go
the back way to the Paper Mill for coffee, or to Lasswade, where William
Drummond is buried in the cemetery, or march on paths alongside pastures
with horses and farmers' fields to get to the bus stop or the town's
library. When I return, I work some more, often in the castle's main
library. Most days I do yoga in the adjoining conservatory, and lead
classes for whoever wants to join me, with spring bees abuzz and apple
trees blossoming. The estate's woods--- ash, hazel, hawthorn, wild
cherry and Scots pine---and gardens are flourishing. After the first
three days of terrible tech withdrawal, I become more grateful each day
for the absence of Internet. Back home I sometimes write and research at
the same time, which ruins my concentration, given the infinitude of the
Web. Once, while writing the hermit chapter, I decided to check
something I'd read. "Did hermits wear hedgehog skins?" I typed in. Three
hours later, after reading about the many uses of animal skins and hair,
and watching Cave in the Snow, a documentary about a British hermit who
slept in a three-feet-square traditional meditation box for 12 years, I

still hadn't written one word. But here, the muddy waters of my thought
processes are settling into blessed clarity. Without any distractions,
technological and other, small events such as meals begin to take on
enormous significance. We're expected to dress and show up for dinner,
which is great because as the days go on, I get ever more dishevelled
and unused to speaking. I enjoy our dinner talks, the only time we're
all together, and learn how it is to be a poet in Israel and Romania;
the secret of the group's two most prolific writers, both novelists, who
say they work to reach daily page counts; about other international
residencies to try and much else. One evening I mention a community of
Trappist monks who, forced by new health regulations to shut down their
egg business, had to find new work light enough for elderly men. "Sperm
donors?" someone guesses. Gourmet mushrooms, actually. Another night the
director tells me a hair-raising tale about Armand Jean le Bouthillier
de Rancé, founder of the Trappists, who found religion after seeing the
decapitated corpse of his mistress. Each night when the director blows
out the candles to signal dinner is over, we disperse. We're monkish and
rarely meet after dinner, instead heading back to our rooms. I read and
am in bed most nights by 10:30 p.m. When I discover I get a cell signal
in my room, I watch Extreme Pilgrim and other spiritual reality shows on
my phone, wondering whether the BBC has ever done a program on arts
monastics. My inner contrarian always acts out so that on a writing
retreat, I never work on the project I've brought with me. Or maybe it's
just that the unplanned slips in. At the castle to advance my poetry
manuscript, instead I become obsessed by hermits and monks, and read and
write prodigiously. In the flow of the days, under the spell of the
river below, time glides by and we all begin to lose track of the days
and feel reluctant to leave the peace that enfolds us. It's glorious:
the spring flowers and trees in bloom, birds singing. I spend sunny
hours reading outside, one book about the pleasures

of being alone and free, another about a modern-day sojourn to
monasteries in the Holy Land. I wake up earlier and earlier each day, at
dawn and before, and soon, by breakfast I have worked for hours. As time
goes on, we all begin to visit Edinburgh for a needed change of air from
our intense little community. One day I walk in the ravishing botanical
garden. I'm amused to realize I'm lingering in the Native Woodland area,
which feels most like home, and in front of an Andy Goldsworthy
sculpture made of flat stones called Cone that reminds me of a Celtic
monk's beehive hut. That evening at dinner, the Israeli poet,
passionately engaged in the conflicts of home, asks how long I stayed in
the gardens. When I tell her she says, "Yes, three hours is enough---you
can only stay in a garden so long." The conversation moves on, but I'm
still wondering, "Why?" Must we limit our intake of peace and beauty?
What about "gather your rosebuds while ye may"? Gardens, like libraries
and art galleries, are sanctuaries we can access easily in our everyday
lives. And given that we are nature, visits can't really be of a
prescribed duration. We humans tend to focus only on the dark, on
conflict and action; but isn't this what makes amplifying the light, the
peace and deep reflection we ignore, of such relevance? About midway
through the retreat the director, ever strategic, shows us the ancient
caves. He offers to lock me in if I want to experience hermit life for
my writing. I decline, feeling panicked. We also visit the medieval
dungeon. It takes two to pull open the heavy trap door in the courtyard.
Everyone descends, but I feel it may not be a good idea to step down
with the others in case the director is finding us tiresome---especially
now I've learned the story of Ben Jonson, my room's namesake. The poet
laureate of England, a former bricklayer, he walked for a month from
London to Edinburgh to visit Drummond/Hawthornden, who later slagged his
new friend in a private journal. The insult got around, however: "He is
a great

lover and praiser of himself . . . oppressed with fantasy which hath
ever mastered his reason---a general disease in many poets." Sir Walter
Scott later commented that conflict between them was likely as the two
men were so dissimilar: "one, a genius and man of the world, 'risen from
the ranks' having a long struggle for intellectual superiority---the
other (who did not exceed a decent mediocrity) living a retired life,
and, therefore, cautious and punctilious, timid in delivering his
opinion, apt to be surprised and even shocked at the uncompromising
strength of conception and expression natural to Jonson." Wild
connections, such as linking an unwanted guest more than 400 years ago
to the director potentially locking me in a dungeon, are rife among us
by now. Odd imaginative states are common on a month's retreat, and
being thrown up against your own work for an extended time sparks both
joy and terror. Annoyances are also common. Week three I write in my
journal: "This morning A ate ants with his Cheerios. I had a little
sprinkled on my muesli and likely ate some too. People are in revolt
about the old Victorian toilet that trickles for ages before you can
flush. No fires in the grates, cracked panes, frayed carpets, faded
grandeur, a kind of rote quality about things." The next day I write:
"It doesn't matter at all: gratitude that someone would support our
efforts like this. It is so heartwarming. I feel buoyant." On our final
morning I sit in the courtyard thinking about arts patrons. Over the
past hundred-plus years, retreats were often founded by the rich
philanthropists of the industrial era. Hawthornden has hosted hundreds
of poets, playwrights, novelists, short story writers, biographers and
essayists from around the world over the past 33 years, playing an
essential role in literary production. For me, periodical retreats were
how I became a writer, stepping stones that led away from the swirl of a
busy everyday life focused on other things. These precious pauses from
the everyday were, and are, my

lamp, lifeboat and ladder, in Rumi's words. Retreat remains my method to
make space for creative work, and for my yoga life, as I'll get to soon.
The motto of Hawthornden is etched in stone on the wall beside me, taken
from the inscription with which Drummond venerated his house in 1638:
"ut honesto otio quiesceret," to be in peace and decent ease. In the
modern world, "peace and decent ease," the notion of deep absorption
necessary to create art, is at risk. Do most artists even want that
now---and do audiences want what comes from that uninterrupted space? I
wonder whether havens like this are fading out, much like the castle's
old carpets. Mrs. Heinz truly loved books. I'm gratified that she saw
fit to redistribute her condiment wealth by making this oasis for
writers---though the rich arts patron model of retreat is often
repellent. The early departure of a writer at the highly sought-after
Santa Maddalena in Tuscany, a byinvitation-only retreat, is described in
a 2007 article in New York magazine. The writer, it seems, "was breaking
the code that defines the artist-patron relationship: The artist is to
be charming until excused." Baronessa Beatrice Monti della Corte von
Rezzori, the article adds, is "an impatient, charismatic,
preternaturally controlling woman." Santa Maddalena is her home, which
she converted into a retreat after the death of her husband, the
novelist Gregor von Rezzori, in 1998. When the bell rings for lunch,
writers "descend from their respective studios and join the baronessa
and her pug, Alice, on the poolside patio. Hostess to a breed not
exactly known for their extroversion, Beatrice is fond of turning meals
with writers into impromptu seminars on etiquette." Santa Maddalena has
no endowment, and its future is uncertain. It sounds like a holdover
from the past, when the rich wanted to be associated with literature and
writers for prestige---a role more often fulfilled, perhaps, by movie
stars and celebrities today? Oftentimes, however, what began with a
patron evolved into a sustaining institution: two of the leading
retreats in North America---the

MacDowell Colony, founded in Peterborough, New Hampshire, in 1907, and
Yaddo, founded in 1926 in Saratoga Springs, New York---were created by
wealthy lovers of art. Both retreats still perform their mission---to
give the gift of time and space to artists so they can further their
creative process and work without interruption in a supportive
community. Both provide room and board for about 30 artists at all
stages of their careers, including writers, visual artists, musicians
and composers, who apply for free residencies of up to two months. Like
many colonies, both are now nonprofit organizations funded by private
philanthropic largesse. Over the years they have hosted thousands of
artists and writers, playing a vital role as a retreat for the likes of
James Baldwin, Leonard Bernstein, Saul Bellow, Flannery O'Connor, Truman
Capote, Jacob Lawrence, Henri CartierBresson, Sylvia Plath, Carson
McCullers and, more recently, A.M. Homes, Amy Tan and Michael
Cunningham, to name a few. The MacDowell Colony was founded by pianist
and philanthropist Marian MacDowell and cultivates a New England work
ethic and simplicity. It has 32 cabin-studios in the woods and one
strict rule: it's forbidden to interrupt other artists while they're
working. This is wise considering that you might find someone weeping,
disinhibited and dancing around, or sleeping at odd hours. Michael
Chabon and his wife, the novelist Ayelet Waldman, take turns going on
retreat here annually for two weeks. "For me there's no substitute,"
Chabon told the New York Times in a phone interview as one of his four
young children screamed in the background. As well, these artist
sanctuaries are often socially responsive. Yaddo housed many writers
during the Great Depression, and today, MacDowell has doubled endowments
to investigative journalists, explaining, "In this era of fast news and
free content, a new model of support is needed for journalists who
dedicate their lives to telling complex stories that have the power to
change our lives and make our society better."

Yaddo, as one might expect from an over-the-top imitation of an Austrian
castle with 55 rooms on a 400-acre estate near the Saratoga racetrack,
has a totally different atmosphere than the woodsy MacDowell. It is
perhaps most storied of all American retreat centres, founded by Katrina
Trask and her financier husband, Spencer Trask. Yaddo, meant to rhyme
with shadow, was named by their four-year-old daughter, who, legend has
it, saw shadows cast by her recently deceased brother amid the trees of
the estate. "Call it Yaddo, Mama, for it makes poetry!" she said.
Tragically, the child and another brother soon after died of diphtheria.
Then an infant daughter died, and after that, Yaddo burned to the
ground. The grieving Trasks rebuilt and opened their artist's colony.
Katrina imagined artists who were "thirsting for the country and for
beauty, who are hemmed in by circumstance . . . creating, creating,
creating!" In Yaddo: Making American Culture, Micki McGee writes that it
was conceived for those "gifted with Creative power"---"a place of
respite for creative workers whose labours were not likely to be
supported by the mechanisms of an expanding market economy that had so
generously rewarded the Trasks' own undertakings." The idea that high
culture needed to be protected, uncontaminated by popular culture, had
taken hold by 1900. "With this new cultural stratification came the idea
that an elite culture, one that would uplift rather than pander to
popular tastes, would require new, non-market driven forms of patronage.
The ideal of culture as a gift to be protected from the exchanges of the
marketplace emerged," writes McGee. "The Trasks shared an abiding faith
in creativity as a transformative force that would necessarily improve
life for mankind." Early on, Yaddo was praised by the New York Times as
a "new and unique experiment, which has no exact parallel in the world
of fine arts." Katrina's vision went like this: "Some of them will see
the Muses. Some of

them will drink of the Fountain of Hippocrene, and all of them will find
the Sacred Fire and light their torches at its flame." Hedonistic
drinking, legend holds, and other sacred fires were also in evidence:
John Cheever, inebriated, once slid down the grand staircase on an
ornate ice sleigh, a gift to the Trasks from the Queen of the
Netherlands. He boasted that he had enjoyed sex on every flat surface in
the mansion, not to mention the garden and the fields. Yaddo, he
declared, attracts "all kinds---lushes down on their luck, men and women
at the top of their powers, nervous breakdowns, thieves, cranky noblemen
and poets who ate their peas off a knife." Yaddo is where, in 1940,
Carson McCullers developed an ardent crush on Katherine Anne Porter and
lay in front of the older woman's bedroom, hoping in vain for some
attention. Porter, annoyed, stepped over her, and rushed off for dinner.
Yaddo, known for its bats---there's a policy against killing them---made
Truman Capote complain in a letter, "I simply can't stand that
cheep-cheep crying as they circle in the dark." Poet Elizabeth Bishop,
who called herself "three-quarters Canadian" and lived as a child in
Nova Scotia, the setting for various poems, once wrote that everyone
needs a long period of solitude at least once in their life. (Elizabeth
Bishop House in Great Village, now privately owned, was for decades a
retreat and place of pilgrimage for writers.) Yaddo wasn't the place for
Bishop. Her witty, often anguished, accounts of her time there feature
in One Art, a fat volume of her letters selected by her long-time
editor, Robert Giroux. At Yaddo, where she was twice, in 1949 and 1950,
she spent most of her time at the racetrack drinking coffee and eating
blueberry muffins. "The auction of the yearlings was fun and very
beautiful---particularly the chestnuts under the bright lights and
against the bright green grass." Or getting terribly drunk and feeling
second-rate and lonely. "I've mixed about like a drop of oil in water,"
she writes to one friend. She tells painter Loren MacIver: "There's not
much point describing this place. It would take

forever and was obviously all the dream of mad millionaires with high
ideals, etc." The mad millionaires' room was to be hers. In a 1949
letter to poet Robert Lowell, she writes: "I have that huge room with 34
windows--- bloody hot---but very grand. I haven't been able to 'work' at
all so spend most of my time very pleasantly sitting on my balcony
blowing bubbles. There is something a little sinister about the place,
though, don't you think? I keep getting bats in my room and even met one
in the woods in broad daylight---and then all those awful scummy ponds.
But I think what is really the source of the trouble is the smell---old
lunch boxes, I guess." Bishop veers between desperate and charming. "In
fact I JUST DON'T KNOW anything except that I'd like to die quite
quickly," she writes at one point. And then, "It has been a tough
stretch but the agony has abated, as Macaulay said at the age of nine
when he burned his finger & someone asked him how it was." Years later
she described this time at Yaddo as "the most wretched and unpleasing
stretch" of her life. By November she was 40, falling apart and spent
Christmas in hospital to dry out. She stayed at Yaddo until March, when
she received the Bryn Mawr fellowship that changed her life. She decided
on "a crazy trip" and found her perfect retreat in Brazil, where she did
her best work, for which she received a Pulitzer Prize. Her small studio
was in the garden of the house in the hills near Rio she shared with her
beloved Lota de Macedo Soares, an architect. The house, Samambaia, which
means "fern," in Portuguese, inspired her luscious poem, "Song for the
Rainy Season," and much else. At Yaddo today the mission is unchanged,
though the range of artists eligible is wider: writers, poets, painters,
sculptors and composers, choreographers, film and video makers and
performance artists, says president Elaina Richardson. "But now we
operate in a deeply changed landscape, where---thankfully---residency
opportunities have increased

dramatically for contemporary artists, but paradoxically, financial
support for individual artists (of all kinds) has diminished radically.
Thus the role of a place such as Yaddo in the ecology of artistic
production has shifted." Arts retreats now too often face financial
challenges: Yaddo's endowment doesn't cover its expenses so it began
opening its doors to the public in 1993, hoping to inspire further
gifts. Complete artistic freedom, like water in the desert, is what the
Banff Centre for Arts and Creativity aims to give performing artists,
visual artists, writers, film and new media creators. Recognizing the
difficulties faced by artists today---and everyone who needs time and
space for creative work--- Banff recently offered a retreat that's about
retreat. In the Art of Stillness residency with Pico Iyer, people from
various disciplines reflected "on artistic practice in an accelerated
world," exploring "what this increased speed of life means for
practising artists and what value we can gain in slowing down." In times
when financial support for artists has plunged, as have incomes in a
"free content" digital world, the chance to experiment and work free of
everyday concerns is rare and precious---as is meeting passionate others
who have accepted the absurd and insolvent artist's life, because
there's nothing they'd rather do. Artistic people find ways to retreat,
even in hard times, cracks in the pavement where their work can take
root. Sheds have been frequent retreats---Dylan Thomas's "word-splashed"
writing shed at Laugharne, Virginia Woolf's shed at Monk's House where
she wrote in summers, Philip Pullman's garden shed. Cabins in the woods
are common too, and today one can add myriad quirky retreats. Low-rent
storage spaces frequently serve as studios in places with decent
weather, and a garbage dump program in San Francisco has been offering
selected artists studio space and "scavenging privileges" since 1990. It
was the idea of an artist trying to normalize recycling, writes Amanda
Petrusich in the New Yorker

---and a sign of our times. "The symbolism of sequestering artists to
the garbage pile is perhaps too hilarious and heartbreaking to ignore,"
she notes. True, artists are squeezed hard and a proliferation of
off-beat residencies can be seen as an indicator of how difficult it has
become to maintain any sort of creative practice. But I can't help
thinking it also displays the resilience of creators, who refuse to cede
their marginal space, in which they make what has no utility---which is
their strength. "To paint now is an act of resistance which answers a
widespread need and may instigate hope," writes John Berger in the
conclusion to his brilliant essay "Steps Toward a Small Theory of the
Visible." In the past, painting was an affirmation of what exists, the
visible, he says. With technology this has changed: no longer real, or
an encounter with what's real, virtual images abound, and technology
refracts them in instants. Berger relates this to the system's need for
consumption, our appetites, which created a shift from the real to mere
spectacle. Existing outside convention and the commercial, artists
traffic in the genuine and heartfelt. Writers today can find their muse
on an Amtrak train residency, and Container offers 12 artists the chance
to spend a month each on board a huge cargo ship on worldwide routes.
"Artists require solitude, beauty, the natural sublime and global
travel," the administrators write. "They crave extended stretches of
time, free of any interruption, in order to create new work. All of this
can be found on a container ship." Dune shacks by the ocean; a residency
at the Large Hadron Collider in Geneva; farm retreats where you can
choose to exchange work for room and board; Land Art Mongolia 360 for
site-specific land art that reflects the biodiversity of the Gobi
Desert---the possibilities for retreat, paid, unpaid, subsidized, are
endless.

All creative spirits can emulate artists' imaginative ways to find
islands of time and space. I was charmed by an artist in Valencia who
takes retreat to new heights: he built a tiny urban hut under a concrete
bridge, suspended 20 feet up in the air, to claim the solitude to work.
Fernando Abellanas's retreat, which took him two weeks to make, is
simply but beautifully decorated, with a chair, desk, duvet and
cushions. The traffic, he says, provides just the right amount of white
noise. To get up there he steps onto an accessible platform on the low
end under the bridge, and then handwinches it across. Abellanas,
understandably, won't reveal his retreat's exact location, but says he
will "enjoy it as long as it lasts." He emphasizes that urban
environments are full of small, unnoticed quiet places we can adapt for
our purposes. His hut under the bridge and his remark stir my
imagination. Abellanas echoes the call to retreat, noting that space is
everywhere if we have eyes to see it. His actions also underline why
retreat matters: so we may pay attention, step past what we already know
and move from the authorized into new ways of being. The marginal,
liminal space his hut occupies under the bridge reflects the way artists
and writers, not to mention hermits, monks and pilgrims, and lovers of
nature, occupy threshold space. In selfexile in a quiet retreat, outside
the everyday hustle and bustle, we preserve an inviolable place for
original thinking and for a kind of divinity that makes life worth
living. May Sarton speaks to the deep engagement, transcendence and
wholeness to be experienced in such sanctuaries of retreat---whether we
are making art, appreciating it or engaging other creative purposes,
alone or alone in community. In Journal of a Solitude, published in 1973
and still in print, she evokes this state of union beautifully: "I have
a fire burning in my studio, yellow roses and mimosas on my desk. There
is an atmosphere of

festival, of release in the house. We are one, this house and I, and I
am happy to be alone---time to think, time to be."

Light of the East Of Yoga Ashrams, Meditation Halls and Body as Temple
In a place helpful to the mind and pleasing to the eyes, in a hidden
retreat, let the aspirant cultivate spirituality. ---Svetasvatara
Upanishad, fifth or sixth century BC

The Inner Temple The wind howls but the mountain remains still.
---Eastern proverb

In India, the decision to step back to a sacred grove, mountain cave or
ashram by the river has long been encouraged and respected. Of all the
Eastern traditions that reached Western shores in the 20th century, yoga
and meditation---which both value retreats and teach that fulfillment
can be

found within---have been the most ardently adopted. These aren't New Age
fads, but ways to rediscover the much-needed wisdom of an earlier age,
to cultivate peace and equanimity amid ceaseless change. Moderns by the
millions have embraced these ancient paths, learning how to be versus
do--- by looking inward and periodically going on retreat. I always roll
my eyes at the misconception that a yoga or meditation retreat is all
bliss and butterflies. Consider the experiences of Jodi Ettenberg, a
writer from Montreal who attended a vipassanā retreat in New
Zealand---never having meditated before. "I need to defrag my hard
drive. It isn't running efficiently," she told a friend, comparing the
retreat to hiring a personal trainer to help her at a first-ever session
at the gym. Her friend replied, "No, it's like running a marathon having
never run before. . . . What are you doing to yourself?" Ettenberg
signed up for ten days---no talking, no interactions and no eye
contact---"in a moment of quiet desperation" after nearly a year of
insomnia and chronic pain. At the retreat she suffered mightily,
afflicted by perfectionism, panic, pain, silence, spiders. Yet her
experience overall was positive: "I emerged from the course a calmer,
temporarily less anxious version of myself. I started to sleep again.
The relief of rest was palpable." A year afterwards she added that the
retreat had "calmed me at a deep and inexplicable level . . . imbued me
with a sense of perspective I now maintain and am deeply grateful for."
Yoga and Buddhism have overlapped significantly in our spiritual but not
religious times, and we often draw on both. Retreat is integral to these
India-rooted systems, which share the same ancient source, the Vedas,
the world's oldest sacred texts. The rise of yoga and meditation in the
West--- and along with it, the practice of retreat---resulted from a
surprising alchemy. Who could have predicted that when the vast wisdom
of the East's spiritual heritage---which shaped the great civilizations
of India, China and

Japan, and Southeast Asia---reacted with the materialistic West, the
result would be a yoga and meditation revolution? These imported
traditions have shaped how we retreat today, guided by a lively array of
gurus and their countercultural students, and spiced with many East-West
collisions. Yoga and meditation have also penetrated deeply into our
culture, seeping into religions, as well as scholarly work, civil rights
and protest movements, health care and psychology. First seen as
religious practices, they appear in many secular contexts such as
schools, workplaces, hospitals and gyms; yoga studios and meditation
centres are nearly as ubiquitous as corner cafés. This familiarity is
why today Westerners willingly face the rigours of retreats in groups or
alone, choosing from thousands of options on websites like retreat.guru
and learning to find sacred space inside. "It is through your body that
you realize you are a spark of divinity," said esteemed Indian yoga
teacher B.K.S. Iyengar. From the start, yoga and Buddhist meditation
suited the Western temperament. Both offer freedom of thought and
worship, as well as personal pathways to the divine or the infinite. For
secular people, no need to believe in God---more of an impersonal
intelligence---though it's no problem if you do. No need to separate
intellectual and spiritual enquiry--- it's about consciousness, one of
the great mysteries, which some scientists call "the hard problem," also
a concern of Vedanta yoga philosophy and Buddhism. With no need to wait
for the afterlife, these traditions also offer techniques and benefits
that appeal to Westerners' pragmatic love of provable results, such as
better health and happiness. As organized religion declined, these
traditions filled a vacuum for people who "found a vision of
possibilities that seemed not only sublime but rational and attainable,"
as Philip Goldberg puts it in American Veda, about how Indian
spirituality changed the West. "What some saw as

theology, others saw as testable hypothesis. What some viewed as
spiritual practices, others viewed as therapies." Matthieu Ricard,
deemed by neuroscientists to be the world's happiest man, is a Tibetan
Buddhist monk and geneticist who has spent years in solitary retreat.
When researchers monitored his brainwaves as he meditated on compassion,
he produced brain gamma waves never before reported in neuroscience. The
waves are linked to consciousness, attention, learning and memory.
Ricard credits meditation, which he calls weight-lifting for the mind.
Anyone can become happy, he adds, by training the brain. As with yoga,
all that's required is the lab of one's own body to apply the techniques
and experience what happens. As with everything else you do
consistently, the more you practise the easier it gets---though habit
energy is strong and it takes time and focus. In general, yoga and
meditation, which come in myriad varieties, teach that the way to a
clear, calm mind is to pay attention to the body and the breath ---the
basis for touching the infinite. "Tell me, what is God? He is the breath
within the breath," writes 15th-century Indian poet-saint Kabir. Simple,
and yet to stop and focus on what's happening in the moment is a radical
act that may involve breaking a lifetime of habit. Paying extreme
attention is where retreat comes in: in a distraction-free setting that
fosters our ability to go deeper, certain insights arise
naturally---that the body and mind are one, for example, and that
everything is interrelated and connected at a deep level. The idea is
that retreat helps us get beyond the ordinary, conditioned self, with
its concepts and endless discursive thoughts, to another, embodied way
of being in the world. Tellingly, body-centred ways of retreat---the
pilgrimage, getting outside in nature and yoga and meditation
retreats---are the most popular in our deskbound, virtual, breathless
21st century.

Retreating is a bit like learning to drive: at first, you don't want to
go on a busy highway; you take a wide, quiet road. Once you've mastered
the basic disciplines of yoga and meditation, you test your newfound
attention and equanimity in challenging places, like everyday life. Far
from being individualistic, yogic and Buddhist retreats aim to promote
selfdevelopment that will create a more positive world. They relate to
deep ecologies, and movements like the "socially engaged Buddhism" of
Vietnamese activist and teacher Thich Nhat Hanh, who emphasizes if there
is to be peace in the world, there must first be peace in the heart.
Personal insights ripple into the political. By replacing our usual
obliviousness with mindfulness, we slow down, settle and begin to
understand ourselves and the impact of our own thoughts and choices.
From there, we can try to create the kind of world we want to live in
once we return from retreat. Modern-day commercialization has diluted
Eastern spiritual traditions ---I thought a yoga and pole-dancing demo
on Oprah must be the final low, but that was years ago, and now these
practices are being used to sell everything from hamburgers to wine. At
the same time it's amazing to see that fuller spiritual systems continue
to gain currency---as with yoga's "eight limbs," which extend beyond the
familiar physical postures and breathing practices. And study retreats
are more widespread than ever. Vedanta yoga has proven so popular,
writes Philip Goldberg in American Veda, in part because it satisfies
conditions that were by and large not emphasized in organized religion
in the West: transformation and transcendence, or "the yearning to
enlarge the perceived boundaries of the self, touch the infinite, and
unite with the ultimate Ground of Being." What are we in search of on
retreat? Contemporary Buddhist teacher and filmmaker Khyentse Norbu
articulates the purpose of the path of meditation in the entertaining
documentary Words of My Perfect Teacher: "When you don't have
obsessions, when you don't have hang-ups, when

you don't have inhibitions, when you're not afraid you'll be breaking
certain rules, when you're not afraid you won't fulfill somebody's
expectations, what more enlightenment do you want? That's it." Being
free from neurosis, basically. Sounds like nirvana indeed. The
transmission of yoga and meditation retreats to the West was led by an
army of pioneering teachers who, especially since the 1960s, popularized
Vedic and Buddhist ideas and practices and awakened millions to the
power of retreat for inner transformation. To deliver their teachings
these yogis, acharyas, monks, bhikkhus and Zen masters began moving into
former Catholic seminaries, summer camps and prisons, where they built
new learning outposts in the forests, mountains, cities and suburbs. The
idea of retreat gradually became commonplace. There have always been
people in history who show their warriorship through peace and
gentleness. Among them is Swami Vivekananda of Kolkata, often credited
with bringing yoga and meditation, and retreats, to North America.
Vivekananda, "clad in gorgeous red apparel, his bronzed face surmounted
with a huge turban of yellow," appeared at the World's Parliament of
Religions in Chicago in 1893. The handsome, dignified monk was an
instant celebrity, drawing large crowds, writes Rick Fields in How the
Swans Came to the Lake. A perfect envoy for Vedanta yoga in the West,
he'd attended a college founded by Scottish missionaries, where he
studied Western philosophy, logic and history. And he was a devotee of
Sri Ramakrishna, "probably the first well-known exemplar of religious
pluralism . . . famously declaring that all traditions can lead to the
infinite," writes Goldberg in American Veda. Swami Vivekananda set a
pattern many later gurus were to emulate: he spoke English, knew the
ways of the West and made practical adaptions to his approach to suit
his new audience. He evoked the Bible, talked of religious
unity---kicking off the modern interfaith movement---and admired

science. Notably for the progress of the practice of retreat in the
West, he also founded the Vedanta Society to disseminate his teachings.
Still highly influential today, the organization has about 20 retreat
properties and centres worldwide, including one of historical and
spiritual significance not far from my home in Kingston. Vivekananda
Cottage, on Wellesley Island in the St. Lawrence River, is known to
millions of followers worldwide as the place where the guru reached
enlightenment while meditating in the woods in 1895. He'd been at the
summer place of one of his wealthy New York students, leading a
seven-week retreat. The property was acquired in 1946 by the
Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Centre in New York City and has been the site of
an annual spiritual retreat for devotees ever since---including J.D.
Salinger in the '50s, before his unhealthy reclusion set in and he put
curtains on his car windows. Today pilgrims from India and all over the
world visit the Victorian cottage, open in the summer months, often
attending arati, the singing of devotional songs and meditation.
Vivekananda adapted ancient ideas to the conditions of modern life, with
a focus on meditation and mantras, rather than movement, and on Vedanta
philosophy. The first wave of yogis who had come to North America from
India at the turn of 19th century, including Vivekananda, were
"hatha-haters" with a legacy of "yoga from the head up," writes Robert
Love in The Great Oom: The Improbable Birth of Yoga in America. They
scorned yoga's physical poses, influenced by British colonizers, their
Indian sympathizers and Christian missionaries who saw the physical
practices as "the embodiment of heathenism." Vivekananda attracted
Western followers from diverse backgrounds, including inventor Nikola
Tesla, and he had many influential friends---notably William James, the
father of modern psychology and author of The Varieties of Religious
Experience. From this time on, many leading Western thinkers were to be

influenced by Eastern teachers, both Vedic and Buddhist. And for
advanced learning, they attended retreats. After Vivekananda, Eastern
teachers began arriving in waves, bringing new traditions, publishing
books and opening retreat centres and ashrams--- taking their place in a
lineage of mavericks of retreat in the West that stretches from the
early desert fathers and mothers through the Romantics and
Transcendentalists. The first superstar guru, Paramahansa Yogananda,
whose name means "supreme swan" and signifies someone in a state of
union with God, arrived in the United States in the 1920s. He introduced
millions to yoga and meditation over the next 30 years, founding the
SelfRealization Fellowship (SRF) retreat in an abandoned hotel on Mount
Washington that overlooks Los Angeles---a city he called the Benares
(Varanasi) of the West, after India's holy city and pilgrimage site. The
quiet and disciplined world of the SRF retreat, which is now its
international headquarters, drew worldly celebrity students who helped
to spread the word. Elvis visited often during his Hollywood years, once
supposedly telling a monk, "Man, you made the right choice." He also
frequented the serene Lake Shrine at the Pacific Palisades retreat, a
ten-acre campus where George Harrison, another follower, held his
funeral. The Hollywood Temple on Sunset Boulevard was founded in 1942,
and the Lake Shrine in 1950; both are still open to the public as
sanctuaries for contemplation and meditation apart from the smog and
noise of the city. Yogananda's profile skyrocketed when he began going
on lecture tours and filling halls, and after he released his modern
spiritual classic, Autobiography of a Yogi, in 1946. He wrote the book
in a hermitage that overlooks the Pacific Ocean at Encinitas,
California. There, he also started the SRF retreat program, which he
called "a dynamo of silence where \[you\] may go for the exclusive
purpose of being recharged by the Infinite." Until

his death in 1952 he continued to open retreat centres, often with
donations from affluent disciples like George Eastman, founder of
Eastman Kodak. The SRF offered "happiness now" and advocated for world
peace through kriya yoga for mind, body and spirit. Yogananda appealed
to spiritual and secular students alike with his practical approach,
calling chakras "centres," rejecting dogma and embracing universal
principles: he revered Jesus and praised scientific rationalism. His
various temples and monasteries drew laypeople wanting to retreat and
also housed monastics. All lived simply in cell-like rooms and spent
days in meditation, prayer, doing yoga postures, working to support the
community and in spiritual study and silence. Like Vivekananda,
Yogananda helped set the template for retreat in the West; today he has
millions of followers and myriad retreat centres worldwide. At first,
yoga and meditation, ancient spiritual disciplines, were considered
dangerous and corrupting by the Western mainstream. One early stumbling
block was that we have no tradition of living with your teacher to study
on retreat. Westerners struggled with the teacher-student relationship
in general, which required a different level of trust, perhaps similar
to the way you believe in your doctor's desire for your well-being, and
in their prescriptions. Conflicts resulted when Eastern tradition met
Western student ---and many gurus were to fall off their pedestals for
abusing spiritual authority. Over the years, countless high-profile
scandals have exposed the sexual and economic exploitation of students.
Rigorous discipline and unquestioning obedience were not very Western,
and the style of Eastern teachers was also a departure: to quote
Tibetan-Bhutanese Lama Khyentse Norbu once again, a teacher "is the
assassin you have hired to dismantle you" with the goal of ridding you
of qualities, such as greed, that stand in the way of your
enlightenment.

One of the earliest tales to emerge from this cultural encounter, and
the most vivid, is My Guru and His Disciple, a spiritual autobiography
written by Christopher Isherwood in the 1930s. Best known as a novelist,
Isherwood describes his unlikely monastic life in retreat with his
Bengali teacher, Swami Prabhavananda, a pioneer sent to continue
Vivekananda's work. Isherwood captures what he calls "the inconsistency
of my life as a demi-monk": as a worldly gay man known for his
sophisticated works of fiction who is newly dedicated to the study and
practice of Vedanta, his worlds collide. The extraordinary book, which
is based on old diaries Isherwood revisited after the Swami's death in
1976, is a relatable look at a mystic's life that makes the spiritual
path seem understandable, as well as precious. This is quite a feat. For
one thing, inner life is difficult to write about. And because
materialists consider mystics flaky---while mystics think materialists
are missing the big picture---it's not easy to write an account with
such wide appeal. On Isherwood's first visit to what was then a sleepy,
leafy, flowering Hollywood Hills neighbourhood, he discovered the gates
to another world. He describes a "squat Hindu temple with white plaster
walls and onion domes" next door to an ordinary wooden bungalow---the
ashram, where students lived with their teacher. The retreat centre is
still headquarters today, established in 1938 to promote harmony between
Eastern and Western thought and to recognize the truth in all the great
religions of the world. Of the temple, with its images of Krishna,
Jesus, Buddha, Confucius and leaders of other world religions, Isherwood
writes: "I was immediately aware of the feeling of calm in this room,
rather uncomfortably so. It was like a sudden change of altitude to
which I should have to get accustomed." This is a perfect way to evoke
the movement from the everyday world to the world of a retreat. A
shorter retreat, say for a weekend or a week or

two, may well turn out to be peaceful and restorative---important in the
scheme of yoga and meditation as a prerequisite for going deeper. But
just as often, you might find you sleep for a week, get a headache,
become terminally bored or desperate to flee your own thoughts, or
actually flee--- all part of the process of settling, of acclimatizing.
Isherwood writes elegantly of common obstacles that face secular
Westerners encountering Eastern spiritual traditions. The swami---whom
he describes as "charming and boyish, although he is in his middle
forties and has a bald patch at the back of his head"---speaks to
Isherwood about the search for God. "I said I hated the word 'God,'"
Isherwood writes. "He agreed that you can just as easily say 'The Self'
or 'Nature.'" It amazes me that nearly 100 years ago, the swami foresaw
today's "secular sacred"---that self-development and the natural world
would become new temples for meaning in the West. Religious or not, the
deeper human question of retreat hasn't changed, the one the whole world
asks: what is the meaning of my life? In another typical negotiation,
Isherwood wants to know whether one can have a spiritual and a worldly
life. Specifically, he lusts after men. The problem is not lust for a
man, or a woman, the Swami replies, just that it impedes one's progress,
because celibacy allows sexual energy to be stored up for spiritual
life. It's a response Isherwood likens to a coach who tells his athletes
to avoid certain things---such as smoking, or overindulging in food,
alcohol and sex---because they aren't good for the training, not because
they're inherently bad. The idea that we're born divine and there's no
such thing as sin was highly appealing for many Westerners who
encountered Vedanta. Me included---a welcome reversal of the Calvinistic
"You'rrrrre all DOOMED!" of my Scottish forebears. Convinced that you
can't go deep by attending sporadic teachings, as his friend Aldous
Huxley did, Isherwood decides to commit, Eastern-style:

he moves into the ashram, cohabiting with a dozen other people, giving
alms in exchange for his live-in studies and pondering his guru's
teachings. Aside from curiosity, the other reasons he gives for
retreating with his teacher preview what the counterculture would soon
be seeking. Isherwood was attracted by his teacher's sanity, honesty and
intelligence, his faith and love, and he wanted to seriously pursue
spiritual truths in an increasingly baffling, violent, war-prone world.
The goal, he said, was to accept with compassion that there will
continue to be good and evil in the world, but that he can change
himself, wake up to his divine nature and be an agent for greater peace,
love and understanding. Predictably, Isherwood's monastic path is rocky,
especially when his habits begin to erode and his ego rebels. "It merely
wanted to maintain the usual messy aimless impulse-driven way of life to
which it was accustomed. It would actually rather wallow in 'lazy black
misery' than be interfered with by Prabhavananda," he says---capturing a
typical dynamic of retreat. On good days Isherwood might write, "The
desire, the homesickness, for sanity, is the one valid reason for
subjecting oneself to any kind of religious discipline." Even after an
exhausting day, spent mainly doing prostrations and sitting in
meditation, as well washing dishes and working on translations for the
Swami, he exclaims happily, "And this is what they call an escape from
the world!" Or he experiences peace and vows to stay forever: "To learn
to be alone and at home inside myself--- that's what I'm here for." He
also confronts his inner Puritan and his outsized ego, not just with the
disciplines of introspection, but with help from his guru. "Once fishing
for a compliment, I asked Swami why he so seldom scolded me. He
answered, 'I don't scold for the big faults.' He gave no sign of
awareness that this statement had crushing implications." On difficult
days Isherwood longs for his lovers, loathes the rules and whines about
being sick of pujas and sitting cross-legged in the temple

three times a day. "This weekend has been stormy, unexpectedly so. We
had a puja and there's nothing like good puja for stirring up lust." He
often fantasizes about escape from the retreat. "I long to get away from
this place. And yet, if I do manage to wriggle out somehow, I know that,
in two or three months, I'll pine to get back in again." And later: "My
day of silence. Eight hours in the shrine. Boredom. Blankness. Storms of
resentment . . ." He regularly complains about the misery of the
discipline, often while carrying out monastic duties with a "fair share
of diligence." Pleasureseeking interludes punctuate his practice. "Then,
on September 20, I went to lunch with the Viertels in Santa Monica and
had another sex encounter on the beach." Feeling "ten times more
disagreeable" than he has ever been before in his life, he asks his
teacher to explain why he isn't more peaceful. "Swami says it's like
cleaning out an inkwell which is screwed to the table: you keep pouring
in water and nothing comes out but dirty old ink---at least, not for a
long long time." Ultimately, Isherwood leaves the ashram when he falls
in love in 1945, but his time of living with Prabhavananda influenced
his life profoundly. He got the idea for his first religious novel after
going with his teacher to Belur Math, the headquarters of the
Ramakrishna Math and Mission founded by Swami Vivekananda---and where
his relics are enshrined. Isherwood's final novel, A Meeting by the
River, is the story of two brothers, the elder a worldly hedonist, the
younger a novice about to take his vows as a monk. They meet at a
monastery on the Ganges after a long separation. Scandalous for the
times, the novel dramatizes the conflict between sexuality and gay
identity and spirituality. Returning periodically to the Vedanta Centre
for spiritual retreats and teachings, Isherwood continued to work on
translations with the Swami. He was always considered family there,
though he was sure the monastics had heard the "lurid and no doubt
fairly accurate rumours about my life." Asked

in the Paris Review in 1974 about his relationship with his guru, he
attempts to explain the unexplainable: "It's made a very great
difference, but I couldn't exactly describe to you what the difference
is. I could say what, so to speak, I've got out of it. I simply became
convinced, after a long period of knowing Swami Prabhavananda, that
there is such a thing as mystic union or the knowledge---we get into
terrible semantics here---that there is such a thing as mystical
experience. That was what seemed to me extraordinary---the thing I had
completely dismissed." Like many of us today, Isherwood was seeking
meaning, retreating and then testing out Eastern philosophy in the
workshop of modern life. When the Vedanta society began to ordain
American monastics in 1946, monasteries and convents branched out from
the main Hollywood Temple, and Vedanta societies opened in cities
worldwide, including in Canada. Living with one's teacher to study was
integral to Eastern yoga and meditation traditions; curious Westerners
began to retreat more, and the ancient practice adapted. The presence of
women was one major change. Also, in contrast to living at a monastery,
retreats were redesigned to accommodate laypeople, who had to fit yoga
and meditation retreats in between jobs, studies and family life. Now,
the metaphorical cave and the hearth were possible, allowing
householders to practise as monastics by going on retreats from time to
time. In the 1950s the Zen meditation boom hit when D.T. Suzuki arrived
from Japan, and among those inspired to retreat were artists, thinkers
and other influential followers who turned many others on, including
musician John Cage, who shifted to making music "that was as strict as
sitting crosslegged, namely, the use of chance operations." Bestselling
author and Trappist monk Thomas Merton was also captivated and observed
that, despite differences, the contemplative traditions of East and West
both aimed at the transformation of consciousness using spiritual
disciplines.

Zen retreats proved difficult for Western students, who were puzzled by
the lack of conceptual explanations and unused to sitting cross-legged
on cushions for hours. While in Japan new students might sit seven days
by themselves, with breaks only for meals; in the West, retreats were
often cut down to three or five days. As well, the idea of a few months
in retreat followed by a few months out was introduced as an alternative
to the usual method: years of uninterrupted retreat in isolated places
for the serious practitioner. Again students struggled when Tibetan
Buddhist meditation arrived after 1959, the year the Dalai Lama,
disguised as a peasant, fled through mountain passes to India. One
hundred thousand others had followed him into exile by the time the
Chinese sealed the borders, and soon Tibetan teachers began spreading
West, fulfilling Padmasambhava's ancient prophecy: "When the iron bird
flies, and horse runs on wheels,/the Tibetan people will be scattered
like ants across the World,/And the Dharma will come to the land of the
Red Man." Om mane padme hum entered Western vocabulary, along with
another new tradition of retreat. One of the first Tibetan teachers to
arrive in the West was Tarthang Tulku, whose strict meditation
disciplines tested his early students: even the introductory practices,
usually done on retreat in Tibet, were gruelling. Imagine performing
100,000 full prostrations---to honour Buddha, and as a purification
practice to cut through false pride---by stretching out fulllength on
the floor, getting up and repeating, for hours, while also reciting
mantras and doing complex visualizations. Western pilgrims also began to
travel East, visiting sages in caves and meditating in jungle
monasteries, boosting interest in Eastern teachings and practices when
they returned home. By the '60s and '70s, times of great social
upheaval, yoga and meditation were everywhere in the West, with retreat
centres dotting the landscape---even more true today.

I have observed that with yoga or meditation retreats, the longer the
duration, the greater the intensity and challenge---and the more likely
that the secret curriculum will come into play. By that I mean
experiences you don't expect or want, but in retrospect may find
priceless. Now, for your edification, or perhaps your recognition, I'll
share the story of two yoga retreats. In one, most goes well; in the
other, all goes terribly, terribly wrong. In the busy port of Nassau I
slip through a gap in the chain-link fence and walk toward some
industrial warehouses, searching for Mermaid Dock. Squeaky cranes move
shipping containers on and off cargo ships, workers banter and sway to
calypso that blasts from the radio---and this has got to be the wrong
place. I'm about to leave when I spot a small, hand-painted sign with
lotus flowers and people doing handstands. I sit underneath the sign on
a shaded wooden bench to wait for the boat to Paradise Island. Blue
Bahamian water shines and dazzles my winterweary eyes. Off the edge of
the pier discarded conch shells by the hundreds tint the depths a
delicate pinky-cream. February heat seeps into my body along with relief
that I chose this ashram in Nassau rather than the one in wintry Quebec,
a few hours' drive from home. I'm here for a month to learn to teach
yoga. I've fallen in love with this ancient practice, which helps me to
breathe freely and inquire more deeply. Now I want to share its benefits
with other frazzled, fast-moving people. I pull a notebook from my
knapsack. "Now it will be no tobacco, caffeine, alcohol, drugs, eggs,
meat, fowl, fish for a month," I write. "Not even garlic or onions,
which make one 'rajasic' and create agitation in meditation. Worst is no
wine." I remind myself that I'm tired of my own habits and want to try
something new. I see a speedboat approaching, and think of all the inner
journeys launched from this dock in the past 50-plus

years. I'm one of thousands from all over the world who have come to
study at the yoga school's five acres between the bay and the deep blue
sea. The tossing boat pulls up, I step onboard, and we zoom across the
choppy channel to the ashram side. Disembarking beside the main temple I
follow a path fringed with ferns and tropical flowers---red, orange,
pink and white hibiscuses, bougainvillea. A large sign with the heart
chakra painted on it declares "God is one. The names are many." Other
signs in the foliage read "Unity in Diversity," and "The highest
religion is love." I follow the path all the way to the sea, a calm
turquoise stripe between white sand and blue sky. A large yoga platform
encircled by swaying palms faces the water beside the beach. This, I
decide, is an enchanting place to learn more about yoga and its ancient
philosophy, Vedanta. Once the retreat gets underway I start to question
this as a suitable locale for a yoga school. The island is overrun by
tourists: Club Med is right next door and Atlantis is down the beach, a
coral-pink monstrosity with the biggest casino in the Caribbean and
bars, lounges, waterfalls, pools, a faux Mayan temple with waterslides
and "the largest man-made marine habitat with eleven exhibit lagoons,
home to more than fifty thousand sea animals." We're told sternly that
impersonating holidaymakers is grounds for "immediate expulsion from the
yoga retreat." Rumour has it that developers have tried to buy the
ashram's property, even offering a private island in exchange, but the
senior teachers refuse to move. Their guru, who died in 1993, blessed
this land, making it the abode of divine qualities such as peace, bliss
and wisdom. Not that you'd notice: in the busy channel between the
ashram and the mainland, yachts proliferate like seagulls and noisy
floatplanes take off and land in the water gaps between vessels. Each
day, many times, a powerboat roars up, cutting its engines just off the
windy campsite where I've pitched

my tent. On board, a man with a megaphone waves his arms at the tourists
who crowd the deck as he delivers his script. "This here is the Port of
Nassau. And this here is a yoga ash-ram," he says, separating the word
in two. "They don't eat meat, they don't drink, and they don't have
sex." There's a calculated pause before he yells: "I guess they ain't
our kinda people!" The tourists laugh, the engine revs, and, cocktails
aloft, they speed away. Every night the squawking cranes load and unload
shipping containers on the docklands, and music blares from the speakers
of the cruise ships in the port. Every night, as we sit down in the
temple and close our eyes to begin silent meditation at eight precisely,
the opening guitar riff of "Sweet Home Alabama" twangs across the bay.
In stark contrast to "the good life" all around us, at the yoga retreat,
we focus on simplicity, peace and interiority. Our routines are strict,
anchored in meditation and yoga. I'd heard that this month-long retreat
was intense, meant to purify students through the path of yoga so they
may reach god consciousness---whatever that means. A Sunday school
dropout, I prefer the practical website blurb: "The teacher training
course is a profound personal experience, designed to build a firm
foundation of inner discipline and provide the proficiency to teach
others." My fellow students come from many parts of the world and
include models, engineers, lawyers, financial wizards, aging hippies,
biodynamic farmers, psychiatrists, psychics, fitness instructors,
musicians and artists of all kinds. Early on, one of the senior teachers
tells us how our teacher-trainee retreat is going to unfold. The first
week, he says, we'll feel adrenaline and energy in the air. The second
week, people will get tired. And the third week, the food and postures
will have changed us, our egos will kick up to put on the brakes and
people will get upset. He doesn't say anything about the fourth week.
"The retreat can be really hard," he cautions. "But I advise you to
stick it out and see what happens." He emphasizes, "Yoga

philosophy asks you not to believe someone else, but to explore and
experience for yourself and then decide." We realize quickly that this
is not a relaxed place to do yoga and eat vegetarian food. It's yoga
boot camp. Wherever you are in the world, Sivananda yoga ashrams,
outposts of transplanted India, follow the same 5:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m.
timetable. The physical poses are just one element of the wider system
of classical yoga, which includes breathing practices, meditation,
chanting, philosophy, community service and more. Each morning and
evening, about 200 of us, including trainees, residents, teachers and
guests, descend on the temple for satsang, a lecture, followed by silent
meditation and chanting. We teachers in training are subjected to
attendance, which along with our uniforms---two yellow T-shirts and two
pairs of white cotton pants--- makes us feel like schoolchildren. We sit
on the hard temple floor for an hour and a half twice daily, the air
redolent of tiger balm. Also twice a day we have a two-hour yoga class:
Sanskrit chants followed by breath of fire and alternate-nostril
breathing, and then sun salutations and variations on 12 poses:
headstand, shoulderstand, plough, fish, seated forward bend, cobra,
locust, bow, spinal twist, crow, standing forward bend, triangle. At the
end we sink into savasana, the corpse pose, to relax and integrate the
effects of our practice. Twice a day, we gratefully eat, at 10 a.m. and
6 p.m. We also receive our "karma yoga" assignments. Doing an hour of
daily "selfless service" is meant to help students "eliminate egoistic
and selfish tendencies." A Greek man says his army service was much
easier. Alice, one of the Irishwomen I scrub pots with for karma yoga,
says she sometimes feels like she's in prison. "No, prison is nicer,"
she corrects herself, giving a massive soup tureen some elbow grease.
"You don't have to get up at 5:30, and you get coffee and three meals a
day."

As time passes, I notice how small things become magnified. I keep on
obsessing about my headaches, though it's likely a simple case of
caffeine withdrawal, and buy up all the chocolate kisses at the Health
Hut, administering them like aspirins. My mind grasps at dramas and
fights going inward. With the usual distractions gone, the "monkey mind"
tries to manufacture new ones---according to the "mind balks at
discipline" section of my training manual. Staying distracted is easier
than being quiet, a hedge against emptiness that prevents uncomfortable
questions such as "What am I doing here?" and "What is the meaning of
life?" Week three arrives, and, as our teacher predicted, the
counsellors, who sit at picnic tables at designated hours, get busy.
People cry and want to drop out. A British man says he won't be
controlled in this way and stomps off to pack his bag. From my
perspective, regular life requires far more conformity. Yoga and
meditation are about freedom and transformation, so I'm willing to stick
it out. It is true that we all struggle---mainly to get accustomed to
the exacting schedule, which leaves only about two hours a day free in
which to do homework, eat, shower and do laundry. The latter is becoming
a real flashpoint. There are only two machines, so it's a fight to keep
our two uniforms clean. As an added challenge, the shop, which sells
tokens and soap, isn't open at the same time as the laundry room. Then
the rain begins. It lasts three days. One man has a meltdown and insists
he must do his laundry. He's yelling, irrational. People feel sorry he's
distressed and two guests, both former yoga teacher trainees, put his
clothes in the dryer for him while we're in yoga class. After what feels
like countless sunrise-to-sunset replays of the same day in dreamlike
succession, the mysterious final week arrives, the one our teacher
didn't describe. To my surprise suddenly everything feels harmonious.
During final relaxations at the end of yoga classes, I get this cosmic
perspective, thinking how all my cells work together as a whole in

my body, though I don't consciously experience it that way. And about
the beauty of the night sky here, and how the Earth is a tiny speck amid
millions of worlds in the darkness. I also experience a deep, felt,
bodily sense of being part of a vast larger intelligence, a unity.
Thirty days is a fairly typical time span for a retreat---long enough to
let the experience change us and to begin to absorb what we're learning.
My classmates and I have lived a yogic lifestyle, experienced its
supportive routines, and we can feel the benefits in our own bodies.
We'd grumbled, even despaired, but most of us now say we wouldn't have
missed this for the world. On the last afternoon we sit in the temple,
listening to our orange-robed teacher's lecture. A moving tableau of
pleasure boats cruises behind him. Cross-legged on the hard floor on our
yoga mats, we fidget less than before. We all want the same thing, the
teacher says---some call it happiness; others, peace. We run after
worldly pleasures because we're seeking happiness, not the objects
themselves. These things are fleeting, which is why we are perpetually
looking for something more. As he talks, a massive cruise ship, ILLUSION
painted on the hull, coasts up, disappears behind him and coasts out the
other side. In a flash I realize this is actually an ideal place for a
yoga school. The ephemeral pleasures the swami is talking about,
Nassau's "high life," are constantly on display. Where else can you find
such a perfect vantage point for seeing the "ordinary" world in such
stark relief? Clearly, the swamis have a different vision of paradise
than their neighbours---and most people. It's not that worldly pleasures
are bad, they say, just that they're fleeting. Inner life is the honey,
they say, but everyone thinks it is the powerboat and bank balance, and
that there is no transcendental realm beyond the senses. This is maya,
illusion, our teacher tells us. Paradise Island ashram: the ultimate
nature-of-reality show.

Our other teachers take turns on the dais, their voices competing with
sirens wailing across the bay. What we've received on retreat are seeds,
they say: we may not understand at first but when we practise and gain
experience, they will sprout. They reiterate that we should never accept
anything we can prove to ourselves by our own experiments. Just follow
the ancient yogic map and see for yourself, they say. There's no need to
seek freedom in distant lands: it exists within, in our own bodies,
hearts, minds and spirits. Inner space offers realms as vast as external
geographies to explore. Next morning as I pack my bag and fold up my
tent, which I have no memory of having slept in because I have been so
exhausted every night, I feel markedly stronger. I'm also more centred,
and purposeful. As I step onto the tossing boat that will take me back
to Mermaid Dock, I wonder about my new life as a yoga teacher and the
after-effects of the retreat. What will linger like the mud stains on my
white yoga pants? What will fade like my tan? Years later my experiences
on this "north star" yoga retreat still guide my steps. Alas, the wine
never lost its appeal, but I did gain a little discipline, and clarity
and perspective about what's healthy, and what's important to me. I also
found that yoga connected me to an experience of harmony, no beliefs
required. That's why four years later, wanting to delve deeper into
yoga, I retreated again. This time I went to India, to the source. We
climb into the white Hindustan Ambassador and luxuriate on the sofalike
back seat. Instead of his usual pink sweatpants, Mani is wearing a
saffron lungi---a South Indian sarong. After our 36-hour trip to Cochin,
Marco and I are grateful to see our friend. Mani is a little brother of
a man: small, sweet, with a quick laugh. Dear to everyone. He's also one
of the

first yoga teachers I studied with in Toronto. Mani's charm, gentle
wisdom and devotion to the path of yoga have kept me in his orbit. We
speed away from the airport in a melee of other Ambassadors,
black-and-yellow autorickshaws and motorbikes that swerve around goats
and cows. A grape-purple bus thunders by, festooned with marigold
garlands and stickers of Jesus and Ganesha, the elephant-god. Destroyer
of obstacles. We're a long way from Mani's yoga studio in Toronto and
our home in Kingston---15,000 kilometres away. Yet I feel certain that
this three-week "yoga intensive" in his home village, where his family
lives, will deepen my understanding of stillness and help me to become a
better yoga teacher. After driving through a busy town---the closest one
to his village, Mani says---we enter the green countryside, where we
wind through palm groves and over small canals. Water buffalo, ropes
looped through their noses, watch us pass. Bumping onto a red-earth
track that cuts through emerald tapioca fields, we reach the village and
pull up at Mani's yoga school---at first glance, a graceful, two-storey
house ringed by tall coconut palms. We hoist our bags out of the trunk
and onto the wide verandah. Garbage is piled high. Inside, everything
looks dirty. "I wasn't expecting this," I think groggily. Mani shows us
to a room with a mattress on the floor. He hands us bedsheets and two
bottles of water. "You can rest here for now," he says. That's when I
notice the noise. Mani explains that unexpectedly a brickyard has opened
up next door. It sounds like they're sawing cement, and a radio blasts
vertigo-inducing music I've only ever heard in Bollywood movies. The
room spins now that we have finally stopped our perpetual motion. I dig
out the construction earplugs, hand a set to Marco. "Let's try to sleep.
Things will seem better when we wake up," I say.

I think back to our flight from Dubai to Cochin, a bright moon floating
in the dark blue sky. An auspicious sign; I had read that the moon rises
during meditation when one attains a deeper level of calm. Right now,
earplugs firmly intact, I can still hear sawing. "What kind of sign is
this?" I wonder, plummeting toward sleep. When we awaken a few hours
later we see white walls stained with monsoon rot, dust layering every
surface. Mouse shit is abundant. Mani says he tried to pay someone from
the village to clean up, but no one would. The place had been closed for
nine years. The retreat starts in four days. That evening, Mani leaves
to stay with his parents. Marco and I are alone in the silent ashram.
The long trip and searing heat leave us thirsty, but we have little
fresh water, and there's none here. Should we go out to buy water? And
where exactly would we go? A droning engine approaches around 9:00. An
autorickshaw lurches up out of the night, and two laughing women descend
with bag upon bag of purchases. I watch them from the upstairs balcony
with relief. Merry people! I rush down to meet them. "Come and see what
we bought," Maya calls as Dorothea waves us back upstairs. Their room
has a pretty paper star hanging on the door. The bed is decorated with a
pink mosquito net. I watch as they pull out cotton housedresses---"You
have to get some when we go to town"---and display new cotton bras with
freaky missile breasts. Marco and I gratefully accept a bottle of water.
Dorothea encourages us to move upstairs and away from the brickyard.
Upstairs, she says, "the noise sucks less." Our new room has a large
ceiling fan, a cement shelf built into the wall, a window with iron bars
and a heavy wooden bed frame. This room's been

cleaned, colourful straw mats adorn the black polished cement and
there's a bathroom. Perfect, we agree, as we drape our mosquito net over
the bed. Next morning, we help Maya and Dorothea clean up, while Mani
visits relatives. They had been travelling in France and Holland
together, and had just recently arrived themselves. I jump as hand-sized
black spiders scuttle out from behind whatever object we move. "That's
nothing," Maya says. "We found the mattresses all piled up in one room.
When we pulled one down, dozens of mice came leaping out." Marco and I
groan. We drag our bed outside, douse it with DEET, and leave it baking
in the sun. That afternoon, we take a break and ride the bus to town,
where local people stare and smile. We are celebrities, of sorts. An old
lady with no teeth comes up to Kevin, Maya's 22-year-old son. She's
laughing, motioning to his lungi. It's on backwards. Signs advertise
"unlimited free STDs." This, Maya explains, is where you go to use the
telephone---standard trunk dialling. We learn how to cross the street:
walk into traffic quickly and pray that vehicles swerve around you. The
sun's incessant beating, combined with car fumes, gives new meaning to
the word "exhaustion." Sitting on a curb to drink a reviving chai, I try
not to think about unpasteurized milk or hepatitis. The other customers
use this technique for drinking so their lips never touch the cup
---they pour the chai into their open mouths, straight from above. When
I try this, the liquid curdles down my front. In a futile attempt to
cool off, I buy some talcum powder. "A mist of hypnotic charm," the
label says. "Mind-blowing & alluring aroma. An unforgettable experience
enriched your feelings." Slowly, other yoga students arrive until we are
12 in all. Canadians. The group includes a carpenter, two university
professors, a public health nurse,

a student activist, a graphic designer and a fitness instructor.
Dorothea is a film editor, and Maya owns the gas station where Kevin
works. All but one person has studied with Mani in the past. Many of us
are also yoga teachers. The night before the retreat begins, spirits are
high. We chat on the balcony upstairs, looking out at the green
mountain. Mani notices that we've been taking turns reading a book we'd
found while cleaning up. It's by the guru of his teacher's guru. "Don't
look at what it says about women," Mani makes a face. "Too late, we've
read it," I say. "So sexist." "Even gurus mess up," he replies with a
shrug. I'm relieved when the retreat gets underway. At first, we all
focus on yoga and fall into the ashram rhythm of full, structured days,
beginning at 5:30. The faraway sound of drums and temple song carries,
otherworldly, on the wind. We gather for satsang from 6 to 7:30, and
then for yoga class from 8 to 10. Our yoga room is in an unfinished
building that will eventually serve as the kitchen for Mani's brother's
catering business. I don't envy those who didn't bring their own yoga
mats as they perform headstands on thin rush mats atop the lumpy
concrete floor. After class, we walk up to Mani's mother's house for
breakfast. Then it's a little time to wash clothes, nap or
read---despite the brickyard racket--- until the two o'clock lecture.
Then yoga again, from 4 to 6, followed by dinner at 6:30 at "Mum's" and
satsang from 8 until nearly 10:30. All day, one moment flows
effortlessly into the next. In the "never hurry, never stop" tempo of
our days, Marco and I have the most contact with the other upstairs
dwellers, especially Maya and Dorothea. They have a shelf stocked with
cookies from Holland, chocolates from Paris and Greens Plus supplement;
they also have every medical remedy known to humans. The women share
generously.

Maya even bought an electric burner so we could make coffee---and boil
drinking water. She creates a sense of community, and Marco and I are
grateful. At dawn, we sit on the upstairs balcony with our cups of
instant coffee, gazing wordlessly out at the mountain. Dorothea, who is
constantly saying lewd things and swearing in Dutch, keeps me laughing.
She bellows silly lines from Young Frankenstein---"It's
Fronkon-steen"---an old film we both love, and tells disgusting stories
about parasites and chilling tales of being sexually harassed in
Varanasi, where she spent three months learning to play the sitar. The
downstairs dwellers are another story. Two laid-back profs in their
fifties, a new student who left a course at another ashram to join ours,
two thirty-something women. Mani. Some have rooms. Others have pitched
tents beside the ashram. During our yoga classes with Mani, I'm
impressed once more by his skill in teaching asanas, the yoga postures,
and by the way he connects with students. Watching the advanced yogis
twisting into poses I've never seen anyone perform, I'm inspired to try
new ones myself. Being a student again, taking a break from yoga
teaching and my other work, I feel free. The village's eternal rhythms
induce peace. Tall coconut palms sway, fronds clacking in the wind.
Kingfishers flash electric blue in the treetops. Out back, a woman in a
sari leads three goats on strings. Other women in bright turbans work
the tapioca fields. White egrets freeload on the backs of grazing water
buffalo. Time slows. Once in a while, things feel so harmonious that I
think I could even live in a crazy little community like this one. Then
come the irritations. People struggle with wicked colds, insomnia and
constipation. The South Indian diet is unfamiliar. Although it's
vegetarian, it's high on rice and low on fresh vegetables. There is
little drinking water. There is 40-plus-degree heat. One day, Mani
announces he

will collect money to buy water. This does not go over well, given we
all paid a fair sum to attend the retreat. Eventually, he purchases an
electric burner like Maya's, so the people downstairs can boil water
too. The day we do kriyas, cleansing practices, there's little water, as
usual. For this exercise, we are going to drink eight cups of salt water
each and then throw up. The last time I had done this, years before, I'd
felt weak and dehydrated. I pass on the practice. I tell Marco about my
previous ashram experiences. Normally, day-today concerns about living
space and meals are well organized so that students can focus on
learning. Why is Mani so unprepared? There's litter everywhere. Out
front is a canal that's full of eels. People and water buffaloes bathe
in that canal---our water source, we realize. We've been taking showers
in that water, boiling it to drink. The public health nurse develops a
tic under her eye and insists we all accept bottles of hand sanitizer.
And the explosions. Over the sawing of the bricks, we hear repeated
explosions. Maya says they come from where the mountain used to be, out
back. The mountain is no longer visible; it's been mined away
completely. Mani is also disappearing---into one young woman's tent.
They giggle together, like kids. Someone asks me if they are lovers. I
dismiss this as a silly notion. In the mornings, Mani is often late to
lead the 6:00 silent meditation. When not feeling at one with
everything, I also notice how distracted I am getting. My mind wanders
ceaselessly during meditation. That floating moon I'd seen on the
flight, my bright omen of deepening calm? It's definitely not rising.
Instead, I'm caught in wave after wave of resentment toward Mani. I'm
troubled by the upstairs/downstairs rift, with the malcontents upstairs,
the keeners down.

Maya and Dorothea quit smoking. They start again. They try to hide it
from Maya's son, Kevin. Mani is smoking too. One day, he gives a
rambling lecture about the difference between yoga and Vedanta---which,
translated, means "the end of knowledge." I'd been looking forward to
this, one of the main topics to be covered. The ancient sage Adi
Sankara, an adept of the Kevala Advaita Vedanta path ---the pure,
non-dualistic school of Vedanta---was originally from South India; he
had summarized the essence of Vedantic teachings in three statements:
God only is real. The world is unreal. The individual is none other than
God. But as Mani talks, clarity does not come. I wonder, "Is it just me?
Or do all his lectures seem less focused than usual?" I'm more
interested in Kevin's efforts to find a loophole in the laws of karma.
He's started speaking with an Indian accent that makes him sound like
Peter Sellers in The Party. Maybe he has the right idea. During lectures
he stretches out on the ground, appears to be sleeping. Once in a while,
Mani asks, "Right, Kevin?" "Right," Kevin says. The questions I thought
I'd be engaging on retreat have been replaced by "What's biting me?"
"Where can I get some water?" "What the hell is going on?" Early the
first week, Swamiji arrives. Mani explains that they had studied
together for a decade in the ashram when they were in their twenties,
and that Swamiji will teach a few classes. His car, a black Ford with
blacked-out windows, looks like a yogi-pimpmobile. It features a fancy
"Om" symbol in orange on the windshield. The car seats, Kevin tells me,
are covered in fake fur.

Swamiji's classes run as follows: "Sit down. Sit straight," he orders.
He instructs us to question him in order to draw out his "deep
knowledge," but when someone does ask, he barks, "I already told you."
He rambles nonsensically in poor English or replies with a kingly air,
"You can't possibly understand." At one point he says, "Ask Mani about
yoga, and ask me about spiritual matters." He talks about using yoga to
gain powers to fight enemies, to walk on water. What about seeking
truth, or perhaps becoming a more peaceful, sane person? One night, he
tells us that the best way to sit in meditation is on the skin of a deer
or a tiger---but only one that died of natural causes. "Have you
experienced this?" Maya asks with a devilish grin. "Yes, I had a tiger
skin." "The animal died of natural causes?" "Yes, the tiger was
electrocuted when it touched an electric fence." We all exchange looks,
laugh out loud, when Maya says under her breath, "So how exactly is
electrocution 'natural causes'?" "I sat on the skin a few times and it
was powerful. I gave it away though," he adds. "I didn't want animal
rights people saying I was killing tigers or something." We tell Mani
that we don't want any more classes with "Ji"---the diminutive means
"little"---but Mani insists that he wants us to see "how yoga is taught
in India." Ji has been sleeping in his car, trying shamelessly to snare
some Western students of his own---us. Yoga teachers often emphasize how
the physical practice of yoga--- hatha yoga---is not as important as its
wider philosophical and spiritual foundations. "It's level one, please
go beyond and bring yoga into your life," Mani says. Here, for me at
least, the poses are by far the most fruitful part of the day.

Walking along the canal after class one morning, a yoga insight arises
out of the stillness. My steps feel heavy. I think of Mani, and the
words form: "This is your disappointment to bear. Let this experience be
what it is," I think. Accept it. For a little while, it's a relief to
let go. The upstairs/downstairs split continues to deepen: skeptics on
the top floor, acolytes on the bottom. Two young women from downstairs
chant nonstop, "Vande gurudev, jaya jaya gurudev." We mimic flinging
things at them from the balcony. The skeptics are giving up on the
retreat. Marco reads the Krishnamurti books he brought from home,
meditates on the roof and joins us only for yoga class and meals. Kevin
practises "naked yoga"---likely a few poses and a nap---up on the roof
or hangs out with his friends. Young men from the village sit with him
on the bridge in the evenings. I love Kevin's reports of these
conversations. "They say we are like animals with clothes," he tells me
one night, referring to Western sexual practices. His friends will have
arranged marriages, most likely when they're in their twenties. I skip
classes too. In the village, the tailors play chess outside, and I have
chai or buy beets, beans and lentil and jaggery balls for dinner so we
won't have to eat with the group. I take an autorickshaw into town to
buy water. I do anything to avoid Ji's Bhagavad Gita classes. He takes
this spiritual gem, this masterpiece of Sanskrit poetry and world
literature, and tortures each sutra. There are 700. Mani's lectures are
growing worse. Someone---a devotee from downstairs---comments on how his
discourses are spirals, how he adds a new piece of information each
time. I once thought that too, I realize. In addition to lectures, Mani
has now asked Ji to lead evening meditation. Mani complains that he
doesn't have enough time to teach and to see his

relatives, the retreat is a lot of work. The course is 15 days long,
minus three days off. Twelve days of teaching. Seven days into the
retreat Ji starts leading evening satsang. I give him a chance, but
after the fourth time, I stay in my room. One night, he comes upstairs
to round us up, calling, "Students, come." On day eight, Mani announces
that Ji will also take over afternoon yoga asana class. This means we'll
be with Ji from 2:30 onward, through the evening. And where will Mani
be? People complain, yet Mani gives Ji more and more to do. Mani
persists, says Ji is an Ayurvedic expert who knows all about plants, and
we should take advantage of his knowledge. Soon he is giving treatments,
going in and out of rooms and tents. Carol, a beautiful blond fitness
instructor, has a skin condition on her scalp. She gets an hour-long
treatment that involves a head massage. It also involves taking off her
top. I hear Dorothea, who has a similar problem but is less
conventionally pretty, say that her treatment lasted all of five
minutes, scalp only. Still, some sensible people from downstairs, men
and women, have been having treatments, and I too have a skin
condition---for which, I hear, tulsi leaves are excellent, so when Ji
asks, I agree to a treatment. I lie naked on my sarong on the floor as
he plasters green paste all over me. He tells me I can wash it off in
half an hour. I feel uncomfortable, but I tell myself that he's
okay---he's Mani's friend. They studied together for ten years, didn't
they? One morning during his lecture, Mani tells us that people either
love or hate India. I'm not sure where I fit just yet. I vacillate. Mani
says to try to drop our expectations, learn to relax. "India will give
you nothing if you come to see old buildings. You need to relax yourself
when frustration arises, and it's the best thing for you in those
moments."

He says if you learn to relax here it's a gift, as India can be crazy
and maddening. So far, what I'm finding crazy and maddening is Mani. Our
day off arrives. We are grateful, and go to visit a local waterfall,
returning that evening to good news. Ji, Mani says, has gone because of
our feedback. "I understand that you came to India to study with me,"
Mani says. In my journal I write, "I hope this improves the focus and
depth of the retreat." The next morning's scuttlebutt is that Ji's
departure is due to his behaviour with two female students during
"Ayurvedic" treatments. In one case, he had dropped his lungi during a
massage and started talking about tantric sex. Oh, and there was
something about a camera hidden under a cloth. And drugged tea. I feel
sick---as does everyone else, especially those of us who had skin
treatments with Ji. I tell Mani that I'm angry, trusted this man because
he was his friend. Why did Mani ignore us for over a week when we said
we didn't want Ji here? "Do you think I would invite someone here to
exploit you, my family, on purpose?" he retorts. He complains that we
should have told him if something was wrong because he has lots on his
mind, adds that Ji is gone and never coming back, all in a "so drop it"
tone of voice. Mani becomes more organized and focused. He does not
apologize, but says "the worst has happened." "Is there anything else
that needs to be said?" he asks. No one speaks: a few of us have
conversed with him already. And it's odd---the woman who says she was
molested, who says that Ji had tried to film and drug her, has shrugged
it off, saying, "It's his karma." Another woman Ji touched sexually
during a massage says she "handled it."

One night, near the end of our final week, I hear a rickshaw engine's
approaching buzz accompanied by wild laughter. Marco and I watch from
the upstairs balcony as three yoga students tumble out of the back seat,
drunk. They try to creep upstairs quietly, but when they see us, they
crack up. "We had 17 beers," Maya shouts, awakening everyone in the
house. I go to bed, my head spinning. In the past, Mani taught me
valuable, even life-changing lessons. In India, I'd hoped to move to the
next level of yoga knowledge, which he certainly possesses. How then did
I end up in a yoga cliché, replete with fake gurus bent on power and
sex, tiger skins and befuddled seekers---including me? Next morning. Six
o'clock meditation. Afterwards, Mani says, "This is not a holiday camp
but a serious retreat centre." His voice is stern. The miscreants are
still asleep upstairs. After all that's happened, his words sound
preposterous. Today, mercifully, is the last day of classes. Tomorrow's
have been cancelled because we've been invited to a Hindu wedding and
Amma, the famous "Hugging Saint" of Kerala, will be giving blessings
nearby. Marco and I will then leave for Cochin, and soon head back home.
In the afternoon, we write a test for our yoga intensive certificates.
It's a charade, but I'm in this to the end. At least it's the kind of
learning I can relate to. I decide to complete the test with the serious
intent that I brought to the retreat. That night, we gather on the roof
of the ashram, in a circle. The sky is dark, black, the stars in
unfamiliar southern constellations. There's a big full moon. We are all
strangely quiet, Mani comments. I stare at the tall coconut palm
silhouettes swaying in the breeze. Mani continues to talk about how he
thinks it was a good retreat. We all sit silent.

A huge lump rises in my throat. I'm sad about my friend and teacher. And
about my lost hope of learning, transformation. All retreats hold the
potential for a touch, a look, a realization that will change you
forever. When we came to study in India, yoga's birthplace, this is what
I both feared and hoped for. I look at that moon and learn what there is
to learn: that no matter what I expect, life will be what it is. Which
in this case, I decide, means the same old shit with an Indian flavour.
In the past, Mani's teachings had been exactly what I'd needed, and for
that I remain grateful. But now? I might get to a place of
understanding, grasp the secret curriculum, what I'm learning but don't
realize I'm learning. But at this moment, I am angry and disappointed.
The retreat officially over, we all lie back in the darkness and gaze at
the sky. I think about another yoga teacher of mine, someone back home.
Once she had advised: "Trust the path. Trust yourself. Trust the
teacher." Then she'd laughed. "No, forget about that last one." I ponder
this awhile. My mind turns to Wallace Stevens. Was he the poet who said
that the last illusion is disillusion? The moon glimmers, golden in the
dark. In Canada, our pioneers of yoga and meditation founded retreats
coast to coast in the late '50s and '60s, as in the U.S. and Europe. One
of our first yoga teachers was Swami Sivananda Radha, who established
the Yasodhara Ashram in 1963 on the shores of Kootenay Bay, British
Columbia. Swami Radha was also one of the first Westerners, and the
first women, to be initiated as a spiritual teacher by an Indian guru.
Born Sylvia Hellman in Berlin to a well-to-do family, she became a
writer, photographer and professional dancer, and immigrated to Montreal
after the Second World War. She had lost two husbands, the first killed
by

the gestapo for helping Jewish friends leave Germany, and the second to
a stroke. A vision of her guru appeared to her in meditation, and she
made a pilgrimage to the foothills of the Himalayas in 1955 when it was
unheard of for women to travel in India alone. She found Swami Sivananda
in Rishikesh on the banks of the Ganges and became his disciple. In
Radha: Diary of a Woman's Search, she chronicles her life-changing
retreat, which included mundane troubles from hungry bedbugs to
selfdoubt, as well as transcendent experiences. I was so refreshed to
find an early female exemplar of retreat that I read her book twice in
rapid succession, studying the rare historical photos with pleasure:
Sylvia meditating on the roof of her apartment in Montreal; Sylvia
sitting beside the Ganges with her guru, who is wearing a cross she
brought him as a gift; and the newly ordained Swami Radha, in the ornate
dress and jewellery of an Indian dancer, performing on the steps of the
temple. Swami Radha's descriptions of an Indian monastery, the dwelling
place of the spiritual teacher, were not what I'd imagined, and bear
little resemblance to her own orderly, graceful retreat centre. Ashrams,
she writes, are happy, busy places without a Western equivalent.
"Catholic monasteries all over the world are established for the purpose
of attaining God-consciousness by means of perfect discipline," she
observes. "This is carried out in the small details of everyday life. In
complete obedience, punctuality, cleanliness, tidiness, orderliness. On
such a foundation, in time, will be laid the spiritual discipline. Not
so here in the ashram . . . In fact there is no discipline at all." She
details her struggle to find a quiet place for meditation and study, the
constant noise, the need for "immunity to insects and vermin of all
kinds"---she puts the legs of her bed in tins of water to evade bugs,
except the ones that drop from above---and says the spiritual aspirant
has to "be able to drink water from the Ganges without shivering at the
things floating

in his cup." She wonders whether or not such "chaotic conditions are
more effective in producing saints than the methods of the West." Her
words are not a criticism. "Certain things exist only under certain
conditions, come alive only under certain conditions," she notes. She's
wary of her own preconceived ideas and talks about the need on retreat
to give ourselves time for development and understanding, about how our
senses are the organs of our perceptions and are limited, which is why
we indulge in oversimplifications---something any retreater will do well
to remember. Swami Radha's time in India ended when her guru asked her
to open an ashram in Canada and spread yoga in the West. "You teach them
only the practices---the way yoga is used by many religions. It is not
itself a religion, but a scientific way of life," he instructed. Swami
Sivananda also told her to live on alms; in India teachers charge no
fees, but students take care of their needs, giving financial
contributions and/or service. "When you go back to the West," he said,
"do not work anymore for money." She told him this was impossible. "When
you go back, just await developments," he insisted. "Everything will
fall into place." For more than 50 years now, Yasodhara has been holding
space for people to retreat in search of meaning---including me. The
dreamlike natural beauty of the setting, evident from the ferry boat as
I approached the ashram, brought to mind the guru's final directive to
his new disciple: "When you leave here, go where you have mountains in
the back, water in front, and trees all around," Sivananda told her.
"The mountains will give you strength and energy, the water will calm
the mind, and the trees will offer you protection." Many improbable
events later Swami Radha found this place, which she called Yasodhara,
the name of the wife of the Buddha, thus recognizing the feminine
principle in spiritual life. From here she shared her distinctive
synthesis of yogic teachings and Western psychology. Swami Radha died in

1995, but her presence is felt throughout the flourishing spiritual
community, and through her teachings, which stress that we each need to
cultivate our unique inner "Cathedral of Consciousness." Distracted,
thinking about Swami Radha's influence, I bumped into a tall, blue-eyed
swami in the hall on the way to dinner. She put a hand on my shoulder,
smiled, inhaled deeply and said, "Breathe." Meals at the ashram were
eaten in silence, which I loved. Silence except for a chant that played
over and over, hari om in a high voice: I found it eerie so I went to
sit outside. It turned out to be a recording of Swami Radha, and now I
often play it in my car. At Yasodhara my room was simple and
comfortable, and I felt I'd landed in a supportive, caring community.
The gardens of the radiant natural campus have flourished, and its
graceful buildings are full of art. Fittingly, images abound of
Saraswati, the patron deity of the ashram's lineage of teachings and a
symbol of art, music and wisdom. Swami Radha also had a literary bent:
she wrote more than a dozen books and founded Timeless Books, the
ashram's publishing house. The modern way of retreat is often
multi-faith and multi-purpose, where East and West have come together in
a weave of yoga and spirit, nature and environmentalism, art, and
personal and professional growth. Individual and group retreats are
offered, and there's a residential karma yoga program ---like a
work-study in integrating work and spiritual life. In exchange for
discounts or full room and board, depending on the program, people can
do groundskeeping, make meals, or otherwise support the community.
Around the same time as Swami Radha was planting the seeds of retreat
out west, another, sent by the same Indian teacher, arrived in Montreal.
Swami Vishnu-Devananda was charismatic, with a flair for publicity that
helped propel yoga, and the practice of retreat, forward from the
fringe. In quick succession he founded nine international Sivananda
ashrams, named for his teacher. In 1963, he opened the organization's
worldwide

headquarters retreat centre near Val-Morin, Quebec, followed by other
ashrams in India, the United States and Bahamas, where I did my teacher
training. Notably, Swami Vishnu was an early influence on the most
famous spiritual retreaters of their generation, the Beatles. He met the
Fab Four near the Bahamas ashram when they were shooting the 1965 film
Help! The band was approached by a "swami in orange robes," according to
the Beatles Anthology, who gave them each a signed copy of his Complete
Illustrated Book of Yoga. Ringo reportedly said he couldn't stand on his
legs, let alone his head, while George asked intelligent questions. The
Beatles' subsequent extended retreat with their guru, Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi in India, caused a media frenzy and brought yogic practice further
into Western awareness. Swami Vishnu's indefatigable teaching and his
high-profile peace missions helped popularize yoga and its study method,
the retreat. Dubbed "the Flying Swami" by the international press in the
'70s, he "bombarded" global trouble spots, tossing marigolds and peace
leaflets from a psychedelic Piper Apache, painted with stars and Om
symbols by millionaire artist Peter Max. The plane, now suspended in the
ashram's museum in Val-Morin, was nearly shot down over the Suez Canal,
where Swami Vishnu was chased by Israeli jets and then arrested by the
Egyptians. He enjoyed the Cairo prison because it was quiet and he could
meditate. When the authorities realized he wasn't a spy, that he was on
a peace mission, he went from prisoner to VIP. His captors fed him dates
and insisted on taking him out to his first nightclub---which he found
so noisy and smoky he asked to be returned to his cell. Swami Vishnu was
18 in 1945 when he moved in with his teacher, Swami Sivananda, an Indian
physician who had given up a lucrative practice to become a wandering
monk, and who later founded his first

ashram in 1932, the Divine Life Society in 1936 and his teaching
organization, the Yoga Vedanta Forest Academy, in 1948. Both still
operate in the Himalayan foothills on the bank of the Ganges near
Rishikesh, a city of swamis, saints, sadhus and holy people. Swami
Vishnu, adept at hatha yoga, was in put charge of that aspect of ashram
life---until his master handed him ten rupees and sent him to the West
with the encouragement "People are waiting." Even in cosmopolitan San
Francisco in the late '50s, when Swami Vishnu offered a yoga workshop at
Golden Gate Park people thought he was giving away free yogurt. A small
brown man in orange robes doing strange acrobatics, he must have seemed
extravagantly weird and even dangerous. Like rock and roll before the
1960s, yoga was either unknown or met with bewilderment and hostility.
Soon after the penniless young guru's serendipitous arrival in Canada in
1959, he visited members of the Massey family in Ottawa, founded the
Montreal Sivananda Yoga Vedanta Centre, still operating today, and
established headquarters at the 240-acre Quebec ashram. Swami Vishnu,
who died in 1993, and is yet another guru recently accused of sexual
misconduct, modified the ancient gurukula system, in which students
would live in a hermitage or monastery in the forest or mountains for
education, to better suit his Western students. He geared his
residential yoga retreats toward laypeople rather than monastics. And he
was among the first---likely the very first---to design retreat programs
to train yoga teachers in the West. Intriguingly, counter to the legacy
of the first teachers, Swami Vishnu emphasized the physical poses of
yoga and then rode the wave of a huge Western cultural shift---the
emergence of the mind-body movement. As in India, his yoga students
would retreat to ashrams to live, work and study with the senior
teachers who resided there, though for shorter periods of time, while
maintaining work and family life.

Among the first Westerners to become a Buddhist monk, Namgyal Rinpoche
founded our oldest meditation retreat, the Dharma Centre of Canada (DCC)
near Kinmount, Ontario, in 1966. The first silent retreat I ever
attended, at age 20-something, was at the DCC, a 400-acre sanctuary of
forest, meadows, beaver ponds and creeks, the site of a former mink
farm. It was a taste of something I hadn't known was missing from my
life ---solitude, silence, clarity, breathing space. My love for
interludes of time apart, and my pattern of retreating and returning to
everyday life has become more and more established ever since.
Rinpoche---an honorific given to important teachers that means "precious
jewel"---was born Leslie George Dawson, and he bridged traditional
methods of Buddhism and modern Western thought. The child of an Irish
policeman and a Scottish nurse, he grew up in Toronto's Beaches,
attended Jarvis Baptist Seminary and went on to study philosophy and
psychology at university in Michigan. He met his teacher while living in
London, England, and travelled east, where he was trained and ordained
as the Venerable Ananda Bodhi in 1958. During his wandering monk period
that followed, he taught in Britain and founded several meditation
retreats, including what became the famous Kagyu Samye Ling in
Dumfriesshire, still going strong in southern Scotland. As Ananda Bodhi,
he travelled the world teaching, often accompanied by his students on
ocean-going cargo freighters for months at time. He was provocative,
jolting them out of their habits and patterns, and many considered
swimming to shore to escape him. He returned to Canada in 1966 with a
group of students and founded the DCC. In 1971 he reordained in the
Tibetan Buddhist tradition and was thereafter known as Karma Tenzin
Dorje Namgyal Rinpoche. His discourses were captivating and often
funny---he was a lively storyteller with a melodious voice---but always
he had a serious point, about

impermanence, or how to "awaken." He often taught and guided DCC
retreats until his death in 2003. Decades ago the DCC was an early
manifestation of the kind of multidisciplinary retreats modern people
favour today. Rinpoche's interests were vast, incorporating arts and
science as ways to enlightenment and paying attention to the planet and
its flora and fauna. His was a universalist approach to the dharma: the
DCC has always hosted other teachers of various spiritual paths and
traditions, along with scientists, artists and healers. While early yoga
and meditation teachers adapted retreats to suit laypeople, today, in a
fascinating reversal, the full monastic path is making a comeback in the
West---not Christian, but Buddhist, and led by places like Cape Breton's
Gampo Abbey. One of the first Tibetan monasteries for Westerners in
North America, the abbey is housed in white, red-roofed buildings that
perch dramatically on 200-foot-high cliffs above the St. Lawrence. I
know this from watching La Trappe, a short documentary about the
monastics and unlikely allies who also see life as a cycle: the redrobed
monks and nuns buy the last catch of lobsters and head out with local
fishers to release the creatures back into the sea. Buddhist nun and
bestselling author Pema Chödrön was long the abbey's resident teacher
and director---she stepped down in early 2020 after the organization
decided that a disgraced teacher, who had left amid allegations of
sexual abuse, would be reinstated. Chödrön first took over leadership of
the abbey in 1984, three years after she became the first North American
woman to be fully ordained as a nun in the Tibetan tradition. She
established the monastery for Western monks and nuns on the instruction
of her teacher. In one of life's ironies, Chödrön, a celibate nun, has
been at once head of Gampo Abbey, which maintains strict, traditional
monastic precepts, and the representative of the lineage of the Tibetan
meditation master Chögyam Trungpa, as legendary for his wildness---he
coined the

phrase "crazy wisdom," like divine madness---as for his spiritual
realization. Trungpa was a major figure in the dissemination of the
Buddhist retreat in the West from the '60s on and founded about 150
meditation centres worldwide, including Scotland's Kagyu Samye Ling
Monastery, where celebrities like David Bowie were among early students.
"I was within a month of having my head shaved, taking my vows, and
becoming a monk," Bowie said about that period of his life, but the
monks advised him to remain a musician because it was how he could most
benefit the world. Trungpa was unorthodox and controversial. After
taking up Western habits like drinking he crashed his sports car into a
joke shop window and was partially paralyzed. Perhaps he saw it as a
karmic sign: when he moved to the United States, he abandoned his robes
for Western suits, saying he wanted to get rid of the trappings of
spiritual materialism, drank more, married a 16-year-old, and slept with
many students. He also taught meditation that was accessible to people
of any, or no, religion, and founded the Naropa Institute, "a crossroads
where the intellectual-critical mind of the West and the way of
experience and meditation of the East could meet head-on." Allen
Ginsberg was one illustrious student; Joni Mitchell wrote the 1976 song
"Refuge of the Roads" as a tribute to Trungpa, the "friend of spirit"
who helped her snap out of a cocaine addiction. Trungpa first visited
Nova Scotia in 1977; in 1983 he established Gampo Abbey in Cape Breton.
He shocked his unflappable American followers in 1986 by announcing he
had found the earthly location of the mythical, enlightened society of
Tibetan legend, Kingdom of Shambhala. "He said, 'We're all moving to
Nova Scotia,'" recalls Jeremy Hayward, a senior Buddhist teacher. "We
thought it was some kind of joke." Trungpa moved international
headquarters from the United States to Halifax and brought many
disciples with him, then the next year, died there of alcohol-

related causes at age 48. Today the community remains one of Shambhala
International's largest. As a symbol of the dharma's rootedness in Nova
Scotia, Trungpa's relics are housed in a stupa at Gampo Abbey. Residents
include monks and nuns who have taken life ordination, or temporary
ordination, and laypeople. Laypeople can try out abbey life for a week
or two on retreat, or do solitary retreats in cabins. Unlike many places
these days, they are specifically not intended for creating space for
writing, yoga, rest and renewal, but only to study and practise
meditation. People can also join practise intensives, or the yearly
winter retreat for experienced meditators--- the "rainy season" retreat
that goes back to time of Buddha, when monks wandered until the weather
got wet, then settled together to retreat and meditate. Or, after
residing at the Abbey for at least three months, initiates can
experience monasticism without a lifetime commitment through temporary
ordination, which lasts nine months. The monastics train in disciplines
and rituals of a monastic life; after two years, they can ask to become
life monastics, which takes another three years. Increasingly, women are
retreating and joining the monastic ranks. Leslie Peters, one of the
abbey's newer monastics, took her vows in 2018. Now called Tsöndru
Khyung Tso, her head shaven and wearing robes, she follows the strict
schedule of her Buddhist practice. From 5:30 a.m. to lights out, the day
is scheduled: chanting, work, meditation, silent time, study, meals.
This simplicity, she says, brings freedom. "Even if it's temporary," she
says, "you go on retreat so that you can have some time to not have to
take care of everything. I visited Toronto recently and I was staying
with my friends and everyone is so busy. You've got your family, work,
you've got to cook, a lot to do just to live in Toronto . . . I feel so
much for people, there's no time to ever relax, to really stop."

To retreat, she adds, for any length of time, is a way to actively
choose to live differently. As with the lives of Christian hermits and
monks who pray for sinners, retreat is not about shutting yourself away
from society. The idea is to develop your spiritual path, lead a more
useful life, help create a more positive society and help all sentient
beings. "We practise every day, not just for ourselves, but for
everyone." That few of us will go on the long-term retreats of advanced
meditators or become monastics isn't the point, says Tenzin Palmo, a
British Buddhist nun who spent 12 years meditating in a Himalayan cave.
"There are many approaches, many ways. What is unrealistic, however, is
to become a mother or a businesswoman and at the same time expect to be
able to do the same kind of practices designed for hermits . . . Whether
one is a monk, a nun, a hermit or a businessman or -woman, at one level
it's irrelevant. The practice of being in the moment, of opening one's
heart, can be done wherever we are . . . It's just that it's easier to
do in a conducive environment away from external and internal
distractions," she explains. Even for short periods, Palmo says, to
retreat is valuable: there is more to life than relationships and work.
"I think it would be very helpful for many people to have some period of
silence and isolation to look within and find out who they really are,
when they're not so busy playing roles---being the mother, wife,
husband, career person, everybody's best friend, or whatever façade we
put up to the world as our identity. It's very good to have an
opportunity to be alone with oneself and see who one really is behind
all the masks." Palmo, the daughter of a fishmonger in London, England,
became the second Westerner ordained as a Tibetan nun. She was inspired
to take to a cave by Milarepa, Tibet's beloved spiritual hero, who
disappeared into the Mountain of Solitude and lived for years on
nettles, which made his skin turn green. Leaving comfort behind she
meditated for years in a cave at

13,000-plus feet. Having prepared for this hard and lonely path for over
six years first. She did intensive practices at a remote monastery in
the Himalayas---a prerequisite before her teacher agreed she could
retreat further up to her mountain cave. With her feat she overturned
centuries of tradition. In her tiny cave Palmo faced blizzards and
subzero cold, snowbound for about eight months of the year on the
exposed mountain, threatened by wild animals, such as wolves, and the
vagaries of her own mind. She sat up in her traditional meditation box,
two feet by six inches square, for 12 hours a day meditating. She went
in at age 33, seeking the secrets of the inner world and deeper levels
of consciousness, and came out at 45. Asked whether a cave is an
anachronism, she says no, not so long as anyone is seeking spiritual
understanding. "The advantage of going to a cave is that it gives you
time and space to be able to concentrate totally. The practices are
complicated \[and\] require much time and isolation," she says. Using a
culinary metaphor, she adds, "Going into retreat gives the opportunity
for the food to cook. You have to put all the ingredients into a pot and
stew it up. And you have to have constant heat. If you keep turning the
heat on and off it is never going to be done. Retreat is like living in
a pressure cooker. Everything gets cooked much quicker." But why do
this, live in terrible austerity in a cave, often snowed in, meditating
for years alone? "In this age of darkness with its greed, violence and
ignorance it's important there are some areas of light in the gloom,
something to balance out all the heaviness and darkness. To my mind the
contemplatives and the solitary meditators are like lighthouses beaming
out love and compassion to the world. Because their beams are focused
they are very powerful." The idea that there's wisdom in the cave that
can help others flies in the face of convention, which deems a retreat
like this lofty, impractical and

useless in times when the world is in crisis. But I like the idea of
meditators using their minds as we might a magnifying glass to start a
fire---it's not that the sun's rays are stronger than usual, just more
focused. Millions attending yoga and meditation retreats are discovering
that the cave is not empty, but where an inner flame resides. "The
inner---what is it?" writes Rilke, "if not intensified sky, hurled
through with birds and deep/with the winds of homecoming."

In Conclusion Of Hermitages of the Heart

White Rooms, Unified Hearts and Empty Fields Going nowhere . . . isn't
about turning your back on the world; it's about stepping away now and
then so that you can see the world more clearly and love it more deeply.
---Leonard Cohen

In the long Western lineage of hermits, monks, naturalists, artists,
thinkers, yogis, meditators and assorted rebels, there's a Canadian
exemplar who

spoke with great eloquence, and often humour, about the role of retreat
in a life. Leonard Cohen always kept a space apart for spirit, nature,
art and beauty. As both an artist and a former Zen monk---when he says
"going nowhere" above, he means a meditation retreat---Cohen was drawn
to mountains, both inner and outer. The Edge, guitarist for the band U2,
compared Cohen once to Moses, calling him the man "who has come down
from the mountaintop with the tablets of stone having been up there and
talking to the angels." I always feel drawn to people like Cohen, who
are both spiritual and worldly. His music has a timeless, devotional
quality that's not modern, yet he was modern. His intimate, poetic songs
draw on ancient wisdom, yet emanate from an international star in an
Armani suit, a man who tasted all the world's pleasures yet longed for
meaning. Retreat was vital to Cohen's method. While the geographies
changed, his chosen architecture of retreat was constant. "Once his life
becomes too cluttered, he moves into an empty room," observed biographer
Ira B. Nadel in Various Positions. "He removes the debris and starts
over again, seeking a clean slate that the bohemian life of Montreal,
the remote island of Hydra, and the isolated forest of Mt. Baldy have
variously given him." Add to this hotels and rooms in Cohen's own homes,
which interviewer after interviewer describe along the same lines:
"Leonard's houses in Montreal and L.A. were exquisitely spare: white
rooms, with no clutter of books, CDs or magazines, though there was a
well-worn edition of Psalms and a rhyming dictionary beside his computer
in L.A.," a reporter noted in Maclean's. Cohen was 26 when he found his
formative retreat, on the island of Hydra in Greece. With a "huge
terrace with a view of a dramatic mountain and shining white houses," as
he wrote in a letter to his mother in 1960, its rooms were "cool with
deep windows set in thick walls. I suppose it's about

200 years old and many generations of sea-men must have lived here."
Cohen bought the rundown three-storey house, which had no plumbing or
electricity, with a \$1,500 bequest from his grandmother. Gardenia scent
wafted through his room, the green Olivetti Lettera he'd bought in
London for £40 sat on the desk and the blue Aegean Sea sparkled just
down the hill. In this artistically fruitful space, supported by
Marianne Ilhen, Cohen paid deep attention to his work, writing two
novels, three books of poetry and starting work on an album---notably
titled Songs from a Room, with its famous track inspired by a bird on
the wire that carried phone service to the island. The wire also brought
a realization: "civilization had caught up with me and I wasn't going to
be able to escape after all," Cohen told Paul Zollo in the book
Songwriters on Songwriting. "I wasn't going to be able to live this
11th-century life that I thought I had found for myself." Today,
pilgrims go to Cohen's Hydra retreat, lighting candles and leaving
flowers on the doorstep of this place of powerful inspiration. An adept
at finding space away from the relentless spotlight, Cohen made retreat
a lifelong practice. He was a master of doing so while still keeping his
all-consuming "day job," finding interstices to step back. Fascinated by
hotel rooms, Cohen withdrew to many, including New York's infamous
Chelsea; made a video called I Am a Hotel; and was the subject of the
1965 documentary Ladies and Gentlemen . . . Mr. Leonard Cohen, filmed in
a seedy hotel room in urban Montreal, his hometown. "You always have a
feeling in a hotel room that you're on the lam and this is one of the
safe moments in the escape," he says as he gets out of bed. "You know
that you have found a little place in the grass, and the hounds are
going to go by for three more hours. You're going to have a drink, light
a cigarette and take a long time shaving." In a later interview Cohen
honed

his remark, adding, "It's a kind of a refuge, a sanctuary, a sanctuary
of a temporary kind and therefore all the more delicious." Cohen began
to retreat in a new way in the 1970s---to the Mount Baldy Zen Center,
6,250 feet above sea level in the high desert of the San Gabriel
Mountains near Los Angeles. Initially he went to the zendo fleeing
domestic strife and needing "somewhere to cool out"---which is what he
found, quite literally. "They had a bunch of these American kids walking
around in the snow at 3 a.m. in sandals," Cohen recalls. Snow blew over
their food in dining hall. The discipline of the strict form of Rinzai
Zen was too severe, and, like many first-time retreaters of all kinds,
he ran away. "But there was something about Roshi that I remembered. So
several months later I came back again and then I began to study with
him and practise with him seriously about 30 years ago," Cohen says in
the 2005 documentary I'm Your Man. "That is spending several months of
the year with him all the time." It's striking how many people are
inspired to retreat after meeting a teacher with admirable qualities
they want to emulate. Whenever Cohen spoke of his beloved teacher, his
face softened and his eyes shined: their long relationship was one of
the most enduring of his life. Kyozan Joshu Sasaki Roshi, the
monastery's founder, was a Japanese monk who became one of the most
influential Zen Buddhist teachers in the United States, known for his
rigorous brand of Zen (and later, after his death in 2014, as a "tainted
Zen master," as the New York Times wrote, accused of sexual misconduct
with students). "It began," Cohen said of his meditation retreats, "with
a need for selfreform." Another time he said of Mount Baldy, "When I go
there, it's like scraping off the rust." In the late 1980s Cohen wrote
the song "Everybody Knows" about the corrupt, impossible state of the
world, signalling his state of mind. By 1993 despair had turned to
anguish. On the heels of a difficult

tour---Cohen was drinking four bottles of wine to make his knees stop
knocking on stage and his personal life was a wreck---he went up the
mountain. He said later that he'd felt at an impasse, that a spiritual
retreat was the only way forward. Cohen spent the next six years paying
radical attention to his inner life. He became an ascetic Zen monk and
Roshi's attendant---his cook, chauffeur and drinking buddy. It was
protocol that he be ordained, though he said he wasn't a Buddhist.
Becoming a monk was "part of the uniform"---Cohen said that had Roshi,
then in his eighties, been a physicist in Heidelberg, he'd have learned
German and moved there. "I wasn't looking for a religion," he clarifies.
"I already had a perfectly good one \[his Jewish faith\]. And I
certainly wasn't looking for a new series of rituals. But I had a great
sense of disorder in my life, of chaos and depression, of distress. And
I had no idea where this came from. The prevailing psychoanalytic
explanations of the time didn't seem to address the things I felt. Then
I bumped into someone who seemed to be at ease with himself and at ease
with others," he told the Independent. Like the other monks, Cohen
shaved his head, donned black robes, sat at a long wooden table, drank
water from small bowl and marched in line. He became Jikhan, which
translates as the silence between two thoughts, which tells me his old
teacher had a sense of humour. He lived in a small cabin. Aside from his
cot, he had his synthesizer and a radio---even on the mountain his
worldly ties weren't completely cut---and he worked on music and a
collection of poems and sketches. Mostly he devoted himself to the study
of Zen Buddhism, which he calls a "study of the self---as it arises and
how the self disappears." He joined a sect that, not so humbly for
humble monks, consider themselves the Marines of the spiritual world due
to their intense physical practices and dislike for conceptual thinking.

Far from offering the seclusion one might imagine, a retreat at the
zendo is designed to eliminate the desire for privacy. Cohen quotes a
saying: "Like pebbles in a bag, the monks polish one another." Depending
on your duties, days on retreat might begin at 2:30 in the morning and
go until midnight, most of the time in silence. Cohen was expected to
comply with daily routines, but was given dispensation to go down the
mountain sometimes to take care of his affairs and see his kids. Though
he liked communal life and living simply in a little shack, after six
years, in 1999, he left the zendo, calling his time as a monk a "phase
of my training." Ever ironic, he once said that perhaps if he'd waited
longer he could have spared himself the trouble of all that meditation,
because anxiety naturally diminishes with age. Another time, asked by
one of his biographers what his retreat with Roshi and Rinzai Zen
contributed to his work and life, Cohen was unequivocal: "Survival." One
week after he went down the mountain Cohen got on a plane to Mumbai,
where he spent a year with Ramesh Balsekar, a Hindu mentor whose books
he'd read, to learn about Advaita Vedanta, or nondualism. There he lived
in a small, unadorned hotel room "with a desk and a narrow bed pushed
against the wall. A wood-framed air-conditioner and mirror took up much
of the opposite wall. On the desk lay a cassette recorder and tapes of
Indian music," his friend told BBC. For reasons Cohen said are
"impossible to penetrate," his lifelong depression lifted. His old
teacher and his new teacher had similar ideas, Cohen's biographer notes:
"There was a great deal of consistency in their doctrines: overcoming
the ego, nonattachment, universal consciousness, tendrel, the
interrelatedness of all things." Spiritually transformed by his retreat
years, he emerged to confront a new challenge: his material life was in
a shambles after his trusted manager embezzled him out of more than \$5
million. Broke and in a blaze of

creativity, and expressing no bitterness, at age 73 Cohen made his
latecareer comeback, going on the road for five years starting in 2008.
The shows---I attended one in Kingston, as much communion as
concert---were routinely deemed the best performances reviewers had ever
seen. "Is this cabaret or prayer-hall, you may wonder," wrote Pico Iyer
in his astute program notes. I had the exhilarating feeling of
witnessing an artist fulfilling himself, hat off, hand over his
heart---and of being in a wry, spiritual presence. Afterwards I kept
wondering why Cohen had called his band the Unified Heart Touring
Company. So one early summer day I went to investigate, visiting his
archive in the University of Toronto's Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library.
Inside the 11 boxes I found, among other things, clippings from the
Montreal Gazette and the New Yorker, a note from Nana Mouskouri, the
proofs of Death of a Lady's Man with an ink sketch and fan event
materials with a symbol, like a Star of David but with two interlocking
hearts. Cohen had designed the symbol for an order of spiritual chivalry
he'd created, I learned from a Globe and Mail clipping. He called it the
Order of the Unified Heart. This made me smile---whimsical, unexpected.
He gave out rings and pins for this "dream of an order," as he called it
when speaking to the reporter. "There is no organization. There's no
hierarchy," he'd explained. "There's just a pin for people of a very
broadly designated similar intent." Asked about his intent he replied,
"To just make things better on a very personal level. You're just not
scattered all over the place. There is a tiny moment when you might
gather around some decent intention." Asked about his own intentions, he
replied slyly that he couldn't think of any, though there must be a
couple. The reporter suggested beauty, and he responded, "Beauty,
certainly."

I packed up the archive boxes and handed them back to the librarian,
disappointed not to have discovered anything conclusive. I had been
struck, however, by Cohen's typically postmodern, pragmatic approach to
spirituality, of taking whatever interested him from different sources.
Religion and spirit had always played a role in Cohen's life: he was
Jewish, grew up in Montreal, with its Catholic sensibility, called Jesus
"a beautiful guy," dedicated a book to Kahnawà:ke's Indigenous saint,
Kateri Tekakwitha---a lover of the divine feminine, he had a shrine to
her in his kitchen---and embraced Eastern ideas. "Anything, Roman
Catholicism, Buddhism, LSD, I'm for anything that works," Cohen once
remarked. Of the word God he said, "People often have difficult
reactions, but it's easier to say 'God' than 'Some un-nameable
mysterious power that motivates all living things.'" He also believed
everyone has a spiritual side, whether they knew or admitted it or not.
Walking down Harbord Street, the trees newly in leaf and birds singing,
it was suddenly obvious: Cohen's retreats, practised over a lifetime,
had accorded him a unified heart. Hedonist or hermit, poet or musician,
worldly lover or ascetic, philosopher or comedian, Jewish rabbi's
grandson or Zen monk---he integrated the contradictions. Once, when told
by an interviewer that Dylan had compared his songs to prayers, and that
works like "Hallelujah" convey a sense of sanctity and holiness in a
world that seems to value neither, Cohen gave a reply that fascinates
me---and seems to apply to our retreats. "I understand that they forgot
how to build the arch for several hundred years," he told Paul Zollo, as
recorded in Songwriters on Songwriting. "Masons forgot how to do certain
kinds of arches, it was lost. So it is in our time that certain
spiritual mechanisms that were very useful have been abandoned and
forgot \[sic\]. Redemption, repentance, resurrection. All those ideas
are thrown out with

the bathwater. People became suspicious of religion plus all these
redemptive mechanisms." Like building arches after the fall of Rome and
other "useful" religious mechanisms, the idea of retreat---of sacred
space---was forgotten for a time, and we are reinventing it for our
anxious, chaotic world. Over his life Cohen stepped back with increasing
regularity into retreats that helped him hold the tension of being a
worldly person, an artistic person and a spiritual one, "part wolf and
part angel" as his friend Anjelica Huston called him. "I think there's
an appetite for seriousness," Cohen told Huston in an article published
in Interview magazine in 1995. Though speaking 25 years ago, his words
sound more relevant than ever. "Seriousness is voluptuous, and very few
people have allowed themselves the luxury of it. Seriousness is not
Calvinistic, it's not a renunciation, it's the very opposite of that.
Seriousness is the deepest pleasure we have. But now I see people
allowing their lives to diminish, to become shallow, so they can't enjoy
the deep wells of experience." Denying ourselves this solemnity, he
added in the same interview, has consequences. "Maybe it's always been
this way, when the heart tends to shut down. If only the heart shut down
and there were no repercussions, it would be OK, but when the heart
shuts down, the whole system goes into a kind of despair that is
intolerable." Despair, he says, is why he chose the "radical solution"
of retreating to the zendo---which he stresses is not for everyone. "You
only address the problem of soul if you feel that you're losing it," he
told NPR's Fresh Air in an interview about Book of Longing, the poems he
wrote on Mount Baldy. For Cohen, the opposite of despair was
clarity---why he says in our "very shabby moment," making space for
what's sacred and spiritual helps. "We're in the midst of a Flood of
biblical proportions," he told writer Pico Iyer in 2004 in Sun After
Dark: Flights into the Foreign, in prophetic mode

once again. "It's both exterior and interior. At this point it's more
devastating on the interior level, but it's leaking into the real world.
I see everybody holding on in their individual way to an orange crate,
to a piece of wood, and we're passing each other in this swollen river
that has pretty well taken down all the landmarks, and pretty well
overturned everything we've got." I admire Cohen's heroic devotion to
his sacred precinct---even more steadfast in the face of deluge and
death. To him, stepping back to pay attention to spirit, art, truth and
beauty was of vital importance, a powerful and positive force against
darkness. Cohen's art and spiritual practice came together in what his
son, Adam, called "a monastic discipline." In the modest home that he
shared with his daughter, Lorca, and her dogs in Los Angeles, not far
from Adam, he got up early to work in his "tower of song"---a sparsely
furnished white room like the one on Hydra, a simple retreat not unlike
a monk's cell. There he'd enter the wise silence and write in complete
solitude, his lifelong sacred vocation until the day he died. In his
last days he worked to finish his book of poetry, The Flame, published
posthumously. His work, said his son, "was a mandate from God." Among
the final lines of the final song on Cohen's album that was released
weeks before he died, he touches on the ultimate gift of retreat in a
life---transformation. In "Treaty," we hear Cohen sing in his dolorous,
wry voice of a shift from "broken" to "borderline." Cohen's retreat
experiences, and the others within these pages, are meant to gesture
toward the ways time apart can help us gain wisdom, amplify the good and
resist the intolerable---"a way to act human in these years the
stars/look past," as William Stafford writes. Paying passionate
attention to what is most meaningful to us, to what we have reverence
for, is urgent in a desacralized world. Retreat is like the

mote of dust the raindrop forms around, or Cohen's "decent intention."
In difficult times especially, I believe it's one of the best things we
can do. After all, refusing easy despair, and seeking meaning in the
face of our certain deaths, is part of what makes humans matter. Our
places of retreat---holy rivers, mountains and deserts, hermitages,
monasteries, pilgrim's paths, cabins in the woods, arts temples,
ashrams, garden sheds, simple white rooms and empty spaces---mark divine
territory, both outer and inner. They stand today as among our least
assailable sanctuaries for independent thinking, solitude, silence,
spirit, creativity and for connection with self, others and the planet.
We step over the threshold and encounter the unmediated and the real. We
come to know ourselves, and being fully present, paradoxically, we can
return and respond fully to the world in all its beauty and darkness. A
retreat is a place, but it is also an act of independence. A resolute
effort of will is required. While it's easier to go with the powerful
tide of the mainstream, which requires no thought or cultivation, we can
choose to withdraw our attention, step back. Like prayer, piano playing,
tennis, yoga and meditation, retreat is a practice---the effort you put
in shapes what you get out of it. The practice of retreat attunes you to
the extraordinary, to the sacramental world. When I began writing this
book I suspected my retreats made me suspect. Now I realize I'm part of
a long lineage, a network like mycelium, under the ground, centuries
old. Of dissidents, who, over the ages, have accorded with Walt Whitman
to "resist much, obey little" when it comes to claiming time apart. I
feel confident now that there will always be people who seek a slower,
gentler, more contemplative life, and that retreat is more valuable as a
method than ever. Most of us, even in this accelerated age, can devise
ways to step away temporarily. Just look to the edges. The margins hold
retreat spaces, where

we can connect to the total attention of the hermit, to the gentleness
and simplicity of the monk, to the pilgrim's sacred ground, to the
naturalist's reverence, to the artist's and thinker's passion for truth
and beauty, to the embodied inner journey of the yogi and meditator.
Retreat is not a flight, but a way of real engagement. Often it's not a
comfortable place to be. When we give serious attention to the fullness
and possibility that exists in the inner world, we bump into our own
contradictions and chaos, which is reflected in the outer world. Retreat
is a gentle call to a certain kind of inaction, one that encourages us
to contact our clearest selves and poses the question, What constitutes
action anyway? As for the ancient split---fulfillment in contemplative
or active life, the solitary or the social---the lessons of this book
confirm for me that these supposed opposites are actually indivisible
parts of a whole. There can be no words or music without
silence---simply noise. A candle can flicker only within darkness. To
retreat is to unify and transform: we can reconfigure ourselves, and the
world, and find within us an enduring kind of liberation. "Freedom is a
pretty strange thing," artist Ai Weiwei said. "Once you've experienced
it, it remains in your heart and no one can take it away." An image has
stayed with me throughout the writing of this book. It's a fallow field.
The brown earth slopes up to nine trees on the horizon and open sky
beyond. Most days during my spring writing retreat in Scotland I walked
a narrow footpath that led between the field and its wild margin, where
old apple trees with foraging bees in the white blossoms grew amid a
tangle of thistles, nettles and wild garlic. It was also the way to the
bus stop for the double-decker to Edinburgh, where I often waited,
studying the empty field. I made many notes and took photos.

The image of the field has been drifting in and out of my consciousness
ever since. With strange frequency, pages of "field notes" resurface in
the chaos of my study, like a reminder. Right now the image is in my
mind's eye, tugging insistently at my attention as I consider my
conclusions. What is it about this field that feels significant? It's
something about the receptive, open space, the blank slate of earth
sweeping up to the faraway line of old trees. And how things slowly
appeared: the yellow flowers that shot out of the horse dung along the
path's edge, the spindly green shoots that pushed up from the soil. The
field wasn't fallow. Over the weeks I saw it fill with the unexpected,
turn a luxuriant green and begin to ripple in the wind. I watched with
amazement as the invisible transformed the world. The field, it strikes
me now, like retreat, is ground where we can grow invisibly---"like corn
in the night," as Thoreau said. Quantum fields, scientists tell us
today, are the stuff everything is made of. To the best of our ability
to know, the universe is actually made from nothing but fields, with no
smaller parts---which dramatically changes our ideas about empty space.
There is no such thing. Emptiness is full, the field of infinite
possibility. All retreats are fields, where the extraordinary comes into
being.

Epilogue: June 8, 2020 I'm sitting on the bridge over Beaver Creek, the
threshold from here to there. The waters flow swiftly below me as I
reread what I'd written about retreat and its role in our modern
lives---before the world changed so quickly. In a strange synchronicity,
I submitted the book's first draft on December 31, 2019, the same day
reports of a strange illness trickled out of China. Now as I make the
finishing touches, in Canada we're in roughly the third month of an
unprecedented experiment in collective, involuntary retreat. When I was
writing this book there was no crisis. I was courting possibility,
exploring how our retreats---to make space for nature, spirit,
imagination and embodiment---give our lives amplitude and meaning. Our
current emergency is not a retreat, because it's unsought. Yet as I
revisit this book, I'm struck to find ideas from our chosen retreats
apply in times of crisis---including this raw moment, when many have
been forced to step back from active and social lives amid fear,
instability and tragedy. "In difficult times you should always carry
something beautiful in your mind," wrote Blaise Pascal in the 1600s,
touching on a guiding impulse for our retreats. Humans long to connect
with beauty, truth, nature and spirit, with larger forces beyond our
understanding. Doing so helps us amplify the good---and to endure much.

A retreat is one way to bring the beauty and light inside, like a gem we
can pull out anytime, anywhere. A physical retreat, transformed by
imagination and memory, becomes a sustaining place, an inner sanctuary.
Every retreat is a retreat to the self---not necessarily a place, but a
state of mind and heart. Now the neglected half of reality, the
receptive and solitary, has come to the fore. For some, this forced
pause may hold space for a choice: to focus inward, develop calm and
connect to what we love---which comes before our actions, and is action.
The desert hermits, among the other companions of this book, knew that a
retreat is not an escape, but a way to wisdom. We need a rethink,
personal and planetary. Our radical attention is needed to protect what
has meaning for us, what is sacred and holy---in the sense of hālig,
from old English, meaning healthy, whole, uninjured. Historically,
retreat has often been a corrective, and a way to invent brave new
ideas---its ancient fruit. The pandemic has underlined that we are all
interconnected. We are all vulnerable. May these difficult days hold
space to reflect, to connect to our vast inner resources and help create
the kind of world we want to live in once the pandemic has passed. For
all its powers, I most value retreat for itself, for the experience of
exploring emptiness, which I find stimulating and challenging. I love
the heightened receptivity, the not-knowing and the strange alchemy that
leads to transformation. How it schools us in the active surrender life
often requires. At its essence, any retreat, whether voluntary or a
pause imposed by life, is an encounter with the unknown---which is
limitless possibility. What are we on the threshold of? I watch the
quicksilver waters of the creek pour, unpredictable as ever, though
flowing within familiar banks. Words surface that seem to speak to

our retreats, and our lives. "All is experiment and adventure," Virginia
Woolf writes in The Waves. "We are for ever mixing ourselves with
unknown quantities."

The Lake Isle of Innisfree I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made; Nine bean-rows
will I have there, a hive for the honey-bee, And live alone in the
bee-loud glade. And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes
dropping slow, Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the
cricket sings; There midnight's all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evening full of the linnet's wings. I will arise and go now, for
always night and day I hear lake water lapping with low sounds by the
shore; While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements grey, I hear it
in the deep heart's core. William Butler Yeats

Acknowledgements For a book about taking a step back and retreating from
society, I have a great many people to thank. My husband, Marco, for
love and compassion---as well as trumpet playing, a wayfaring spirit,
and many of the photos in this book. My two beloved Katharine MacLeods,
mother and sister, whose ideas enrich everything. Helen Humphreys and
the not-so-shaggy allies, Charlotte and Fig. Solvitur ambulando---"It is
solved by walking." The Villanelles, bright stars: Ashley-Elizabeth
Best, Nancy Jo Cullen, Ying Lee, Sadiqa de Meijer, Susan Olding, Sarah
Tsiang. Kindred spirits at ECW: Susan Renouf---for encouragement, warmth
and editorial expertise. And for sharing the weirdness of working on a
book about retreat as the world took a history-making, collective step
back. Jen Knoch---for well-considered and often-hilarious editorial
comments. With gratitude to Sara Maitland, author-hermit and patron
saint of this book. Special thanks also to: Shannon Parr for expert
book-wrangling, and everyone at ECW who fielded my million questions
with grace.

Cyndy Baskin, Mi'kmaq and Celtic Nations, Associate Professor of Social
Work at Ryerson University in Toronto, for Indigenous cultural expertise
in reviewing the pilgrimage chapter. Coleman Barks, Chen Chen, Daniel
Ladinsky and Karen Solie, for great generosity in granting permission to
reprint their luminous work. Jeff Cramer at the Walden Woods Project for
astute advice and sharing images. Swami Lalitananda and the kind people
of Yasodhara. Dr. Valentina Bold, scholar and storyteller, for resources
on Scottish pilgrimage and St. Ninian. Hamish, Ruth and the Hawthornden
writers---gratitude for your thoughts, research suggestions and shared
meals at the castle after long days spent writing. Thanks also to the
Hawthornden International Residency and the late Mrs. Drue Heinz. The
New Quarterly for publishing "The Hermit Diaries," "Green Cathedral" and
"The Retreat." In particular, thanks to Pamela Mulloy, and to Susan
Scott, who expertly edited my first book, including the two chapters
reprinted here. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
Access Copyright Foundation and Ontario Arts Council. Perpetual
gratitude goes to: My steadfast wonders---Mel McCallum and Cary
Silverstein. Maira Reiter for the pilgrimage. Aline, Ingrit, Janete,
Karin, Silvana and all the dear Brazilians---Abraços para todos. Janet
Crocker and Eric Tenn---for taking us to the wilds, and for moving to
town. Ed Vreeke and Leslie Shanks---for glorious swims, time and space
to write at Weatherhead, and for the motivating "Hazelnoot."

Susan Mockler, for Wednesdays of shared writing and friendship. Anita
Jansman and Sarah Withrow, fine pilgrims, writers and pals. Katrina and
Roddy Beaton---for love, hospitality and for introducing me to The
Living Mountain by Nan Shepard. Marilyn Birmingham and Matthew
Gventer---for book loans, ideas, leads, research, adventures with
chickens and other neighbourly pleasures. The Le Moine Point and
Cataraqui conservation areas. Jennifer Payne, for greater ease, and my
yoga community---in particular Mona Warner and Janati Yoga, and the
Drifting Dragons, for sharing their light. And many thanks to you.

Notes Epigraph "I will arise and go now" {page vii}: from William Butler
Yeats, "The Lake Isle of Innisfree," The Collected Works of W.B. Yeats
Volume I: The Poems, revised second edition, Simon & Schuster, page 39.
First published in the National Observer in 1890.

An Introduction "Lao-Tzu dictated" (page 5): from Stephen Mitchell,
trans., Tao Te Ching, HarperPerennial, 2000, page vii. "Wilhelm, who
translated" (page 5): from Richard Wilhelm, trans., The I Ching, or Book
of Changes, Princeton University Press, 1990, page 129--132. {See the
Retreat hexagram.} "To quote the Tao Te Ching" (page 6): from Stephen
Mitchell, trans., Tao Te Ching, HarperPerennial, 2000, page 78.

Green Cathedral "from The Lonely Forest Dweller" (page 11): from Prince
Tissa Kumara, see
https://www.buddhistinquiry.org/article/the-lonely-forest-dweller/.
trans., Andew Olendzki, "The Lonely Forest Dweller," Spring 2003. "We
are driven to distraction by the pursuit of the fragmentary" (page 13):
see
https://www.tagoreweb.in/Render/ShowContent.aspx?ct=Essays&bi=72EE92F5-BE5040D7-AE6E-0F7410664DA3&ti=72EE92F5-BE50-4A47-4E6E-0F7410664DA3&ch=c.
"The Poet's Religion," retrieved Nov. 8, 2020. "misery of manilla
folders" (page 15): from Theodore Roethke, "Dolor," The Collected Poems
of Theodore Roethke, Faber & Faber, 1968. See

https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/poets-corner-dolor-by-theodore-roethke-8x592ckc0dg.
"Asked to explain this to my urban friends, I'd quote" (page 17): from
Dorothy Parker, "Sanctuary," Complete Poems, Penguin Classics, 2010.
Appears in essay:
https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/articles/69664/dorothy-parkersperfect-contempt.
"I like to think of myself as a praise poet" (page 21): see Maria
Shriver, "Maria Shriver Interviews the Famously Private Poet Mary
Oliver's "Upstream," Oprah Magazine, March 2011.
https://www.oprah.com/entertainment/maria-shriver-interviews-poet-maryoliver/3.
"Attention is the beginning of devotion" (page 22): from Mary Oliver,
Blue Iris: Poems and Essays, Beacon Press, 2006.

The Art of Retreat "Now and again" (page 30): from Morihei Ueshiba, The
Art of Peace, Shambhala Publications, 2007, page 25. "more devalued than
it has been in a long time" (page 32): see Brent Crane, "The Virtues of
Isolation," The Atlantic, March 30, 2017.
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/03/the-virtues-of-isolation/521100/.
"The dream had a wistful feeling" (page 33): from Chen Chen, "I'm not a
religious person but," Poetry, June 2015, When I Grow Up I Want to Be a
List of Further Possibilities {BOA Editions, 2017}. "I look to Marie
Howe" (page 36): from Marie Howe, reading at Boston University, School
of Theology, March 18, 2016.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVYpwxmMl7g. "like taking behavioural
cocaine" (page 36): from Hilary Andersson, "Social Media Apps Are
'Deliberately' Addictive to Users," BBC Panorama, July 3, 2018.
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-44640959. "Join the Attention
Resistance" (page 38): from Cal Newport, Digital Minimalism: Choosing a
Focused Life in a Noisy World, Portfolio, 2019. "Neurologist Oliver
Sacks wrote in his essay" (page 38): see Oliver Sacks, "The Machine
Stops," The New Yorker, February 11, 2019. "Privacy is no longer a
'social norm'" (page 38): see Bobbie Johnson's "Privacy no longer a
social norm, says Facebook founder," The Guardian, January 11, 2010.
"Your wi-fi router could spy" (page 39): from "June 22 --- Is your Wi-Fi
watching you? Dog's manipulative eyebrows, Darwin's finches in danger
and more . . ." Quirks & Quarks, CBC Radio, June 22, 2019.
https://www.cbc.ca/radio/quirks/june-22-is-your-wifi-watching-you-dog-s-manipulative-eyebrows-darwin-s-finches-in-danger-and-more1.5182752/your-wi-fi-router-could-be-used-to-watch-you-breathe-and-monitor-yourheartbeat-1.5182770.

"a seventh-century Scottish hermit" (page 40): from Karen Solie, "Origin
Story," The Caiplie Caves, House of Anansi Press, 2019, pages 69--70.
"'To pay attention'" (page 41): from Mary Oliver, "Yes! No!" Owls and
Other Fantasies: Poems and Essays, Beacon Press, 2003, page 27.
"Intrigued, I decided to consult" (page 44): see I Ching Online,
https://www.ichingonline.net/. "The being one creates of oneself" (page
46): from Alice Koller, The Stations of Solitude, William Morrow and
Co., Inc., page 23. 1990. "'Escaping to such a solitary place'" (page
47): from Philip Koch, Solitude: A Philosophical Encounter, Carus
Publishing, 1999. Page 102. "In How to Be Alone" (page 47): from Sara
Maitland, How to Be Alone, Macmillan, 2014, page 117. "'Removing oneself
voluntarily from one's habitual environment'" (page 48): from Anthony
Storr, Solitude: A Return to the Self, The Free Press, 1988. Page 34.
"the terrible epidemic of loneliness in the West" (page 53): see Faye
Bound Alberti, "The invention of loneliness: why being 'unhappy alone'
is a surprisingly modern idea" \[not dated, retrieved Nov 8, 2020\].
https://www.historyextra.com/period/victorian/inventionloneliness-mental-health-lonely-history-modern-unhappy-self-isolation-alone/
and A Biography of Loneliness: The History of an Emotion by British
historian Fay Bound Alberti, who ties modern loneliness to capitalism
and secularism. Oxford University Press, 2019. "'Aloneness implies a
conscious choice'" (page 54): see Brent Crane, "The Virtues of
Isolation," The Atlantic, March 30, 2017.
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2017/03/the-virtues-of-isolation/521100/.
"Similarly, clinical psychologist" (page 56): from Ester Schaler
Bucholz, The Call of Solitude: Alonetime in a World of Attachment, Simon
& Schuster, 1999, page 21. "the desert to become 'wholly aflame'" (page
57): In a story of the desert fathers a hermit goes to see Abba Joseph
and entreats, "I fast a little, I pray and meditate, I live in peace as
far as I can, I purify my thoughts. What else can I do?" Abba Joseph
lifts his hands up to heaven, and his ten fingers blaze like lamps of
fire. "If you will, you can become all aflame," he replies, a man
transfigured. "talk of 'the rise of millennial hermits'" (page 58): see
Sarah Todd, "Why Millennials Never Want to Leave Their Apartments
Anymore," Quartz, November 15, 2019,
https://qz.com/quartzy/1748191/how-millennials-became-a-generation-of-homebodies/.
"youthful 'rubber tramps'" (page 58): see Matt Derrick, "The Rise of the
Rubber Tramps," Squat the Planet, May 27, 2019.
https://squattheplanet.com/threads/the-rise-of-the-rubbertramps.38472/.
"cloud-connected 'hobos'" (page 58): see Drew Magary, "This Hobo Life,"
GQ, March 28, 2016. https://www.gq.com/story/millennial-hobo-life.
"Swedish environmental activist Greta Thunberg" (page 58): see Emily
Witt, "Greta Thunberg's Slow Boat to New York," The New Yorker,
September 9, 2019.

"Temperament is a well-studied aspect of personality" (page 58): see
Jonathan Rauch, "Caring for Your Introvert," The Atlantic, March 2003.
"it was deemed more desirable to be an introvert" (page 59): from Merve
Emre, The Personality Brokers: The Strange History of Myers-Briggs and
the Birth of Personality Testing, Random House Canada, 2018. Tim Lewis,
"Myers-Briggs personality tests: what kind of person are you?" The
Guardian, September 15, 2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2018/sep/15/myers-briggs-not-sure-youre-reallyour-type-merve-emre-author-origins-validity-personality-tests.
"in Shanghai and Southern Ontario" (page 59): from Susan Cain, Quiet:
The Power of Introverts in a World that Can't Stop Talking, Broadway
Books, 2013, page 187; and Xinyin Chen, Kenneth H. Rubin and Yuerong
Sun, "Social Reputation and Peer Relationships in Chinese and Canadian
Children: A Cross-Cultural Study," Child Development 63{6}, December
1992, pages 1336--1343. DOI: 10.1111/j.14678624.1992.tb01698. "no one
can say with certainty why we sleep" {page 60}: see Jerome Groopman,
"The Secrets of Sleep," The New Yorker, October 16, 2017. "writes Czech
philosopher Erazim Kohák" {page 60}: from Wojciech W. Gasparski,
Environmental Political Philosophy, Routledge, 2017, page 273.

A Hut of One's Own "'To live as a hermit'" (page 63): from Meng-hu,
"Sayings in the Hermitary Style," Hermitary,
https://www.hermitary.com/sayings/ https://www.hermitary.com/sayings/.
"a stylite living atop a pillar" (page 66): see Laura Freeman, "The Art
of the Hermit," The Spectator, April 4, 2020. St. Simeon Stylites was
the first, a fifth-century Syrian monk who genuflected on a ruined
pillar for 37 years in the desert sun, trying to get as near to God as
possible. His attempt provoked many imitators who tried to surpass his
austerities ---suspended in cages, walled up in hermitages, buried in
cisterns. When pillar hermits reached wintry Europe the tradition mostly
died out, deemed impossible because the ascetics would freeze to their
pillars. St. Simeon's life involved many extreme retreats: he bricked
himself into a hut, chained himself to a rock and lived at the bottom of
a well. "Father Maxime Qavtaradze climbed up the 50-metre Katshki
pillar" (page 66): for vivid photos of his eyrie see the works of Amos
Chapple, a wandering photojournalist from New Zealand.
https://www.rferl.org/a/25102766.html. "Take Pete, 'one of New Zealand's
last hermits'" (page 67): see Tess McClure, "What It's Like to Be a
Hermit in New Zealand," The Wireless, June 2, 2016. "'invited her to
accompany him to a lecture by Germaine Greer whom he had heard had great
legs'" (page 68): see "All Quiet on the Western Front," The Scotsman,
November 6, 2008.

"'sad, mad or bad'" (page 69): from Sara Maitland, How to Be Alone,
Macmillan, 2014, page 15. "a cowled man with a lantern, suggesting
Diogenes the Cynic" (page 71): The ideals of Diogenes, the Greek
proto-hermit, were radical truth, freedom and simplicity, and he laid
down tracks for the first Western hermits, whose influence bridges the
ancient and modern worlds. Diogenes thought life had become artificial
and called for a return to simplicity, with dogs as role models because
they slept anywhere, ate anything and did their natural functions
without shame in public---all of which he also did. At a banquet, after
guests tossed him bones, the sage lifted his leg and urinated on them.
He scandalized people with indecent behaviour in the marketplace,
unapologetically remarking that he "wished it were as easy to relieve
hunger by rubbing an empty stomach." His wild transgressions were meant
as a shortcut to virtue: he embraced poverty, spurned the material and
cultural trappings of Greek life, and asserted that the individual was
more important than social rules---a new line of thought that has
inspired rebels who have chosen to live outside society ever since. He
was the most eminent of the Greek Cynics. Many Cynics joined the early
Christian hermits, sharing their hostility for Greco-Roman civilization,
and praising self-discipline and the mendicant lifestyle. "He was the
ancient philosopher who demanded the most from himself and his followers
in terms of asceticism, cheerful acceptance of hardship, verbal freedom
and absolute physical and intellectual self-sufficiency," writes David
Mazella in The Making of Modern Cynicism. University of Virginia, 2007,
page 13. "Months later I read a dark, often-hilarious article" (page
76): see Sam Knight, "Back to the Garden," The New Yorker, September 4,
2017. "'closyd in an hows of ston'" (page 78): Anchorites were
symbolically buried alive, entombed. Last rites were administered in an
elaborate ceremony before the cell was bricked up, with only a hard bed,
a crucifix and an altar, and their own grave---anchorites were often
buried in their cells. "Admiring their own white hands is bad for many
anchoresses who keep them too beautiful . . . they should scrape up the
earth every day from the grave in which they will rot," advised Ancrene
Wisse, a guide for enclosed women written by an unknown author. Like
other hermits, anchorites were rarely alone. Typically the anchorhold
had three windows. A narrow slit called a squint gave a view of the
church altar, and many cells were designed so that the anchorite had to
kneel in her own grave to see it. There was a food hatch and an
assistant: anchorites had to have funding to pay for food and servants
before the bishop would agree to enclosure, but this wasn't difficult to
arrange. Patrons got divine credits with their support and were repaid
through prayer. At a third window, people could come for wisdom, prayer
and counsel. Anchorites often worked, doing sedentary tasks like
producing books and textiles. "Ornamental hermits" (page 78): from
Gordon Campbell, The Hermit in the Garden: From Imperial Rome to
Ornamental Gnome, Oxford University Press, 2013, page 2. This marked the
return of the hermit after hundreds of years. In the sixth century, the
Protestant Reformation that split the Church ended the extreme religious
lifestyle of

hermits, monks and anchorites in many countries. In Britain, where
traditions had lasted five centuries, anchorites such as a 100-year-old
woman were turfed out at the Dissolution of the Monasteries. Traditions
languished or disappeared in Protestant countries for centuries. Hermit
life continued, but mainly under the auspices of monastic orders in
Europe. But when hermits made their comeback in the 1800s, they couldn't
have been less like the fiery desert ascetics of St. Anthony's vintage,
or the hermits who lived in isolation to pursue higher spiritual
enlightenment once so common in Europe's landscape. Now, hermits were
the ultimate accessory for busy landowners who hired them to show their
meditative sides---by outsourcing them. "Revelations of Divine Love"
(page 79): Julian of Norwich, who was walled up in middle age for her
last 26 years, had been twice married before choosing a mystical
marriage. Though her real name is unknown, she was born in 1343, the
same year as Chaucer, and her cell adjoined the church of St. Julian in
Norwich. From there she dispensed comfort and advice to visitors through
a grille, and wrote Revelations of Divine Love. To my surprise I'm
familiar with a passage from her ancient writings, though I'd never
known its source: "All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all
manner of things shall be well." Curious: I repeat a version of this
when I'm truly in a panic, poetic words of comfort that echo down the
centuries. "the first true Western hermits" (page 79): The desert
fathers and mothers broke from convention and followed the example of
St. Anthony, the Old Testament prophets and Christ, who spent 40 days
and nights in the wilderness---by going to fight Satan in desert. This
was a practical solution to cleanse sin. Holy hermits, in their ability
to endure physical suffering and torture the flesh, "were believed to be
able to wear away the curtain that separated the visible world from the
divine," writes William Dalrymple in From the Holy Mountain, "and by
reaching through they gained direct access to God, something that was
thought to be impossible for the ordinary believer." Flamingo, 1998,
page 162. "Mortifications. Why?" (page 80): I'm not the only one who
finds these ascetic practices repellant. Historian Edward Gibbon, author
of The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, published in
1776, described what he saw as an ascetic epidemic: "A hideous,
distorted and emaciated maniac without knowledge, without patriotism,
without natural affection, spending his life in a long routine of
useless and atrocious self-torture, and quailing before the ghastly
phantoms of his delirious brain had become the ideal of nations which
had known the writings of Plato and Cicero and the lives of Socrates and
Cato." "intercessors with God" (page 80): "Oh hermit's life, bathtub of
souls, annihilation of sins, purgatory of the soiled, you purify secret
thoughts, wash away the filth of wicked deeds, and lead souls to the
brilliance of angelic cleanness," wrote 11th-century monastic leader and
Church reformer Peter Damian, quoted in a wonderful book by Tom Licence,
Hermits and Recluses in English Society, 950--1200, Oxford University
Press, 2011, page 149. "St. Anthony, the first desert ascetic" (page
80): St. Anthony was born in the Nile to a rich landowning family but
left behind what he saw as the corrupt worldly life of 270 AD

Egypt in disgust. He retreated alone to an abandoned tomb, where he was
locked in, praying to God. Logistics? I'm not sure, but history records
that he had friends to feed him. I've seen Anthony's tomb, beautiful and
full of birds, on TV. A church has been built over top. Fleeing
followers, he later moved to his famous desert cave. Anthony might have
lingered at this retreat a few decades longer, but devotees broke into
his cell. And when God told him in a vision to go to the desert and he
moved into the ruins of an old desert fort in the eastern Sinai, many
went along. Bedouins led him through the sands to the mountains near the
Red Sea, which are riddled with caves, where he found a lifegiving
spring. As is often the fate of religious hermits, people---in this
case, adoring Greco-Roman intellectuals from Alexandria---kept after
Anthony, seeking spiritual advice. Hermits withdrew from society but
were asked to give back, to dispense wisdom about how to live. Soon, the
inhospitable desert was full of hermits, thousands of them, occupying
the mountain caves in the harshest imaginable wilderness, a feared place
of privation and death. Anthony did manage to spend the last years of
life alone in his cave. The world's first monastery was founded on his
burial site in 356 AD. He is often credited with giving birth to two
traditions for contemplative life: the eremitic {solitary} and the
coenobitic {communal} that gradually become the norm, in which the self
is submerged in obedience and collective discipline. "most repeated
subjects in Western literature and art" (page 81): Flaubert wrote The
Temptation of St. Anthony, in which the saint lusts after the Virgin
Mary; Michelangelo's earliest known painting is of Anthony ambushed and
beaten in mid-air by devils; and Salvador Dalí depicts a naked Anthony
in the desert facing down exotic temptations. Hieronymous Bosch's
celebrated triptych that reflects Anthony amid grotesqueries, venalities
and ordeals feels contemporary. "the most wild and deserted places"
(page 81): from William Dalrymple, From the Holy Mountain, Flamingo,
1998, page 106. "portals of prayer" (page 82): see William Dalrymple,
"Everything is illuminated," The Guardian, July 12, 2003.
https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jul/12/art. "The Scotsman
journalist writes of Maitland" (page 90): see "Five Hermits Who Have
Called Scotland home," The Scotsman, June 2, 2017. "asked why he made
films" (page 89): Federico Fellini and Charlotte Chandler I, Fellini,
Cooper Square Press, Lanham, MA, 2001, page 215. "silence is more like a
plan" (page 94): from Adrienne Rich, "Cartographies of Silence," The
Dream of a Common Language, W.W. Norton & Co., 1978.

Monasticism for Moderns "There are hundreds of ways" (page 95): from
Jalaluddin Rumi, The Essential Rumi, trans. by Coleman Barks and John
Moyne, HarperOne, 2004, page 36. "the travellers slipped past":

see Mathieu Drouin, Canada's History, "Ursulines and Augustinians:
Educating and Healing Canada Since 1639," July 23, 2014.
https://www.canadashistory.ca/explore/women/ursulines-and-augustinians-educating-andhealing-canada-since-1639.
"Great was their disappointment" (page 97): see Loretta La Palm, "The
Hotel Dieu of Quebec," Journal of Canadian Catholic Historical
Association, CCHA Study Sessions, 41{1974}, pages 53-64.
https://www.cchahistory.ca/journal/CCHA1974/LaPalm.pdf. "With their
organic, artisanal products made with care and simplicity" (page 110):
from "Monastic Merchandise: Products Made by Monks," Under the
Influence, CBC Radio, January 31, 2019. "'stepping outside' the confines
of the self" (page 110): from Karen Armstrong, {introduction}, A Time to
Keep Silence, St. Martin's Press, 1997, page x. "under an abbot's
authority" (page 111): Benedict's monks lived apart from society and
were self-sufficient, farming and keeping bees and learning the
artisanal skills they are still famous for today. Another new idea was
that after a long probation in the monastic community, with permission,
a monk could become a hermit, which was still considered the peak of
monastic life. This meant monks had training first, to avoid the
difficulties and spiritual dangers of the Egyptian ascetic way to God.

Pilgrim Ways "Traveller, there is no path" (page 120): from Antonio
Machado, Campos de Castilla {Plains of Castile}, Ediciones Catedra S.A.,
2006 {first published in 1912}, trans. by Kirsteen MacLeod. "kinetic
ritual" (page 122): from Edith Turner, Image and Pilgrimage in Christian
Culture, Columbia University Press, 1995, page xiii. "We depart in
search of" (page 122): from Rebecca Solnit, Wanderlust: A History of
Walking, Penguin Books, 2001, page 45. "It's heartening that" (page
127): see Christine Luckasavitch, "A Brief History of the Madaoueskarini
Algonquin People," MuskokaRegion.com, June 6, 2019. "Hybla Gospel
Tabernacle" (page 132): from Ontario Abandoned Places,
https://www.ontarioabandonedplaces.com/Hybla-{semi-ghost-town}\_loc732.html.
"Not doing it for religious reasons" (page 146): see Bob Walker, "Walk
of faith: 500 km of sugar, storms and blisters," BBC News, July 23,
2015. https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-33550932. "Most sought-after
pilgrimage goal" (page 149): from Edith Turner, Image and Pilgrimage in
Christian Culture, Columbia University Press, 1995, page xvii.
"Substitution shrine" (page 151): from Edith Turner, Image and
Pilgrimage in Christian Culture, Columbia University Press, 1995, page
xvi.

"Members of the Driftpile First Nation often arrive" (page 152): see
Amber Bracken, "The Healing Waters of Lac Ste. Anne," The Globe and
Mail, July 30, 2015. Ernie Giroux, president of the Driftpile Cree
Nations Pilgrimage Society, each year leads a group of his people from
their home in Lesser Slave Lake to Lac Ste Anne. "We're here for our
ancestors who had made the journey before and passed on. We do it to
honour their memory and follow in their footsteps," he says. See Caitlan
Kehoe, "Lac Ste. Anne pilgrims united by tradition and faith," The Grove
Examiner, July 25, 2014. "1995's Healing Waters" (page 152): from Steve
Simon, Healing Waters: The Pilgrimage to Lac Ste. Anne, University of
Alberta Press, 1995. Another resource about the pilgrimage is the
master's thesis, "'Rendezvous' for renewal at 'Lake of the Great
Spirit': The French pilgrimage and Indigenous journey to Lac Ste-Anne,
Alberta, 1870--1896," by Jessica Anne Buresi {University of Calgary,
2012}. "Since its very inception," she writes, "the Lac Ste-Anne
Pilgrimage has also been a manifestation of the Aboriginal people's will
to both adopt and resist aspects of the colonialist mindset, including
new religious ideas and a popular form of Catholic worship, while
continuing to also adapt older cultural gathering practices of their own
to the new event, based on their relationship to the land." "In Manitoba
there is a spiritual place" (page 154): from Robert Houle, "Where the
Gods are Present," in The Good Lands: Canada Through the Eyes of
Artists, Figure 1 Publishing, 2017, page 261. "Border Angels, women who
walk" (page 155): see Jackie Bryant, "Pilgrimage," Sierra,
November/December 2019; and see "Life, Death, and the Border Patrol,"
November 6, 2019,
https://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/2019-6-november-december/last-words/life-deathand-border-patrol.
"To wander is the Taoist code word" (page 158): from Rebecca Solnit,
Wanderlust: A History of Walking, Penguin Books, 2001, page 144.
"meditation versus action" (page 158): from Youtube, "Glenn Gould reads
from The Three Cornered World."
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvI5a3kZl0M. "I read an old copy of"
(page 159): Aldo Leopold, A Sand County Almanac, Ballatine Books, 1986,
pages 294--295 {first published by Oxford University Press, 1949}. "'I
fill my glass for you, dear pilgrim'" (page 161): from Hafiz, The Gift,
trans. by Daniel Ladinsky, Penguin Compass, 1999, page 262.

I Will Go to the Wild Woods "the genius of Henry David Thoreau" (page
170): Terry Tempest Williams, quoted from radio interview, To the Best
of Our Knowledge.
http://archive.ttbook.org/book/transcript/transcript-terry-tempest-williams-thoreau
\[no date given\].

"of sacred geographies" (page 174): from Courtney Milne, The Sacred
Earth, {quoting the Dalai Lama}, Western Producer Prairie Books, 1991,
page 174. "literate monks and hermits" (page 181): see Kathleen Jamie,
"Lone Enraptured Male," London Review of Books, March 6, 2008.
https://www.lrb.co.uk/thepaper/v30/n05/kathleen-jamie/a-lone-enraptured-male.
"her family and schoolmates publicly professed their belief in Christ"
(page 182): from the Emily Dickinson Museum, see "Emily Dickinson and
the church,"
https://www.emilydickinsonmuseum.org/emily-dickinson/biography/special-topics/emilydickinson-and-the-church/.
The site observes, "In Dickinson's teen years, a wave of religious
revivals moved through New England. Although she agonized over her
relationship to God, Dickinson ultimately did not join the church---not
out of defiance but in order to remain true to herself: 'I feel that the
world holds a predominant place in my affections. I do not feel that I
could give up all for Christ, were I called to die,' she said." "she
studied botany" (page 184): from Judith Farr, The Gardens of Emily
Dickinson, Harvard University Press, 2005, page 3. "the place of a
gaping mouth" (page 189): Ken Burns, The National Parks {series}, PBS,
2009. http://www.pbs.org/nationalparks/history/ep1/. "Colonial crime
scenes" (page 189): see Robert Jago, "Canada's National Parks are
Colonial Crime Scenes," The Walrus, June 30, 2017. "forced off their
lands" (page 189): see Kevin Mcnamee and Maxwell W. Finkelstein,
National Parks of Canada, The Canadian Encyclopedia, 2012 and updated
2019. http://www.pbs.org/nationalparks/history/ep1/. "the backwoods of
northern Ontario" (page 193): 'She of the Loghouse Nest': from Kirsten
Greer and Sonje Bols, "Gendering Historical Ecological Reconstructions
in Northern Ontario," Historical Geography Volume 44 {2016}: pages
45-67.
https://d2cu82y6eo7f22.cloudfront.net/2020/01/08220733/05HG44-Greer.pdf.
"under the cottage microscope" (page 194): see Jill Lepore, "The Right
Way to Remember Rachel Carson," New Yorker, March 26,
2018.https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/03/26/the-right-way-to-rememberrachel-carson.
"'Has Rachel Carson's prevision really come true?'" (page 193): see Jim
Daley, "Silent Skies," Scientific American, September 19, 2019. "her
beloved friend" (page 197): from Rachel Carson, Always, Rachel: the
Letters of Rachel Carson and Dorothy Freeman, 1952-1964, Beacon Press,
1995, page 394. "Li's science" {page 205}: see Qing Li, "Effect of
Forest Bathing Trips on Human Immune Function," Published online 2009
Mar 25. doi: 10.1007/s12199-008-0068-3.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2793341/ and Dr. Qing Li,
Forest Bathing: How Trees Can Help You Find Health and Happiness,
Penguin Random House, 2018. "aerosols emitted by evergreens and many
other trees" {page 206}: see Florence Williams, "Take Two Hours of Pine
Forest and Call Me in the Morning," Outside, November 28,

2012. "The nature cure is an idea" {page 206}: see James Hamblin, "The
Nature Cure," The Atlantic, October 2015. "'Throughout our evolution'"
{page 207}: from Florence Williams, The Nature Fix: Why Nature Makes Us
Happier, Healthier, and More Creative, W.W. Norton & Co., 2017, page 23
{quoting Yoshifumi Miyazaki}. "they're right, says David Strayer" {page
207}: ibid., page 187 {quoting David Strayer}. "Li's advice is similar"
{page 207}: ibid., page 218 {quoting Qing Li}. "because a chronic
disconnection" {page 208}: ibid., page 3 {quoting Elizabeth Nisbet}. "We
evolved in nature" {page 208}: ibid., page 13 {quoting Elizabeth
Nisbet}. "Researchers say 27 per cent" {page 209}: see Alison Flood,
"Scientists use Thoreau's journal notes to track climate change," The
Guardian, March 14, 2012.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/14/henry-david-thoreau-climate-change.
"that's killing the planet we depend on for life" (page 210): see Damian
Carrington, "Survival of the Natural World Is in the Balance," The
Guardian, June 24, 2019. "what are people doing" (page 210): see Curt
Stager, "Henry David Thoreau's Walden Pond is Being spoiled by climate
change - and urine," As It Happens, CBC Radio, April 5, 2018.
https://www.cbc.ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-thursday-full-episode1.4606389/henry-david-thoreau-s-walden-pond-is-being-spoiled-by-climate-change-andurine-1.4606651.
"his temple was made of wood" (page 211): see Laura Dassow Walls,
lecture, The Morgan Library and Museum, New York,
2017.https://www.themorgan.org/videos/henry-davidthoreau-life.

Artists, Writers, Creative Thinkers, Dreamers "Best of any song" (page
213): from Wendell Berry, A Timbered Choir: The Sabbath Poems,
Counterpoint, 1999, page 207. "Thoreau, who wrote up a storm at Walden"
(page 215): see "Thoreau's writing,"
https://www.walden.org/education/for-students/thoreaus-writing/. He kept
field notes, started his lifelong journal there and also wrote A Week on
the Concord and Merrimack Rivers and the first draft of Walden, among
other writings. "servant of the hours" (page 218): from Mary Oliver, "Of
Power and Time," Upstream: Selected Essays, Penguin Books, 2016. "Opera
now serves as" (page 219): see Vanessa Thorpe, "Opera leaves me
transfigured," The Guardian, June 23, 2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2018/jun/23/rufuswainwright-opera-transfigured-second-classical-release-change-direction.
"appreciating art can change us" (page 219): see Bill Moyers, Moyers on
Democracy, "The Wisdom of Faith with Huston Smith," March 26, 1996.

https://billmoyers.com/content/wisdom-faith-hinduism-buddhism/. "it's my
default position" (page 219): see Susan Gonzales, "Writing Is Simply an
'Alibi' for Living Says Poet and Novelist Eileen Myles," YaleNews,
September 20, 2019. "much less fully heard" (page 220): see Meena
Alexander, "What Use is Poetry?" World Literature Today, September 2013.
https://www.worldliteraturetoday.org/2013/september/what-use-poetry-meena-alexander.
"Whoever is unwilling" (page 222): see "In Search of Ludwig
Wittgenstein's Secluded Hut in Norway, April 25, 2016.
http://www.openculture.com/2016/04/in-search-of-ludwigwittgensteins-secluded-hut-in-norway-a-short-travel-film.html.
"'great veteran pines'" (page 222): from Emily Carr, Hundreds and
Thousands, Irwin Publishing, 1986, page 103. "nobody pesters you" (page
223): from Emily Carr, ibid., page 120. "'we never seem crowded'" (page
223): from Emily Carr, ibid., page 133. "'my tabernacle, my refuge'"
(page 224): from Susan Crean, The Laughing One, HarperFlamingo Canada,
2001, page 372. "Six acres of boreal forest" (page 225): see Portrait of
Marlene Creates, 2019 #GGARTS winner.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7apC0qVneE8&feature=youtu.be. "tiny
urban hut" (page 243): see Jessica Stewart, "Designer Suspends Tiny
Hidden Art Studio Under a Bridge," My Modern Met, August 21, 2017.
https://mymodernmet.com/fernandoabellanas-art-studio/.

The Inner Temple "Consider the experiences of" (page 248): see Jodi
Ettenberg, "My exhausting meditation retreat: 10 days of Vipassana,
silence and spiders," The Guardian, March 31, 2016. "which share the
same ancient source" (page 248): from Philip Goldberg, American Veda,
Harmony Books, 2010, page 3. "'the breath within the breath,'" (page
250): from Kabir, The Enlightened Heart, ed. Stephen Mitchell, trans.
Robert Bly, HarperPerennial, 1993, page 72. "these traditions filled"
(page 250): from Philip Goldberg, American Veda, Harmony Books, 2010,
pages 14--15. "The handsome, dignified monk" (page 252): from Rick
Fields, How the Swans Came to the Lake: A Narrative History of Buddhism
in America, Shambhala Publications, 1992, page 121. "'famously declaring
that all traditions can lead to the infinite'" (page 252): from Philip
Goldberg, American Veda, pages 68--69. "The first wave of yogis" (page
253): Robert Love, The Great Oom: The Improbable Birth of Yoga in
America, Viking, New York, 2010, pages 72-73.

"Vivekananda Cottage" (page 253): see the website of the
Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Centre of New York, "Vivekananda Cottage
Visitors' Information" https://ramakrishna.org/cottage.html. "yoga from
the head up" (page 253): from Stefanie Syman, The Subtle Body, Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 2010. "Elvis visited often" (page 254): from Louis
Sahagun, "Guru's Followers Mark Legacy of a Star's Teachings," Los
Angeles Times, August 6, 2006. "I'll share the story of two yoga
retreats" (page 262): Both stories appeared originally in my book The
Animal Game, Tightrope Books, 2016. "The band was approached" (page
285): from the Beatles, The Beatles Anthology, Chronicle Books, 2000,
page 167. In American Veda, Goldberg writes, "It may have been the most
momentous spiritual retreat since Jesus spent those 40 days in the
wilderness," page 7. "Pema Chödrön was long the abbey's resident
teacher" (page 289): see Matthew Abrahams, "Pema Chödrön Steps Down as
Senior Teacher at Shambhala," Tricycle, January 17, 2020. "the monks
advised him" (page 289): see Rod Meade Sperry, "That Time David Bowie
Almost Became a Buddhist Monk," Lion's Roar, January 15, 2016. "'We're
all moving to Nova Scotia'" (page 290): see Suzannah Showler, "Kingdom
Come," The Walrus, December 2010. "women are retreating" (page 291): see
"The freeing power of restricting your freedom," Out in the Open, CBC
Radio, February 2, 2018.
https://www.cbc.ca/radio/outintheopen/freedom-ltd-1.4505386/the-freeing-power-ofrestricting-your-freedom-1.4505921.
"'away from external and internal distractions'" (page 292): from Vicki
Mackenzie, Cave in the Snow: A Western Woman's Quest for Enlightenment,
Bloomsbury Press, 1999, pages 197-8. "'who one really is behind all the
masks'" (page 292): ibid., page 198. "'Everything gets cooked much
quicker'" (page 293): ibid., pages 197--198. "their beams are focused"
(page 293): ibid., page 196.

White Rooms, Unified Hearts and Empty Fields "calling him the man" (page
298): I'm Your Man, DVD release, 2006. "'Once his life becomes too
cluttered'" (page 298): from Ira B. Nadel, Various Positions, Random
House of Canada, 1996, page 271. "along the same lines" (page 298): see
Brian D. Johnson, "Life of Lady's Man," Maclean's, December 7, 1992.
"snow at 3 am in sandals" (page 300): Various Positions, page 190. "a
need for self-reform" (page 300): ibid., page 190.

"'it's like scraping off the rust'" (page 300): ibid., page 202. "he
went up the mountain" (page 301): ibid., page 190. "wasn't looking for a
religion" (page 301): see Simon Worall, "Leonard Cohen: Out of the
Monastery and Back on the Road," The Independent, June 15, 2008.
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/features/leonard-cohen-out-ofthe-monastery-and-back-on-the-road-845789.html.
"Like pebbles in a bag" (page 302): see "Leonard Cohen on Poetry, Music
and Why He Left the Zen Monastery," Fresh Air, NPR, March 22, 2006.
https://www.npr.org/2016/10/21/498810429/leonard-cohen-on-poetry-music-and-why-heleft-the-zen-monastery.
"'On the desk lay a cassette'" (page 302): from Soutik Biswas, "When the
Light Got in for Leonard Cohen," BBC News, November 16, 2016.
https://www.bbc.com/news/worldasia-india-37971848. "'tendrel, the
interrelatedness of all things'" (page 302): from Sylvie Simmons, I'm
Your Man, McClelland & Stewart, 2012, page 425. "'Beauty, certainly'"
(page 304): see Sarah Hampson, "Hampson on Leonard Cohen," The Globe and
Mail, May 29, 2007. "Anything, Roman Catholicism" (page 304): see David
Remnick, "Leonard Cohen makes it Darker," New Yorker, October 17, 2016.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/leonard-cohen-makes-it-darker.
"Of the word God" (page 304): see Douglas Todd, "Leonard Cohen: Jewish,
Buddhist and Christian too," Vancouver Sun, November 25, 2016. "'they
forgot how to build the arch'" (page 304): from Paul Zollo, Songwriters
on Songwriting, Da Capo Press, 2003, page 344. "not for everyone" (page
305): see "Leonard Cohen's 'Book of Longing,' Fresh Air, NPR, January 1,
2007. https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=6696573.
"there's an appetite" (page 305): see Angelica Huston, "Leonard Cohen,"
Interview, November 1995. Posted as "Remembering Leonard Cohen,"
November 11, 2016.
https://www.interviewmagazine.com/music/leonard-cohen. "a monastic
discipline" (page 306): see Scott Timberg, "Romance, Regrets and
Notebooks in the Freezer: Leonard Cohen's Son on his father's final
poems," The Guardian, September 28, 2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2018/sep/28/leonard-cohen-poetry-theflame-adam-cohen-interview.
"we hear Cohen sing" (page 306): from Mikal Gilmore, quoted in "Leonard
Cohen, Remembering the Life and Legacy of Brokenness," Rolling Stone,
November 30, 2016 {quoting Leonard Cohen}. "'the stars look past'" (page
307): from William Young, "William Stafford, The Art of Poetry No. 67,"
The Paris Review, Winter 1993.

Selected Bibliography Ansell, Neil. Deep Country. London: Hamish
Hamilton, 2012. Ansell, Neil. The Last Wilderness: A Journey into
Silence. London: Tinder Press, Headline Publishing Group, 2018.
Armstrong, Karen. A Short History of Myth. Toronto: Vintage Canada,
2006. Badé, William Frederic. The Life and Letters of John Muir. New
York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1924. Bakewell, Sara. How to Live: A
Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty Attempts at an Answer.
London: Vintage Books, 2011. Berger, John. Confabulations. London:
Penguin Books, 2016. Buchholz, Esther. The Call of Solitude: Alonetime
in a World of Attachment. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999. Carr, Emily.
Hundreds and Thousands: The Journals of an Artist. Toronto: Irwin
Publishing, 1986. Carson, Rachel. Always, Rachel: the Letters of Rachel
Carson and Dorothy Freeman, 19521964. Boston: Beacon Press, 1995.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1962.
Clifford, Amos. Your Guide to Forest Bathing. Newburyport, MA: Conari
Press, 2018. Colegate, Isabel. A Pelican in the Wilderness: Hermits,
Solitaries and Recluses. London: HarperCollins, 2002. Crean, Susan. The
Laughing One: A Journey to Emily Carr. Toronto: HarperFlamingo Canada,
2001. Dalrymple, William. From the Holy Mountain. London: Flamingo,
1998. Dassow-Walls, Laura. Henry David Thoreau: A Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2017. David-Neel, Alexandra. My Journey to
Lhasa. New York: Harper Perennial, 2005. Dickinson, Emily. The Complete
Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Thomas H. Johnson. New York: A Back
Bay Book, Little, Brown and Co., 1961. Dillard, Annie. Pilgrim at Tinker
Creek. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics, 2013. Emre, Merv. The
Personality Brokers: The Strange History of Myers-Briggs and the Birth
of Personality Testing. Toronto: Random House Canada, 2018. Fermor,
Patrick Leigh. A Time to Keep Silence. New York: New York Review of Book
Classics, 2007.

Fields, Rick. When the Swans Came to the Lake: A Narrative History of
Buddhism in America. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1992. France,
Peter. Hermits: The Insights of Solitude. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1997. Goldberg, Philip. American Veda. New York: Harmony Books, 2010.
Hass, Robert. The Essential Haiku. New York: Ecco, 1994. Hirshfield,
Jane. Nine Gates: Entering the Mind of Poetry. New York: HarperCollins,
1998. Isherwood, Christopher. My Guru and His Disciple. New York:
Penguin Books, 1981. Iyengar, B.K.S., Light on Life. Vancouver:
Raincoast Books, 2005. Iyer, Pico. Sun After Dark: Flights into the
Foreign. New York: Vintage Departures, 2004. James, William. The
Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Penguin Classics, 1985.
Koch, Philip. Solitude: A Philosophical Encounter. Peru, IL: Open Court
Publishing Inc., 1994. Koller, Alice. The Stations of Solitude. New
York: Bantam, 1991. Koller, Alice. An Unknown Woman. New York: Bantam,
1991. LaBastille, Anne. Woodswoman. New York: Penguin Books, 1992.
Ladinsky, Daniel, translator. The Gift, Poems by Hafiz. New York:
Penguin Compass, 1999. Lawrence, Louise de Kiriline. The Loghouse Nest.
Toronto: Natural Heritage/History Inc., 1988. Leopold, Aldo. A Sand
County Almanac and Sketches Here and There. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1949. Li, Quing. Forest Bathing: How Trees Can Help You Find
Health and Happiness. New York: Penguin Random House, 2018. Licence,
Tom. Hermits and Recluses in English Society, 950--1200. London: Oxford
University Press, 2011. Lindbergh, Anne Morrow. Gift from the Sea. New
York: Pantheon Books, 2005. Mabey, Richard. Nature Cure. London: Chatto
& Windus, 2005. MacAvoy, Liz Herbert and Mari Hughes-Edward,
eds. Anchorites, Wombs and Tombs: Intersections of Gender and Enclosure
in the Middle Ages. Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2010.
Macfarlane, Robert. The Old Ways. London: Hamish Hamilton, 2012.
Macfarlane, Robert. The Wild Places. London: Granta Books, 2008.
Mackenzie, Vicki. Cave in the Snow. London: Bloomsbury, 1998. Maitland,
Sara. A Book of Silence. London: Granta Books, 2009. Maitland, Sara. How
to Be Alone. London: Pan Macmillan, 2014. Merton, Thomas. Thoughts in
Solitude. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999. Mitchell, Stephen,
ed. The Enlightened Heart. New York: Harper Perennial, 1993. Mitchell,
Stephen, trans. Tao Te Ching. New York: Perennial, 2000. Nadel, Ira B.
Various Positions. Toronto: Random House of Canada, 1996. Norris,
Kathleen. Cloister Walk. New York: Riverhead Books, 1996. Norris,
Kathleen. Dakota: A Spiritual Geography. New York: First Mariner Books,
2001. Oliver, Mary. Blue Iris: Poems and Essays. Boston: Beacon Press,
2006.

Oliver, Mary. Upstream: Selected Essays. New York: Penguin Books, 2016.
Radha, Swami Sivananda. Radha: Diary of a Woman's Search. Palo Alto, CA:
Timeless Books, 1990. Rich, Adrienne. The Dream of a Common Language.
New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1978. Ritter, Christiane. A Woman in the
Polar Night. New York: E.P. Dutton and Co., 1954. Sarton, May. Journal
of a Solitude. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1992. Scott, Susan, ed. Body
& Soul: Stories for Skeptics and Seekers. Halfmoon Bay, BC: Caitlan
Press, 2019. Sebald, W.G. The Rings of Saturn. Translated by Michael
Hulse. London: The Harvill Press, 1998. Simmons, Sylvie. I'm Your Man.
Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 2012. Simon, Steve. Healing Waters: The
Pilgrimage to Lac Ste. Anne. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press,
1995. Solie, Karen. The Caiplie Caves. Toronto: House of Anansi Press,
2019. Solnit, Rebecca. Wanderlust: A History of Walking. New York:
Penguin Books, 2001. Stark, Freya. Bagdad Sketches. New York: E.P.
Dutton and Co., 1938. Storr, Anthony. Solitude: A Return to the Self.
New York: The Free Press, a Division of Macmillan, 1988. Strayed,
Cheryl. Wild: From Lost to Found on the Pacific Coast Trail. New York:
Vintage Books, 2003. Symons, Stefanie. The Subtle Body: The Story of
Yoga in America. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010. Tagore,
Rabindranath. Creative Unity. Portland, OR: The Floating Press, 2009.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden: Or Life in the Woods. New York: Penguin
Classic, 2016. Thorson, Robert M. The Guide to Walden Pond. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018. Turner, Victor, and Edith Turner. Image
and Pilgrimage in Christian Culture. New York: Columbia University
Press, 2011. Ueshiba, Morihei. The Art of Peace. Boston: Shambhala
Publications, 2007. Wilhelm, Richard. The I Ching, Or Book of Changes.
Princeton, NJ: Translated by Cary F. Baynes. Princeton University Press,
1990. Williams, Florence. The Nature Fix. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.,
2017. Williams, Terry Tempest. The Hour of the Land. New York: Sara
Crichton Books, 2016. Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One's Own and Three
Guineas. New York: Penguin Modern Classics, 2000. Woolf, Virginia. A
Writer's Diary. Edited by Leonard Woolf. London: The Hogarth Press,
1953. Worster, Donald. A Passion for Nature: The Life of John Muir. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2018. Yogananda, Paramahansa.
Autobiography of a Yogi. Los Angeles: Self-Realization Fellowship, 1971.
Zollo, Paul. Songwriters on Songwriting. Boston: Da Capo Press, 2016.

Image Credits Section 1: Mapping the Ground---Of Sacred Groves, Inner
Mountains and the Art of Retreat, p. 1 Poet on a Mountaintop, Shen Zhou,
late 15th century, China. (Wikimedia Commons) An Introduction, p. 3 The
bridge at Beaver Creek. (Kirsteen MacLeod) Green Cathedral, p. 8 The
cabin at Beaver Creek. (Marco Reiter) The Art of Retreat, p. 30
Travelers in Autumn Mountains, Sheng Mou, 1271--1368, China. (Creative
Commons, Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Severance A. Millikin 1963.589, courtesy
of Cleveland Museum of Art) Section 2: The Old Ways---Of Hermit Caves,
Monasteries and Pilgrim Paths, p. 61 St. Paul and St. Anthony and the
raven that brought them bread. Every effort has been made to contact
copyright holders; in the event of an inadvertent omission or error,
please notify the publisher so full

acknowledgement can be given in future editions. (Icon with St. Anthony
visiting St. Paul of Thebes Inv. No. 3418 Painted wood H: 55 cm, W: 56
cm Old Cairo, Monastery of Mercurius (Abu Sayfayn), 1777 Coptic Museum,
Cairo) A Hut of One's Own, p. 63 The hermitage in northwestern Scotland.
(Marco Reiter) Monasticism for Moderns, p. 95 Nuns in the garden at Le
Monastère, Quebec 1937. With permission from the archives of Le
Monastère des Augustines (HG-A-26.22.11.1.6) Pilgrim Ways, p. 120 The
Hastings Heritage Trail north of Bancroft, Ontario. (Marco Reiter)
Section 3: The New Deities: Nature and Culture---Of Forest Cabins,
National Parks and Creative Sanctuaries, p. 165 Original title page of
Walden drawn by Sophia Thoreau. (Courtesy of Walden Woods Project) I
Will Go to the Wild Woods, p. 167 A drawing of Walden Woods. (Wikimedia
Commons) Artists, Writers, Creative Thinkers, Dreamers, p. 213 Emily
Carr and company at her caravan, "the Elephant," at the southwest end of
Esquimalt Lagoon in 1934. Image F-07885 courtesy of the Royal BC Museum
and Archives

Section 4: Light of the East, p. 245 Drawing of a sacred grove in India,
1782. (Wikipedia) The Inner Temple, p. 247 At the Hermitage, folio from
the Ramayana, 1780. (Creative Commons 1.0 universal public domain
dedication) Section 5: In Conclusion---Of Hermitages of the Heart,
p. 295 Hawthornden Castle near Edinburgh, Scotland. (Kirsteen MacLeod)
White Rooms, Unified Hearts and Empty Fields, p. 297 Meditation cabin in
the mountains of British Columbia. (Marco Reiter)

Permissions Grateful acknowledgement is made to the following for
permission to reprint previously published material: COLEMAN BARKS,
MAYPOP BOOKS: One line from Jalal ad-Din Rumi, The Essential Rumi,
translated by Coleman Barks and John Moyne, HarperOne, 2004. Reprinted
by permission of Coleman Barks. Page 95. WENDELL BERRY: one line from A
Timbered Choir: The Sabbath Poems, Copyright 1998 by Wendell Berry.
Reprinted by permission of Counterpoint Press. Page 213. CHEN CHEN: two
lines from "I'm not a religious person but," from When I Grow Up I Want
to Be a List of Further Possibilities, BOA Editions, 2017. Reprinted by
permission of Fred Courtright, The Permissions Company, LLC Rights
Agency for BOA Editions, Ltd. Page 33. HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS: Six
lines from the Tao Te Ching, by Lao Tzu. Translation copyright 1988 by
Stephen Mitchell. Used by permission of Harper Collins Publishers. Page
3.

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS: Excerpts from The Poems of Emily Dickinson,
edited by Thomas H. Johnson, Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press, Copyright 1951, 1955 by the President and
Fellows of Harvard College. Copyright renewed 1979, 1983 by the
President and Fellows of Harvard College. Copyright 1914, 1918,1919,
1924, 1929, 1930, 1932, 1935, 1937, 1942, by Martha Dickinson Bianchi.
Copyright 1952,1957, 1958, 1963, 1965, by Mary L. Hampson. Page 18284.
DANIEL LADINSKY: two lines from The Gift: Poems from Hafiz, the Great
Sufi Master, translations by Daniel Ladinsky. Penguin Compass, 1999.
Reprinted by permission of Daniel Ladinsky. Page 161. ANDREW OLENDZKI:
Eight lines from "Ekavihariya Thera: The Lonely Forest Dweller" (Thag
10.2), translated from the Pali by Andrew Olendzki. Access to Insight
(Legacy Edition), 2 November 2013. Reprinted by permission of Andrew
Olendzki
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/thag/thag.10.02.olen.html.
Page 252. KAREN SOLIE: five lines from "Origin Story," The Caiplie
Caves, by Karen Solie. Reprinted with permission from House of Anansi
Press Inc., Toronto, 2019. www.houseofanansi.com. Page 40. VIKING BOOKS:
"Sanctuary," from The Portable Dorothy Parker by Dorothy Parker, edited
by Marion Meade. Copyright 1931, renewed 1959 by Dorothy Parker. Used by
permission of Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Random House LLC. All
rights reserved. Page 17.

About the Author Kirsteen MacLeod is a writer and yoga teacher. Her
debut collection of short stories, The Animal Game, was published in
2016. Her fiction, poetry, and creative non-fiction have appeared in
prominent literary journals, including The New Quarterly and The Malahat
Review; scores of her articles have been featured in leading Canadian
magazines; and her work has been a finalist for the CBC Literary Award
in creative non-fiction, among other awards. She divides her time
between Kingston, Ontario, and a riverside cabin in the woods near
Bancroft.

Copyright Copyright © Kirsteen MacLeod, 2021 Published by ECW Press 665
Gerrard Street East Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4M 1Y2 416-694-3348 /
info@ecwpress.com All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
by any process --- electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise --- without the prior written permission of the copyright
owners and ECW Press. The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this
book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of
the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only
authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage
electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author's
rights is appreciated. Editor for the Press: Susan Renouf Cover design:
Natalie Olsen Library and archives canada cataloguing in publication
Title: In praise of retreat : finding sanctuary in the modern world /
Kirsteen MacLeod. Names: MacLeod, Kirsteen, author. Identifiers:
Canadiana (print) 20200384511 \| Canadiana (ebook) 2020038483X ISBN
978-1-77041-473-0 (Softcover) ISBN 978-1-77305-654-8 (ePub) ISBN
978-1-77305-655-5 (PDF) ISBN 978-1-77305-656-2 (Kindle) Subjects: LCSH:
Solitude. \| LCSH: Solitude---Psychological aspects. \| LCSH: Spiritual
retreats. Classification: LCC BJ1499.S65 M33 2021 \| DDC 155.9/2---dc23
The publication of In Praise of Retreat has been generously supported by
the Canada Council for the Arts and is funded in part by the Government
of Canada. Nous remercions le Conseil des arts du

Canada de son soutien. Ce livre est financé en partie par le
gouvernement du Canada. We acknowledge the support of the Ontario Arts
Council (OAC), an agency of the Government of Ontario, which last year
funded 1,965 individual artists and 1,152 organizations in 197
communities across Ontario for a total of \$51.9 million. We also
acknowledge the support of the Government of Ontario through the Ontario
Book Publishing Tax Credit, and through Ontario Creates for the
marketing of this book.


