Praise for F**k It and John C. Parkin 'Stressed, angry or upset? Then
try F**k It therapy.' SUNDAY TIMES STYLE

'Everyone can relate to F\*\*k It.' THE TIMES

'John combines Wayne Hemingway's style with Eddie Izzard's flights of
surrealism.' THE GUARDIAN

'The self-help phenomenon that we can all swear by.' EVENING STANDARD

'"F**k It". I was practising the words. They rolled around my head. We
need to say "F**k It" when we're out of sync with the natural world; it
helps us go with the flow.' THE OBSERVER

'This book makes me smile and, more importantly, clicks my brain into
positive mode.' FEARNE COTTON

'This brilliant, funny, wise book gives us the kick we need to stop
making excuses and do what we love. Parkin is living proof that it can
be done.' METRO UK

'A new life bible urging us to tip the life balance back in our
direction and make time for what's important, rather than all that stuff
we feel

we should be doing.' SUNDAY MIRROR

Also by John C. Parkin Books F**k It -- Do What You Love (2016) F**k It
Is the Answer (2014) F**k It: The Ultimate Spiritual Way (2008, 2014)
F**k It Therapy (2012) The Way of F\*\*k It (2009)

Audiobooks F**k It Therapy (2015) F**k It: The Ultimate Spiritual Way
(2014) The F\*\*k It Show (2010)

Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK Ltd, Astley House, 33
Notting Hill Gate, London W11 3JQ Tel: +44 (0)20 3675 2450; Fax: +44
(0)20 3675 2451 www.hayhouse.co.uk Published in the United States of
America by: Hay House Inc., PO Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100 Tel:
(1) 760 431 7695 or (800) 654 5126 Fax: (1) 760 431 6948 or (800) 650
5115 www.hayhouse.com Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia
Ltd, 18/36 Ralph St, Alexandria NSW 2015 Tel: (61) 2 9669 4299; Fax:
(61) 2 9669 4144 www.hayhouse.com.au Published in India by: Hay House
Publishers India, Muskaan Complex, Plot No.3, B-2, Vasant Kunj, New
Delhi 110 070 Tel: (91) 11 4176 1620; Fax: (91) 11 4176 1630
www.hayhouse.co.in Text © John C. Parkin, 2018 The moral rights of the
author have been asserted. All rights reserved. No part of this book may
be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic or electronic process, or
in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a
retrieval system, transmitted or otherwise be copied for public or
private use, other than for 'fair use' as brief quotations embodied in
articles and reviews, without prior written permission of the publisher.
The information given in this book should not be treated as a substitute
for professional medical advice; always consult a medical practitioner.
Any use of information in this book is at the reader's discretion and
risk. Neither the author nor the publisher can be held responsible for
any loss, claim or damage arising out of the use, or misuse, of the
suggestions made, the failure to take medical advice or for any material
on third-party websites. A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library. ISBN 978-1-78817-089-5 in print ISBN
978-1-78817-096-3 in ePub format ISBN 978-1-78817-097-0 in Kindle
formats Interior images: xvi © Gaia Pollini; 218--19 Christian
Wheatley/istockphoto

CONTENTS

Welcome to the Game of Life Level 1: I'll be at Peace When... I get a
Raleigh Chopper The school holidays arrive I'm back with my friends I
get my qualifications They say 'yes' There's peace in the world I have
my own car I find my ideal job I have a place to call home We have a
family The kids are off to school We manage to pay the bills and
mortgage

We have a larger house The house is tidy I'm a success I'm wealthy I win
that award I've lost this weight I'm well again I can take redundancy
The holidays arrive We have a change of government I've paid off the
mortgage The divorce is settled I/we retire The operation is over This
pain has gone I'm resting in peace Level 2: I Can Be at Peace Now
Honking the Horn of Peace I can relax now How peaceful am I now? I can
be grateful now I can switch off my phone now I can bring meditation to
life now

I can sit and drink tea now, and be at peace But I can't remain at peace
for long (there's always something) The family something The money
something The geo-political something The health something The weather
something The me something The environment something The work something
The unclear something The dying something Level 3: F**k It. Be at Peace
with Life, Just as It Is F**k It to caring F**k It to positivity F**k It
to being good F**k It to being authentic F**k It to being patient F**k
It to how it's supposed to go F**k It to loving F**k It to loving
yourself F**k It to the linear process

From Mad Men to Peaceful Man The Breeze of Peace F**k It to doubt F**k
It. Be at peace with difficulty F**k It. Be at peace with injustice F**k
It. Be at peace with stress and anxiety F**k It. Be at peace with
failure F**k It. Be at peace with hurtful people F**k It. Be at peace
with bad things happening F**k It. Be at peace with the bomb Postscript
About the Author Join the Hay House Family

WELCOME TO THE GAME OF LIFE

If you're anything like me, you'll have read through the 'contents' of
this book to see what's in store for you. Actually, if you're anything
like me, you may well have read them in the bookshop, to see if it was
worth buying the book. Because you can tell a lot from a contents list;
in fact, you can tell so much from a contents list that sometimes it's
enough just to read that -- you get the feeling you won't glean that
much more by spending multiple hours (depending on your reading speed)
reading the details between the chapter titles that constitute the full
book. So, the first part of my job, really, over the course of this
book, is to persuade you that it was worth going beyond the 'contents'.
The second part is to get you from Level 1 to Level 3. And I'd suggest
that reading the contents alone will not get you to Level 3. I said 'if
you're anything like me', and that of course implies that some of you
haven't yet read the contents. You've dived in recklessly, with no
thought for the context of what you're reading. Did you even see the
title of the book? Or did a good friend who was concerned for your
welfare give you the book, and you didn't really look at it; instead,
going on trust, you just got stuck into the introduction?

Actually, I suspect there are even some readers who'll ignore the
introduction and go straight to the first chapter. I can say anything
about them here because they're never going to read it. They don't read
the chapter titles and they don't read the introduction. Fools. They'll
never get to Level 3, as getting there takes a level of incisive
intelligence -- along with other qualities like patience and
selfawareness (which aren't necessarily subsets of intelligence, as I
know plenty of intelligent but impatient and self-ignorant people). The
point I'm making here is about the 'game' structure I've chosen for the
book -- this Level 1, 2, 3 thing. I like a good game, especially at
Christmas: a parlour game, or a board game, or even a video game (if I
can manage to get my hands on a controller). Actually, I've been known
to pay my children for a go on their video games. I say 'their' rather
generously of course, because I paid my hard-earned cash for both the
hardware and the various overpriced pieces of software, the 'games'. So
having to then pay a further sum to actually play the game does seem
rather unfair. Hey-ho. And this 'level' thing is more like a video game.
It's rather flippant, of course, to suggest that 'life is a game'. For
most people, for most of the time, life doesn't feel like much of a
game: it feels difficult and stressful. But part of getting to Level 3
is becoming aware that there's a game-like quality to life. Which makes
life more like a game that everyone is forced to play, without knowing
it's a game; it's only revealed to be a game if you get to the highest
level. All analogies fall down, of course, upon scrutiny. Look at the
Old Testament, for example.

HOW THIS BOOK CAME ABOUT During a F**k It Weekend I was running earlier
this year, I had a realization: there's another level to the F**k It
concept -- one that's beyond what I'd previously imagined. This
realization sent me on a journey of discovery (this book) that
manifested in rather astonishing shifts in perspective. And if you read
this book slowly, and ponder it sufficiently, and follow some of the
suggestions it contains, and give it enough time, with a good wind, you
too will experience similar (or dissimilar, but still astonishing)
shifts in perspective. I can't guarantee that, of course. There's no
money-back guarantee of Level 3 enlightenment here. But I'm holding
nothing back: I've seen some light, and I've worked out how to keep
seeing the light. And I'm sufficiently good at describing the light --
as well as explaining how you can see it and keep seeing it -- so I
don't think I'd have to shell out that much cash if there were a
money-back guarantee (and you could persuade me that although you'd done
your part, the light still wasn't being seen). So, back to that
realization I had on the F**k It Weekend: it both blew me away with its
power and pissed me off -- because it kind of undermined the whole point
of the weekend. I also knew that, to understand this realization fully,
and to absorb it into my life and my way of being, I'd have to
investigate it, unpack it, live it, and see what popped up through that
investigation. The title of the weekend was 'Be More F**k It', and early
on, the participants and I listed all the aspects of our behaviour and
personality that are not so 'F\*\*k It'. So people noted things like:
'take things too seriously', 'uptight', 'thin-skinned',
'over-ambitious', 'quick to anger', 'judgemental', 'stressed', 'care too
much about what others think', 'afraid', and so on.

Then we looked at what, for us, would constitute being more F**k It.
Here, people listed things like: 'relaxed', 'open', 'happy', 'not so
bothered about what others think', 'content in my own skin', 'patient',
'optimistic', 'courageous', 'light-hearted', and so on. I wrote up these
suggestions on two flipcharts and we all looked at the two lists -- less
F**k It and more F**k It. And then I suddenly realized something. I
asked the group: 'Can you think of some prominent people in the world
who personify these qualities?' The response was immediate: 'Trump and
Obama'. And it was very striking. Trump was the personification of 'less
F**k It', as the participants had defined it for themselves, and Obama
was completely 'F**k It'. Granted, this was in the early days of Trump's
presidency, so he was naturally top of our minds then (as he is now,
too). But the list of 'less F**k It' qualities did describe him to a 'T'
for 'Trump'. Although another possible view of the orange one is that
he's actually rather 'F**k It' -- in his straight-talking,
shoot-from-the-hip, make-it-up-ashe-goes-along way. And the more F**k It
list did describe Obama -- or 'No-Drama Obama' as his colleagues in the
White House referred to him. In fact, when I saw a particular photo of
him -- taken in February 2017, when many of us were worrying ourselves
sick about what Trump would say or do next -- Obama's F**kitness
bothered even me: he was on a boat with Richard Branson, wearing a
wetsuit -- having just been kitesurfing -- and looking as if he didn't
have a care in the world. So, having established what constitutes less
or more F**k It in our lives, I wanted to use a technique called 'muscle
testing' to evaluate these qualities. Muscle testing is the ability to
gauge how strong you are, based on certain conditions; for example, it's
often used to test for allergies. I like to use it to compare the effect
on our bodies of certain thoughts or states.

Muscle testing is easy to do: you stand up straight, raise one arm out
to your side and then make a statement out loud; a person standing
directly behind you then tries to push down your arm while you resist
the pressure (see the drawing below).

Muscle testing

The first 'muscle test' I usually do is a person's name: they say their
own name out loud, followed by an invented name. They discover (usually)
that their arm is stronger (i.e. it resists the pressure more) when they
say their own name. The F**k It Weekend group and I set about testing
less and more F**k It. Each person chose a sentence that summed up a
less F**k It aspect of themselves -- for example, 'I'm really
impatient.' They said this sentence out loud as another person tested
the strength of their outstretched arm. After this, they tested a more
F**k It version of the same thing (though it had to be believable). So:
'I know that, sometimes, things need to happen at their own pace.'

Now, truth matters in muscle testing (as the testing of the person's
real name demonstrates), so the more F**k It assertion had to draw on
some truth within the person. And, in this example, most impatient
people can see that things do need to happen at their own pace
sometimes. With the group organized into pairs, the testing took place.
And, generally, people found that they were physically stronger when
asserting the more F**k It sentence. After this exercise there was a
question from one of the group, so I invited her out to the front, to
test her myself. She was, indeed, stronger with the more F**k It
assertion. Job done. I could have let her sit down, but there was
something wrong. Even though she was happy with the result -- and
couldn't believe how much stronger she'd been when giving herself
permission to be more F**k It -- I still felt there was something wrong.
As the woman started to return to her seat, I called her back, and asked
her to test a new sentence. Now, I'll tell you what she was testing, but
I won't tell you who she was. So I'll call her 'Judi Dench'. (Of course,
it wasn't actually Judi Dench -- that's just a name I've given her. She
was nothing like Judi Dench, and neither did her name begin with 'M'.)
So Judi Dench's 'less F**k It' sentence was: 'I care too much what
others think of me.' ('Well, maybe you shouldn't have become an actor
then, eh, Dame Judi?' you might say.) And her 'more F**k It' sentence
was: 'I don't care so much about what others think of me.' Which was
believable and possible for her, so it made her stronger. The new
sentence I asked her to test was this: 'On occasion, it's perfectly
natural to be bothered about what others think of me.' She began
repeating this new sentence, and raised her arm ready for me to test her
(for a third time). I pressed down on her arm -- slowly at first, as we
teach people to do, then more forcefully -- and I couldn't

budge it an inch. Judi Dench was rock solid. Again, she couldn't believe
it.

THE THIRD LEVEL TO F**K IT But this time she was confused: wasn't the
point of the exercise to see how 'being more F**k It' was the answer? In
fact, wasn't that the point of the whole weekend? Well, yes it was. But
my definition of what 'being more F**k It' means was being tested
itself. I felt exhilarated though, as I knew this was a big insight for
us all. I knew then that there was a third level to this F**k It thing.
In Dame Judi's case: Level 1: I stress about what others think of me,
and that blocks me and bothers me. Level 2: I find a way to be not so
bothered about what others think of me. Level 3: I realize that it's
fine to be stressed about what others think of me occasionally, as it's
perfectly natural. And in our case, when we apply Level 3 to the subject
of being at peace -- which is what this book's about, after all -- it
goes something like this: Level 1: I'm stressed and don't feel peaceful.
Level 2: I find ways to feel peaceful. Level 3: I'm at peace with being
stressed at times and peaceful at others, as both are a natural part of
life.

Now that might be confusing you as you read it (as it confused Judi
Dench and the rest of the group on that 'Be More F**k It' workshop). If
so, relax: there's a whole book here for us to explore this. Or you
might instead feel a blast of freedom as you realize what this book has
to offer. The doorway to this understanding is 'F**k It'. Saying 'F**k
It to being peaceful' can easily confuse you (if being 'at peace' is
what you're after -- and, having bought the book, there's a good chance
that it is), but it can also offer a glimmer of the freedom to come when
you start to care less about things; even the very things you most want.
So, please say after me: 'I know I want it, but F**k It to being
peaceful.' And let's go explore this new game of life some more.

Although we're just starting out, at Level 1, we're pretty advanced in
the sussing-out-life game if we believe that 'being at peace' is an
important aim. You may already have reached this level, even though you
might have used expressions such as 'I'll be fine when...' or 'I'll be
happy when...' instead of 'I'll be at peace when...'. The sub-Level 1
strata are made up of more or less unconscious scramblings through life.
We go after jobs because that's what we're supposed to do. We take up
offers simply because they're offered -- regardless of whether or not
they're good for us. We get closer to Level 1 when we understand that we
do most things, and aim at most things, in order to feel something in
particular. When we're young, that thing might be 'excitement' or 'a
thrill'. As we mature, it might be 'relaxation' or 'contentment'. I've
settled on this 'at peace' thing because I think it's what's there
underneath for most of us. I don't need to be excited all the time, or
relaxed all the time, or happy all the time, but to be 'at peace' all
the time feels like a high aim to have. So, as you read through this
Level 1 section, you might occasionally need to substitute the 'at
peace' bit for something similar. As a child I would have said 'I'll be
happy \[rather than at peace\] when I get a Raleigh Chopper'; but it was
being at peace that I wanted, even then, even if I didn't know it.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I GET A RALEIGH CHOPPER

Do you know what a Raleigh Chopper is? It's the best bike ever invented:
with a seat like a Yamaha motorbike, a gearstick on the crossbar
straight out of a Ford Mustang, handlebars from a Harley Davidson and a
name from a Western. And I wanted one. I went to sleep every night
imagining what it would be like to own one. I knew that I'd be happy,
and that my life would be complete, if I could just have a Chopper. I
know this is a funny one to start on, but I'll never know whether I'd
have been forever happy, and my life complete, because I never got that
Chopper. Instead, I got a Grifter. I can't remember why. It wasn't due
to my parents' lack of generosity -- maybe the shop was out of Choppers.
Maybe I need to buy one now, eh? Maybe a Chopper is still the answer?

Fortunately, though, we all have other things in our lives -- things
that we want, and then succeed in getting -- and through these we'll see
whether the 'at peace' outcome can be achieved as anticipated.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE SCHOOL HOLIDAYS ARRIVE

For me, school was long, drawn-out agony. I didn't have a 'misspent'
youth -- I spent much of my time diligently applying myself to my
studies -- but I dreaded most classes. I spent a lot of energy either
trying to slow down time -- as I waited for the dreaded Monday, or a
test or exam -- or speed it up, longing for the breaks and the holidays.
I bet time got confused. Consequently, I wished most of my teenage years
away -- those precious years. I wished those heavy weeks in those dark
classrooms with the sadistic teachers gone -- so that I could get to the
holidays. The holidays were then like escaping to a desert island, and I
did find peace, of sorts. Of course, after a while I'd be looking
forward to the holidays within the holidays -- the times when the family
would go away to the Lake District or the seaside. Even within the
holidays within the holidays, I'd be looking forward to the more special
bits.

I can recall my precise thought processes at different times of my life.
And I'm somewhat reluctant to commit this to paper/screen because it
both fixes it and changes it slightly. It's like taking a photograph:
after a while the original memory starts to fade and you remember only
the photograph. So I'm afraid that I'll only remember the words I'm
about to use, rather than the original thought impressions. Hey-ho, in I
go for you, reader. For most of my childhood holidays, we went to the
same seaside town on England's east coast (Sutton-on-Sea), and stayed at
the same guesthouse (Holmfirth Christian Guest House), with the same
relatives (grandparents and aunts and uncles), and the same 'other'
family (the Roscamps from Sheffield in the north of England). And we'd
do pretty much the same thing every year, only changing with the
evolving habits and desires of age. The first full day of the week
(Sunday) would start with chapel. And during the service -- with its
quaint Methodist hymns and prayers from a bygone time, and a sermon from
a blind old man called Mr Lockwood, who sounded to me just as I imagined
John Wesley would have sounded -- I'd be wishing I was on the beach. But
I was also aware that I shouldn't be wishing away time, as this was
SUTTON-ON-SEA. And the last thing I should be doing was trying to speed
up time. I'd go back and forth like that for a while. Later, while
building a sandcastle on the beach, I'd be looking forward to the big
game of football we'd all have on the sand. Dads would come down to join
us. Mr Roscamp had once been in the Manchester United squad. Our dad
liked (and still likes) to think he was in the Aston Villa squad, though
the reality was he'd been called to a trial and told 'you only have one
foot'. As a child, I never understood that story, as he quite obviously
had two. Maybe the coach was Mr Lockwood.

So I'd do my best to restrain my 'Ooohhh, I can't wait' impatience to
get onto the next heavenly thing, and try to just enjoy what we were
doing. This would now be called mindfulness exercises, and that's what I
was doing -- effectively saying, 'I must be present to this -- it's
marvellous.' It was fairly hopeless though, because, in my
superexcited-kid way, I did want to get to the next thing.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'M BACK WITH MY FRIENDS

We've just returned home after our annual three-week trip to the
volcanic island of Stromboli, off the north coast of Sicily (where we
teach retreats). It's heaven there. Our 15-year-old twin boys love it
too. But one of them, Arco, spent the last week moaning that he wanted
to be back home -- to 'be with my friends'. I get it. My sister and I
spent ages looking forward to being with our Sheffield friends, Andy and
Joy Roscamp, every summer. Then, as the new school term neared, my dread
of school was partially balanced by a desire to be back with my school
friends. You feel like yourself with your friends (if they're the right
friends). You have fun with your friends. Everything will be OK when I'm
back with my friends.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I GET MY QUALIFICATIONS

When we're very young, we're naturally more 'present', aren't we? As
kids, we are as most of us would like to be as adults. Not in the
endlessly eating crisps and ice cream sense (that's something I still
do, but would prefer not to), but in our ability to just play and be
present, and not plan what we'll do for the day, or worry about things
not getting done. But as we grow up, we encounter built-in systems that
turn us into left-brained (more on that later), future-facing machines.
And one of those systems is exams and qualifications. God knows what
it's like now in the UK (our boys have been schooled in Italy, which is
blissfully free of tests and exams); if anyone starts talking about SATs
or 11-plus exams or any other tests to evaluate kids' academic level, I
stick my fingers in my ears and go 'la la la la' until they stop. I took
my first exam at 11 -- to get into the Institute of Sadism that I
attended for seven years. Although I now know what came

afterwards, I do recall sitting in the exam hall, looking at the
invigilating pupils in their smart blazers and thinking, I'll be happy
if I can just get in here. So I got in (temporary relief and happiness).
Then there were two sets of exams every year: at Christmas and in summer
-- two words that should be all pleasantness but which were (thankfully
temporarily) sullied by the presence of the exams. The exams would
occasionally take on more import (for us, they were 'O' levels and 'A'
levels), and the stakes got higher too. The last lot allowed us entry
into the Institute of Freedom, aka university. This was in the
near-forgotten days when an 18-year-old didn't have to take out a huge
loan in order to learn good stuff just for the sake of it. Stuff that
would later benefit others in a variety of difficult-to-quantify ways --
and also in the easier-to-quantify form of higher taxes paid to the
state to support others' welfare and learning. And thus the cycle of 'I
can relax when the exams are over' started early. Of course, there was a
built-in secondary trap too -- like a mouse that manages to steal the
cheese with only a grazed tail, the bigger vice would come clamping down
in the form of 'the exam results'. Several summers were spent in blessed
relief that school and exams were over, but then we'd start to feel the
growing shadow of the imminent results block out the sunlight. Like lab
animals, the system trains us early to think 'I'll be at peace when...'.
And it's a difficult habit to lose.

LEVEL 1 HACK This is most likely too late for you, but don't grow up too
quickly. Don't listen too much to your teachers, or even your

parents in many cases. Keep playing. Keep dreaming. Don't answer when
you're asked what you'll do when you grow up. Only answer when asked
what you'll be doing this afternoon.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THEY SAY 'YES'

If only they would notice me, and say 'yes' to going out; then I'd feel
OK. And they would then say 'yes' to going out again, of course, and
we'd become an item. Then I hope I'd get a 'yes' to getting closer, if
you know what I mean. And that there'd be lots of yes, yes, yeses from
both of us. Then maybe we'd both say 'yes' to settling down together.
That would be good. Then I'd be at peace. Maybe we'd then say 'yes' to
having kids, which is a whole other game, I suppose. And I just hope
that they don't say 'yes' to anyone else along the way. And I hope I
don't, either. I hope that when we argue, we can say sorry and find our
peace. I hope that if I'm wrong, I'll be forgiven, and find my peace. I
hope that if they are wrong, I can forgive, and leave them in peace. I
hope that, if it ends, we can both move on, and find our peace.

The 'circle of control' is a concept that says there are things in life
that we can control (or think we can) -- such as what we eat. Outside
the circle of control is the 'circle of influence', where we can't fully
control the outcome, but we can influence it. So this might be what our
teenage son or daughter eats. Then outside that is the 'circle of
concern', where we can't control the outcome, and we can't really
influence it, but we're concerned about it. So this might be what
children in Africa are eating, or not. A more rational route through
this question of finding our peace suggests that we should concentrate
only on the things that we can control. So it would make more sense to
believe we can be more at peace when we've passed our exams, than when
world peace has been achieved. On this basis, our intimate relationships
-- one of the most important aspects of our lives and one in which we
hope to find peace -- involve another party whom we cannot control, and
should probably be wary of even trying to influence (although we should
clearly demonstrate some concern for them). In other words, to rely on
others for your sense of peace, even your nearest and dearest, is not a
particularly functional way to go about things. Sorry.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THERE'S PEACE IN THE WORLD

I grew up in the shadow of the Cold War, with its ever-present threat of
nuclear apocalypse. As I became more politically aware, I struggled to
find peace within myself when there was so much struggle at the
geo-political level. But then the Berlin Wall came down, Nelson Mandela
was released, there was 'glasnost' in Russia, and a new kind of opening
occurred around the world. And we could relax, at last. But at the time
of writing, there's uncertainty and threat everywhere: the war in Syria,
the ballistic missile tests launched by North Korea, tensions around
Russia, and President Trump's daily tweets. What would it take to be at
peace in this environment? For the wars to end, for Kim Jong-un to halt
his nuclear weapons programme, for Putin to stop provoking Europe with
military exercises, for Trump to stop tweeting?

We know that none of those things is likely to happen any time soon, but
it's still difficult to find peace until they do. We sit and watch the
news (well, we don't really do that anymore do we? We don't just watch
it, and it isn't broadcast at a fixed time these days; instead, it
bleeds into all our waking hours) and remind ourselves how absurd it
would be to feel at peace now.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I HAVE MY OWN CAR

When we're young, a car is freedom on wheels -- it's the primary mode of
transport for taking us out of the family home and into the outside
world. From rules and restrictions to freedom, via the open road. Can
you remember the feeling of getting into your own car for the first
time, then shutting the door and just driving around? There was a total
thrill to doing that. I thought I'd be happy once I'd passed my driving
test and owned my own car. And I did feel that way once I was out on the
road. I felt pretty relaxed and at peace in my car for the first few
days and weeks. I remember driving sedately as I learned the ropes, but
then something else took over. I wanted to be faster than the other road
users. It wasn't enough to be driving my vehicle of freedom with others
on the roads -- I had to be driving past the others.

A similar thing has happened many times in my life, including with these
F**k It books. I won't write a section title like 'I'll be at peace
when... I get my book published' because it scores pretty low on the
universality scale (lower even than the Chopper). So I'll bury it here,
under first cars, but... I'd written the first F**k It book (F\*\*k It,
the Ultimate Spiritual Way) and found an agent via a friend (hurrah!)
But he couldn't find a publisher (boo!), so I decided to self-publish,
which I did 10 years ago today (hurrah!) People liked the book and
talked about it, and soon I received an email from Michelle Pilley,
officially the Best Managing Director of the Best Mind, Body, Spirit
Publisher in the World, Hay House (UK) who, after a meeting, offered to
publish it (double hurrah!) And, throughout that process, I told myself
I wasn't bothered if the book was published or not. But I was only
trying to protect myself from the disappointment of it not being
published. I was bothered, because getting published felt like a very
good thing indeed. In fact, in the moments when I wasn't pretending I
wasn't bothered, I do remember thinking, Oooh, if I were published, that
would be it. I could just relax, and my work would be done, because I'd
be PUBLISHED. So the papers were signed and, even though the arrival of
the finished book on bookshop shelves was still a few months off, I was
now PUBLISHED, and I sat back in that feeling. And it felt as good as
I'd imagined it would. My work was done. I'd made it. I was a published
author. I sat like an author (imagining myself with a pipe). I walked
like an author (at a slow but confident pace). I talked like an author
(preceding every sentence with a drawn-out 'Welllllll...'). I'd arrived
at the summit of life. I could now sit down, relax, and gaze upon this
wondrous world, oxygen permitting.

This 'at peace' (and somewhat self-satisfied) feeling lasted for a few
days. Just as I drove around at a sedate pace in my newly owned (but not
new) car. Then something else kicked in. I couldn't be just any old
published author: I had to be a successful published author. So the next
time I saw Michelle, I asked her, 'How many copies must the book sell
for you to consider it a success?' She mentioned a figure. It didn't
sound so many. I pushed harder: 'What would be a HUGE success for you,
then?' She mentioned another figure. And I was off. My foot hit the
accelerator. I could now see where the other drivers were on the road,
and I wanted to pass them. I'd drop into a lower gear, my twin exhaust
manifold would hum like a Lamborghini's, and I'd pass those frickin'
Sunday drivers in their hats, giving them the finger as I did so. That's
what happened to the idea that I'd be at peace when I got my book
published... just the same as what happened when I thought I'd be at
peace when I got my own car.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I FIND MY IDEAL JOB

When I emerged from university in the late 1980s, the UK economy was in
a deep recession and the outlook for employment was grim. Signing up for
income support was not the way I'd planned to start my working life, so
I thought I'd be happy with any job. My first (temporary) job was in the
post office. I'd sort letters into the appropriate streets, ready for
the postmen to pick up and deliver. And I was quite happy there for a
while. Before long I'd moved onto filing and photocopying in various
offices around Maidenhead, a town in southeast England; and then onto a
job with some interesting prospects, in one of the offices in which I'd
been filing. But I realized, over time, that I'd like to write for a
living -- and I fancied the idea of writing television ads. So the
journey began. It's not an easy job to get: I had to sell my car and go
back to college, and then spend a year chasing my first opportunity in a
good London advertising agency.

But being hungry makes you appreciative of food. In the year that my
creative partner and I were tramping the streets of London, taking our
portfolio to swanky agency after swanky agency (with the odd wanky
agency along the way), the idea of having a desk in one of those places
grew more and more appealing. How cool would it be to be a creative in a
London agency? I imagined that, once we'd got the job, my partner and I
could sit back and enjoy the good life. The ideas would flow. The
commercials would be made. We'd enjoy anonymous fame during the ad
breaks that punctuated Britain's greatest soap operas. The feeling of
getting that first job was great; and then being hired by our dream
agency was even better. That was a sit-back-and-enjoy feeling. But the
peace didn't last long, as we're beginning to learn -- and I couldn't
settle until I'd done some great work. Then, after the first bit of good
work (the first TV commercial for Haagen Dazs), I couldn't settle until
I'd done some more. You're only as good as your last ad, they say in
adland. I took that a step further: I was only as good as my next ad.
And there's something else to be said here, isn't there, about the
advertising business? And maybe I could add an 'of course' to this, as
it may be patently obvious to you. I always saw advertising as a fun way
to communicate the benefits of a product to the nation. If you don't
object to free-market capitalism (and there are many who do, I know),
how can you object to companies advertising their wares? I had no moral
objection to advertising in principle, though there were areas of the
business that I did object to, and wouldn't work on (such as advertising
cigarettes). But, in this book about 'being at peace with life',
advertising clearly doesn't exist to make us feel at peace. It exists to
sell more stuff, and we generally buy more stuff when we don't feel we
have enough, or are enough.

The advertising world (and the corporate world it represents) doesn't
want you to feel at peace with life, as it is. But then again, that's
life, as it is.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I HAVE A PLACE TO CALL HOME

An Englishman's home is his castle. I'm not sure what this means, as
most castles were built as a defence against rampaging marauders, and,
unless you live in particular postcodes, I can't imagine that's a
priority. We load the idea of having our own home with so much: it's a
place to express our personality; a place to escape to; a place to be
ourselves. And, in the UK for the last 20 years or so, it's been a place
we regard as our own personal pot of gold. My first place was a loft in
East London -- I'd seen too many jeans commercials in the 1980s. It
wasn't a very big loft; my brother-in-law remarked that it was 'more
like a pigeon loft' -- he pronounced this with a northern English
accent, because he's from the north of England, and therefore knows what
a pigeon loft looks like. And, admittedly, it was more a narrow room
with a very high ceiling. But it was in an old factory at least.

I can remember sitting in that empty, echoey space on my first night,
looking around and saying to myself, This is mine. It's MINE. It was a
very good feeling. And I was at peace there. For a while, at least (as
usual). The fact that the feeling didn't last (as usual) may be (small)
comfort to the masses of young people who are struggling to afford a
place of their own (or even to rent a place of their own). I'm sorry.
It's not fair. Throughout my life I've enjoyed owning various
properties, but it's not the ultimate answer. It won't solve everything.
But it's worth talking a little about the essentials that can be an
objective and serious block to feeling any kind of peace, ever. There
are some things that we just plain 'need' if we're to have any chance of
a decent life and a minimum level of wellbeing -- physical and mental.
For us humans, this has probably been the case for a long, long time. We
have a basic survival need for shelter (a safe place to live, protected
from the elements); food and water for ourselves and our families; and a
way to heat ourselves and light our space. And we thus usually need a
way to 'earn' these things, commonly via some form of work. For most of
us, it's been a while since our ancestors built and maintained their own
shelters, hunted for or grew their own food, chopped wood for heat, and
so on. But if you think about how much of the money you earn from doing
some modern kind of work goes on your property, food and water, and
energy bills, you'll probably realize that not a lot has changed. We've
introduced an exchange mechanism so that we don't literally have to
build our own shelters or produce our own food. Our properties, meals
and means of keeping warm are vastly more sophisticated now, but still.
And just as the desires of our ancestors hundreds of years ago might
have revolved around less gruelling work, or a more comfortable

home, or a special meal, how much desire energy do you spend on thinking
of better (and better paid) work, a nicer property and a fancy meal out?
Given such ancient experience with the same desires and needs, how good
are we at getting it? Well, the problem is that the goalposts keep
changing, don't they? One minute you're thinking you've got it all
worked out, with your excellent father-passed-to-son hunting skills, and
the next minute you're looking askance at the price of a ready-made
crispy duck meal from some posh supermarket. One minute it's enough to
get into grammar school, then choose a good, solid job that'll set you
up for life. The next minute everyone's talking about portfolio jobs and
the rise of the robots. One minute you can buy a nice terraced house,
fit for you and your future family, for the price of a year's earnings.
The next minute, you'd have to sell your grandmother to afford the shed
in the back yard of the same terraced house. One minute you're burning
coal to heat yourself and cook your food -- coal that was mined in the
next county and delivered by a lorry to your cellar. The next minute
you're paying the price of a shed every year to a company that agrees to
light your home from an unknown source -- fracked gas, perhaps, or a
nuclear power station, or unsightly wind farms -- and passes most of the
money to a shareholder who lives in the biggest house on the street.
Yet, until we get a national basic living wage for which we need to do
no work in return, we'll need to find some way to earn some money to pay
for the shelter, the sustenance and the heat and light. So, because
those bloody goalposts keep changing -- unlike in the real game of
football, that's kind of what the metaphorical goalposts do, isn't it?
-- we need to get used to being ready to shoot at a moving target.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... WE HAVE A FAMILY

Talking of football, let's have some kids, so I can play football with
them in the park. Now, I know we don't all want a family. I have one, as
you know, but I didn't for years. Sorry, it's sounding like a commodity,
isn't it? 'I put up with saggy jowls for years. I know a face tuck isn't
for everyone -- I never imagined I'd want one, actually -- but since Dr
Tucker did his magic, I've never felt better.' So for those of you who
do want to have kids... We imagine that life will be complete when they
arrive. And there's no overstating how totally gorgeous it is to have
children. Our boys are 15 and I've spent their lives thinking something
along the lines of, Oh, this is probably the best age -- appreciate
this, as it'll change soon, and I continue to do so.

Being 'Dad' is probably the most cherished bit of my spell on this
planet. Whenever the boys call me 'Dad', which they do all the time (as
I've banned 'John' and 'wanker'), a little bit of me melts. But... it
ain't peaceful. That's the last thing it is. You know that, without me
explaining it (if you don't have kids), don't you? And being at peace?
Well, for the times when you feel that, there are an equal number of
times when you feel the opposite. I recognized this the very day I
learned that my wife Gaia was pregnant with twins (we knew she was
pregnant, but it was a trip to the hospital for a checkup that confirmed
everything was OK and that there were two of them). I felt elated, and
at the exact same moment I felt an entirely new feeling of
responsibility. I felt the total joy of new life, combined with the huge
potential for pain at the vulnerability of said life, and my
responsibility for it.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE KIDS ARE OFF TO SCHOOL

I remember our boys' first day at nursery school, the windows of which
had views onto the mountains (unlike at my schools: one of which looked
onto the municipal dump, and the other, onto a caravan concession).
After dropping off the boys, Gaia and I drove back home, where it was...
quiet. However you look after your kids before they go off to school --
whether you share childcare, have grandparents nearby, employ a nanny,
or are on your own -- it's hard work. It's bloody hard work.
Pre-children, I had a glimpse into the life of a parent while I was
working in a creative partnership with a new father called James. I
would leave my easy life of leisure outside work to come into the office
and sit down with a resigned look that said, Right, let's get down to
this then. James would come into the office and slump down

into the chair with a look of total relief, as if this was his time of
leisure. And in many senses, it was. Yes, bloody hard work: I'll be at
peace when they're off to school, for sure.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... WE MANAGE TO PAY THE BILLS AND MORTGAGE

Many people suffer from financial insecurity in one way or another, and
most of it will entail a good degree of 'I'll be at peace when...'. And
it can come down to whether we have enough money to pay the bills and
mortgage or rent each month. I have, in the past, exhibited a common
pattern around money (I seem to have cured myself of it, but we'll see).
I'd spend months not really knowing our financial situation in detail --
just assuming it was kind of OK, and thus not worrying about it. And
then I'd force myself (or be forced by some large tax bill) to look at
everything properly; this would cause me lots of worry and pain, so I'd
soon be back to burying my head in the sand. I was supported in this
pattern by the fiendishly complicated tax system here in Italy. It's
practically impossible to understand how exactly we're taxed; and the
rules change every year anyway; and

taxes are rather high. This meant that, whatever happened, I could
always blame the taxman and/or the accountant. Anyway, now that I've
kicked that habit, and know what's going on without freaking out, I have
a more predictable curve in my state of mind around money and our
business: when we're meeting or exceeding our forecasts I tend to feel
OK, and if we're behind our forecasts, I'm more anxious. And you could
argue that this is fine, as that anxiety incentivizes me to find ways to
improve our results as a business (so it's far better than the
head-in-the-sand obliviousness to the early warning signs). But I can
easily, therefore, lead a life of 'I'll be at peace when we meet our
forecasts.' In one way or another, many of us believe we'll be at peace
when we're able to pay this or that, or when we've paid off this or
that. But, generally speaking, the relief of paying off one thing is
soon smothered by the anxiety arising from having to pay for something
else.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... WE HAVE A LARGER HOUSE

We have laundry drying in the lounge all the time; the kids really
should have their own rooms by now; I've had it with working at the
kitchen table; the garden is tiny; all our friends have bigger houses;
there's no room to swing a cat in here. The place was fine when we
bought it, but now... If only we could afford a larger house, then
everything would be tickety-boo.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE HOUSE IS TIDY

I was born with two opposing preferences that have doomed me to
everlasting domestic misery: The desire for a tidy, organized space A
dislike of tidying and organizing My desire for a tidy and organized
space, whether at home or in the office, isn't just a flippant desire --
such as, I'd like to drive a Ferrari round the Imola motorsport race
circuit. It's one that affects my every waking (and maybe sleeping)
moment. I don't have to go into energetic/Feng Shui reasons to know that
I simply feel better in a clear and tidy space; and I feel more
uncomfortable in a messy space. But I don't like tidying. And neither
does Gaia. And we have teenage boys. You get the picture. So, yes, we
have a cleaner. But once

she's left, and we're all in the house -- and especially if we're eating
-- it takes about half an hour for it all to go to (dirty) pot. I've
adopted strategies over the years to cope with this: to find my
(slightly tidier) way through the mess. I currently fence off certain
areas of my life that I then keep tidy and clear. So the area next to my
side of the bed -- a table and an Ikea bookshelf system containing my
favourite books, family photos and precious personal items -- is
immaculately tidy and clean. I know that this area, at least, is tidy.
When our home is so untidy that I have to navigate an obstacle course to
arrive at the bedroom, I'll stand looking at 'my corner' to calm myself
down. Even then I sometimes have to 'blinker' my eyes so I can't see
Gaia's side of the bedroom (think 1970s squat with Italian style). The
other fenced-off area is my car. I can't bear to sit in Gaia's car, as
she simply doesn't understand why anyone would want to keep a nice clean
car. This is Gaia's car: empty water bottles, receipts, biscuit
wrappers, an apple core, coins, a banana skin, yoga mats and cushions, a
box with miscellaneous items collected during a long-ago-attempted tidy,
a screenwash bottle (leaking), a highvisibility jacket (unfolded,
creased and dirty), a beach umbrella (all year round), a golf umbrella
(borrowed from a hotel, but then kept). And this is not an exhaustive
list. I shudder and shake my head when I look into her car. She shudders
and shakes her head when she sits in mine. She tries to relax by putting
her foot up on my immaculate dashboard -- so I reach across and tap her
ankle. No matter how much time Gaia spends in my car -- and no matter
what I say to her about taking her things with her, and reminding her
that I've just had it cleaned -- this is what I find in the passenger
seat footwell when I next get in: an empty Tupperware container with a

spoon in it and the remains of something oily and yoghurty; discarded
tissues/kitchen paper; the inevitable water bottle with a quarter of the
water remaining; and that dusty footprint on the dashboard. If I ever
say anything about this, Gaia just shakes her head, appalled at my
bourgeois insistence on orderliness. But still, once it's been cleaned
up after a Gaia visit, my car is my refuge. Without driving a metre, I'm
transported to calmness and tranquillity. And I'm guessing that if our
house were anything like my car, yes goddammit, I would be at peace.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'M A SUCCESS

Have you enjoyed success in your life? Most of us have, in one thing or
another. And I think all of us should. However, it clearly depends on
how you define 'success'. If your definition of success is very narrow
and consists only of 'winning a Nobel Prize', then your experience of
life will be very different from that of someone who enjoys all the
successes they have along the way. From getting a gold star in nursery
to attaining good exam results; from achieving something great in a
sport, to getting their first job... and so on. I've enjoyed successes,
large and small, in my life; just as I've endured failures, large and
small. I make a to-do list every day and I enjoy the 'success' of
ticking each thing off. Those small daily successes often lead to bigger
successes in my life (so today's list includes writing three sections of
this book; a future success would be lots of people reading the chapters
of this book; and a greater success still would be lots of people
feeling more 'at peace' in their lives because of it).

But here's what I've found with success on any scale: although we use
the word 'enjoy' around it, that enjoyment doesn't last long. When I
hear about any success of mine or ours, I enjoy it for a few moments,
and then I quickly move on to the next thing to achieve. I'm not good at
enjoying success, and simply being at peace with having achieved
something great; this is probably because, underneath, I believe that
'being at peace' is not conducive to achieving success, and that success
comes from a perpetual restlessness. I wish you success, if only so
you'll see that it's not the ultimate answer; I also hope that you may
'enjoy' that success for longer.

LEVEL 1 HACK Hang out with someone who doesn't see life in this Level 1
way -- constantly looking to the next thing to get through so they can
be happy. There are a few around. They're usually not meditation or yoga
teachers. They probably work in the corner shop.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'M WEALTHY

In this world, some successes can lead to wealth. And like success, our
definition of wealth can vary hugely. What does 'wealth' mean to you? Of
course, if you sat down and compared your lifestyle and prosperity with
that of the least fortunate people on the planet, you'd likely feel very
wealthy. But most people see wealth as somewhere else. Even relatively
wealthy people are likely to see real wealth elsewhere -- in others'
salaries, second homes and stock portfolios. Most people, in other
words, would like more. A survey asked a group of very wealthy people --
from millionaires to billionaires -- if they felt content with their
level of wealth. Most said 'no'. They were then asked, 'How much more
would make you feel content?' And they were invited to put a \$ figure
on it. The researchers turned that figure into the percentage of extra
wealth

that the wealthy people wanted in order to feel content. The figure was,
roughly, the same for all of them: 20% extra. It seems then, that
everyone is 20% away from being content, regardless of their income. And
that's worth bearing in mind as you go about wanting more wealth, more
things, and trying to get them. If you believe that you'll be at peace
when you're wealthy, the research suggests you'll remain forever 20%
away from peace.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I WIN THAT AWARD

Even if we're doing a job we like, or have achieved what we regard as
success, there's usually something else that we're hankering after. It
might be an award or an accolade of some sort; it might be an honorary
position. But there's usually something that keeps us motivated to keep
at it -- to achieve more, to hit greater heights, to stand out for what
we do, to make a mark, to create a legacy. And that's a good thing,
isn't it? If the incentives are incentivizing enough, everyone benefits
from the common pursuit of excellence. More people achieve excellence
and we all then benefit from these various excellences: whether it's in
science or engineering or medicine or the arts, or whatever you'd regard
as most beneficial to your existence. The thing is, those chasing the
award or accolade are not at peace until it's won. In fact, many regard
'not being at peace' as a positive thing. Sure, we dress it in other
language -- like 'drive',

'determination', 'ambition' -- but it amounts to the same thing. We've
persuaded ourselves that a certain kind of restlessness is critical for
our common progress.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'VE LOST THIS WEIGHT

Bummer, I just got up to make myself a few slices of brown bread and
butter, only to sit down again and see this subject heading on my list.
I spend a good amount of time pondering how to lose weight. I
contemplate what meals to eat and which foods to avoid; I decide whether
to fast or just skip one meal; whether to go on that proper diet that
really worked for me last time, or just try to eat naturally without
obsessing about it. I exceed my 10,000 steps each day, but it's not that
many calories really (in fact, I think I've eaten those calories in the
buttered bread and the accompanying watermelon slices I've just eaten).
I'm certainly not at peace when I'm thinking about food and my weight.
And I assume I'd be more at peace if I could lose this weight: I'd be
more comfortable in my own (less padded) skin, happier when catching my
reflection in a shop window, and more at ease on the

beach (though I do sometimes wonder if I'm not quite uncomfortable
enough with my belly, and thus not sufficiently motivated to lose it).
The problem with weight issues is that we face a unique selfsabotaging
opposition when trying to deal with them. It goes something like this:
we begin by not feeling good (our weight problems often contribute to
this), and know that we'd probably feel better if we could lose the
weight. But our more natural response to not feeling good is to eat. But
eating takes us further away from losing weight. And we feel worse. So,
what's the answer here? First, within the theme of this part of the
book, it's to be aware that it's unlikely -- even if we do lose the
weight -- we'll be fully at peace, and all our problems will end.
Second, it's to recognize that the improvement in mood we feel when we
eat (and then overeat) is usually temporary and a way of numbing the
emotions. So, whether it's the side of us that thinks eating is the
answer to being at peace (i.e. in the short term) or the side that
thinks not eating (so much) is the answer to being at peace, both are
probably wrong. We need to find our peace elsewhere. And in doing so,
our weight issues might well resolve naturally. This is what many people
have found out for themselves. Lucky beggars.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'M WELL AGAIN

This one, I really know. When I was aged three or so, I ate some tuna --
something I'd happily eaten before -- and had an allergic reaction to
it. I went on to develop (not intentionally) allergies to a whole
variety of things, and the allergic response manifested itself in a
variety of symptoms. Since that time, I've experienced long periods of
chronic illness and short, spectacular acute emergencies. So I'm
familiar with both chronic and acute illness. And they both have the
same effect on my head in that I believe I could be at peace if only I
could get better. Well, that's how I've responded as an adult. I do know
that, as an at times very sick child, I didn't much contemplate my
illness, or the possibility of getting better (or not). I was sick and
that was that -- I didn't think 'that's that', of course. But when I
entered a long period of chronic illness as a young adult, I longed to
be well. My symptoms would vary, but were generally very uncomfortable
and sometimes simply embarrassing. I imagined

that, if only I could be well, then I'd have nothing else to worry
about. My health was my main worry, and everything else seemed kind of
trivial in comparison. I couldn't understand why people without such
debilitating symptoms were worrying so much. 'What do they have to worry
about? They don't realize how lucky they are' was a favourite mantra of
mine. I dreamed about what it would be like to be 'normal' (this is how
I naively saw the rest of the non-suffering world), and not have to
suffer as I did. But I got to find out what it's like to be 'normal', as
I saw it. Because, since 2005 (and a period of healing I connect with
'F**k It' -- as described in the book F**k It, the Ultimate Spiritual
Way), I've been largely free of symptoms. I'm still allergic to stuff: I
can't eat fish or nuts or share a small room with a dog; and I don't
have any issue with that. When people hear that I can't eat fish, they
often say, 'Oohh, that must be terrible.' My response is: 'No, it's not
-- what is terrible is the symptoms I'd get if I ate the fish.' So,
what's it like, being normal? I think you know the answer. Having
suffered for so long, I did spend a good amount of time really
appreciating being well. I lived happily in the comparison with how I'd
been. I enjoyed eating normally, drinking normally and living normally.
But, rather sooner than I expected, other worries and concerns emerged,
like weeds, in my head. And most of them had less obvious solutions
(than 'getting better'). And that was with the chronic illness. The
acute side presents a more intense manifestation of this same
phenomenon, though. Every two or three years, I eat something by mistake
that contains an allergen that has the potential to kill me. I've not
had a serious anaphylactic shock for 25 years. When I did have one, the
reaction

(to nuts in a Danish pastry) took five hours to reach its
lifethreatening crescendo. So when I eat something I shouldn't (in an
allergen sense, not a cream cake sense), I tend to experience the same
early-stage symptoms: it's just difficult to predict which way it will
go -- whether the symptoms will slowly diminish, or whether they'll
worsen. Therefore, I tend to get myself close to a hospital emergency
room (I don't enter it, as they'd hit me with various drugs) and sit it
out. When the symptoms are intensifying (it takes a while for the
crippling stomach cramps to kick in), I get seriously worried, and I try
to calm myself down. I have the same conversation with myself every
time. It goes something like this: This is serious. Bloody hell. Why
have you been worrying about such stupid things recently? Jeez, they
don't matter. Why do you never understand that? Just be happy to be
alive. Be happy to be well. Be happy to be with what you've got. And I
reply (to myself): I know, I know. You're right. But if we get through
this one, I'll change. I'll relax more. I'll keep things in perspective.
You're right -- we just need to be happy to be alive. It's good to be
reminded. Yes, but we've been reminded before. Why do you never
remember? And so on. The symptoms then diminish, and I breathe a sigh of
relief. I spend the rest of the day appreciating life like a man let out
of prison. I go to bed, just happy to be alive. Nothing more needed. I
wake up the next morning, and the worries rush back in. Don't get me
wrong, I love being well (when I am -- as I am now), but I'm the expert
in knowing that 'getting better' is just another place where the peace
thing keeps running ahead of you. And that's the

feeling, isn't it? We catch up with it for a moment. We get the job, the
boy/girl, the healing, the award; or we go on holiday or get some great
news... and we're at peace. But then off it runs again. And off we go,
chasing after it.

LEVEL 1 HACK Turn to Level 2 -- you've got this, haven't you?

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I CAN TAKE REDUNDANCY

The timing is perfect. I've not been happy here recently: it's not what
I expected, and there's not much opportunity for promotion. I could do
with a rest too -- maybe rethink things, or do some travelling. It's
been a long time. And I now hear that they're looking to make some
redundancies (layoffs), and that they're likely to offer voluntary
redundancies first. That would be perfect -- just perfect. It means I
could take time out, and maybe make a new start. Crikey, yes: I really
want this. The thing is, I've spent all these years trying to show how
indispensable I am. I now have to demonstrate that they can do without
me, but that I'm not too keen to go. (Or maybe they'll assume I'll go
anyway, without being paid. Blimey, I really want this.) I really do
feel that I'll be at peace when I can take redundancy.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE HOLIDAYS ARRIVE

In the stress, rush and madness of everyday life, we all like to have a
booked future holiday glowing in our diaries. We usually see the
benefits of a holiday in terms of the pleasure and rest we get while
we're away, and then how we bring our refreshed selves back into normal
life. But the benefits of a holiday begin the moment we plan it. When
it's all feeling too much, we remember that we have our holiday booked.
When we're exhausted and stressed, we think of our holiday. When it's
dark, grey and raining, we think of the holiday. Whatever we're feeling,
we know we'll be at peace when the holidays arrive. And many of us are
fortunate enough to have been able to craft the kind of holiday that
hits the spot for us, 'at peace' wise. If there's one area of our lives
in which we consciously try to create the perfect environment for
feeling at peace, it's the holidays. In the annual

schedule of our lives, we leave two weeks (or whatever) free to paint
our idea of life perfection. So what's your ideal holiday haven/heaven?
Though we live in Italy (close to the sea), the Italian beach is still
our favourite family holiday destination (in another part of Italy,
Sicily). We like huddling in the shade of our beach umbrella on a
wild(ish) sandy beach; picnicking on ciabatta with Pecorino cheese and
sun-dried tomatoes; snorkelling in the clear, warm sea; wandering around
fishing villages at night, and sleeping under a fan. As our boys hit 16
(in 3 days' time), it's special just to be together for a couple of
weeks. And we leave for Sicily in seven days. You have to hand it to us
humans for this system we've created for living: by dropping refreshing
holidays in at regular intervals, we can tolerate a lot more in our
everyday lives. The holiday environment, too, reminds us that, no matter
how terrible we're feeling back at home (and work), there'll always
exist a place like this where we can feel at peace. Because the truth is
that we do feel at peace on holiday, don't we? The dramatic change in
geography, climate, routine, cuisine, language -- and the fact that our
diaries have been cleared of all the usual commitments, responsibilities
and stresses -- leads us to feel at peace. And the knowledge that
there's an actual place on the planet where we could feel at peace, in
comparison to what we feel now, is reassuring. The thing is, that could
be the problem, couldn't it? If we didn't have this idealized 'at peace'
experience dangling tantalizingly and reassuringly over every other
moment of our more humdrum existence, maybe we'd be more able to find
peace in the present.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... WE HAVE A CHANGE OF GOVERNMENT

I see so much injustice everywhere. This government has squeezed the
poor and needy for every last penny; it's run down the health service;
and then it helps the rich get richer. They're only looking after their
own: their friends in the City, and their private school chums. There's
no one looking out for ordinary working people anymore. Our children can
hardly afford to rent somewhere to live, never mind buy a house. Jobs
are not secure anymore. The term 'zero-hours contracts' says it all --
how can any contract be zero-hours? Might as well call them zero-money
contracts. This government might say it's there for the working people,
but it's a lie. There's only hardship and misery. How can we possibly be
at peace when we have a government like this?

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'VE PAID OFF THE MORTGAGE

A mortgage is a 25-year peace-delayer. Even with historically low
interest rates, your mortgage, if you have one, is likely to be your
most significant outgoing. Financially, then, it's the main reason you
work. And thus the main reason you have to work. Justifiably or not,
many people see the paying off of the mortgage as a herald of a new era
of freedom. Even though the home accounts might not back this up
(i.e. there are other costs to living), there's a sense that the heavy
ties of obligation to our job loosen somewhat when the monthly mortgage
payments end. And so, 'when I've paid off the mortgage' becomes another
significant asset in our personal bank of 'I'll be at peace when...'s.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE DIVORCE IS SETTLED

Everyone says that divorce is one of the most stressful experiences in
life; and I'm finding this so difficult. I just want to get it over with
now. I wish it didn't take so long. This is unbearable, and the effect
it's having on the kids is breaking my heart. At least when it's over,
we can all just settle and know where we are, and be at peace.

LEVEL 1 HACK Don't wish this on yourself -- it's an inadvertent hack --
but when shit happens big time, you'll be hit by

perspective, and the realization that you have to live more in the
moment.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I/WE RETIRE

They've just raised the retirement age again; it seems like every couple
of years they raise it by a couple of years. Are they raising it at the
same rate that we're living? Will retirement forever remain 10 or 20 or
30 (however old you are) years ahead of you? People see retirement in
different ways: some look forward to it, while others dread it; some
never even think about it. But many of us still see the prospect of
retirement as one long holiday. Which I suppose, if you retire to a warm
foreign clime or you're wealthy enough for regular trips there, it can
be. Or seem to be, from this side of retirement. Because, even though
there'll be similarities with what pre-retirees see as a 'holiday' --
i.e. the sun, the sangria and long lazy days -- there will be
differences too. Because our pre-retirement concept of a 'holiday' is
protected by its short-burst nature.

The holiday environment is so attractive because it's so different to
what we're used to. And we don't get long enough to get used to it.
We're back in the normal way of life before we know it, keeping
'holiday' preserved as a special oasis for our hopes and dreams. But
stay on the beach and drink the sangria for longer than a couple of
months, and your concept of this perfect holiday destination begins to
change. When you start to complain about things at the resort, and find
people annoying, and worry about things, and get bored, you might at
first think it's the place that doesn't really suit you, after all. But,
of course, it's the fact that we take ourselves with us wherever we go.
And though the moany, worrying side might be quiet for a couple of weeks
a year, it will want to have its say, sooner or later. So, even if your
retirement looks from the outside like one long holiday, it's unlikely
to be the notion of 'holiday' you're used to. And, however it looks,
retirement will reveal the same truths that everything else in our lives
reveals -- it's probably not the answer or the destination. The problem
with the idea of 'retirement', as opposed to, say, getting your own
home, is that you can get stuck with its peace-dangling delusion for
decades.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THE OPERATION IS OVER

I can imagine a hundred things that could disturb the anticipated peace
of retirement, and one of them must be medical intervention. There's a
unique combination of discomfort in the period before a serious medical
intervention: the discomfort created by whatever it is that it's
necessary to intervene in (some type of pain or incapacity) and the
discomfort of the anticipation of the medical intervention itself (which
clearly depends on our level of anxiety around such things). It must,
therefore, be rather difficult, with this double whammy of discomfort,
to feel fully at peace in a pre-op environment.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... THIS PAIN HAS GONE

Pain is hard to deal with, and it's certainly hard to be at peace with
it. In fact, that's one of the points of pain: it's the body's way of
saying to you, 'Oi, you, there's something wrong here: can you do
something about it please? Don't just sit around feeling all "at
peace".' Pain is another of the body's self-regulation mechanisms -- a
red light flashing on the dashboard of our nervous system. Disturbing us
from our peace, in order to make us act and sort out the problem, is
good programming. The difficulty is with chronic pain, which can't
easily be relieved The idea that we'll only find peace when the pain has
gone is flawed, for two reasons. The final 'peace' we feel is likely to
be short-lived, as we've found again and again in this Level 1 section
of the book, and thus not worth the expectation we have of it. And that
idea -- that

'peace will come when...' -- does, as usual, prevent us from searching
for ways to find peace now. Now, you may see that it's probably easier
for someone who believes they'll find peace when they get that big
promotion to recognize this delusion -- and attempt to find peace in the
present -- than it is for someone in great pain to see it. And that's
what makes pain such a great teacher. And maybe why, generally speaking,
the pain-loading in our lives tends to be weighted more towards the
final years, as we wear out. Whatever peace we can find in the midst of
pain is a hard-won and highly valuable peace (not that peace has a value
scale, but I'm sure you see my point).

LEVEL 1 HACK Work hard, dream big... get through as many of these as
quickly as you can -- except the death thing -- so you repeatedly get
the message that there's always another thing. You'll thus hasten your
way to Level 2.

I'LL BE AT PEACE WHEN... I'M RESTING IN PEACE

'Rest in peace', we say, and hope for, when someone dies. No one knows
what, if anything, awaits us on the other side, but as death brings the
simple cessation of what the majority of human beings experience while
alive -- i.e. they're neither resting nor being at peace -- it's
probably sufficiently close to 'rest' and 'peace' for most. And many
people do, at some point in their lives, believe that the only way to be
at peace is to be no more. These can be the dark thoughts of the
desperate, or of those who are considering taking their own lives, or a
readiness in the elderly to 'go' (which is something you might have seen
in your own relatives). But I've placed the peace that death brings in
Level 1 intentionally. The 'I'll be at peace when...' precept is a
delusion. We've seen that, at best, the peace and happiness gained is
woefully short-lived. And maybe it's the same with death. The dying of
the light which then (possibly) finales with a growing of the light and
a sense of peace is

then (literally) short-lived, as consciousness is (most likely) snuffed
out. Because the kind of 'peace' that most of us are after is one that
we can be conscious of. And the truth is, as we've seen, it's a fool's
game to believe we can find that peace by chasing after it. It's a mouse
wheel that never stops turning. The only logical answer is to see that
it's possible to stop running -- to let the wheel slow down -- and find
peace in the present.

Diary entry: 7 August 2017 -- Honking the Horn of Peace We're on
holiday. We're sitting on the balcony of our villa (on the west coast of
Sicily), looking out over the sea. Below, on the narrow road between our
villa and the beach, comes the honking sound of a car horn and voices. I
look down and see a rubbish lorry (i.e. a lorry that collects rubbish,
not an inferior lorry), crawling along at walking pace as a rubbish man
(a man who collects the rubbish, not an inferior man) picks up the
rubbish bags (you get the picture) from outside the houses and throws
them into the back of the lorry. Behind the lorry is a small car with a
couple inside. They're driving one metre behind the back of the (smelly)
lorry, and are clearly frustrated. But they can't get past because there
are cars parked on both sides of this narrow road, and there's no room
for the lorry to pull over (even if it wanted to). It's unlikely that
the couple in the car have anywhere urgent to be. They're probably just
going to the beach, as that's all there is... beach. I would bet they're
from the city, most likely Milan. They believe that peace and happiness
lie on the other side of the lorry, on the beach. But this lorry isn't
going to be moving over for a while. Result: stress. A
horn-honking-tapping-the-steering-wheelcursing-these-rubbish-people
(i.e. people inferior to them) stress.

And that, as we've seen, is how most of us live our lives. The answer
for the couple in the car -- given the absolute, unchangeable reality of
the slow-driving lorry -- is to sit back and relax, and find some peace
before the moment they hit the beach. The answer for them, and for us,
is to find some peace now.

Yes, it's time for Level 2. We take a big step forward in life when we
recognize that working out what we'd like to feel is more important than
working out what we'd like to do, or whatever other aim we have in life.
And if we realize that feeling 'at peace' is one of the highest aims in
itself, then Level 1 is indeed a high starting level. Like the opening
rounds of the World Cup Final in football, you have to be a top team and
a top player to get there in the first place. The beautiful further
realization that if being at peace is your aim, then maybe you can feel
at peace now, is powerful and potentially life-changing. If being a
stone (14lbs) lighter is your aim, then it's clearly impossible to be a
stone lighter now. If having a larger house is your aim, then that's
equally difficult to have now. But we do have the potential to be at
peace now. You could argue that, if you're lost on the plains of Africa
and a lion is running towards you, then feeling at peace now is as
difficult as being a stone lighter. And yet the high number of people
who report experiencing a sense of peace in such extremely stressful,
lifethreatening situations indicates that it's not impossible to do so,
but possibly even likely. So it does seem that we have as much ability
to feel a sense of peace now as we do the ability to clench our fists.
We just don't realize that we do.

And clenching a fist was something I did as part of the first relaxation
exercises I learned, back in 1990. I'd realized that stress and tension
were a problem for me and my health, so I'd bought some relaxation tapes
(a pre-streaming analogue audio delivery system). More detail on the
clenching-fist technique later...

LEVEL 2 HACK Giggle at those who take 'peace' very seriously. Giggle at
the mindfulness addicts, the crossed-legged yogis, the shaven-headed
mini-Buddhas, the peace brigade, the vegan proselytizers, and the
levitating Reiki rabble. And giggle at yourself as the peace drops on
you and you start to feel blissed out, holy and woken.

I CAN RELAX NOW

Ever since I listened to those tapes in 1990, I've been teaching people
how to relax. So, while teaching a Qigong (the Chinese healing art)
retreat on the volcanic island of Stromboli in Sicily last month, I
intended to talk about relaxation, and how to relax in just about any
circumstances. I asked the group for a show of hands in response to the
following question (you can answer it, too): 'Who knows how to relax
now, without the help of whatever you normally use to relax -- whether
it's calming music, a yoga stretch or a glass of wine?' Usually only
three or four people (out of a group of 20) raise their hands. And it's
often the case that they've been on a retreat with me before (so I
should hope they'd know). I then usually go about teaching them various
techniques (which I'll teach you), until more and more people are able
to put up their hand (slowly, and in a very relaxed manner).

Even after a few more days of being on holiday and learning the best
relaxation techniques money can buy, there are usually a couple of
people who still don't feel they can raise their hand in response to
this question -- so I just drop a Valium into their Aperol Spritz before
dinner. On this particular afternoon, after asking the question and
getting the usual small show of hands, I tried something different.
Rather than launching into my usual talk about how relaxation works, and
how to relax, I asked the group to walk around the rooftop terrace of
the retreat at a regular pace. Then I said to them: 'Just relax, now.'
Many of them slowed down, and I could feel the relaxation just happen.
'Good,' I continued, 'now you know what it's like to relax: you just...
relax.' Then I asked the participants to return to their previous state,
and they all started walking more quickly; then I asked them to relax
again. I did this a few times so that they got used to this movement --
from tense to relaxed and back again -- and also so that they'd start to
notice the difference between the states. And you can do this now: it
really does save a lot of time and effort learning elaborate relaxation
exercises: Just... relax. Then go back to not being so relaxed. And then
relax again. Notice the difference between the two states. When I asked
the group, again, after 10 minutes: 'Who knows how to relax now, without
the help of whatever you normally use to relax -- whether it's calming
music, a yoga stretch or a glass of wine?', most people put up their
hand.

It was the quickest, most successful relaxation masterclass I'd led in
30 years. It was from the Nike school of peace training: Just Relax. And
for those who didn't put up their hand? I dropped a couple of tabs of
Valium into my bag for later.

LEVEL 2 FACT Over time, meditation appears to shrink the 'amygdala', the
'fight or flight' area of the brain, and thicken the prefrontal cortex,
the area of the brain related to higher order functions such as
decision-making and awareness.1

HOW PEACEFUL AM I NOW?

In talking about being 'relaxed', I've assumed that a sense of peace
accompanies relaxation. It does for me: to feel more at peace, I just
need to relax more. But it might be different for you. It's time to find
out. To be more at peace now, we need to know how at peace, or not, we
actually are. For an air-conditioning system to work, and either cool or
warm the air accordingly, the system first needs to know the current
ambient temperature. So the thermostat is essential to any
heating/cooling system. When it comes to knowing how they are, most
people don't have much of a thermostat. They don't really know how
they're feeling. They're not aware of their relative levels of tension
and relaxation; they don't know whether they feel particularly happy or
sad -- they don't think about it. This may surprise you. If you're
hyper-aware of how you're feeling, it may seem impossible that a person
can be oblivious of his or her

feelings. But we've seen over the years, in our retreat groups, that
there are always those who simply don't know how they feel, and who have
great difficulty contacting any feelings. Why is this? Well it's likely
that they've had to switch off their thermostat. If our thermostat
constantly reads a temperature that we don't like, then maybe it's best
to switch it off and not know. I can relate to that literally -- and
it's probably the reason I chose 'air conditioning' as the analogy just
now -- as it's so hot where we are at the moment (it was 42°C/107°F on
our car thermostat at midday today), that I'd kind of prefer not to know
the temperature. Knowing it's so hot makes it feel even hotter. The
other day I read an article about the likely effect of rising
temperatures and humidity levels in certain parts of the world in years
to come: in short... death. Apparently, if the combination of
temperature and humidity reach a high enough level, then our bodies will
not be able to sweat sufficiently to reduce our temperature. And we'll
die. The article said that we humans would not be able to last more than
six hours in such conditions, even if we stayed in the shade. I'd not
imagined this possibility in such a vivid way before. And now I can't
forget it. Like certain things you see in life that you'd love to
forget, but can't. And what comes to mind now is something that happened
when I was around eight years old. It was a Sunday and my parents had
family friends round for lunch; let's call them the Smiths. After we'd
eaten, I needed to go to the loo, for a number one, and went to the
downstairs toilet. I opened the door, and there was Mrs Smith -- sitting
there with her tights and knickers around her ankles. Nooooooo. It was a
sight I'll never forget. Maybe in my dying moments on this planet, I
won't see a tunnel of white light and feel a sense of

immense enveloping peace, but see Mrs Smith sitting there having a poo;
and my last enveloping sense will be Noooooo.

LEVEL 2 HACK Mix your increasing experience of peace with an equal and
opposite exposure to the noise and distraction of life. Find the noise,
the mess, the escapist film or book or Facebook page and lose yourself
in it. So, how do you tune up your thermostat? Back in 1990, the
relaxation exercise I learned involved tensing up different parts of the
body, then relaxing them. The first thing I'd do was clench my fists,
then release them. You can do that now: simply make a fist -- really
clench that fist -- and notice what it feels like. Then relax your hand,
and notice what that feels like. You can go around your whole body doing
the same thing. In doing so, you're training yourself to identify the
two extreme states that likely exist either side of where you normally
exist. So, now, maybe you're naturally slightly tense about something in
the background, but generally quite relaxed as you read these words.
You're not really tense, like the clenched fist. And you're probably not
really relaxed either, like the relaxed and limp unclenched fist. So
feeling these two surrounding states begins to tune our 'state'
thermostat. We're tuning it to recognize a high temperature (the highly
tense state) and a low temperature (the deeply relaxed state).

By reading these extremes, you'll now start to get a sense of a scale
between them too. And this will develop as you start to use your
thermostat. And to do that, you simply need to ask yourself, How am I
feeling? At the moment we're looking at how tense/at peace you are, but
there's clearly a huge spectrum of potential responses here. So if I ask
myself now, How am I feeling? (on the tense/at peace scale), the answer
would be somewhere just below midway. I'm not stressed, but neither am I
fully relaxed and at peace. There's a lot going on around me, including
persistent requests from a four-yearold girl to help her colour in her
fairy castle. If I ask How am I feeling? more widely, I get this: a
little tired, a little full, a little spacey, a little uncomfortable
about something I can't quite put my finger on, and a little restless.
Nothing is strong and fullon: hence the 'little's. And -- before you go
away and practise this -- you can add another element to it: don't judge
what you notice too strongly (and preferably not at all). There will be
times of course when you need to act on what you notice. If you notice
you're feeling really tired, for example, then have a rest and go to bed
earlier if you can. In the same way that, if my car thermostat reads
42°C/107°F, I'm probably better off staying in the air-conditioned
interior than venturing into the desert-like external world of Sicily.
But, generally speaking, try to notice without engaging too much, and
without judging too harshly. This is important. Remember: the reason
many of us have disabled our thermostats is that we haven't liked what
they were reading. The ability to subdue some of this like/dislike
response to the thermostat readings is critical to our desire to keep
the thermostat on and working. If I ask myself How am I feeling? and the
answer is, Sad and upset, and so tired of this pain in my hip, I'll tend
to engage strongly with this response, and get caught up in a negative
thought

process: Why am I so sad and upset again? Why can't I just be happy?
I've nothing to complain about, after all. And this pain in my hip is
probably something serious, maybe arthritis. Maybe I'll have to have a
hip replacement, and so on. So, how can we engage less with what we
notice? An effective way to practise this is to add the words 'that's
interesting' to whatever it is we're noticing. It's a neutral,
acknowledging response, but it stops the over-engagement that our mind
tends towards. Try it out: I'm sad and upset... that's interesting; I'm
tired of this pain in my hip... that's interesting. That kind of thing.
You might occasionally want to punch the 'that's interesting' voice in
the mouth until it can no longer speak... well, that's interesting. We
are, then, aiming to notice more (engaging the thermostat) while judging
less. This process, in itself, is likely to increase your levels of
peace (and as we'll see later, it's akin to aspects of meditation). But
the primary reason is to sensitize yourself more to how you are, so that
you work more effectively with where you'd like to be. It's when you
observe that you're not at peace, now, that you engage your ability to
find peace, now. This process may seem somewhat clunky at the beginning,
but it becomes more and more natural, until you have a persistent sense
of how you are and how you're feeling, and then adjust accordingly.
There are, of course, many other ways to measure how you are,
state-wise. If you find yourself moaning and complaining a lot, you're
probably quite low on the 'at peace' scale. Likewise, if you find it
difficult to sit still. A great indicator for me at the moment is the
presence of small humans. We're on holiday with friends who have a
four-year-old girl (they gave birth to her, it's not just that they
happen to 'have' her): the one who wants help with her colouring-in.
Now, if I'm relaxed and

peaceful, she wants to be with me. If I'm not, she doesn't. She's my
thermostat. Pets, I've found, can be the same. Well, I only know what
it's like with cats -- because we've had cats -- but not dogs, or
rabbits, or guinea pigs, or snakes. With cats (and possibly the rest of
the list too), we soon learn that they respond to us more when we're
relaxed, so we relax to be with them, and then being with them relaxes
us more. And this is the idea behind any kind of thermostat we use: we
see the current temperature and that allows us to adjust the temperature
rapidly to the desired level. So let's look at more ways to rapidly
adjust the temperature.

LEVEL 2 HACK As soon as you can in your practice, enjoy feeling superior
to stressed-out non-peace-seekers. It's going to happen at some point,
so you might as well get it out of the way now. Do enjoy it though. It's
like seeing other fatsos when you're on a diet. They may be no heavier
than you, but unlike you, they're not on the enlightened path to
leanness. Heathens.

I CAN BE GRATEFUL NOW

Being grateful for stuff might be your natural disposition, but for most
people, it isn't. Most of us focus on what's wrong, and what we don't
have, rather than on what's right and what we do have. You could argue
that such a focus motivates us towards constant improvement, both
personally and in society as a whole. It's this focus that drives us on
and drives up our country's GDP figures each year. Where would the
economy (and the advertising industry) be if people were happy with what
they have, rather than always striving for more? Yet being grateful for
what we have is a powerful way to access peace in our lives. It's a good
idea, then, to spend more time every day being grateful for what you
have. People call this 'gratitude practice', but that's like calling
sitting quietly 'meditation': it over-formalizes and separates something
that can just be a natural part of our lives. When I'm feeling out of
sorts, or find myself moaning about things, I tend to list what I'm
grateful for -- like this:

I'm grateful for this sunshine and the blue sky; I'm grateful for my
(generally) functioning body and the ability to walk; I'm grateful for
Gaia and the boys; I'm grateful for all that we have -- the things that
make our lives more comfortable and the cars to take us to new, exciting
places; I'm grateful for our business and all the people who attend our
retreats and courses and buy our books (that's you); I'm grateful for
another day alive on this beautiful and crazy planet. I realized the
other day that I use gratefulness as a primary tool when meeting
challenges. We'd just arrived at our holiday destination: a four-bedroom
villa on the west coast of Sicily. It had seemed OK when we booked it:
although it was relatively cheap, it looked comfortable, was located
right on the seafront, and had good reviews. The reality, however, was
rather depressing (we had to go back to the website and look again at
the photos). The villa had one good bedroom and three box rooms,
including one without a window; the bathrooms were covered in mould;
there was nowhere to park outside; the beach (shingly rather than sandy
-- and somewhat inferior to the beach in front of our own home) was
packed with people and very average. Oh, and there was no air
conditioning: it was 42°C/107°F when we arrived. We adults were
disappointed, to put it mildly. And as the depression took hold, I
started to list what I was grateful for, and counted our blessings:
Well, we're on holiday together at least; and, with the boys now 16,
there probably won't be that many more holidays like this with them. We
can hear the sea crashing onto the beach from the villa, and I'll be
able to hear that tonight, in bed, and that's a rare and beautiful
experience. I'm sure there'll be some fantastic beaches a short drive
away... which there are, as I'm lying on one of them now: it's one of
the most

stupendous beaches I've ever been on, and deserted on an August bank
holiday. And the food will undoubtedly be fantastic, wherever we go...
which it is... and so on. In that challenging moment (and I know it
wasn't challenging in the grand scheme of things), when things were
looking pretty gloomy for our annual summer holiday together, taking my
attention off what was wrong and what we didn't have (like air
conditioning) and focusing on what was right and what we did have,
cheered me, settled me and allowed me to be at peace with us, our
holiday, and the shitty half-built villa. Being grateful, then, for who
we are, what we do, what we have and our lives as they are, is a quick
way to find peace in the now. (You may well be wondering this: Man, you
shouldn't have been so easily accepting of the shitty situation. You
should have tried to change to another villa, or complained about the
state of the place: done SOMETHING about it at least. And of course we
contemplated alternatives -- there weren't any -- and then took what
action we could: like asking for the bathrooms to be cleaned. But the
basics of the place and the situation remained the same.) The funny
thing is that now, a few days later, we all feel rather good about the
villa and its position. The beach is usually empty, and has plenty of
space to park every day (we'd arrived on a busy weekend), and the sea is
actually rather lovely to swim in first thing in the morning. The fans
in the rooms just about do it at night (and feel more natural than harsh
air conditioning). And we don't really notice the ugly aspects of the
accommodation anymore. I'm grateful that I've been able to share these
insights with you. I'm grateful that you're there, reading these words,
exploring this whole 'at peace' subject together. I'm grateful for this
moment, as it is, now. And I'm grateful for the moment in which you're
reading this --

however much or little distance in time there is between these two
moments.

I CAN SWITCH OFF MY PHONE NOW

I love everyday realizations: those moments when we understand somewhat
obvious things that we know can make a big difference in our lives. It
was on the F\*\*k It Qigong retreat on Stromboli this summer that I had
one of these prosaic epiphanies. I was greatly enjoying the space we
were finding in the group sessions; I was easing people into the space
gently. I'll tell you precisely how soon, but we'd do 10 minutes at a
time just sitting around doing nothing. I was finding real peace in
those periods, and that peace was spreading out into the rest of the day
too. I was curious, for myself, as to why I'm not able to find more time
in my everyday life just to hang out like that. I concluded, as I
normally do, that I'm just very busy: that I'm up early making breakfast
for the family, and then, aside from 20 minutes' Qigong practice, it's
pretty much all go for the rest of the day. I then made a promise to
myself that I'd find more slots to just sit and be during the day and
evening.

But, soon after waking one morning during that retreat, I had an
everyday epiphany that revealed a truth I'd been deluding myself about
for a long time. After getting up and having a pee, I grabbed my phone,
and went outside onto the terrace. From there, it's possible to see out
to sea -- to the tiny island, more a rocky outcrop, of Strombilicchio,
and, in the other direction, up towards the top of the volcano (which
explodes every 20 minutes or so, sounding precisely like a thunderclap).
I sat down and looked at the view for a nanosecond before picking up my
phone and starting to check out the news headlines. Then I realized
something: this is what I do to cover the 'spaces' in my life. It's so
obvious, but I hadn't spotted it before. I'd somehow discounted those
little 'gaps' in the day when I'd normally just turn to my phone, as you
probably do: the times when we're waiting for a bus or taxi, or we're
early for a meeting, or we're eating a sandwich, and so on. There are so
many of these gaps and moments during the day that if we could just
disable our phones, and not replace them with some other mode of
distraction, we'd have the perfect practice opportunities for
significantly increasing the levels of peace in our lives. So why don't
we do that? Well, I had a look at why I don't -- at why I turn to my
phone, like most of us do, at the slightest whiff of a gap in my daily
life. I have no excuse, by the way, in 'utility': I'm not reading urgent
emails or posting important promotions on Facebook; I'm usually just
checking up on what Donald J. Trump has said or done that day. I realize
that I'm kind of scared (and not just by what Trump has said or done).
I'm scared of the space, the gap (so it's funny that I fill it with
fear-inducing stimulus). Yes, even me: I do this stuff for a living and
have meditated, in one form or another, since I was 20 years old, yet
facing the gap can bother me.

If I enter the gap, I have to face my own thoughts and feelings. I --
along with close to 7 billion others -- have to face any worries or
fears or guilt or longing or discontent. So many of us long to be at
peace, to be calmer, and have more space in our hectic lives... yet what
we do with these little offerings of space reveals to us that the real
picture is more complicated. No matter how much you say you'd like to be
at peace; no matter how much you realize that the putting-off-peace game
of Level 1 is a fool's game, and that you could actually feel peace in
the now; no matter how much you convince yourself that there's not
enough time to be at peace. The most powerful app on your phone is the
reminder it gives you, each time you look at it, that you're unable to
just be still -- to sit without distraction. Just to sit still. And be.
Which is what I'm going to do now -- before I guide you through how to
face those fears and just sit there yourself. It's easy enough when you
get the hang of it. We've just lost the hang. And now it's time to get
it back. The hang, that is. Excuse me for half an hour or so.

I CAN BRING MEDITATION TO LIFE NOW

That's better. As I was sitting here, I thought of my grandad. When we
were on holiday together, he'd rise at 5 a.m. and go up to the beach hut
and make himself a cup of tea; he'd sit there, just drinking his tea and
looking out to sea. During the day, he'd sit in his deckchair, smiling,
and not saying much. When he said anything, it was generally
appreciative: of the sound of the seagulls or the warmth of the day, or
the tastiness of a cheese and pickle sandwich. He wasn't meditating. He
wasn't doing gratitude practice. He wasn't being mindful. He wasn't
practising kindness. He was just sitting still for hours and
appreciating life, as it is. Here's how to get the hang of that (again?)

THE THREE MODES OF THE MIND

Last year, while sitting still and looking out to sea one day (it's
genetic, you see), I realized that, when we're not in conversation with
someone, or we're not being distracted by something or other, our minds
are in one of three modes. Now, I could multiply the number of modes to
incorporate sometimes subtle differences in mode, but keeping it simple,
and to three, works for me -- and it's worked for all those I've shared
this with over the past year.

Mode 1 The first mode is when we're thinking about something, and we're
so involved in that thought process that you could say we're 'lost' in
those thoughts. This is likely to be the default mode of your own
particular head. The thoughts could be about anything: going over things
from the past, planning or worrying about things in the future, or
pondering what to have for lunch (a ham and cheese focaccia, thanks for
asking). Or how, if you skip lunch (I won't, thanks), you might lose a
bit of your belly (no I won't, I'm afraid).

Mode 2 The second mode is when you're aware of your thoughts in some
way. So that might be when you suddenly come out of a particular thought
process and then look at that thought process in some way. So you might
think, Oohh, look at me being so negative -- why do I get like this?
It's as if another person enters the conversation. Given our earlier
practice of noticing things more but trying to judge less,

mode 2 might also include just emerging from your thoughts and simply
noticing them. There's also the possibility of being in a thought
process and being aware of the thoughts -- as if from the outside --
simultaneously. So in mode 2, you might be thinking exactly the same
thoughts as in mode 1, but you're aware of those thoughts too, as if
from the outside, rather than being 'lost' in them.

Mode 3 This is the absence of thoughts. Some people find it difficult to
imagine what the absence of thoughts could be like, as they don't think
they've experienced it. And trying to imagine it, or wondering whether
they've experienced it, doesn't really help. But the more you're in mode
2, and are seeing how the thoughts work, the more you'll see there are
small gaps between the thoughts (usually). And once you start to notice
them, these gaps slowly start to grow, without any effort or intention
on your part. That's it: that's what happens in your head when you're
not your phone. So? Well, once you're aware of this, you just need to
put the kettle on, make a cup of tea, and sit around, noticing which
mode you're in, and how your head is working. And there's no aim to
this: you're not aiming to increase the amount of mode 2, and then mode
3, that you experience. Let me repeat that: there's no aim to this.
You're not aiming to increase the amount of mode 2, and then mode 3,
that you experience. And no matter how many times I say that, many of
you will want to do it, and think you've failed if you stay in mode 1.

But please, especially at the beginning, don't judge which mode you're
in. Otherwise, you'll introduce tension to the exercise. Because
whenever we want something, there's a tension around whether or not
we'll get it. Just creating the space to be still, and then being aware
that there are these three modes, is enough to create some very
interesting results. And it's likely too that, after a while, you'll
simply start to enjoy the process (even more than looking at your
phone). Again, I know this from the retreat I ran on Stromboli this
summer. Each time the group sat together, I'd give us a specific time to
do so, which slowly increased over the course of the week. I'd time it
precisely, too. So after, say, 15 minutes, I'd bring everyone back (not
that they'd gone anywhere; they were actually more 'here' than ever
before) and ask: 'Who would have been happy to sit for longer?' At the
beginning of the retreat, only a couple of people put up their hand. By
the end of the week, most hands were up (so we were able to sit for
ages). Why did some people not want to continue sitting, even at the end
of the week? Three reasons: they were frustrated that they couldn't find
more peace and get to mode 3 (that's why it's important not to be
bothered which mode you're in); the thoughts they were having (generally
in mode 1) weren't pleasant; or they just got bored. (The trick with
boredom is simply to sit through it, like a runner going through their
'wall'.) In fact, the trick with this whole thing is to try to sit it
out, full stop. If you just carry on sitting -- even if it's
uncomfortable, or the thoughts are difficult, or you're bored -- it
usually all settles and resolves in time. It's distracting ourselves --
and thus not facing those discomforts -- that creates the problems.

LEVEL 2 FACT

Meditation is as good at reducing the symptoms of depression and anxiety
as antidepressants.2

MIND THE GAP Now, only read this next bit if you've started to try this
sitting-aroundwith-a-cup-of-tea-in-one-of-three-modes-thing. Once you
can do it without judging which mode you're in, you can then move on to
noticing how pleasant it is in mode 3 (or mode 2 for that matter). And
as you notice how pleasant it is, you'll naturally start to learn how to
increase the gaps when there's nothing, or very little, going on in your
head. After a while you might find that you can slip into these gaps at
will, especially if you're relatively relaxed, and that they last for
increasing amounts of time. You may be wondering how you'll know when
you're in a gap, if it really is a complete cessation of thinking. I've
asked lots of people about their experience of the gaps, and it seems
that, for some, there's no thinking and no separate awareness during
them; they only know that there's been a gap as they come out of it.
This makes mode 3, for them, more like mode 1: in that they are 'lost'
in the gap. For me, and for others, there's an awareness in the gaps. It
feels as if there's a watching, but no commenting. For me, it's like
watching myself gently holding my breath, and the breath then gently
returns occasionally (as the thoughts return). This makes mode 3 more
like mode 2. And -- really don't read this next bit until you've been
sitting around like this for a while -- I'll share too what I was doing
for myself when I first developed this idea (or observation) a year ago.
I'd sit with my stopwatch (or rather, my watch in 'stopwatch' mode),
with my finger poised over the 'start' button, and I'd start the timer
when I hit a gap.

I'd then see how long the gap would be. And I could, very soon, easily
increase the gaps' duration. It's a great way of training your brain to
drop into such gaps (and thus... peace). But I am, as you've seen, very
reluctant to share this, because having that as the aim of the exercise
-- to get to the mode 3 gaps and to increase them -- is likely to reduce
the all-round pleasure of sitting. And it's likely to increase tension.
It could easily become like a meditation boot camp. And, like any boot
camp, it might do you some good for a while, but soon you can't wait to
get back to sitting on your sofa with a beer in one hand and your phone
in the other. In fact, if you've got this far, and only did so by
practising sitting around, then this is the higher-level trick for the
whole sitting-around thing: how can you hold the idea that all modes are
just the same -- that it's no better being in mode 3 than in mode 1 --
while, at exactly the same time, gently guiding yourself into mode 2 and
then mode 3. Preferably without a stopwatch. The ability to do
apparently opposing things at the same time -- and thus create, and
hold, a paradox -- will, as you'll see later, become possibly the most
interesting and enlightening aspect of the whole thing. Right, it's time
for another cup of tea for me. It's early and no one's about; I'm out on
the balcony of our broken villa and the sea is lapping the shingly
shore. So I'm just going to sit around now until the family world wakes
up and gets going... ... And I realized as I was sitting here just now
(and as various members of our two families arrived at this, now
breakfast, table) that I hadn't said anything more about the title of
this section, 'I can bring meditation to life now'.

Because, if you want to, you can see the modes 1--3 process as
'meditation'. If so, it's a form of meditation that everyone can do. But
calling it 'meditation' limits it, and separates it from life, for me.
As I said, my grandad wasn't meditating, he was just sitting around,
drinking tea. So I'd prefer to see it as just a part of life, or -- if
you prefer -- a way to bring meditation to life. And, as you can
probably see, that has two potential meanings: a way to take your
meditation practice out into life, and a way to enliven a form of
meditation. Rather than meditation, I'm just going to call the next
section 'I can sit and drink tea now, and be at peace'. Ready? Watch...

I CAN SIT AND DRINK TEA NOW, AND BE AT PEACE

Sitting around and drinking tea is, for me, the most effective way to
access peace in life. We're now going to look at how you can further
play with this experience and how you can create more opportunities to
sit around and drink tea.

I WANT TO DRINK MORE TEA NOW If you're able to sit around in modes 1, 2
or 3 (without caring so much which one you're in), you'll soon really
start to enjoy it. And when you enjoy something, you naturally want to
do more of it. So really feel that enjoyment, when it happens (and it
won't happen all the time, as I've mentioned). Then, without much
effort, you'll start to find lots of ways to sit around more, drinking
tea (if that does indeed become your thing).

Imagine if you enjoyed just sitting looking out of the window as much as
you enjoy talking to a friend on the phone. Imagine if, on your drive to
work, you enjoyed sitting in the car in silence as much as having the
radio on, or listening to your favourite driving playlist. Imagine
sitting on the loo and not reading a magazine or looking at your phone,
and instead, getting into mode 2 as you do your number two. You'll know
it when it starts to happen. And it will start to happen. And when it
does, rejoice, as you're now naturally finding more peace in your life.

LEVEL 2 HACK No matter how blissful your experience of peace, don't hang
onto it and never try to recreate it: flush it down the loo with your
next (blissful) poo.

I'LL DO LESS, SO I CAN DRINK MORE TEA As you begin to enjoy sitting
around and drinking tea, and the opportunities to do so multiply
naturally, as if out of nowhere, you'll also probably want to make some
deliberate moves to do less and sit around more. And this is when one
word in particular comes in very handy: no. You'll probably start saying
no to invitations, to evening classes, to long conversations, to
overtime at work, to box-set-binging, to

nonessential chores, as you take the other option: just sitting around
and drinking tea. If that starts to concern you -- and you think you'll
lose all your friends and become Billy no-mates -- consider the new
quality you'll bring to everything you do outside those sitting-around
moments. As you make contact with and get to know this more peaceful
side of yourself, imagine how different you'll be when you do get on the
phone to a friend, or you go to a party, or you're in an important
meeting at work, or you're doing the washing-up. Indeed, the more you
get into sitting around and drinking tea, the more everything else in
your life will begin to feel like sitting around and drinking tea. In
doing so, might you naturally arrive at Level 3 on your own? We'll see.

I'LL AUTOMATE MY LIFE AND DRINK MORE TEA You're more likely to get this
sensation of sitting around and drinking tea, even when you're not
sitting around and drinking tea, when you're involved in tasks that
don't require a vast amount of intellectual exertion. I'm not
necessarily suggesting that you resign from your job as a professor of
political science and go and work in the local factory packing tins into
boxes. Though my happy, grateful and naturally meditative grandad did
just that (not the resigning the professorship bit, but some form of
tins-into-boxes factory task). No, but whatever you do, it's likely that
you can simplify it and organize it more. I use the word 'automate' in
the title of this section, because I know a good deal about how to
literally automate parts of your life: I automate a good deal of
marketing and customer service tasks in our business, for example.

No, and I've started another paragraph with 'no', even though I've moved
on from the point about using 'no': I'm talking about a variety of
things you can do to reduce your effort and willpower exertion. For
example, if I carefully plan what I have to do on a working day, at the
beginning of that day, it frees me up during the rest of the day to just
go ticking through my list. Having to follow my list, which tells me
'one hour of emails', tick, then 'one hour of accounts', tick, then 'one
hour, write blog', tick, frees me up and relaxes me a lot more than
doing one task then trying to figure out what it's best to do next. The
same goes for just about anything in your life: 'automate' the bits that
would unnecessarily waste energy and effort. That way, more and more of
your life will start to feel like sitting around, drinking tea.

LEVEL 2 HACK Always end a 'meditation' session with some mediation,
mastication or masturbation. It keeps things lively and reminds you that
mixing up your life is as important (and easy) as mixing up words.

I CAN INCREASE THE NATURAL EFFECT OF DRINKING TEA

I'm happy that, by now, you've probably been sitting around and drinking
tea a good deal yourself. You should therefore know what it feels like
to be more peaceful. Well, for you, anyway. I'm aware that relaxing and
being more peaceful feels different for different people. When teaching
retreats I have to be careful not to assume that my experience of peace
is the same as everyone else's. The more you get to know what peace
feels like for you, the more peace you'll be able to access. For
example, when I relax and become more peaceful, I become more sensitive
to sound. I notice sounds more, and the sounds reassure me and relax me
more. I'm writing this on another idyllic sand-duney beach on the
southwest coast of Sicily, so as I relax now (which is easy, of course),
the sound of the waves and of chattering friends and children, and of
the wind blowing our sun umbrella and the pages of this notebook, all
rise to the surface of my consciousness. I feel even more relaxed, and
listening to the sounds does something to me that often happens when I
become more peaceful: it brings back happy memories (usually from
childhood). So, for me, a familiar and happy chain reaction occurs in my
brain when I start to relax. But that's me. And knowing this --
observing this -- means that I can use sounds to help myself become more
peaceful when I need to. What happens to you? How do relaxation and
peace feel for you? What happens in your body, and in your mind? As you
begin to observe this, make a mental note (in a relaxed fashion) for
later. Because what you experience when you're peaceful can subsequently
be used to make you more peaceful when you're not. This is the
fundamental trick of relaxation exercises: to use the 'effects' of
relaxation to engender relaxation whenever you want, and need, to relax.
This is how I've generally taught relaxation over the years. But, as I
mentioned earlier, there's an even better shortcut: just relax... just

feel more peaceful at the drop of a hat. So drop that hat and let the
tea go to your (hat-less) head.

LEVEL 2 FACT At the University of California, Los Angeles, USA,
researchers have found that the Buddhist-inspired Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction programme, which includes meditation, improves immune
function.3

TEA GOES TO YOUR HEAD When you sit around and drink tea -- in fact, when
you find more peace in any way -- your brain, and a whole lot more,
changes. The predominant behaviour of Level 1 living -- planning,
striving, hurrying and achieving -- is, to be rather simplistic about
how the brain works, predominantly left hemisphere. And when we relax,
we switch more to the right hemisphere. Of course, the real picture is
somewhat more complicated, with the brain changing in frequency too, and
different areas of the left and right hemispheres lighting up, both
individually and simultaneously. Broadly speaking, though, we associate
the left brain with logic, language, rationality, planning, and future-
and past-based thinking; and the right brain with creativity, openness,
presence, calm and peacefulness. The movement then from the Level 1
behaviour of imagining that we can be at peace and happy one day in the
future to the Level 2 realization that we can be peaceful now, is a
movement from left to right brain. And that's generally a very good
thing.

It's also a movement in the nervous system: from sympathetic to
parasympathetic. Again, this is somewhat simplistic, but the sympathetic
system is the 'alert and ready' system -- always looking for the threat
and poised to fight or flee -- and the parasympathetic system is the
resting and restorative system. And, again, that's generally a very good
thing. And talking of good things...

TEA IS GOOD FOR YOU For many reasons, sitting and drinking tea, being
more at peace, and then creating changes in the brain and body, are very
good for you. Western science and medicine tends to focus on the
detrimental effects of stress and tension on the body and brain. There's
a vast amount of evidence for the numerous diseases and conditions that
are either created or exacerbated by stress. The emphasis, then, is on
how to avoid stress, rather than on how to encourage relaxation and
peace. Eastern medicine, in the form of a discipline like Traditional
Chinese Medicine (TCM), also recognizes that stress and tension are a
major cause of disease, but it also places great emphasis on relaxation
(in the form of meditation and healing arts like Qigong) for its healing
potential. From the perspective of Level 2, when you realize that you
can actually be at peace now, and that life can improve now -- not in a
month or a year, or a lifetime -- there's the (not insignificant)
benefit that you'll be significantly healthier, which will help prevent
illness. But we all know this, don't we?

I LOVE TEA, BUT...

I do love sitting around and drinking tea. I do love feeling at peace
with myself and the world. It feels as if everything will turn out OK,
no matter what's happening in the news, and life, headlines. I'm able to
sit around and just enjoy being me: watching the world, and my thoughts,
go by. Nothing needs to be done to feel OK. Nothing needs to be said. I
don't need to go anywhere, or be anything else, or improve, or heal, or
resolve, to feel at peace. In this sense of peace, my body is relaxed
and soft, and my head feels clearer and lighter. I tend to be funnier
too: more playful and less inhibited. Crucially, things don't matter so
much. What I thought were problems seem further away from here. From
here, and I'm here now as I write this, the colours are more vivid and
the sounds more evocative; the tastes are more precise and delicious,
and the sense of just being alive is... tangibly and gently...
THRILLING. If only I could be here all the time...

BUT I CAN'T REMAIN AT PEACE FOR LONG (THERE'S ALWAYS SOMETHING)

Are you familiar with the following phenomenon? Something bad has
happened -- maybe you've lost someone close to you -- but somehow you
manage to get to sleep. When you wake up, everything is fine with the
world, for a few moments, but then the realization hits you like a
train. And you're back into your grief and pain. Similarly, it seems
that, no matter how good we are at feeling peace in the present -- no
matter how good our techniques, or how good we become at just sitting
around and drinking tea -- something always pops up and drags us out of
that state of peace. And it doesn't have to be anything big, either. It
just seems that, no matter how old we are, or how good or bad our
health, or how successful or wealthy we are, or whichever country

and climate we live in, or how blessed, or not, we are in various
ways... There's always something...

THE FAMILY SOMETHING

If you've ever had a relative, you'll know that there's always something
of a family nature going on. Perhaps you're worried about your kids, or
jealous of your sibling, or feel 'unheard' by your parents, or are
unhappy with your partner; whether there's a genuine family crisis or
the 'something' that's going on has been bubbling away for most of your
life, this particular something is so peace-disturbing because it's
(literally) so close to home -- and because it's more difficult to opt
out of. As we'll see, in many cases, if something is really disturbing
you, you can choose to leave that situation. And there are clearly many
people who leave relationships, and families with kids, and those who
break off contact with parents and siblings. But we're more attached in
family relationships: it's not like losing contact with a friend. When
something goes wrong, or there are disagreements, or familiar and
disturbing dynamics, it's harder to find our peace, as it all feels like
it means too much.

THE MONEY SOMETHING

Sometimes the 'family something' is a 'money something': we know a few
families who are, at the moment, stressing and arguing over inheritance
issues. There's nothing like someone dying and leaving something
different to different people to stir things up. Maybe you could do with
a little inheritance yourself at the moment, to ease any money tensions
that you have? It's hard to be at peace when you're unsure whether you
can pay the rent or mortgage this month. Or when you're struggling to
keep your business afloat; or when the stock market has just crashed and
taken your net worth with it; or when house prices have gone up again,
making the prospect of owning your own home increasingly unlikely. We
covered money in Level 1 -- 'I'll be at peace when...' -- but the
peace-delaying activity of that level is different to the
peaceinterrupting effects of Level 2. These concerns are more immediate.
It's less 'I'll be at peace when I've paid off the mortgage,' and more,
'I would feel at peace if it wasn't for this high mortgage payment I
have to make this month.'

The money something is particularly peace-interrupting because money
issues branch out into so many areas of our lives, and are often related
to our basic needs and very survival. When we're struggling with money,
we're struggling with our rent or mortgage (shelter), our bills (heat
and light), our food costs (sustenance) and our leisure costs, such as
going out or taking a holiday (rest). It's clearly hard to feel at peace
when it seems our very survival is under threat.

THE GEO-POLITICAL SOMETHING

Speaking of survival, as you know I'm writing this in the summer of
2017, when Donald Trump is goading the leader of North Korea with
threats of 'fire and fury'. Commentators are calling it 'this
generation's Cuban missile crisis'. People are scared. Although we are
holidaying -- sitting on dream beaches, swimming in the warm sea (which
today is unusually rough and thus great for wave jumping and body
surfing) -- I wake each day somewhat dreading reading the news: what
Trump has said or done overnight, scaring the shit out of us from a golf
cart. Though I still feel strangely compelled to read every word on
every angle of this crisis. It's hard to be at peace, even on holiday,
when everyone is openly talking about nuclear war. I'm aware too that,
by the time you read this, you'll know how this particularly grim
chapter turned out. Maybe it all blew over and you've forgotten about
it. Or maybe it all blew up, in every sense, and it's changed
everything.

As I read more commentary and opinion on the current crisis, the 'war of
words', I can tell that I'm actually looking for something to reassure
me. But it's hard to find. I feel like a gambler who, having lost a lot
at the table (in my case, the peace-of-mind table), keeps betting in
order to win it all back. Like any gambler, I do occasionally win
something back: yesterday I read the views of three experts on North
Korea, who all said they thought the prospect of actual military
conflict was highly unlikely. I breathed a small sign of relief, until
my breath was promptly taken away again by another belligerent tweet
from President Trump. There is, of course, something absurd -- and I
would like to say comical -- about this crisis, but it feels too heavy
for that now, as we gallop towards the apocalypse with this buffoon.
It's like being led off a cliff by Benny Hill, all of us running in
single file, speeded up, with that music playing (if you know it, you're
now singing it in your head). So I sit on this beach and I breathe. I
take in the astonishing view. I lie down and have a nap. I wake up
feeling rested and at peace; and then I think of Donald. At the
geo-political level, there's always something -- and it seems like a
particular drawn-out, existential-threat-something now. I hope we can
get through this orange-stained-Trump-something soon and without too
much loss of life.

THE HEALTH SOMETHING

A common peace-disturber for me is my health. Or rather, the nothealth
bits. I seem to suffer from two opposing and equal mental afflictions:
the first is the belief that I'm invincible and could survive anything,
even a bullet in the guts (I've had that particular fantasy since I was
a boy and watched too many Westerns); and the second is the delusion
that once I'm ill, I'll never get better. I was 12 when I first
experienced the second delusion (well, so far it's been a delusion: I'm
aware that one day it will turn out to be true). I'd been sent home from
school with the flu, and I felt terrible -- I really couldn't imagine
feeling anything other than that terrible ever again in my life. If I'm
feeling peaceful -- as I am at the moment, our boys having emerged from
a thrilling surf session in the sea -- and all seems well with the world
(if I don't bring to mind the orange-topped warmonger), it only takes a
twinge in my right knee, as I get up, to curtail that sense of peace. I
start wondering whether that pain will be there every time I get up, for
the rest of my life, or whether it will

get worse. Then I imagine failed surgery that leaves me forever limping.
I'm exaggerating -- I normally just say to myself, I must get that
checked out by the physio -- but the worry is there, lurking in every
unknown cause of the slightest ache or pain. And it's a worry that
always drifts me away from my peaceful state, like the gentle crossshore
current that's right in front of me now: the one that, every 10 minutes
or so, forces me to walk against it to get back to my original position
in front of the beach umbrella (thus straining my knee). Knee ache, hip
ache, headache, enflamed this, irritable that; a rash here, an itch
there -- with a limp, a fart, a faint and a flutter, there's always
something, health-wise.

THE WEATHER SOMETHING

In theory, I should be struggling to write this one, as we live in
Italy, where the weather is generally something to celebrate rather than
complain about. I'm British and the stereotype is that we spend a lot of
time talking, and complaining, about the weather -- and with good
reason. But I've found that the Italians, too, talk a lot about the
weather. Granted, not as much as they talk about food... In Italy, most
meals are spent talking about food, which sounds rather reasonable as I
write it, but I'm simply not accustomed to it. At mealtimes, most
Anglo-Saxons talk about something over their food, not about the food
itself. But maybe that's simply because there's not as much to talk
about as there is over an Italian meal. It's Ferragosto today. This is
Italy's big public holiday on 15 August, when the whole country goes to
the beach, and then out for a big meal where they talk about how
marvellous the food is. We've just enjoyed (and I mean enjoyed) three
fresher days, with a breeze, a

more turbulent sea and lower temperatures (average 34°C/93°F). So
everyone was talking about that. Today we're probably back into the high
30°Cs, maybe low 40°Cs, and everyone will be talking about how hot it
is, and how impossible it is to do anything -- apart from going into the
sea or lying down. My peace was disturbed, even this morning, as I was
trying to do Qigong on the beach at 8:30 a.m. (rather than a more
sensible 7:30 a.m.) and it was just too hot. I would be literally more
peaceful if it wasn't for this (gorgeous) weather. No, we have nothing
to complain about here. But my compatriots and friends in less
hospitable climes do. If, after a long, dark winter, your summer is
generally cloudy and wet, then it can feel harder to be at peace with
the world. Particularly during the specific times that you try to catch
up on peace -- your holidays. No matter how good we've become at putting
up with the rain, we'd (generally) prefer the sun.

THE ME SOMETHING

Even when the weather's perfect, and all the other life conditions are
apparently ideal -- if indeed that ever happens -- there's usually
something that rises up within us to disturb our peace: the dreaded 'me'
something. The Buddhist saying 'wherever you go, there you are' sums
this up rather depressingly. It's often a blessed relief that there are
enough other 'somethings' in life to mask the fact that, if you could
clear everything of an external nature that disturbs your peace, you'd
still have something arising within you to do the job. You can call this
something whatever you want: 'issues', 'problems', 'attachment issues',
'unresolved trauma', 'character flaws' -- yikes -- it doesn't change the
fact that there's always something. So, having found yourself
beautifully at peace with the world in a good session of sitting around
and drinking tea, it usually doesn't take long for something to trigger
you, or upset you, or make you feel inadequate, or oversensitive.

It doesn't take long for you to start comparing yourself to others
(usually harshly), or feeling sorry for yourself, or wondering what you
did wrong, and feeling guilty, even shameful. I know I'm touching my 'me
something' when I say something not so pleasant to myself, like: 'you
prat'. It happened recently, during a trip to the UK. I was staying in a
hotel near the airport I'd arrived at the day before ('London' Southend,
I'm almost ashamed to say) and decided to send a text message to my
friend Simon, arranging for us to meet up. I wanted to get online with
my laptop, but there was no Wi-Fi code written anywhere in my room.
There was also no phone, but I found the number for the hotel using my
own phone. So I noted down two numbers on a piece of paper: Simon's, so
I could send him a text, and the hotel's number, so I could ask how to
get on Wi-Fi. I checked the numbers and then texted Simon. I then
re-consulted the piece of paper and tapped in the number for the hotel's
reception desk. A man answered immediately, saying, 'Good morning.'
'Good morning to you,' I replied. 'I was wondering if and how I can
access Wi-Fi in my room -- do I need a code or something?' 'A Wi-Fi
code?' the man on the reception desk asked. 'Yes,' I said, 'a Wi-Fi
code, so I can access the Wi-Fi.' It was as if he'd never been asked
this before, which surprised me, what with this being a hotel and there
being no Wi-Fi code displayed in the room, or printed on the small card
pouch that came with my room card. And then the receptionist burst into
laughter. I was shocked, affronted. Is he drunk, I thought? Has he been
up all night, and is just tired? How could he laugh at me for making
such a reasonable request? I felt like I was at school. Then, as he
burst into another round of laughter, I realized I recognized the tones,
the timbre, of the laugh. Crikey, I must know

this person, I thought. I wondered whether I'd hit the wrong 'contact'
on my phone, as you sometimes do. My brain scanned through my male
friends: who could this be? Then I realized (as you probably have
already) -- it was Simon. I'd dialled his number from my handwritten
note, not the hotel's. We laughed about it -- it was fun. And at some
level I don't care about such things. But there's still that level
which, after I'd put the phone down, made me say to myself, you total
prat, and then punch my own head. I now pause and realize that I've just
exposed another embarrassing episode in my life; and I say to myself,
you prat. I have, though, managed to namecheck Simon; I mentioned him in
my book F\*\*k It, Do What You Love, but he never read about himself
there. And, even though I told him I'd probably mention him again in
this book, he probably won't read this one either. Prat. The truth is
that we've all gone through stuff in our lives that has left its mark.
However well-intentioned our parents, guardians, teachers and guides
were (and clearly some of them weren't), few of us were ideally loved,
cherished, protected and guided through our early years. Few of us were
seen as the perfect, whole, angelic beings we were (and are), but
instead were projected upon, and moulded in others' images. We can, of
course, slowly work through the issues that we have, the patterns that
hold us back, and the marks that have been left. And that can be a
beautiful (and painful) process. But it doesn't change the fact that,
even when we find we're at peace, we usually find, soon enough, there's
some 'me' something or other.

THE ENVIRONMENT SOMETHING

In 1989, the world was changing (and I was changing too: leaving
university to enter the big wide world). The Cold War was over, and we
celebrated as the wall came down in Berlin. For years we'd lived in the
shadow of a possible nuclear apocalypse, and then that threat fell away.
I celebrated for a day, and the next day I realized we were heading for
an environmental apocalypse. Looking back, I don't know whether I
enjoyed that day of celebration and peace quite enough. I educated
myself about the growing threat of global warming; I joined Friends of
the Earth and Greenpeace, and other charities whose names I can't now
recall, my monthly donations to them having long since lapsed. But I
mainly experienced a period of gloom and pessimism. Today, close to 30
years later, I walk on a beach strewn with washed-up plastic detritus; I
recall from a recent news story that the accumulation of plastic waste
around the world could soon pose a threat as great as the planet's
warming. And another story, just

yesterday, revealed that scientists are detecting tiny bits of plastic
in fish -- and even in our tap water. Plastic has entered the food
chain, and thus our bodies. In a relatively short period of time --
given how long we've been on this planet, and how long this planet
existed before we arrived -- we've really messed things up. We're at a
critical point now: we all know that (even those who still try to deny
the overwhelming scientific evidence). It's easy to be gloomy about the
state of the Earth and our environment -- about its future, and our
future. So, when we're feeling at peace with the world, it's easy to be
pulled out of that sense of peace when we remember what we're doing to
that world.

THE WORK SOMETHING

I was sitting on the balcony of our holiday villa last night, listening
to the sound of the waves crashing onto the shore: just sitting,
enjoying sitting. And then my phone beeped with some notification or
other (I haven't yet learned which sounds relate to which subject I'm
being notified of). Ha, my phone just 'notified' me of something else as
I was typing that... Last night the notification was a message from a
member of our F\*\*k It team, who was telling me about an issue with a
retreat booking. I thought about the issue for a few minutes, worried a
bit, then came up with an answer, and messaged her back. Gaia and I have
had our own business -- running retreats and various courses -- for 14
years now. And there's always something... Now, I'm generally accustomed
to dealing with the numerous somethings, and I know what I'm happy to be
'disturbed' by on holiday; our team is great at covering most of the
numerous somethings, but they'll contact me when a particular kind of
something comes up. This was one of those, so the team member

was right to send the message; however, it doesn't alter the fact that
this particular moment of peace was disturbed by that particular work
something. So, whether you have your own business too, or you're
freelance, or you're employed, or you're just checking out the value of
your stock portfolio on your phone every morning, there's always
something with work and business. Always.

THE UNCLEAR SOMETHING

On this holiday we're on at the moment, with two other families, we're
experiencing the effects of a lack of clarity. And this is very familiar
to me. In my birth family, we believed that everything was happy and
smiley (and 'clappy' too, if you take into account the evangelical
Christian backdrop to it all), but beneath the surface there was a world
of feeling and thinking that wasn't expressed verbally. The thing is,
even when things aren't said, they are felt. So the dynamics that ensue
with a lack of clarity and expression include: judgement, suspicion,
resentment, feeling 'wrong', power games, silent bullying, and tensions
and blocks in many ways. Such blocked dynamics tend to create illness
and unhappiness, even if you're still smiling (and clapping) on the
surface. The lack of clarity we're experiencing and observing at the
moment has created huge tensions. Taking the step to express the

unexpressed and say the unsaid takes courage. It's rarely easy or
painless to confront difficulties and bring them out into the open.
There are two competing expressions that allude to this: 'clearing the
air' and 'airing your dirty laundry'. Though I suspect what connects
them, and takes us to the same place, is that airing our dirty laundry
will ultimately lead to a clearing of the air too (and the dirty laundry
will be 'aired' and thus cease to pollute the space). It is, apparently,
easier to not say anything and just carry on. An alternative to the
famous and now overused wartime slogan 'Keep calm and carry on' would be
'Keep schtum and carry on'. That's what most of us do; we keep schtum
(silent). But a lack of clarity in any relationship sends out ripples
that will inevitably disturb your pond of peace.

THE DYING SOMETHING

When we find peace, and find ourselves at peace, the world is a
beautiful place. The smallest and most ordinary things can give us joy:
we appreciate life more than ever and feel the vibrancy of life, both in
ourselves and out in the world. So the realization that life is followed
by death is a hard and often peace-dissolving one. Death and dying
provide a rude interruption to our life-affirming sense of peace. And
they do so in many ways: from the death of those we love and the demise
of celebrities we adore (have you noticed that more of our beloved stars
are dying at the moment?) and from the various forms of illness in
ourselves and others that remind us of our mortality, to accidents, and
the decay we see in nature. Even the down cycle of a business or the
economy can remind us that everything tends towards decay and entropy.
It seems too that, by finding more peace in our lives -- and by creating
more space and relaxing more -- we do get more in touch with the
flipside of life. What a neat little euphemism that is; in fact, I think
it's one of the reasons that many people don't, underneath it all,

want to find space: they're scared of touching and feeling the flipside
of their lives. The truth is, there's always some 'dying' something. We
can't avoid it. We can only try to ignore it, if that's our way (I hope
it's not mine). This book is called (as you know) F**k It. Be at Peace
with Life, Just As It Is, and it should really be called F**k It. Be at
Peace with Life and Death, Just As They Are. But hey, that's for Level
3. Here, in the dying embers of Level 2, death-related somethings serve
only to jolt us from our happy-andat-peace moments.

F**k It is the gateway to Level 3. When you say F**k It, when you feel
F**k It, when you live more F**k It, you naturally start to enter Level
3. And a big part of that is the effect F\*\*k It has on how much we
care.

F\*\*K IT TO CARING

In both Levels 1 and 2, caring is a problem. In Level 1, because we care
about having our own home, we believe that we'll only be at peace when
we have one. In Level 2, if we have a house, a drop in property prices
disturbs our peace because we care about its value. In fact, caring is
so often the root of our state of stress: it's such a rapid dissolver of
peace that it might seem as if being at peace, and caring about stuff,
are incompatible. Fortunately, though, it's how much we care, not caring
per se that matters (so we should care about stuff, but not too much).
Caring too much and about too many things, is the path to pain. There's
simply too much to go wrong, and too much at stake. Imagine that you
care deeply about your children (not much imagination is needed there if
you have children, I suppose), and your position at work, and staying
fit and well, and the state of the environment, and the price of gold;
and that you also care about retaining liberal values in society, and
upholding human rights, and

that there are no further hikes in energy prices, and that combustion
engines are phased out as soon as possible, and that your pension will
keep you in the manner to which you've become accustomed, and so on.
Being at peace with all those cared-for-but-fragile spinning plates is
going to be difficult (and you only need look behind that platespinning
Greek restaurant down the road to the perpetually perilous state of its
proprietors' home country to see how fragile things can be). Equally,
imagine not caring at all about anything. That's not an expression of
the life force that arises when we find peace, is it? It's usually the
opposite: an expression of depression. That's not the answer. Part of
the answer is to care less about lots of things -- hopefully the things
that you realize don't actually matter so much to you. That's an
essential element of the power of F**k It. When we say F**k It we
recognize that what we're caring so much about, but which is causing us
pain, doesn't actually matter so much. In saying F**k It to anything, we
consciously and literally reduce our level of care for that thing. Try
it now: say F**k It to anything that's bothering you, and feel your care
level reduce. My favourite analogy for illustrating this point about
care levels is the tachometer, or revometer: the gauge in your car that
measures the engine's revolutions per minute. Or, in technical terms,
'revs per min'; or, to get even more technical, 'RPM'. Are you still
with me? I don't know if you ever look at, or use, that gauge, but there
will be a point at which your car's engine is most comfortable, and then
a point at which it will strain and lose power.

That's the 'red line' and it's usually marked with, wait for it, a red
line, or a red shaded area. Your care levels are like this tachometer.
If you care too much about too many things, you'll be straining and
stressing about life too much. Whereas if you can reduce your care
levels, you can get to a point where things are more comfortable. My car
is most comfortable at 1,500 revs per minute, and my life is most
comfortable at an equivalently low rate of cares per day. Note too that
if the revs in your car drop too low then you can lose power completely,
and stall: and it's the same in life, as we stall into depression when
we care for nothing at all. Getting your 'cares per day' rate lower,
then, is critical to increasing your chances of peace. And F**k It will
aid that, big time. But I said this was part of the answer, and this is
Level 3 after all. Level 3 takes F**k It up a level: so that we say F**k
It to caring about caring. In doing so we recognize that there are times
when we'll care too much -- and things we'll care too much about -- even
though it's generally best to reduce those overall care levels. Again,
this is 'F**k It to caring' and also, at the same time, 'F\*\*k It, I
care: that's life.'

F\*\*K IT TO POSITIVITY

We all know it's better to be positive, optimistic and life-affirming
than it is to be negative, pessimistic and down. We want to be around
people like that, and we want to be people like that. There's plenty of
evidence that positive and optimistic people do better in life too, and
attract more opportunities. But you don't need any 'evidence' for that,
do you? It's obvious. If you train yourself to be generally positive,
you're at Level 2: when we realize that we can be positive and
optimistic now, and that this can make a real and transforming
difference to our lives (it really can, I'm positive). But, just as with
our 'at peace state', life can drag us out of our positivity; and our
natural selves can also sabotage our carefully practised positivity. So
Level 3 is F\*\*k It to positivity. You don't have to be positive and
optimistic all the time. Even if you were a positivity saint, there
would be days when your halo would slip and you'd say: 'Oh, bloody hell,
I knew that halo wouldn't last -- it was probably made in China. What

am I going to do now? I'll never find another halo at this time of year
-- the halo shops will be right out of haloes. Bloody typical.' Yes,
F\*\*k It to positivity and optimism. You can give in to your inner
grump, your Eeyore within. Don't resist, and see how much better you
feel. Because it's more real and truthful that way. Give in to your
inner grump today, and you'll naturally return to a more positive state
tomorrow. But the movement is then natural and not forced. Sure, it's
better to be positive than negative. What, John? Can you stop
contradicting yourself? One minute you're saying it's better to give in
to your inner grump, the next, that it's better not to?' Well, yes and
no, because: Level 1: I'll be positive when... Level 2: I can be
positive now. Level 3: It's fine to be as we are, whatever we are --
positive or negative. And I'm going to introduce a concept now that will
serve us well until the end of this book, and possibly to the end of
this life. It's called 'We Have Two Hands'. To elaborate, we have two
arms, and at the end of them, two hands. And as well as enabling us to
carry out many tasks (such as holding our phone with one hand and typing
into it with the other), the two-hands thing is rather useful in that it
allows us to say, 'On the one hand (insert argument)', but on the other
hand (insert counter-argument)'. So, with our new handy little concept
fully, errrmmm, grasped, this is how to apply it: On the one hand, of
course it's better to be positive and optimistic than negative and
pessimistic; and it's better to be

Level 2 than 1. But on the other hand, it's perfectly natural to be
negative and pessimistic at times, and the last thing you want to do is
suppress something that's perfectly natural. When we allow what's
natural within us, things keep moving. It's only when we make something
'wrong' -- as we might make 'negativity' wrong at Level 2 -- that things
start to get stuck. If we open the door to our own natural occasional
grumpiness, we open the door to our own natural positivity at the same
time. So nothing is forced: we're not forcing the grumpiness out, and
we're not having to force the positivity in. And we all know what forced
positivity looks and feels like -- we speak optimistically through
gritted teeth, and our smile is fixed and false. So this is Level 3 --
'F\*\*k It to positivity' and let's be real.

F\*\*K IT TO BEING GOOD

Are you a good girl or boy? I am (the boy bit). I always have been. I
did as I was told; I did my homework on time and stood up for the
bullied kids at school; I raised money for charity and helped people
across the road; if I knocked another car with my car door, I left a
note for the driver; I handed lost items in to the police; I sent
birthday and Christmas cards: I was a hard-working employee and then an
understanding boss. And, of course, I'll have this book written on time
with most of the 'i's dotted and the 't's crossed. As far as 'being
good' is concerned then, I find it easy. Though I've been 'bad' too of
course, as we all have (I'm not talking criminal activity here). And
don't go thinking you'll get another list here. What goes on in Parkin's
memory, stays in Parkin's memory. Well, Level 3ers, F\*\*k It to being
good. And by that, I don't mean go out and raise hell, piss people off
or hurt them, of course. As you know, it's better to be good than bad.
But it's even better to welcome ourselves, as we are, without judging
too much. This is about being kinder to ourselves, just as we are.

And then it's the same when it comes to others: live and let live. Don't
judge so much. Unless what someone is doing is having a detrimental
effect on you, or hurting others, stay out of their business. As I was
writing that, a young Italian man came wandering past us on this
pretty-much deserted beach; he was wearing headphones and singing along
loudly and out-of-tunely with the music (as you do). Everyone tutted,
and I muttered 'prat' (as I do), even though he was gone in a moment,
and harming no one. In this context, I like US author and speaker Byron
Katie's concept (outlined in her book Loving What Is) of what is 'our
business'. She divides life into 'my business', 'your business' and
'God's business'. An efficient, and more peaceful, way to live is to
realize where everything lies, and to stay in your own business (and
thus not get into others' or God's business). Let's say you and I are
having a meal together on the outdoor terrace of a restaurant on the
coast. What I eat is 'my business'; what you eat is 'your business'; and
what the weather does while we're sitting on the terrace is 'God's
business'. So it's tedious for you if I have anything to say about what
you eat ('Ooh good,' you say, 'then I'll have the burger and chips,
followed by the "Death by Chocolate" dessert'). It's tedious for me if
you have anything to say about what I choose to eat (I'll have the
burger and chips anyway). And it's tedious for God, and a waste of our
energy of course, if we have anything to say about his weather tricks.
It's the same, generally speaking, with whether people are being good or
bad: it's their business. Right up until the moment it becomes my
business. And it's the same, generally speaking, with whether I'm being
good or bad. It's my business, sure, but it's also Level 3 business --
where we're saying 'F\*\*k It to being good'. Amen (for doing His
business).

F\*\*K IT TO BEING AUTHENTIC

'Authentic' is the new 'good'. While I was growing up, being 'good' and,
at home in particular, not 'sinning' was all the rage. Back then,
grown-ups wore beards and sandals and bleated on about love, peace and
goodness. Now the beards are back and everyone's bleating on about being
'authentic'. And with good reason, too. As I explained earlier, in
muscle tests we're always stronger when we're being authentic in any
area of our lives, than when we're not. Being authentic is about being
in our 'truth' and the truth literally makes us stronger (muscle testing
is essentially a truth-and-lies detector). So, for some high Level 2
performance, be authentic. The thing is, I'd be inauthentic if I didn't
admit that I'm not always authentic. For 100 reasons, some noble, some
not, there will be times when we're not authentic in any way. In fact,
inauthenticity is the oil that keeps our social engines running. We'll
all say that we're fine to hear the truth, when we're not; that we're
happy to listen, when we're not; that things are 'alright', when they're
not; that we

think bums don't look big in certain items of clothing when they
patently do (but that's fine and still rather attractive). I'll do
things in life that don't express the 'authentic me' (like the
accounts), be things that aren't particularly authentic (like being
patient when I'm boiling with frustration), and say things that I don't
believe. So, F\*\*k It to being authentic all the time. If it's not the
moment to be authentic, don't get hung up about it -- and revel in your
inauthenticity. I really mean that. LOL. Smiley.

F\*\*K IT TO BEING PATIENT

It's noon on one of the days of our holiday. But we're still hanging
around in our rental villa while the world outside swims and sunbathes
and plays on the beach. I've given up trying to rouse the masses -- to
organize the rest of the day -- and instead sit relaxing on our bed (and
writing this, clearly). I switch between feeling I'd like to shout and
throw things around and just sitting back and resigning myself to my
(ever-delayed) fate. Being patient -- and I'm generally pretty patient
-- has served me well in life. Good things come to those who wait, after
all. I've been good at waiting, and I've enjoyed many good things as a
result. But I've also been very impatient and frustrated at times, and
it's driven me to force things through and shake people up. And as
unpleasant as shouting and throwing things around is, it does create an
effect -- and, often, the results you want. I'm exaggerating, of course:
I don't often shout and throw things around, but I do express my
impatience and frustration clearly to people.

In the recipe of life, I'd propose 20% shouting and throwing things
around, and 80% calmly talking things through and being patient. The
main thing, though, is to have little judgement about which way you go.
That's Level 3. See what feels right at the time, and then follow that,
without any self-judgement. That's being at peace: allowing what feels
right in the moment and just following that. So F\*\*k It to being
patient (Level 2) or to being shouty and impatient, and simply embrace
what feels right at the time.

F\*\*K IT TO HOW IT'S SUPPOSED TO GO

Our plane is just about to take off: Ancona to London, two hours and six
minutes. If it seems as if we spend most of our time on a beach or in a
plane, it's not true: it's simply the opportunities I'm getting to write
this summer. We're tired: we've spent two days at home, washing
(clothes) and writing (emails) and running (about). So now we intend to
sit back and sleep for two hours. We have eye masks and neck cushions.
But there are two toddlers behind us who are very excited, and are
expressing their excitement with lots of high-pitched yelping -- and by
kicking out their little legs (against our little seats). Maybe this
flight won't go as we supposed it would. The holiday we've just returned
from didn't, either. It was supposed to go like this, but it went like
that. And the fact that it went like that contributed to our current
tiredness. We were surrounded by, and involved in, a whole host of
dynamics. It was hard work, emotionally

at least. All that sitting around on the beach was lovely, but the
confusing world of the unspoken was difficult. Lots of things in my life
have not gone as they were supposed to. I'm alive (good news), when it
was a close shave a few times. I have two beautiful sons (good news),
and I never imagined that I'd have kids. I've had unexpected crises (bad
news), unjust shocks (bad news), and anaphylactic shocks (big bad news).
As I fly to the UK to commence another big project, I have ideas about
how I'd like it all to go, of how it's supposed to go -- with a good
wind, a stable geo-political climate, some hard work and planning, and a
good dose of luck. And I can, now, feel the attachment to how I would
like it all to go, and how it's supposed to go. Well, F\*\*k It to how
it's supposed to go. I hereby (attempt to) embrace how it goes -- in
real-time-unfolding-reality -- rather than how it's supposed to go. It
is, after all, the gap between how I want it to go, and how it actually
goes, that will cause me pain. And to close that gap, I must simply
accept more what happens, as it happens. I say 'simply' in the way that
a yoga teacher will ask you to, 1. Jump your legs out wide... tick. 2.
Lean forwards from the hip, with arms limp... tick. 3. Allow your head
to drop to the floor, and let it rest there... What? Saying that is
simple enough; and it almost sounds simple when you hear it said so
simply. But doing it, in reality, is a different thing entirely.
Acceptance, though, is a major part of 'being at peace' with things,
isn't it? I haven't used that word so far because it instantly brings up
the idea of being passive; as if accepting is a form of giving in. Well,
it doesn't have to be (and in its pure, radical way, it's not).
Acceptance as most of us imagine it is Level 2 acceptance: working with
calm acceptance of the things that trouble us, disturb us, that

we're resisting, or which go against our plan for life. Then there's
Level 3 acceptance, which is a higher level of acceptance (not just in
my level-numbering system, but in every way) of all that unfolds, of all
that is (even our localized resistance). On the one hand (yes, back to
our key two-hands concept), we can work with what we're resisting; on
the other hand we can be fine with our multiple-resistance crimes. In
this way, Level 3 is like a loving parent to the loved small child:
accepting of all (or most) behaviours, traits and ticks. Whatever the
loving parent sees (that would disturb just about anyone else), they say
'F\*\*k It, I love you.' So 'love' becomes like a hot knife that slides
through the butter of resistance and judgement. If you could love
yourself in the way you love your children (if you have them), you'd
instantly be more at peace with yourself. If you could love life and all
that arises in your window onto reality, you'd instantly be more at
peace with life. Oh dear, I've just looked at my notes for the title of
the next section...

F\*\*K IT TO LOVING

This F**k It thing can be like a strict Zen master: you know, the one
who'll come and hit you with a stick if your attention wanders from your
present awareness meditation. Just when I'd uncovered the utter power of
'love' and 'loving' to cut through all that resistance just now, I felt
the sting of the stick on my back from Zen Master F**k It. (And I won't
go back and change that now, and we won't edit it later please, editor
-- because that shows how easy it is to slip back into Level 2.) Because
loving, of course, is in Level 2. Yes, it would be marvellous to be able
to love ourselves and life just as we love our children. Just as it
would be marvellous to be as peaceful in a traffic jam as we are when
we're lying on a beach (and there are no family--friend dynamics going
on in the background). But extending that unconditional love beyond your
own children is tough indeed. I have my mini-demonstrators of that
sitting right behind me. No matter how hard I try, I cannot extend the

unconditional love I feel for the two boys sitting next to me to the two
little brats behind me who are screaming and kicking my seat. Of course
I don't hold them in the contempt I reserve for their halfpissed parents
-- they're innocent children after all -- but I do not love them in any
way, I'm afraid. So, F\*\*k It to loving. And by that, I'm not proposing
that we all start hating. Love when you can, how you can; spread the
love; love yourself more -- even the shouty kids behind you more, if you
can -- love life more. But don't get down on your non-loving self and
behaviour either. That's Level 3. That's being at peace with how you
are, as you are, and life, as it is.

F\*\*K IT TO LOVING YOURSELF

At a therapeutic level, there's little you can do that's more powerful
for self-healing than loving yourself more (and, ultimately,
unconditionally). We talk to ourselves, and treat ourselves, in a way
that we'd rarely use to talk to, or treat, other members of the human
race, even people we don't like. So on the one hand, if you want to
improve things in your life, big time, at Level 2, then work on loving
yourself more. Louise Hay has (and I'm afraid that's now 'had', as she
passed away between the time I wrote these words in a notebook and typed
them into my laptop) the most beautiful affirmation at the heart of her
'Heal Your Life' teaching: 'I love and approve of myself.' She suggested
you say it to yourself 100 times a day. You'll encounter a good deal of
resistance as you do this (because it's usually not true that you love
and approve of yourself -- yet, at least).

But the light will slowly start to spread: shining into the dark,
selfloathing corners of your own head, and then out into the world. And,
just as with a practice of peace, or acceptance, this self-loving regime
will work and, eventually (probably) lead you naturally into Level 3:
i.e. the realization that true self-love includes and even embraces the
self-loathing. So, F\*\*k It to loving yourself -- or, rather, believing
that you should only love yourself -- and seeing not loving yourself as
somehow wrong. We don't really like 'somehow wrong' in Level 3, and 'not
really liking' is just fine too.

F\*\*K IT TO THE LINEAR PROCESS

In endeavouring to show you how being 'at peace' with life, just as it
is, is very different from feeling peaceful, I've introduced the three
levels of this book. The implicit suggestion in such a three-level model
is that we can move through the levels in a linear way, so that
attaining 'wisdom' would constitute the following process: Realizing
that feeling at peace should be our highest aim. Believing that we'll
feel at peace once the next thing has been attained. Realizing that we
don't have to wait to feel at peace -- we can feel it now. Seeing that
there's always something to bring us out of peace. Recognizing that
there's a higher level of being at peace that includes everything,
including not being peaceful. There's also an implicit suggestion that
we can move through these levels by simply understanding intellectually
how they work. But the

reality of such wisdom attainment is likely to be very different. It's
unlikely to happen in such a linear way (though it might) and it's
unlikely to be attained through intellectual understanding alone (though
that is conceivable). So, as we draw nearer to the end of our Level 3
process, we're going to blast open both the linear aspect of the wisdom
progression, and the emphasis on the intellectual understanding of it.
And an out-of-chronology diary entry will now assist us in this
blasting: as I recount a random, seemingly unprompted moment of peace
and clarity and then ponder the phenomenon of illumination.

Diary entry: 6 May 2017 -- From Mad Men to Peaceful Man It's late
afternoon. Earlier, after a rather pleasant nap, I watched an episode of
the US TV show Mad Men on Netflix. And, just before that ended, 10
minutes ago, something rather peculiar happened. Not in the show's plot,
but to me. I'd been sitting there watching the episode -- enjoying
watching the episode, if you know what I mean. My brain was taking
several lines of thought during this pleasant watching experience, and
one of them was how pleasant it was to be sitting there watching.
Another was that I should really get on soon with continuing the job I'm
currently doing (recording the audio sessions for the 'F\*\*k It Sorts
Stress eCourse' that starts on Tuesday). But I thought maybe I should
start that after having a walk; because I haven't had a walk today, and
it would be nice to have a walk before it gets dark.

Then some slight guilt about sitting watching the television arose, and
I told myself that it was a perfectly fine way to spend my time -- it's
Saturday afternoon after all -- and that the work will get done one way
or another. And I settled again. These were the lines of thought that I
suppose were arising in the less dramatic or engaging moments of Mad
Men. And I've noticed that Mad Men does have some of those. In fact, it
has whole scenes that are boring, and which I struggle to understand the
narrative point of. But I forgive that flabbiness in its scriptwriting,
if that's what it is (maybe I simply don't understand the significance
of those scenes), given the overall awesomeness of the series. In most
scenes, during most dialogue, I was engaged, and I suppose my brain was
not having other thoughts. And so to the last scene... Betty Draper (Don
Draper's wife) is talking to Helen Bishop, the mother of a young boy
called Glen. Glen is in love with Betty and had run away from home; he'd
been sleeping in the wooden house in the Drapers' garden. Betty
discovered Glen in the wooden house (well, her dog did, actually) and
brought him inside, cooked him a meal, and watched cartoons with him.
Then, later, she called Helen, Glen's mother. Helen picks Glen up. But
later, maybe on another day, Helen comes round again to see Betty. She's
angry with Betty. Betty says she hasn't done anything wrong, and says
that Glen is lonely. They open up to each other. Betty says that her
husband Don is not living at home anymore. They share their pain. There
are silences. And... well, this is when the peculiar thing happens. It's
as if someone switches on the world. I hear the birds tweeting outside
first; then distant traffic, and church bells ringing. Then I see the
colours in the room. And the TV screen hovering on the wall in

front of me, with beautiful moving pictures. And everything becomes 3D.
And I feel that everything is OK. Beautiful, actually. I feel a deep
sense of peace -- I think that's what it is. Acceptance maybe. A kind of
'all is well in the world'. And then Helen says, with a sigh -- 'The
hardest part... is realizing you're in charge.' Her words blew me away.
I realized that, just as I was sitting back watching the show -- both
Mad Men and the show of life that had just erupted before me -- I was
effectively sitting back in life too. I realized that I'm not really in
charge, and thus there isn't this 'hardest part'. And now, 40 minutes
later, a car ticks over outside, then cuts as the engine is turned off.
Then a door slams. And the birds tweet. And a chair is scraped over the
floor in a nearby apartment. And a dog barks. Now, I still feel it.
Somewhat dimmed, maybe, by the exercise of committing this to typed-out
words. In fact, in moving from the sofa to the sleeping laptop, and
unsleeping it and opening a file to write this, and the file not
opening, and all the Word documents saying they're 'not responding'...
and staying patient and calm until the cursor finally started to flicker
on the blank page -- like someone slowly tapping their fingers on a
table when waiting for something to happen or something to be said --
there was the reminder to me of the world I can't control; or even my
single rebelling billionth copy of Microsoft Office, or whatever package
it is that Word is part of. And now, as my neighbour sings, as she often
does -- it sounds more like humming today, actually -- I contemplate the
other times in my life that such powerful moments have occurred. The
time I was meditating late at night, many years ago now, when I heard
voices next door, and a quite distinct conversation going on. Then I
realized it was my own thoughts.

And the time on the beach in 2002 when I had a huge feeling of energy at
a point in my lower spine, like an energy gateway opening up. It was
astonishing, and I didn't want the feeling to go away, but it did after
a couple of minutes. And all those moments of epiphany, of
understanding. When everything is seen more clearly. When everything is
felt more clearly. They come and they go. For me, 'awakening' is not a
linear process, as some people suggest it can be. I have moments and
periods of clarity. And when I do, I try to bring back some of what I've
experienced into my everyday life. I bring back things in a variety of
ways. 'F**k It' is one of those things, actually. F**k It is the feeling
I get when I see clearly -- when I see that everything's OK, and that
things don't matter so much. I see this phenomenon in religions and
spiritual traditions and philosophies. I see it as what people have
tried to bring back from their experience of clarity. The thing is, we
then get those things second-hand. And, because they're often not
experienced or handled with such clarity, they then morph into something
else; and once they're third-hand, they can be ugly things. The
invitation, though, is to try to use the 'things' that are brought back
(by ourselves or others) to contact that experience firsthand. And that,
I suppose, is what the title of this book I'm writing does. F\*\*k It.
Be At Peace with Life, Just As It Is is a snapshot of reality taken from
the space of clarity. It can therefore jar with our current view of
reality ('How can I possibly be "at peace" with all this going on?'), or
we can relax and let go and feel the message. And in doing so we can
edge towards a wider view from the space of clarity ourselves. Or not
even 'edge towards' sometimes. After all, one hour ago, it just happened
to me. Out of the blue.

It's a little like being an astronaut. When they aren't at work,
astronauts live a regular life as regular people with a regular view of
the world, but when they get blasted into space, they're given a new and
clear view of the planet they've been treading the whole of their lives.
They suddenly realize things about human existence that they hadn't
realized before. For example, that we're all in this together -- the
human race -- and that we should see this and work together more on our
small planet. They realize these things from the clarity of being in
space, looking at Earth below. Then they return to Earth (and reentry
can be tough, and they risk being burned up and losing everything... I'm
writing here, of course, with one eye on the metaphor. And they share
with everyone what they saw from their (literal) space of clarity. Along
the way, since they experienced their moment of epiphany, astronauts
have tried to capture their epiphanic moment in a variety of ways...
usually in words, using those to try to convey that feeling or
perception to themselves in as adequate a way as possible. And they
bring those words back. Which are as a photograph taken of Earth from
that spacecraft. They might have elements of accuracy, but they're not
the real thing -- they're not the true apprehension of the visual
panorama or the enlightened perception. And they share those words with
the rest of the human race: maybe in press interviews, or in talks to
high-school kids, or in books. And they do so for years, often decades,
to come: the words changing slightly over time, drifting free a little
or a lot from their original clarity. Like the photograph fading. Until
the words and the photograph become the thing itself. The original
thing, over time, is replaced

by the attempted recording of that thing. And people, over the years,
take the words and the photographs, and they place their own
interpretations on them. They take the perception that 'we're all in
this together' and draw up free trade agreements and nuclear
proliferation treaties, and compose songs about equality and march for
peace and write adverts for fizzy drinks that start with the words, 'I'd
like to teach the world to sing.' Some of these people, through the
words and the photographs, access that clear perception and feeling.
Others don't get beyond the words and photographs, and make their own
thing of it entirely, laced with their skewed, non-space-clarity
perceptions. That, for me, as well as describing a common experience of
space travel, describes a common experience of spiritual, religious,
philosophical, artistic, psychological travel. We explore. We see
clearly. We try to bring it back. And sometimes the medium we use
(ideas, words, commandments on a stone, music, pictures) takes people
there. And sometimes people take the medium we use to interpret in their
own way, often twisting it for their own purposes. And now, 100 minutes
later, I still hear the birds tweeting, thunder rattling in the
distance, people chatting on the street below, an aeroplane flying
overhead. And it's time for that walk. Before the storm hits the shore
of Fano, on the east coast of Italy, which is in southern Europe; a
thigh-high boot kicking down towards North Africa -- that huge continent
that gets smaller as we see it as just some green against the blue of
the sea as we see just a glowing blue planet in the distance. The
feeling of the experience I had in May 2017 faded somewhat over time,
but it didn't disappear. I'd then occasionally experience the same level
of perceptive intensity, again randomly. On one occasion

(in June) I was driving on the motorway, and the same thing happened, in
that I could suddenly hear and see everything in a more intense way.
Then I noticed dozens of birds gathering overhead and then flying in the
same direction as I was travelling -- as if they were consciously
accompanying me on my journey. These experiences were apparently random.
Sure, I practise Qigong every day, and I sit around a lot drinking tea
(you know, by now, what that means), but no more than I'd usually do.
More reliable evidence, though, for the importance of some form of
regular (or, indeed, intense) peace practice, came during the Qigong
retreat I taught on Stromboli this summer. Now, before you start reading
the following diary entry, it's worth saying that it describes the peak
experience of the whole 'be at peace' process I went through while
writing this book. We've discussed various ways of highlighting this
section more. I quite fancied the idea that when the reader turned the
page to begin reading this diary entry, a pop-up (paper or card) boxing
glove would spring out and punch them in the face, to represent the
consciousness-punching significance of this bit of the book. Much
discussion was had as to the risks a paper boxing glove might pose to a
reader. And, given that I'm now warning you about the possibility of
this before you turn the page, maybe we were advised that we could do
it, as long as I wrote a warning on the preceding page. Actually, as it
so often does, it came down to a matter of cost, as well as health and
safety. So the boxing-glove idea was another one that got away. And we
were left with the much cheaper option of printing this section in ink
mixed with the gland secretions of the incilius alvarius or Colorado
River toad. We concluded that inhalation of the 5-MeO-DMT
chemical-infused ink would enhance the effect of this revelatory
section.

Please breathe out, and then turn the page.

Diary entry: 18 July 2017 -- The Breeze of Peace I'm running a Qigong
retreat. And something big happened in the session this afternoon. It
didn't announce itself as something big at the time. It just appeared as
something very ordinary and everyday -- but these things often do. In
fact, earlier in the week, I was talking about everyday epiphanies. I
used the word 'epiphanic' for these experiences, and then wondered out
loud if I'd made that word up. Well, I just looked up 'epiphanic' and it
does exist, and this is what it means: A sudden, intuitive perception of
or insight into the reality or essential meaning of something -- usually
initiated by some simple, homely, or commonplace occurrence or
experience. So I was sitting there this afternoon in one of the comfy
outdoor armchairs (did the chair have something to do with it?) and I
was surfing between these states: some thoughts, then some watching,
then lots of space, and lots of feeling the breeze and hearing the
sounds. And then I suddenly felt this sense of there being a space;
maybe I thought this was my head at first, through which all of this was
moving. I know, it doesn't sound very 'big' does it? Bear with me,
please. Let's see if it gets any better... It was a new feeling, but a
very natural feeling. There was this space, and the thoughts and the
sounds and the feeling of the sunshine and any emotions or memories, or
sights of the other

people in the group, were all just gently blowing through this space,
like the breeze from the sea below that was gently blowing through our
seated group. And, somehow, all those elements felt the same. The
thoughts were the same as the sights were the same as the slight ache in
my knee was the same as the buzz of the 'Ape' three-wheeled van whizzing
round the alleyways. As I felt this, I relaxed more and dropped back. I
was also noticing this experience as I had it. I couldn't really tell
where the space was either, and in a gentle way I was wondering, Is this
in my brain cavity, or is it this space on the rooftop? Or is this a
vast space -- a universal-everything space -- with things just blowing
through? Time was up too soon. I, like more than half the group now,
could have sat for longer. But we shared -- more deeply than we'd done
before. Some people shared some difficult things, and I was touched by
what people said. But something else was happening too: their words,
insightful or painful, were just the same as the sound of the children
playing on the beach, or the thoughts in my own head, or the breeze
blowing in from the sea and through our group. At the same time, I felt
more moved by what people were saying -- truly touched -- but also
utterly at peace with whatever they were saying. Not me being at peace
with their words, or them, but just a sense of this big space, through
which everything was blowing. And that was peaceful.

It was hard to convey in words, and still is, how profound that
experience was. It was probably the most perception-altering experience
I've had in my life. And it wasn't about 'understanding' anything: it
was about 'feeling' something. It was more sensation than comprehension.
And as such, it's very difficult to pass on. Although, as before, the
intensity of this sensation has faded, its residue has remained in my
consciousness. It was a feeling that fundamentally shifted the way I
feel; and, as a natural effect, the way I think. The assertion 'be at
peace with life, just as it is' was felt, and then understood,
completely clearly: then (and now).

F\*\*K IT TO DOUBT

Neither you nor I can be sure of your precise route to a deep
understanding and sense of this being-at-peace-with-life-just-as-it-is
thing. I suspect it will involve a mix of practice (Level 2) and
intellectual understanding (the theory of Level 3) that will then, in
its own magical way, sprout the kind of apparently random epiphanic
experiences that I've recounted here, and seen in others. But if that
leaves you with too much doubt and uncertainty, it's time to say F\*\*k
It to doubt, and for me to take you on a journey of neuroscientific
discovery. I've already mentioned that the Level 1 time-based
procrastination of peacefulness is likely rooted in the brain's left
hemisphere; and that the Level 2 present-based experience of
peacefulness is rooted in the brain's right hemisphere. Level 3, then,
is best described as a form of 'allowing of movement' between the two
hemispheres, in a perfectly natural way.

But there's a neuroscientific insight that might allow you -- with a
degree of certainty -- to comprehend the underlying and sometimes
overriding sensation of being at peace, with life, just as it is. This
insight was most persuasively and dramatically experienced and then
recounted by American Jill Bolte Taylor in her book My Stroke of
Insight. Bolte Taylor was, and is, a neuroanatomist, and thus has a
profound understanding of how the brain works. On 10 December 1996, when
she was 37 years old, Bolte Taylor woke up feeling unwell. As she got
moving, and attempted to make herself feel better (she did some
exercise, started to run a bath and so on), she began to realize that
something was seriously wrong. And, as the symptoms accumulated, she
realized she was having a stroke. She was rapidly losing the ability to
walk, talk, read, and remember numbers (for making an emergency
telephone call), or to recall anything of her life, for that matter.
Yet, while this catastrophic brain haemorrhage was happening, she
experienced a huge sense of peace. A sense of peace that she'd never
before experienced in her life: a sense that everything was fine as it
was (even though, at another level in her brain, she knew that she could
be dying). After a long struggle to recall the right phone number, Bolte
Taylor managed to call for help. She was rushed to hospital, and over
the following eight years, she did recover from the stroke. But the huge
insight that the stroke elicited was that, as she puts it: 'Peace is
only a thought away, and all we have to do to access it is silence the
voice of our dominating left mind.' Bolte Taylor knew this because her
left brain had been forcibly silenced, and she'd then been dropped into
such an overwhelming sense of peace.

Peace, then, is not somewhere else (as we think in Level 1). It's
available here and now (Level 2): it's just that the noise of the left
brain drowns out the quiet peace of the right brain. Indeed, there are
many stories in various spiritual traditions of the treasure that's
searched for, far and wide, and then discovered, in the end, at home:
right under the noses of the seekers. The moral of all these stories is
that 'it was there all along, and it is, thus, here now'. Underneath the
noise of everything, is peace. The default mode is peace. It's the
foundation. It's what our brain returns to when the rest subsides. It's
not that, when we don't appear to be at peace, the peace disappears.
It's always there. And that's the insight that can eliminate the doubt
that you'll access the at-peace thing. In this moment you are,
underneath it all, at peace. There's a part of your brain that knows
everything's fine -- not that it'll be fine if certain conditions are
met, and certain things turn out in certain ways. But that, whatever
happens, everything is fine, and OK just as it is. Another person who
had the same insight as a result of severe ill health was the
14th-century English Christian mystic Julian of Norwich. She -- yes she
-- had powerful spiritual visions during her illness (and she was so
ill, she was given the last rites). Later, she wrote about them in her
Revelations of Divine Love (the first book in the English language known
to have been written by a woman). These are the most famous words from
that book: 'All shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of
things shall be well.' Now this might also be the first example of the
rhetorical trick of repeating a word or phrase three times to emphasize
the point: such as when you're told that the three most important things
in setting up

a shop are 'location, location, location', or when former British prime
minister Tony Blair set out his priorities as 'education, education,
education'. Julian of Norwich could have summed up her insight like
this: 'The most important thing I realized was that all shall be well.'
But she says 'shall be well' twice, for effect. And then, as if the word
'all' isn't clear enough, she says 'all manner of things' and goes for a
third strike. It's the knowledge of this, as fact -- taken either from a
14th-century mystic, or a 21st-century neuroanatomist, or from your own
epiphanic moments -- that can eliminate any doubt and provide you with a
Level 3 understanding of the whole at-peace thing. Namely, even when you
don't feel at peace -- and the world and your life feel anything but --
you are, underneath, at peace. ----------------------------------Now,
I'm guessing that as you contemplate all this, questions will come up
(from your left brain, probably). So, I can switch off the Powerpoint
presentation now and open to questions...

Q: I'm really struggling at the moment. How can I feel this sense of
being 'at peace'?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH DIFFICULTY

You can try to work with relaxing and attempting to feel at peace in the
moment. It depends on the level of struggle, the nature of your
difficulty, and how agitated you are. Many people get great results from
practices such as meditation or gratitude in times of difficulty. They
are about working with your response to whatever is difficult. Of
course, you can also try to work with the source of your difficulty.
What can you do, if anything, to reduce the cause of the difficulty? In
both ways of dealing with difficulty -- dealing with the source and
dealing with your response -- you're likely to experience fluctuating
levels of stress, and at least some peace. The breakthrough comes when
you realize that beneath it all, a part of you is already at peace --
that everything is actually fine as it is, and that everything will turn
out for the best. It's the remembering of this that adds a new quality
to the struggle.

That new quality isn't perpetual peace -- that would be crazy, given the
circumstances -- but it's a holding of the struggle within a new, benign
context. The shift, then, is in the background -- and that might, or
might not, affect the local, everyday experience.

Q: What about injustice -- how can we possibly be at peace with that?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH INJUSTICE

The world is not just. Whether we see the manifestation of this on the
news every day, or we directly experience injustice personally (and
painfully), we can't start with the assumption that the world should be
just (because it isn't), or live in the hope of it becoming just (it
won't). We have to deal with injustice. We can thus fight it, and
attempt to win through. And many brave people have made the world a
better place for us all by fighting injustice. Or, if we can't fight it,
we have to deal with it another way. Religious people might suggest that
forgiveness is the only way to be at peace around injustice. But
attempts at forgiveness can deny our natural anger. To be at peace with
our own anger around injustice is the most likely route to clearing such
anger -- and, one day maybe, feeling at peace about the actual
situation.

So, remembering our underlying at-peace nature doesn't exclude or banish
the fight or the anger; instead it's the opposite: it includes all. Full
stop.

Q: How can I get through this stress and anxiety to feeling at peace?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH STRESS AND ANXIETY

From the perspective of a stressed or anxious self, the idea of being at
peace feels like the far-off promised land. There are many valid ways
and techniques for dealing with, and thus reducing, levels of stress and
anxiety (some of which I've outlined in this book, such as 'sitting and
drinking tea'). But both stress and anxiety should not simply be seen as
'wrong' and therefore something to be eliminated. Our stress response is
an essential survival response and we'd never want to train it out of
ourselves. Of course, stress and anxiety can be debilitating in the
present, and detrimental to our health in the long term, but they are
simple feedback mechanisms that invite us to look at our lives and make
changes. It's best to see stress as a helpful warning flag that's trying

to tell you something -- you just have to get your warning flag manual
out and look up the meaning. This rational understanding of stress is
also a step in the direction of the full acceptance of the stress and
anxiety that exists at your underlying at-peace level, which is always
there, in the background. So being 'at peace' with stress and anxiety
means, as it suggests, not an elimination of either, but a gentle
acceptance of both. That is life, after all. For most of us, stress and
even anxiety are a part of life. We can (on the one hand) work with the
sources and our responses, but (on the other hand) we can sit back into
an acceptance of them, too.

Q: I'm obsessed with what I've done wrong, and my failures. How can I
find some peace?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH FAILURE

Google the term 'failure quotes' and you'll soon feel better. I love the
following one by Winston Churchill (please imagine him saying this as
you read it): 'Success is the ability to go from one failure to another
with no loss of enthusiasm.' In this era of relentless Facebook friends'
status updates, it's easy to think that everyone's doing well and is
happy. It's less tempting to post a photo of the bus stop in the rain
than one of the beach; or a shot of your disappointing exam results than
your top grades; or your tired and down selfie than your made-up and
cheery self. Look up 'CV of failures' too. One professor at the
prestigious Princeton University in the USA published a CV of all his
failures, and got more publicity for that than he ever did for his
successful academic work. The failures included degree programmes he
hadn't

got onto, research funding he hadn't got, and paper rejections from
academic journals. We all fail. It's just that most of us keep quiet
about these failures. When we're feeling down about our failures, and we
look around us, all we see is people singing about their successes. So
we assume that's all there is. Even at this rational level then, I can
start to feel at peace with my failures. But if you drop to the
underlying at-peace level, there is no recognition of something as a
'failure' at all. There's just life being lived, and things being
experienced. There's not the colour of judgement, only the technicolour
of a full and vivid life -- unfolding moment to moment like a miracle.

Q: How could I ever be at peace with those who've hurt me?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH HURTFUL PEOPLE

F**k 'em, the bastards. People can be cruel and hurtful and sometimes
pure wicked. And it's even harder when you've trusted them, and confided
in them, and given them so much. That they could then be so cruel and
hurtful in return -- F**k 'em. Sure, you can conjecture that whatever
happened to them while they were growing up was difficult for them. Or
maybe you can see that they didn't understand what they were doing. But
it doesn't alter the fact that they were cruel and hurtful to you. You
can't forgive and you're unlikely to forget. And you're tired of people
telling you that you need to let it go. So... feel it. Don't feel guilty
that you still feel like this. You feel the way you do, and that's that.
The only way it will ever pass is for you to stop blocking yourself when
you feel it (with thoughts like, Oh, I should have let go of this by
now).

Being at peace with hurtful people, then, is to recognize that there
will always be some hurtful people out there; and to fully feel the pain
when they hurt us. As the biggest hurt they could cause is locking
inside us any unexpressed pain.

Q: I've just lost someone close unexpectedly. How can I feel at peace
with that?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH BAD THINGS HAPPENING

A part of all of us sits coiled up in dread at the possibility of bad
things happening. Our very nervous system is constantly on the lookout
for the first signs of the threat and the bad thing. And bad things do
happen, clearly. Bad things are likely to happen to me, and to you. Bad
things have happened to me, and likely to you too. And the bad things
that have happened, which you and I have survived, sometimes make us
stronger, and sometimes make us weaker and more scared about more bad
things happening again. I really wouldn't want a replay of certain
things I've experienced. My gut tightens up if I just flash a few of
them through my mind. Rationally, I'm partially reassured by the fact
that, like most people, I'm likely to get through the bad things that
happen. We seem to have a way of getting through and surviving the most
difficult of circumstances.

Though I find it hard to imagine now how I'd get through certain
scenarios that I don't even want to imagine today, experience (my own,
and of seeing others) tells me that it's possible. Rationally, I know
that bad things happen. And that it's a part of life. Bad things are
happening to people every day. But to have a rational stance on such bad
things is a long way off feeling 'at peace' with them. I'd have to drop
a whole lot of attachments, and say some huge 'F\*\*k Its', to get close
to that. But I don't need to do that. Because I know that, underneath,
there's the understanding that, whatever happens in life, all shall be
well. And this 'all shall be well' voice is like the calming tones of a
parent reassuring their frightened child. The parent knows that, in the
context of the thing the child is worrying about, everything will be OK.
And this voice knows that, in the context of everything our earthly mind
and meat-suit can face, everything will be OK.

Q: This constant news about President Trump and North Korea is freaking
me out. How can I be at peace with the possibility of nuclear
annihilation?

A:

F\*\*K IT. BE AT PEACE WITH THE BOMB

As you know from the many references made to it in this book, I've spent
this year, 2017, very aware, and disturbed, by the escalating tensions
between North Korea and the USA. I've asked many people, most of whom
don't seem as concerned as I've been, how they've been able to process
the news. And they invariably say the same thing: 'Oh, I don't watch the
news anymore.' They then give a reason for that, such as, 'It's always
the same negative stuff' or 'It's just politicians saying the same
thing, and they're all the same anyway'. Or, without any irony, given
the likely source of this perception: 'Well, the news is all fake
anyway.' For these people, ignorance is bliss, or at least the normality
of everyday life.

You could argue that they've found their peace with it, but that it's an
'it' they don't understand and refuse to hear anything about. And this
may be a rational and healthy response, given that there's little or
nothing we can do to help avert a nuclear war. (I didn't want to write
just 'nothing' there, as I'm sure you could find a way to argue that if
we voted for him or her, or lobbied for this or that, or marched here or
there, it could conceivably have an effect); And there's little or
nothing we can do to prepare for such an eventuality -- in any way that
would make a difference -- come that eventuality. (Again, I'm allowing
for the bunker-with-water-and-foodstocks preparation stance that some
will take here.) Given this, then, why get all het up as we pore over
the horrific possibilities of something we can't do anything about? Best
to play the finest tune on your violin as the Titanic goes down, without
paying much attention to the Titanic going down. But to me, the most
rational response, initially at least, is fear and horror (which has the
same rhetorical ring, funnily enough, as Trump's 'fire and fury'). We're
facing the possibility of an escalating nuclear war... of the
apocalypse. Please allow me to get scared, upset and a bit teary about
the potentially huge loss of human life, the vast scale of the
suffering, and the annihilation of life as we know it. You'll know by
now that at Level 3 at-peace-training, we don't exclude that response,
or avoid it, or suppress it. It's the most natural response. But there's
one unavoidable fact about this whole crisis: it's happening. We don't
know, at this point in time, where it will go (though I'm guessing Trump
has some pretty clear ideas already), but it's happening. This crisis,
like the health issue you have, and the noisy neighbours who keep you up
at night, and your money worries, and the way

young people talk to each other nowadays -- and every other aspect of
life that seems to stop you feeling at peace -- is happening. And yet,
underneath all those fearful, anxious, angry, exasperated thoughts, is
the thought and perception that 'all shall be well'. Even in the most
extreme not-being-well scenario, there's a bit of us thinking, feeling
and knowing that all shall be well. There's a bit of us that is at peace
with the bomb. And to be at peace with something, and with everything --
with life, as it is -- doesn't exclude all that is not peace: instead,
it includes and even embraces all of it. That's truly what being at
peace means. It's about the most radical thing you can imagine. It
includes all that is not apparently at peace, calm in the knowledge that
all there is, is peace. There's a book that refers to 'the peace ...
which passeth all understanding...'.4 I think this is meant as a
rhetorical device, a form of hyperbole that's actually saying, 'This
kind of peace is not what you think it is, and it's really rather
difficult to understand.' If it were literal, we'd be lost, and it would
become like a Zen Buddhist kōan or some missive from a pretentious,
exclusive club of a 'If you think you understand x, then you haven't
understood it' nature. I mention it though because understanding this
at-peace thing is clearly not easy: it has to be felt as much as
understood; and both the feeling and the understanding of it will come
and go. That, it seems, is also life, as it is.

POSTSCRIPT

The title of this book -- F\*\*k It. Be at Peace with Life, Just as It
Is -- is in the second person. I, the author, am suggesting that you
could be at peace with life, just as it is. Yet the epiphanic
experiences that happened to me during the writing of this book were
characterized by the feeling of an absence of the 'I', the 'you', and
all the other personal pronouns. There's just the breezing-in of stuff,
non-differentiated -- so the traffic noise has as much value as the
voice of pain, and neither seem tethered to anything else. Sure, the
personal pronouns come back in, all the time. I reappear as me, and you
reappear as you. But they seem to have been found out, too. I don't get
into it much -- the possibility that the 'me' thing is a delusion or a
construct -- because I'm unlikely to be able to persuade myself that I
don't exist. But there's something there that sees my 'I' as much and as
little a part of the game as my big toe or a Big Mac or the Big Apple.
And this feels like the end of the film that leaves an opening for the
next. And it usually involves the hint that a character you thought was
dead is still very much alive. This ending, on the contrary,

involves the hint that a character you thought was alive is not there at
all, and maybe never has been. Evil laughter, starting low and getting
higher, and then fading away into the distance.

NOTES 1 Source: Scientific American magazine 2 A 2014 review study by
researchers at the USA's Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
looked at meditation and its efficacy in reducing stress-related
symptoms like depression, anxiety, and pain. It found that the 'effect
size' of meditation was 'moderate', at 0.3; however, the effect size of
antidepressants is also 0.3, so the benefits of meditation rival those
of pharmaceuticals. 3 Source: Dr Daniel J. Siegel, 'The Science of
Mindfulness'; www.mindful.org/the-scienceof-mindfulness/ 4 The book is
the Bible, and specifically, Philippians 4:7 of that book.

With thanks to, in particular -- Michelle Pilley

Dedicated to, in particular -- Patrick Lucocq, 1966--2018 Friend and an
original F\*\*kiteer

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Photograph: © Torge Niemann

John C. Parkin is the UK's bestselling wisdom teacher. The son of
Anglican preachers, John realized that saying F**k It was as powerful as
all the Eastern spiritual practices he'd been studying for 20 years.
Having said F**k It to a top job in London, he escaped to Italy with his
wife, Gaia, and their twin boys, where they now teach their famous F**k
It Retreats in various spectacular locations (such as on the volcano of
Stromboli). He spends his days spreading the F**k It message -- on the
retreats, in F**k It eCourses and even with F**k It Music -- then says
F\*\*k It himself and naps by the pool. www.thefuckitlife.com

JOIN THE F**K IT AUTHORS IN PERSON IN ITALY FOR A F**K IT RETREAT This
is where it all started: John & Gaia ran their first F**k It Retreat in
2005. They run these famous retreats in spectacular locations around
Italy, including on the live volcano of Stromboli, on the beach of
Pesaro and in a luxury spa near Urbino. Say F**k It and treat yourself
to a F**k It Retreat. 'Anything that helps you let go is okay on a F**k
It Retreat.' THE OBSERVER 'I witnessed some remarkable transformations
during my F\*\*k It Retreat.' KINDRED SPIRIT


