![](Images/9781615194766_ebook.jpg)

[]{#title.xhtml}

::: {style="text-align: center; padding: 0pt; margin: 0pt;"}
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" height="100%" preserveaspectratio="xMidYMid meet" version="1.1" viewbox="0 0 1000 1415" width="100%">
`<image height="1438" width="1004" xlink:href="../Images/cover.png">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>
:::

[]{#toc.xhtml}

`<!--?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?-->`{=html}

<nav epub:type="landmarks" hidden="hidden" id="landmarks">

## Landmarks

1.  [Cover](../Text/cover.xhtml){.cover}
2.  [Contents](../Text/toc.xhtml){.toc}
3.  [Note to the Reader](../Text/note.xhtml){.bodymatter}

</nav>

[]{#note.xhtml}

NOTE TO THE READER

The Five Pillars of ikigai

[T]{._idGenDropcap-1}hroughout this book, I refer to the Five Pillars of
ikigai. They are:

Pillar 1: Starting small

Pillar 2: Releasing yourself

Pillar 3: Harmony and sustainability

Pillar 4: The joy of small things

Pillar 5: Being in the here and now

These pillars come up frequently, because each one provides the
supportive framework---the very foundations---that allows ikigai to
flourish. They are not mutually exclusive or exhaustive, nor do they
have a particular order or hierarchy. But they are vital to our
understanding of ikigai, and will provide guidance as you digest what
you read in the forthcoming pages and reflect on your own life. Each
time they will come back to you with a renewed and deepened sense of
significance.

I hope you enjoy this journey of exploration.

[]{#1.xhtml}

CHAPTER 1

What is ikigai?

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_1_FishInBasket.png)

[W]{._idGenDropcap-1}hen President Barack Obama made his official visit
to Japan in the spring of 2014, it befell Japanese government officials
to choose a venue for the welcome dinner to be hosted by the prime
minister of Japan. The occasion was to be a private affair, preceding
the state visit that was due to start officially the following day, and
which included a ceremonial dinner at the Imperial Palace, with the
emperor and empress presiding.

Imagine how much consideration went into the choice of restaurant. When
it was finally announced that the venue was to be Sukiyabashi Jiro,
arguably one of the world's most famous and respected sushi restaurants,
the decision was met with universal approval. Indeed, you could tell how
much President Obama himself enjoyed the experience of dining there from
the smile on his face when he stepped out. Reportedly, Obama said it was
the best sushi he had ever eaten. That was a huge compliment coming from
someone who grew up in Hawaii, with exposure to a strong Japanese
influence including sushi, and who, presumably, had had many previous
experiences of haute cuisine.

Sukiyabashi Jiro is proudly headed by Jiro Ono, who is, as I write this,
the world's oldest living three-Â­Michelin-star chef, at the age of
ninety-two. Sukiyabashi Jiro was already famous among Japanese
connoisseurs before the first Michelin Guide for Tokyo in 2012, but that
publication definitely put the restaurant on the world gourmet map.

Although the sushi he produces is shrouded in an almost mystic aura,
Ono's cooking is based on practical and resourceful techniques. For
example, he developed a special procedure for providing salmon roe
(*ikura*) in a fresh condition throughout the year. This challenged the
long-held professional wisdom followed in the best sushi
restaurants---that ikura should only be served during its prime season,
the autumn, when the salmon brave the rivers to lay their eggs. He also
invented a special procedure in which a certain type of fish meat is
smoked with burned rice straw to produce a special flavor. The timing of
the placing of the sushi plates in front of eagerly waiting guests must
be precisely calculated, as must the temperature of the fish meat, in
order to optimize the sushi's taste. (It is assumed that the customer
will put the food in his mouth without too much delay.) In fact, dining
at Sukiyabashi Jiro is like experiencing an exquisite ballet,
choreographed from behind the counter by a dignified and respected
master with an austere demeanor (although his face will, by the way,
crack into a smile from time to time, if you are lucky).

You can take it that Ono's incredible success is due to exceptional
talent, sheer determination, and dogged perseverance over years of hard
work, as well as a relentless pursuit of culinary techniques and
presentation of the highest quality. Needless to say, Ono has achieved
all of this.

However, more than that and perhaps above all else, Ono has ikigai. It
is no exaggeration to say that he owes his incredibly fabulous success
in the professional and private realms of his life to the refinement of
this most Japanese ethos.

Ikigai is a Japanese word for describing the pleasures and meanings of
life. The word literally consists of *iki* (to live) and *gai* (reason).

In the Japanese language, ikigai is used in various contexts, and can
apply to small everyday things as well as to big goals and achievements.
It is such a common word that people use it in daily life quite
casually, without being aware of its having any special significance.
Most importantly, ikigai is possible without your necessarily being
successful in your professional life. In this sense, it is a very
democratic concept, steeped in a celebration of the diversity of life.
It is true that having ikigai can result in success, but success is not
a requisite condition for having ikigai. It is open to every one of us.

For an owner of a successful sushi restaurant such as Jiro Ono, being
offered a compliment from the president of the United States is a source
of ikigai. To be recognized as the world's oldest Michelin three-star
chef certainly counts as a rather nice piece of ikigai. However, ikigai
is not limited to these domains of worldly recognition and acclaim. Ono
might find ikigai simply in serving the best tuna to a smiling customer
or in feeling the refreshing chill of the early morning air, as he gets
up and prepares to go to the Tsukiji fish market. Ono might even find
ikigai in the cup of coffee he sips before starting each day, or in a
ray of sunshine coming through the leaves of a tree as he walks to his
restaurant in central Tokyo.

Ono once mentioned that he wishes to die while making sushi. It clearly
gives him a deep sense of ikigai, despite the fact that it requires many
small steps that are in themselves monotonous and time-consuming. In
order to make the octopus meat soft and tasty, for example, Ono has to
"massage" the cephalopod mollusk for one hour. Preparing Kohada, a small
shiny fish considered to be the king of sushi, also needs much
attention, involving the removal of the fish's scales and intestines,
and a precisely balanced marinade using salt and vinegar. "Perhaps my
last sushi making would be Kohada," he said.

\* \* \*

Ikigai resides in the realm of small things. The morning air, the cup of
coffee, the ray of sunshine, the massaging of octopus meat and the
American president's praise are on equal footing. Only those who can
recognize the richness of this whole spectrum really appreciate and
enjoy it.

This is an important lesson of ikigai. In a world where our value as
people and our own sense of self-worth is determined primarily by our
success, many people are under unnecessary pressure. You might feel that
any value system you have is only worthy and justified if it translates
into concrete achievements---a promotion, for example, or a lucrative
investment.

Well, relax! You can have ikigai, a value to live by, without
necessarily having to prove yourself in that way. That is not to say
that it will come easily. I sometimes have to remind myself of this
truth, even though I was born and grew up in a country where ikigai is
more or less an assumed knowledge. In a TED talk titled "How to live to
be 100+", American writer Dan Buettner discussed ikigai specifically as
an ethos for good health and longevity. At the time of writing,
Buettner's talk has been viewed more than three million times. Buettner
explains the traits of the life styles of five places in the world where
people live longer. Each "blue zone," as Buettner terms these areas, has
its own culture and traditions that contribute to longevity. The zones
are Okinawa in Japan; Sardinia in Italy; Nicoya in Costa Rica; Icaria in
Greece; and among the Seventh-day Adventists in Loma Linda, California.
Of all these blue zones, the Okinawans enjoy the highest life
expectancy.

Okinawa is a chain of islands in the southernmost part of the Japanese
archipelago. It boasts a lot of centenarians. Buettner cites the words
of its inhabitants as testimonies of what constitute ikigai: a
102-year-old Karate master told him that his ikigai was caring for his
martial arts; a hundred-year-old fisherman said his could be found by
continuing to catch fish for his family three times a week; a
102-year-old woman said hers was in holding her tiny
great-great-great-grand-daughter---she said it was like leaping into
heaven. Woven together, these simple lifestyle choices give clues as to
what constitutes the very essence of ikigai: a sense of community, a
balanced diet, and an awareness of spirituality.

Although perhaps more obvious in Okinawa, these principles are shared by
people in Japan in general. After all, the longevity rate in Japan is
extremely high everywhere in the country. According to a 2016 survey by
the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, compared to other countries
and regions in the world, Japanese men's longevity ranked fourth in the
world, with an average life expectancy of 80.79 years, after Hong Kong,
Iceland, and Switzerland. Japanese women lived the second longest in the
world, with an average life expectancy of 87.05 years, after Hong Kong
and followed by Spain.

It is fascinating to see the extent to which ikigai comes naturally to
many Japanese. A key study concerning the health benefits of ikigai
published in 2008 was conducted by researchers at the Tohoku University
medical school based in the city of Sendai in northern Japan. This study
involved a large number of subjects, enabling the researchers to derive
statistically significant correlations between ikigai and various health
benefits.

In this study, the researchers analyzed data from the Åsaki National
Health Insurance (NHI) cohort study, conducted over a period of seven
years. A self-administered questionnaire was distributed to 54,996
beneficiaries of the Åsaki Public Health Center, a local government
agency that provides health services to the residents of fourteen
municipalities, aged between forty and seventy-nine years.

The survey consisted of a ninety-three-item questionnaire in which the
subjects were asked about past medical and family histories, physical
health status, drinking and smoking habits, job, marital status,
education, and other health-related factors, including ikigai. The
crucial question relating to the latter was very direct: "Do you have
ikigai in your life?" The subjects were asked to choose one of three
answers: "yes," "uncertain," or "no."

Analyzing data from more than fifty thousand people, the Åsaki study
paper concluded that "as compared with those who found a sense of
ikigai, those who did not were more likely to be unmarried, unemployed,
have a lower educational level, have bad or poor self-rated health, have
a high level of perceived mental stress, have severe or moderate bodily
pain, have limitation of physical function and be less likely to walk."
Using just this study, it is of course not possible to tell whether
having ikigai has led to improved marital, employment, or educational
status of the subjects, or, alternatively, whether the accumulation of
the various small successes in life has led to an increased sense of
ikigai. But it would be reasonably safe to say that having a sense of
ikigai points to a frame of mind whereby the subjects feel that they can
build a happy and active life. Ikigai is, in a sense, a barometer that
reflects a person's outlook on life in an integrated and representative
way.

Furthermore, the mortality rate for people who answered "yes" to the
ikigai question was significantly lower than for those who answered
"no." The lower rate was the result of their being at a lower risk of
cardiovascular disease. Interestingly, there was no significant change
in the risk of cancer for people who answered "yes" compared to those
who answered "no" to the ikigai question.

Why did the people with ikigai also have a reduced risk of suffering
from cardiovascular disease? Maintenance of good health involves a large
number of factors. It is difficult to say definitely what factors are
ultimately responsible but the reduction of cardiovascular disease would
suggest that those who have ikigai are more likely to exercise, since
engagement in physical activities is known to reduce the risk of
cardiovascular disease. Indeed, the Åsaki study found that those who
answered positively about ikigai did exercise more than those who gave a
negative response.

Ikigai gives your life a purpose while giving you the grit to carry on.
Although Sukiyabashi Jiro is now a world-famous culinary destination
frequented by people such as the French restaurateur JoÃ«l Robuchon, Jiro
Ono's origins are very humble. His family struggled to make ends meet
and out of financial necessity (these were the days before the
introduction of regulations banning child labor in Japan), he started to
work in a restaurant in the evenings when he was just an elementary
school boy. During the day at school, tired from working long and
arduous hours, he tended to nod off in class. When the teacher made him
stand outside as punishment, he would often take advantage of the break
from lessons to run back to the restaurant and finish chores, or to get
a head start and reduce his workload. When Ono started his first sushi
restaurant, the one that would eventually lead to Sukiyabashi Jiro, his
aspiration was not to create the world's finest dining establishment. At
that time, it was simply cheaper to open a sushi restaurant, compared to
other types of restaurants. Sushi restaurants, in their basic form,
require only the most rudimentary equipment and furnishings. This is
unsurprising, when you consider that sushi started as street food sold
from stalls in the Edo period in the seventeenth century. For Ono, at
that time opening a sushi restaurant was an effort to make ends meet,
nothing more, nothing less.

Then started the long and arduous climb upwards. However, at every stage
of his long career, Ono had ikigai to help support and motivate him as
he listened to his own inner voice in his relentless pursuit of quality.
This was not something that could be mass marketed, or easily understood
by the general public. Ono had to pat himself on the shoulder along the
way, especially in the early days when society at large had yet to take
any notice of his strenuous efforts.

He quietly kept going with making small improvements to his business,
designing a special container, for example, that was fitted within the
unusual counter space of his restaurant, so as to make everything neat
and clean. He improved several tools used in the preparation of sushi,
unaware that many of them would go on to be used in other restaurants
and would eventually be recognized as being his original invention. All
these small advancements have been labors of love, supported by Ono's
keen sense of the significance of **starting small** (the first pillar
of ikigai).

\* \* \*

This little book wishes to be a humble help for those who are interested
in the ethos of ikigai. I hope that by telling Jiro Ono's story I have
given you a flavor of what this concept entails and how valuable it can
be. As we will see together, having ikigai can literally transform your
life. You can live longer, have good health, and become happier, more
satisfied, and less stressed. In addition, and as a by-product of
ikigai, you may even become more creative and successful. You can have
all these benefits of ikigai if you know how to appreciate this
philosophy of life and learn to apply it in your life.

Because ikigai is a concept heavily immersed in Japanese culture and its
heritage, in order to clarify what it entails, I will be delving deep
into Japan's traditions, while seeking relevance in its contemporary
mores. In my view, ikigai is a kind of cognitive and behavioral hub,
around which various life habits and value systems are organized. The
fact that the Japanese have been using ikigai in their everyday lives,
not always necessarily knowing what the term means exactly, is a
testimony of the importance of ikigai, especially if you take into
account the lexical hypothesis, first put forward by the English
psychologist Francis Galton in the late nineteenth century. According to
Galton, important individual traits in a race's personality become
encoded in the language of the culture, and the more important the
trait, the more likely it is to be captured in a single word. The fact
that ikigai has been formed as a single denomination means that the
concept points to a major psychological characteristic relevant to the
life of the Japanese. Ikigai represents the Japanese wisdom of life, the
sensitivities and manners of action that have been uniquely pertinent in
Japanese society, and that have evolved over hundreds of years within
the closely knit society of the island nation.

I will show you that, of course, you don't have to be Japanese to have
ikigai. When I think of ikigai as a private pleasure, I remember a
special chair I encountered in the United Kingdom. For a couple of years
in the middle of the 1990s, I was doing postdoctoral research in the
Physiological Laboratory at the University of Cambridge. I was lodging
in a house owned by an eminent professor. When he showed me the room I
would be staying in, he pointed to a chair and explained that it had
sentimental value for him: His father had made it especially for him
when he was a small child.

There was nothing extraordinary about the chair. To be honest, it was
rather clumsily made. The design was not refined, and there were ragged,
irregular features here and there. If the chair was for sale in a
market, it wouldn't have fetched much money. Having said that, I could
also see, by the glimmer in the professor's eyes, that the chair had a
very special meaning for him. And that was all that mattered. It had a
unique place in the professor's heart, just because his father had made
it for him. That is what sentimental values are all about.

This is just a small example, but it is a powerful one. Ikigai is like
the professor's chair. It is about discovering, defining, and
appreciating those of life's pleasures that have meaning for you. It is
OK if no one else sees that particular value, although as we have seen
with Ono and as you will find throughout this book, pursuing one's
private joys in life often leads to social rewards. You can find and
cultivate your own ikigai, grow it secretly and slowly, until one day it
bears a quite original fruit.

Throughout this book, while reviewing ways of living, culture,
tradition, mindsets, and philosophy of life in Japan, we will discover
suggestions for good health and longevity that are entrenched within
ikigai and you can ask yourself along the way:

- What are your most sentimental values?
- What are the small things that give you pleasure?

These are good places to start when it comes to finding your own ikigai
as a way to a happier, more fulfilled life.

[]{#2.xhtml}

CHAPTER 2

Your reason to get up\
in the morning

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_4_RisingSun_v3.png)

[F]{._idGenDropcap-1}or some people, getting out of bed is not a
problem. For others, it seems very hard to do. If you are one of those
people who lingers under the duvet after the alarm clock goes off,
wishing that it was a holiday, only able to drag yourself out of bed
reluctantly after the second or third wake-up call, then this chapter is
for you.

Ikigai is sometimes expressed as "the reason for getting up in the
morning." It is what gives you an ongoing motivation for living your
life, or you could also say that it gives you the appetite for life that
makes you eager to greet each new day. As we will see in this chapter,
the Japanese do not need grandiose motivational frameworks to keep
going, but rely more on the little rituals in their daily routines. Of
the Five Pillars of ikigai described at the beginning of this book,
getting up early has the most to do with **starting small**.

Hiroki Fujita, who trades in tuna in Tokyo's famous Tsukiji fish market,
is no stranger to the ethos of getting up early in the morning. He gets
up at 2:00 [AM]{.small}, and prepares to go to work, following his usual
protocols. It is still dark when he arrives at his shop in the market,
even in the middle of summer. Fujita immediately starts to work in the
same brisk manner he's been accustomed to for many years.

There is a special reason why Fujita gets up that early every day. As a
broker for tuna fish, he needs to get hold of the finest tuna, and
therefore can't afford to miss anything important that goes on at the
market. Fujita's customers depend on him. As the world discovers the
heavenly, delectable taste of *toro* tuna, more and more attention is
given to the process of selecting and seasoning the best specimens.
Fujita examines dozens of tuna laid out on the floor of a special
section of the Tsukiji fish market, trying to choose the best one for
his impressive list of clients, most of them the top sushi restaurants
in and around Tokyo, including, of course, Sukiyabashi Jiro.

Choosing a good tuna is an intricate art in itself, says Fujita. At
Tsukiji, tuna fish are sold whole, and the tuna broker cannot see the
inside of the fish when making a purchase. The only means by which a
tuna broker can select the fish in the market is by looking at the
surface of the meat near the caudal fin, which has been chopped off the
body of the fish. Fujita often touches and feels the fish at the caudal
fin cut, using his fingers to tell if the meat inside is mature. "The
public can have misconceptions about what kind of tuna is tasty," says
Fujita.

People tend to think that red, fresh-looking tuna is best, but nothing
could be further from the truth. The best tuna actually has a more
subdued appearance. That comes only with a certain kind of fish body,
captured by a limited range of fishing procedures. The best kind can be
found only in, say, one out of a hundred. One tries to find certain
looks and textures, but it is difficult to be sure, as the best ones are
often very similar to, if not indistinguishable from, those damaged
through oxidation. I get up early in the morning, because I am always in
pursuit of that special kind of fish. I think to myself, would I find
the one, if I go to the fish market today? That thought keeps me going.

We should, perhaps, all be embracing the morning the way Fujita does. We
know enough about the physiological conditions of the brain to know that
that time of day is best for productive and creative work. Data suggests
that during sleep, the brain is busy registering memories within its
neural circuits as the day's activities are sorted and consolidated.
There is still ongoing research as to the dynamics of memory
consolidation. It would appear that new memories are temporarily stored
in the brain with the help of the region known as the hippocampus (we
are sure of this essential role of the hippocampus, as people with
substantial damages to it are no longer able to form new memories). Then
those memories appear gradually to "migrate" into the associate cortex
to be consolidated into long-term memories. The brain is able to do all
this efficient storing, linking, and indexing of memories in the absence
of incoming sensory information.

In the morning, assuming you have had a sufficient amount of sleep, the
brain has finished its important night job. It is in a refreshed state,
ready to absorb new information as you start a day's activities. Saying
good morning---*ohayo* in Japanese---and making eye contact activates
the brain's reward systems and leads to a better functioning of its
hormonal regulation, which results in an improved immune system. All
these effects have been shown to be statistically significant, although
the causal links are not completely understood. As we will see below,
the ethos of getting up early in the morning is embedded in Japanese
culture, so it comes as no surprise, perhaps, that there are rules about
how and when to say ohayo. These things are taken seriously! As various
hormonal regulations in the brain are known to be in harmony with the
processions of the sun, it therefore makes sense to live in synchrony
with the sun, as the circadian rhythms are tuned to the natural cycles
of day and night.

That is the neurological explanation for why getting up so early is so
much a part of Japanese tradition. But, as we were just saying, there is
also a cultural one: Japan is a nation that has always placed a high
value on the morning sun.

Prince ShÅtoku, who ruled Japan in the seventh century and was a son of
Emperor YÅmei, was a man of prodigious talents. According to legend, he
could listen to and comprehend ten people speaking at the same time.
Prince ShÅtoku is credited for introducing affirmative political
reforms, such as a seventeen-article constitution, which famously
stressed the importance of *wa* (harmony) in its very first article (of
which we'll discuss more later).

When sending an official letter to the emperor of China, Prince ShÅtoku
began with the sentence, "From the sovereign of the land of the rising
sun." This was a reference to the fact that Japan is situated east of
China, the direction in which the sun rises. The image somehow stuck,
and Japan is still sometimes regarded as "the land of the rising sun" in
Western civilization. *Japan* is an exonym; in the Japanese language the
name of the nation is Nippon or Nihon, two alternative pronunciations
for the nomenclature expressing "the origin of the sun." The national
flag of Japan, *hinomaru* ("circle of the sun"), is a visualization of
the idea of the land of the rising sun. The sun has been the object of
worship, as something that symbolizes life and energy, for a long time
in Japan. On New Year's Day, many people get up early (or stay awake all
night) to see the first rising sun of the year. It is customary to climb
Mt. Fuji in the night, so as to revere the rising sun from the peak.
Many Japanese brands, including beer, newspapers, life insurance,
matches, and a television station use the rising sun as their theme.

Another reason why the Japanese like to get an early start goes back to
the economic history of the country. During the Edo era (1603--1868)
when Japan was ruled by the Tokugawa Shogunate, approximately 80 percent
of the whole population were farmers. Even after the rapid
industrialization and urbanization, about 50 percent of Japanese were
still farmers in 1945. And for the sake of successful farming, it is
necessary to get up early in the morning.

That farming has had such an impact is perhaps no surprise, given how
reliant on rice the Japanese economy has been. Rice was the most
important, almost sacred product of the land. It had to be offered to
gods in rituals, and the rice cake symbolized the coming of the New
Year. Sake, the popular Japanese alcoholic drink, is made from rice.
Sacred decorations at Shinto shrines are made from rice straws.

Today, the percentage of people engaged in agriculture has dropped to
1.5 percent of the whole population. The relative importance of farming
in the mindset of the average Japanese has diminished. However, many
conceptual frameworks related to farming are still alive today,
influencing people's attitudes in daily life. For example, the planting
of rice sprouts in the spring and harvesting in the autumn is one of the
most important rituals conducted by the emperor. The specially
designated rice fields are in the Imperial Palace grounds in Tokyo. Both
the planting and harvesting is done by his Imperial Majesty's own hand,
and the scene is broadcast on national television. In his role as
representative of the Japanese people, the emperor does this because
this was something the majority of the population did for a living.

It was not only farmers who had the ethos of getting up early in the
morning. Among merchants, it was traditionally considered commendable to
get up at dawn and start the day's work straight away in order to get
ahead with business, as well as to save fuel and candles during the
night. There is an old Japanese proverb, "getting up early is a profit
of three *mon*," the *mon* being the currency of Japan during the
Muromachi period (1336--1870). The saying is roughly equivalent to the
English proverb "the early bird catches the worm." There is a general
perception among the Japanese populace that getting up early makes
economic sense. And today we see this whether it's tuna merchants
getting up in the night to go to the market or workaholic businesspeople
in the financial sector going to the office in the early hours to
respond to activities in foreign markets.

One perhaps unlikely profession that takes the "before breakfast" ethos
literally in contemporary Japan is the sumo one. Sumo wrestlers famously
train in the morning, before they have breakfast. Actually, sumo
training is done *only* in the morning. In the afternoon, the wrestlers
take it easy by having a nap or immersing themselves in their favorite
hobbies. Needless to say, the nap and playtime come only after a
generous helping of food, which helps the wrestlers build their famous
oversized bodies.

*Radio taiso* (radio calisthenics---short exercises set to music) is
perhaps more representative of Japan's morning-oriented culture of
physical activity. And this one is for ordinary people of all ages.

Conceived in 1928 by the government to improve the physical fitness of
the general public, radio taiso has been a regular custom (except for a
break of four years after the Second World War) among the Japanese ever
since. Many are introduced to it during primary school. Children in
their first year of education are taught how to move their arms and legs
in synchronization with the music, as the actions are simple enough for
six-year-olds to imitate. During the summer holidays, local meetings of
radio taiso are held, which children are encouraged to attend with
rewards of collectable stamps. If a child accumulates a certain number
of stamps on a stamp card, they are given a present such as sweets or
stationery at the end of the holiday. This custom is supposed to have
great educational value, in encouraging children to go to sleep early
and wake up in the morning, a healthy habit to establish especially in
an era where digital entertainments such as games and YouTube videos
tend to keep them awake late into the night. Children are therefore
encouraged to carry the spirit of the "rising sun," although not in a
nationalistic way. Radio taiso is an example of a small dose of
ingenuity going a very long distance.

Radio taiso is sometimes practiced at construction sites and factories,
where physical preparation for work is deemed necessary, and, even in
white collar offices, before a day's work begins.

Nowadays, it is mainly senior people who duly practice radio taiso. It
is not uncommon to see a group of elders gathered at a park in
residential areas for the daily morning exercise. They take their
positions at precisely 6:30 [AM]{.small}, just as NHK Radio 1 starts
broadcasting the theme music. It is their ikigai.

The image of people in uniform exercising in unison has sometimes been
used by the international media to portray the image of Japan as a
group-oriented country. At the early morning radio taiso gatherings of
the elderly, the movements are not at all orderly or synchronized. You
find people scattered all over the place, each with their own
individualistic approach to the calisthenics. Some are out of step with
the music, while others are chatting briskly while moving their arms and
legs. Some just join in the middle of music, while others might leave
before the end. In other words, there is an abundance of idiosyncrasies,
and they are tolerated.

Radio taiso is perhaps an apotheosis of the Japanese ethos of prizing
early morning activities. It is particularly interesting from the point
of view of the social building of ikigai, because it brings together a
community, in keeping with **harmony and sustainability**, the third
pillar. It has had other repercussions, too. The theme music has come to
occupy a special position among the Japanese people and has been
featured in many popular Japanese films and dramas.

**The joy of little things** seems particularly pertinent in this
context, given that it is customary in Japan to have something sweet
first thing in the morning, traditionally with green tea, although
increasingly this has been replaced with coffee or black tea. It
certainly makes sense. No matter where you are in the world, if you make
a habit of having your favorite things soon after you get up (for
example, chocolate and coffee), dopamine will be released in your brain,
reinforcing the actions (getting up) prior to the receipt of your reward
(chocolate and coffee). As Mary Poppins famously sang in the eponymous
musical, "a spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down."

Other small things can help you get out of bed in the morning. Many
Japanese have a long commute, especially in and around metropolitan
areas such as Tokyo, Nagoya, and Osaka. I myself used to take a 6:20
[AM]{.small} train to go to my senior high school. I would sit in the
same car every time. There were always some familiar faces in the seats
nearby. What was remarkable, and cheering, was that every morning
several office workers would be playing *shogi* (Japanese chess)
together, enjoying themselves on their commute. This shogi club was
something like the radio taiso club, using the power of community to
enhance the motivation for an early commute (in following with the third
pillar of ikigai, **harmony and sustainability**). To this day, I
remember the sight as something close to the image of perfect happiness.

Thus, radio taiso and shogi can be a regarded as a well-devised scheme
for promoting the first, third, and fourth pillars of ikigai, namely
**starting small**, **harmony and sustainability**, and **the joy of
little things**. Needless to say, you don't have to be born in Japan to
practice the custom of getting up early. After all, every land is a land
of the rising sun. Seen from the space station, there is no difference.
At any moment, the sun is rising for some locations, and setting for
others.

Perhaps you could try your own version of radio taiso, or shogi club,
immersed in your own local culture. You might want to start a book club
with the regular commuters on your journey, or prepare a delicious
breakfast that you can look forward to after a gentle jog or stretching
exercises. Make **the joy of little things** work for you, then you can
also start your ikigai in the morning.

[]{#3.xhtml}

CHAPTER 3

[Kodawari]{style="font-style: normal;"} and the\
benefits of thinking small

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_3_StarryBowl.png)

[I]{._idGenDropcap-1}n recent years, Japan has become a popular tourist
destination. In 2010, nearly eight million people from abroad visited
the country. In 2015, the figure increased to nearly twenty million. It
has become common to see hordes of tourists walking the streets of such
popular destinations as Tokyo, Kyoto, and Osaka. Tourists can also now
be spotted in remote villages, in restaurants hitherto known only to
locals, as they brave places that traditionally were avoided.

Ever since the modernization of the nation, the Japanese government has
been trying to lure foreign tourists. In the Meiji era (1868--1912), a
number of western style hotels were built, welcoming tourists from
Europe and the United States. In those times, Japan was not an
industrialized exporting economy, so the foreign currency those tourists
brought was considered vital. After the economy grew rapidly following
the Second World War, the number of people visiting Japan was considered
to be of relatively small importance in comparison to the manufacturing
of electronics and automobiles, which helped earn foreign currency.

But there has been a recent push to encourage people to visit Japan. Now
Japanese industries, facing competition from countries like China,
Korea, and Taiwan, in addition to the dominance of an internet-based
economy coming from the United States, are losing their edge. Once, the
Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI) was revered and feared
as the engine of corporate Japan. Now, METI regards the "soft power" of
the nation as an indispensable part of its money-making machinery. METI
has initiated a "Cool Japan" campaign, inspired by the "Cool Britannia"
movement of the United Kingdom, which aims to encourage economies other
than manufacturing and secure tourism as the new breadwinner for the
nation. To increase numbers of tourists is regarded as one of the
important challenges of the "Cool Japan" initiative.

Tourists often mention the high quality of service, presentation, and
attention to detail as being some of the key charms of Japan. From the
almost flawless operations of Shinkansen ("bullet") trains to the
meticulously efficient and quick delivery of beef dishes in the
fast-food chains, things taken for granted by the Japanese tend to
impress and even awe those of other nationalities. Visitors consistently
find Japan clean and tidy, a place where everything works and is on
time. Public toilets, convenience stores, and public transport in
general are seen to be meticulously operated. Japanese locals are
praised for being kind and helpful.

Needless to say, there are occasional hiccups; like everywhere, Japan
has its share of incompetent people or organizations. The Japanese,
always keen on maintaining a high standard, themselves often complain of
deteriorating standards. But on average, it is fair to say that the
Japanese would get an A+ when it comes to the general quality of
services and friendliness.

When considering why Japan consistently delivers such high-quality goods
and services, it is important to understand the concept of kodawari.

Kodawari is difficult to translate. In English it is often rendered as
"commitment" or "insistence." However, these words, like many concepts
nurtured in a particular cultural context, do not adequately capture the
true meaning of the word. Kodawari is a personal standard, to which the
individual adheres in a steadfast manner. It is often, though not
always, used in reference to a level of quality or professionalism to
which the individual holds. It is an attitude, often maintained
throughout one's life, constituting a central element of ikigai.
Kodawari is personal in nature, and it is a manifestation of a pride in
what one does. In a nutshell, kodawari is an approach whereby you take
extraordinary care of very small details. Of the Five Pillars of ikigai,
kodawari is the first pillar, **starting small**, without necessarily
justifying the effort for any grandiose schemes.

One thing visitors to Japan notice is the large number of small-scale
restaurants and bars, owned and operated by private individuals rather
than chains or conglomerates. They have a local feel, are unique,
individual, and represent their owners' tastes. These places will often
have a *kodawari no ippin*---a particular signature dish---of which the
owner is proud. It might involve specific ingredients, or focus on the
region from which they've been sourced or on the amount of time taken to
prepare the dish. Customers appreciate that these places where uniquely
prepared dishes can be consumed are born from a wish to celebrate
personal interaction and a sense of community.

A particularly interesting example is the famous ramen noodles. Here,
Japan has shown great skill in transforming something imported from
abroad into something close to perfection. This type of noodle
originated in China, but once in Japan, there was an explosion in the
kinds of ramen noodles produced. Depending on the flavor of the soup,
how the noodle is prepared, and the choice of ingredients, there is now
a huge variety. Once two Japanese start arguing what kind of ramen
noodles they like, you can be sure there will be no end to the
discussion. One of the most astute cinematic observers of Japanese
society, Juzo Itami, paid humorous tribute to the kodawari exhibited in
ramen noodles in his film *Tampopo*. Every aspect of ramen making, such
as the concoction of soup, kneading of the noodles, and the number and
proportions of toppings required is described. In addition, the
customers have to learn the proper way to savor and eat ramen. This is
all comically rendered in the film. But although the zeal bestowed on
ramen is humorous and exaggerated, and there is much that is sheer
entertainment, it is funny precisely because there is so much truth to
it. **Starting small** and executing each step to perfection is the very
ethos of ramen shop owners in Japan, and one that is compassionately
shared by the general public.

Kodawari in itself appears to be a trait that is uncompromising and
self-centered, almost to the point of excluding all give and take.
Indeed, in the popular imagination of the Japanese, a ramen shop owner
with kodawari is hard to talk to, grumpy, demanding the same standard of
appreciation on the part of the customers. In Tampopo, the ramen shop
owner is only satisfied when his customers have drunk all the soup. But
in actual fact, kodawari is ultimately all about communication. The
final and personal reward for performing each of the small tasks that go
into making the perfect bowl of ramen is the smile on the customer's
face.

Steve Jobs had this kind of kodawari too, although he didn't express his
ethos in so many words, when he tried to perfect the features of the
iPhone, for example. In fact, one may say that kodawari was Steve Jobs'
defining characteristic. One could even say that Steve Jobs was Japanese
in his kodawari spirit!

Of course, Jobs was an outstanding individual. What is perhaps unique in
Japan is the prevalence of the kodawari spirit among ordinary people.
From small owners of *izakaya* taverns to producers of Kobe beef and
tuna from Åma (a port in the Aomori prefecture, in the north of the
country), Japan has a large population of people expressing their own
kodawari. There are many artisanal farmers who devote all their time,
efforts, and ingenuity to creating the best and tastiest produce. They
get the soil right, plan and execute optimum pruning and watering, and
choose the variety of produce to be planted very carefully. They go an
incredible length, propelled by their strong sense of **starting
small**.

One crucial aspect of kodawari is that people pursue their own goals
above and beyond reasonable expectations based on market forces.

If you want to succeed, you usually need to produce items of reasonable
quality. However, once you reach a certain level, the incremental
improvement in quality diminishes compared to the input of effort. It is
like the learning curve. If you are a student, at a certain point, it
does not make sense to study further except in unusual circumstances,
since the improvement in score is small; you are better advised to put
your effort into something else.

This kind of rationality is alien for people who have kodawari. They are
not satisfied with "just fine" ramen noodles. They will not stop the
pursuit of quality with "just so" tuna (remember Fujita). Producing
"just fine" or "just so" things would make you reasonably successful.
However, those with kodawari go beyond that, without any apparent
reason. "Good enough" is simply not good enough for them. You could even
call it a creative insanity, really.

At a certain point, a casual observer might feel that these pursuers of
perfection are going over the top, and that the effort is too much. Just
at that moment, something miraculous happens. You realize that there is
actually further depth to the quality you are pursuing. There is a
breakthrough, or the production of something completely different. With
the creation of a new genre of products, a brand new market emerges, in
which people are prepared to pay premium prices for qualities previously
unimagined.

For example, producing fruit is a field in which the Japanese have
exhibited a particularly high degree of kodawari. Fruit producers aim
for ever better quality. Some people even pursue the dream of a "perfect
fruit," for example, a strawberry that has a gradient of sweet and sour
along the longitudinal axis.

One of the most interesting features of the perfect fruits offered at
Sembikiya, Japan's premium fruit shop, however, is that there is no
single definition of "perfect." Just looking at the strawberry section,
you have a feeling that you are witnessing the culmination of different
lines of evolution, which do not necessarily lead to any single
definition of what a strawberry should taste and look like.

In Japan, there is even an elite league of fruits. Sembikiya dates back
to 1834. The fruit sold there is of such supreme quality that if a
produce is accepted to be sold in one of its shops, it can be considered
to have made it to the hall of fame for fruits. When you visit one of
the Sembikiya outlets in or out of Tokyo, it is difficult not to be
impressed by the incredibly high prices and the beautiful appearance of
the fruits, which are almost like works of fine art.

A quintessential example of the perfect fruit sold there is the
muskmelon, named after its particular musky flavor. The very mention of
Sembikiya conjures up an image of a muskmelon in the public's
imagination with extraordinarily high prices, usually purchased for
gifts. Indeed, in Japan, a gift of a muskmelon is considered the highest
expression of respect. A Sembikiya muskmelon can cost you anything from
20,000 yen (\$200) upwards a piece. It may sound ridiculous, but if you
knew the extreme efforts---and the kodawari---that go into the making of
a muskmelon, you might, incredibly, think it is a bargain.

Muskmelons sold in Sembikiya are grown with the "one stalk one fruit"
method, by which the superfluous fruits are removed, so that they don't
take away the nutrients that go into the one targeted fruit. Because
people know the extraordinary efforts that go into the making of a
muskmelon, they don't consider the price tag ridiculous, although,
needless to say, not everyone can afford it.

If you are lucky enough to receive a Sembikiya muskmelon as a gift,
prepare yourself for a whole new experience in sweet, juicy, and sublime
flavor and texture. If you cannot afford the whole fruit, you can taste
slices offered at the cafÃ©s and restaurants operated by Sembikiya, where
they use the same muskmelons sold at the outlets.

The fruit sold at Sembikiya are biological arts produced by the kodawari
of dedicated farmers. Needless to say, the proof of these arts is in the
eating. You might admire a *kanjuku* (perfectly ripe) mango, priced at
over 10,000 yen (\$100) a piece. The mango would appear as a jewel in
the shiny presentation box specially prepared by Sembikiya. The
incredibly high price would make you shy to tamper with it, let alone
consume it. However, unless you skin the fruit and cut it into pieces,
you cannot appreciate the true value of the perfect ripe mango. In other
words, you need to destroy it, in order to appreciate it.

And how subtle that experience is! You put the fruit into your mouth,
munch and swallow it, and then, it's gone. Your \$100-worth gourmet
experience is over.

Perhaps the Japanese love affair with the perfect fruit is a reflection
of a belief in the ephemeral. *Hanami*, when the Japanese admire the
blooming of the cherry blossoms every spring, is a prime example. The
Japanese take the transient things of life seriously. The eating of a
perfect mango or stately muskmelon takes only a few minutes, providing a
fleeting joy. You cannot hold on to the experience. Unlike audiovisual
stimuli, there is no record of what you eat, and that is how it is
likely to remain for the foreseeable future. You can't take a selfie of
taste!

The belief in the ephemeral of ikigai, **being in the here and now**
(the fifth pillar), is possibly the most profound of the Five Pillars.

Of course, ephemeral joy is not necessarily a trademark of Japan. For
example, the French take sensory pleasures seriously. So do the
Italians. And, for that matter, the Russians, the Chinese, and even the
English. Every culture has its own inspiration to offer.

But here's another example of kodawari in Japanese culture: pottery.

The Japanese have always appreciated the art of pottery. Bowls used in
tea ceremonies have been particularly valued for centuries. When the
warlords fought in battles and made their names, they expected to
receive famous bowls as symbolic rewards. It is even said that some
warlords were disappointed when they received only a castle and land to
govern, rather than a precious bowl.

There is a particularly famous type of bowl that used to be treasured by
the warlords, called *yohen tenmoku*. *Yohen* refers to the concept of
metamorphosis in the process of baking pottery in the kiln. Yohen
tenmoku bowls are thought to have been produced in China in the period
of a few hundred years starting in the tenth century. *Tenmoku* is the
Japanese pronunciation of Tianmu, a famous mountain west of Hangzhou in
China from where, it is believed, certain types of bowls originated.

A yohen tenmoku bowl exhibits a star-like pattern of deep blue, purple,
and other colors, like a galaxy of luminance scattered in the black
expansion of the cosmos, which is why I call it, quite simply, "starry
bowl." There remain only three starry bowls in the world. All of them
are in Japan, and each one is registered as a National Treasure. Each
one is unlike the other---they have an unmistakable individuality, and
leave an unforgettable impression.

Legends abound about treasured bowls in Japan, but the one about starry
bowls is particularly poignant. Historically, there was a fourth starry
bowl, treasured by the legendary warlord Nobunaga Oda. It is believed to
have been destroyed when Nobunaga Oda met his untimely death in 1582 by
his retainer Mitsuhide Akechi at the HonnÅ-ji temple in Kyoto, in a coup
d'Ã©tat, just as expectations were mounting for Oda to reunite Japan
after the chaos caused by the Ånin War that had lasted for more than a
hundred years. Taken by surprise, and seeing there was no chance of
winning or escape, the proud Oda killed himself and set the temple on
fire, destroying everything, including the prized bowl.

Today, how the starry bowl was made is regarded as one of the greatest
mysteries in the history of pottery making. It is generally regarded
that they were made from feldspar, limestone, and iron oxide. Depending
on the way the clay is prepared, and how the ceramic glaze is formed and
finished in the process of heating and cooling, bowls exhibit variable
surface patterns and textures. These bowls are remarkable for the
variability of their finish, an alchemic process of transformation that
is not perfectly understood or controlled by craftsmen. Within that vast
universe of possible patterns reside the starry bowls, which are likely
to have been produced as the result of rare chance. The probability of
the production of a starry bowl was perhaps less than one in tens of
thousands of specimens.

The reproduction of the starry bowl has become the life-long passion and
kodawari of some famous pottery makers in Japan because they love this
precious bowl so much. It now represents the holy grail of Japanese pot
making.

One of them is Soukichi Nagae the Ninth, who is the ninth-generation
master of a pot-making household based in the city of Seto near Nagoya,
an area that Nobunaga Oda used to govern. Nagae is the family name,
while "Soukichi" is the designated common name assumed by the masters of
the house.

The reproduction of the starry bowl was originally a passion of his
father, Soukichi Nagae the Eighth. Soukichi Nagae the Ninth testifies
that his father was a "once started, he would bet his life on it" kind
of man. While his father was alive, since childhood, he heard the name
"starry bowl" mentioned tens of thousands of times, literally filling
their daily lives. Indeed, his father was so captivated by the pursuit
of the starry bowl that, for a period, he abandoned his day job, which
was the production of conventional Seto pottery.

Soukichi Nagae the Eighth made some progress, and at one point it looked
as though success was in sight. Then the long stalemate began. Without
completing the reproduction of the starry bowl, he passed away,
suffering a stroke. Nagae, after assuming the title of Soukichi Nagae
the Ninth, initiated his own efforts to reproduce the bowl. He bought
more than a hundred different materials for pot making, and tried
different combinations, with variable proportions. Nagae tried more than
seven hundred kinds of *yuyaku*, a special cocktail of materials used to
cover the pot before putting it through the baking process.

The starry bowls are thought to have been made in Jian ware furnaces of
the Fujian province of China. There used to be around ten furnaces in
the district producing Jian ware, and it seems most likely that the
starry bowls were made in one of them. One of the furnaces that has been
excavated in modern times measured a length of 135 meters (443 feet),
and more than one hundred thousand pots would have been put in it over
the years. The Jian ware site was used for more than three hundred
years, from around the tenth to the thirteenth centuries AD. The starry
bowls would have been one of millions of pots produced there.

Soukichi Nagae the Ninth imported a container full of soil from the Jian
ware site, which weighed forty tons, or the equivalent of material for
ten thousand bowls. Making bowls from the Jian ware soil had been a
dream handed down from his father, Soukichi Nagae the Eighth. For Nagae,
the replicating of a starry bowl was like building a pyramid. At the
pinnacle, you will find the starry bowls. However, you have to level the
ground first, in order to make the ascent possible.

At the Jian ware site, there still remain mountains of failed pots.
Layers of broken pieces, at times more than thirty-three feet (ten
meters) deep, cover an area of thirty acres (twelve hectares).
Strangely, a starry bowl fragment has never been discovered there. This
has led to various speculations, including some conspiracy theories.
However, in 2009, fragments of a starry bowl were discovered in a
construction site in the city of Hangzhou, which used to be the de facto
capital of the Southern Song dynasty (1127--1279), effectively putting
an end to conspiracy theories. It is now thought that starry bowls were
indeed produced by craftsmen in the Jian ware district.

In 2002, Soukichi Nagae the Ninth made a presentation in an
international symposium held in Jingdezhen, a city that has produced
pottery for 1,700 years and that is known as the "porcelain capital." In
this presentation, Nagae laid out the fundamentals of his approach
toward replicating these ancient pots. Nagae hypothesized that the use
and vaporization of fluorite in the Jian ware kilns contributed to the
formation of various tenmoku ware patterns, including those of the
starry bowls.

Today there are some hopeful-looking signs of success in the
reproduction of starry bowls, but the quest of Nagae and others is far
from over.

The story of the starry bowls is characteristic of the Japanese mindset
in several ways. The first characteristic is the great curiosity
exhibited toward things that come from abroad, such as these bowls from
China. As already mentioned, all three starry bowls that remain in Japan
are designated National Treasures by the Agency of Cultural Affairs, a
governmental organization dealing with such matters. There are numerous
other examples where artifacts originating in other countries are highly
valued and given status of the highest recognition by the Japanese
government. The denomination "national" treasure has nothing to do with
chauvinistic nationalism.

The people of Japan are good at absorbing and then adapting and owning
something that has been imported, whether Chinese characters in ancient
times or the techniques used to make the English garden in recent years.
Baseball was imported from the United States, and has evolved into a
Japanese sport with quite distinct characteristics. Take *Anne of Green
Gables* by the Canadian novelist Lucy Maud Montgomery, or *Moomin* by
the Finnish author Tove Jansson. Both books have been made into
successful anime series. The novelist Haruki Murakami has been
translating works written in English, most notably those by Raymond
Carver. Due to the reputation of the novelist himself, and partly
because of the quality of the translation, translated authors have grown
to be quite popular among Japanese readers, with an almost cult
following.

As we have seen in this chapter, the Japanese are sometimes dedicated to
producing things with an attention so meticulous that it verges on the
ridiculous, such as the perfect fruit sold at Sembikiya or attempts to
reproduce the starry bowl. Ikigai derived from living up to one's
kodawari is often the engine behind these actions. If you take kodawari
in the static sense, it might sometimes appear to lead to an
inflexibility of method, an emphasis on tradition, and a closing of the
mind to external influences. However, kodawari does not necessarily lead
to a rejection of external influences. Quite the contrary, the Japanese
have been and still are curious people.

Crucially, **starting small** is the hallmark of youthful days. When you
are young, you cannot start things in a big way. Whatever you do, it
does not matter much to the world. You need to start small. And what you
have in abundance is open-mindedness and curiosity, the great
kick-starters devoted to one's cause. Children are always so
inquisitive, you can see what the link is between curiosity and ikigai.

Funnily enough, in postwar Japan, the Supreme Commander of the Allied
Powers, General Douglas MacArthur (who was the leader of the nation as
the top military governor at GHQ), famously referred to Japan as "a
nation of twelve-year-olds." In this remark, MacArthur referred to the
immature nature of Japan's democracy at that time. The phrase was
intended to be derogatory; however, if you take the view that a youthful
mindset with its avid expression of curiosity is a plus in life, then
MacArthur's remark could be taken as a compliment.

Just possibly, ikigai makes a Peter Pan of all of us. And that is not
necessarily a bad thing. Let us all be twelve years old! Youthfulness of
mind is important in ikigai, but so is commitment and passion, however
seemingly insignificant your goal.

[]{#4.xhtml}

CHAPTER 4

The sensory beauty of ikigai

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_4_EihejiTemple.png)

[A ]{._idGenDropcap-1}starry bowl in good condition, if put in an
auction, would fetch millions of dollars. Of the ones that remain, the
Inaba starry bowl (*inaba tenmoku*) is regarded as the finest of the
three. It was handed down from the Tokugawa Shogunate to the house of
Inaba, and would fetch tens of millions of dollars if put on the market
today.

Koyata Iwasaki, the fourth president of Mitsubishi Conglomerate, and one
of the richest men in modern Japan, became the owner of that particular
bowl in 1934. However, considering himself unworthy of it, Iwasaki never
used it at his tea ceremonies.

The Japanese certainly make a fuss of pretty bowls. After all, a bowl is
just a bowl, and its function is to contain liquid.

In terms of that capacity, it is no different from any ordinary bowl in
the market. And while the enthusiasm surrounding these receptacles would
surely find parallels in other cultures, one feels that there is
something unique in the Japanese culture that makes the passion for them
quite extraordinary. Where does this kind of sensory enthusiasm come
from?

In [Chapter 1](../Text/1.xhtml), we referred to the lexical hypothesis,
which states that expressions for important personality traits in life
gradually and eventually come to constitute a part of everyday language,
as is the case with ikigai. There is another interesting aspect of the
Japanese language, worth focusing on and particularly pertinent here.

In Japanese, a dog barks *wan wan*, while a cat goes *nya nya*. In
English, they go *bowwow* and *meow* respectively. Every language has
its share of such onomatopoeic expressions, but it is generally
considered that the Japanese language has an inordinately abundant
variety of them.

They are sometimes referred to as Japanese sound symbolism, and they are
often made up of the same word said twice.

For example, *bura bura* means a nonchalant, carefree way of walking,
while *teka teka* describes a shiny surface. *Kira kira* refers to the
glittering of light, whereas *gira gira* refers to a more intense,
almost blinding source of light, such as the headlight of a motorbike at
night. *Ton ton* refers to a light tapping sound, whereas *don don*
refers to a heavy, thudding one. A dictionary of onomatopoeia edited by
Masahiro Ono lists 4,500 instances of sound symbolism.

With the growing popularity of Japanese manga and anime, an increasing
number of people around the world are interested in Japanese sound
symbolism, as many of the expressions are frequently used in popular
manga and anime works. However, Japanese onomatopoeia is difficult to
master, partly because of the subtlety in the way it is used and partly
because there is so much of it. Unlike in some cultures, the Japanese
continue to use sound symbolism in their adult life, as well as in
childhood. Indeed, it is not uncommon for the Japanese to use sound
symbolism when discussing things in a professional context. Such a
perception structure has certainly developed more in some fields of
industry than others, for example, in gastronomy. You can imagine sushi
chefs such as Jiro Ono and experienced fish brokers such as Hiroki
Fujita using onomatopoeia in their conversation, because sound symbolism
is often used to describe the texture and flavor of food. Similarly, you
can be sure samurai warriors used onomatopoeia to discuss the quality of
swords, from the glitter to the texture of the blade surface. Manga
artists make frequent use of it, too, using words such as *ton ton* and
*don don* to reflect the subtle nuances of the actions of their
characters.

The fact that there is so much sound symbolism in the Japanese language
implies, according to the lexical hypothesis, that there is a
correlation between it and the way in which the Japanese perceive the
world. The Japanese seem to distinguish between many different nuances
of experience, paying attention to the plethora of sensory qualities.
The proliferation of onomatopoeia reflects the importance of detailed
sensory nuances in the life of the Japanese.

Such attention to detail has nurtured a culture in which craftspeople
continue to receive respect in an era where waves of innovation promise
to change our lives.

Japan continues to have a large number of traditional products made by
craftspeople. Craftspeople, although not outspoken or flamboyant, are
held in high esteem and play pivotal roles in Japanese society. Often,
their lives are regarded as the embodiment of ikigai---lives devoted to
creating just one thing properly, however small.

The work of craftspeople is often very labor-intensive and
time-consuming. As a result, the product tends to be highly refined and
of excellent quality. Japanese consumers recognize that time and effort
has gone into the creation of these goods and appreciate the quality, in
such diverse areas as the crafting of knives, swords, blades, ceramics,
lacquerware, *washi* paper, and of weaving.

The ethics and work of craftspeople continue to have an impact on a wide
range of economic activities. Similarly, the Japanese understanding and
handling of the great variety of sensory qualities have led to
correspondingly fine artisanship and manufacturing techniques.

Although Japanese companies have been losing out for many years in the
field of consumer electronics, one area in which the Japanese are still
preeminent is the manufacturing of intricate instruments such as medical
cameras. High-end precision engineering and commitment to perfection
makes Japanese medical cameras among the best in the world. Likewise, in
the case of semiconductor devices, Japanese manufacturers have the
advantage, the accumulation of knowhow and carefully coordinated
operations being a must for efficient and high quality production.

Paying attention to the multitude of sensory experiences is necessary to
execute the finely tuned operations supporting craftsmanship and
high-tech manufacturing. As with craftsmanship, these cognitive
capabilities are reflected in the linguistic make-up of the language.
The richness of the Japanese language as regards onomatopoeia reflects
such fine-tuned sensitivities.

\* \* \*

As we will see later in [Chapter 8](../Text/8.xhtml), in the Japanese
mind, each sensory quality is equivalent to a god. The Japanese tend to
believe that there is an infinite depth to the nuances displayed by the
multitudes of colors in nature and artifacts, just as the story of God
creating the whole universe is deep.

Sei ShÅnagon, a court lady who served Empress Teishi around the year
1000, is famous for her collection of essays *Makura no soshi* (*The
Pillow Book*). In one essay, Sei ShÅnagon pays meticulous attention to
the small things in life. Here's an example (my own translation): "Cute
things. A child's face painted on a melon. A young sparrow hopping
toward an imitated mouse squeal. A toddler crawling in a hurry, finding
a small piece of dust, and pinching it with lovely fingers, and showing
it to adults."

Sei ShÅnagon does not use grandiose words to describe life. She just
pays attention to the small things she encounters in life, understanding
instinctively the importance of **being in the here and now**. Sei
ShÅnagon also does not talk about herself. Referring to small things
that surround her gives an expression of her own individuality much more
effectively than a direct reference to her person.

Sei ShÅnagon's approach as expressed in *The Pillow Book* can be linked
to the contemporary concept of "mindfulness." In order to practice
mindfulness, it is important to attend to the here and now, without
rushing to make judgments. An adherence to the self is considered to
stand in the way of achieving mindfulness.

Considering when *The Pillow Book* was written (it was completed in 1002
AD), the fundamentally secular nature of the essays foretell of the
contemporary zeitgeist by a millennium. It is almost as though the
author, Sei ShÅnagon, belongs to modern times.

One of the unique Japanese contributions to the philosophy of life, as
it applies to the meaning of life, therefore, would perhaps come from a
negation of the self.

A carefree child does not need ikigai to carry on, a point stressed by
Mieko Kamiya in her famous book *Ikigai ni tsuite* (On the meaning of
life \[ikigai\]). A carefree child is not burdened with a social
definition of the self. A child is not tied to a specific profession,
nor social status, yet. It would be wonderful to maintain a child's way
throughout one's life. This leads to the second pillar of ikigai,
**releasing oneself**.

Just as Sei ShÅnagon almost never refers to her own position in society
in the whole of *The Pillow Book* as if she was born just this morning,
like virgin snow falling on the ground, forgetting oneself leads us to
one of the key tenets of Zen Buddhism. It is interesting to observe how
self-negation goes hand in hand with the appreciation of the present, in
a fulfillment of mindfulness philosophy. **Releasing oneself** is very
much related to **being in the here and now**. After all, it was in the
traditions of Buddhist meditation that the modern concept of mindfulness
was born.

The Eihei-ji temple in the suburb of Fukui, Japan, is one of the centers
of excellence for Zen Buddhism. Founded in 1244 by DÅgen, the Eihei-ji
temple remains fully operational today as the venue for the learning and
training of would-be priests. Thousands of candidates for the priesthood
have applied to and studied at the temple, to train, meditate, and
obtain qualifications. In order to be accepted as a disciple at the
temple, an applicant must stand in front of the gate for days, sometimes
in the pouring rain. Although it might seem to be abuse from the modern
point of view, there is a rationale as to why such a demeaning
introduction to the world of Zen is considered necessary, especially
with regard to the negation of the self.

Jikisai Minami is a Buddhist priest who had the rare experience of
staying within the realm of the Eihei-ji temple for more than ten years
(most disciples stay only a few years in order to qualify). Minami says
that one of the most important rules of the Eihei-ji temple (and
therefore Zen Buddhism in general) is that there is no merit system. In
the outside world, people get credits, or brownie points, for doing
something valuable, something good. Within the Eihei-ji temple, however,
there is no redeeming prize for a laudable act. Once you get into the
system, no matter what you do, however earnestly you may meditate,
however conscientiously you might execute the daily chores, it does not
make any difference. You are treated like any other regular disciple:
you become an anonymous being, almost invisible; individuality loses any
sense of relevance.

The schedule at the Eihei-ji temple is very arduous. The disciples get
up at 3:00 [AM]{.small} and, after cleaning themselves, practice morning
meditation. After the meditation comes a heavy schedule consisting of
more meditation, cleaning, and various chores. The disciples take three
meals a day. The menu is very simple, consisting of rice, soup, and a
few vegetarian items.

During the day, the Eihei-ji temple is open to the public, and tourists
can wander around in the interior. The disciples share the same space as
the tourists. From time to time, it happens that tourists encounter
disciples walking along the corridors. The contrast between the
countenances of the tourists and disciples could not be greater. The
tourists bring the air of the wider world, with its emphasis on
self-awareness, the pressure to make good use of one's self, effectively
to collect brownie points. The disciples, on the other hand, walk by as
if they are not aware of their own presence, let alone that of others.
They have succeeded in the **releasing oneself** pillar of ikigai. They
are slim, with smooth skins (it is said that the Eihei-ji diet is good
for facial beauty), and they exhibit a deep self-absorption that can
make even an onlooker feel envious.

In fact, imagine for a moment that you are one of the disciples in the
Eihei-ji temple. The sensory flow in your mind is filled with the
exquisite architecture, interior, and other beauties that have been
designed, maintained, and polished over the years. Although your
material satisfaction would be minimal, and there would be no
satisfaction for the ego, every waking moment spent at Eihei-ji would be
an unbroken flow of sensory beauty.

When you are immersed in the ambience of the temple, you have a sense of
almost timeless bliss. As if to compensate for the loss of individuality
and the merit system, there is an abundance of serene beauty within the
temple, providing the setting in which the disciples carry out these
daily rituals.

The Cambridge-based neuroscientist Nicholas Humphrey, who discussed the
functional significance of consciousness in his book *Soul Dust: The
Magic of Consciousness*, argues that consciousness is functionally
significant because it gives us sensory pleasure---a reason to carry on
with life. Humphrey takes up the extraordinary example of the ritual of
the prisoners' last breakfast before their execution in the United
States. The prisoners have the final privilege of choosing their own
personal menu. Humphrey quotes the prisoner's last menu as posted on the
Texas Department of Criminal Justice website. One inmate might select
fried fish fillet, French fries, orange juice, and German chocolate
cake, another might go for a plate of chicken *katsu*. The point is that
they give considerable thought to the very last meal of their life, a
testimony of the importance of the sensory pleasures we derive from our
food. It can be said to be an ultimate form of **being in the here and
now**. It is almost as though finding ikigai in a given environment
could be regarded as a form of biological adaptation. You could find
your ikigai in a wide range of conditions, and the key to that
resilience is sensory pleasure.

In the contemporary science of consciousness, sensory qualities that
accompany an experience, including those in culinary consumption, are
called "qualia." The term refers to the phenomenological properties of
sensory experience: the redness of red, the fragrance of a rose, or the
coolness of water are all examples of qualia. How qualia arise from the
activities of neurons in the brain is the greatest unsolved mystery in
neuroscience, or, indeed, in the whole of science. Nothing turns us on
like a great mystery. If you put a strawberry in your mouth (it does not
have to be one of the expensive perfect fruits sold at Sembikiya), you
have a certain spectrum of qualia, which would presumably give you
pleasure. And the pleasure is equal to the mystery of life.

Earlier, we drew our attention to the fact that there are many examples
of onomatopoeia (sound symbolism) in the Japanese language.
Onomatopoeia, after all, is just representation of various qualia
encountered in life.

There is a deep link here. In a mysterious way, **releasing oneself** is
linked to the discovery of the sensory pleasures. The Japanese culture,
with its abundance of onomatopoeia, has cultivated this linkage,
nurturing a very robust system of ikigai in its course. By relieving
ourselves of the burden of the self, we can open up to the infinite
universe of sensory pleasures.

[]{#5.xhtml}

CHAPTER 5

Flow and creativity

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_5_Teapot.png)

[N]{._idGenDropcap-1}egation of the self sounds a little pejorative. It
conjures up thoughts of denial and rejection. However, if you understand
the beneficial repercussions that come with this approach within the
context of ikigai, nothing becomes more positive. If you can achieve the
psychological state of "flow," as described by the Hungarian-born
American psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, you will get the most out
of ikigai, and things such as daily chores will even become enjoyable.
You won't feel the need to have your work or efforts recognized, you
won't be looking for a reward of any sort. The idea of living in a
continuous state of bliss, without searching for immediate gratification
through external recognition, is suddenly within your reach.

According to Csikszentmihalyi, flow is a state in which people are so
involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter. That is how
you find pleasure in work. Work becomes an end in itself, rather than
something to be endured as a means of achieving something. When in flow,
you don't work to earn money for your living. At least, that is not your
first priority. You work, because working itself gives you immense
pleasure. Wages are a bonus.

Negation of the self, therefore, becomes a release from the burden of
the self and becomes a fundamental aspect of flow. It corresponds to the
second pillar of ikigai, which is **releasing oneself**. Naturally, as a
biological entity, you are concerned about your own welfare, the
satisfaction of your desires. That is normal. However, in order to
achieve this state, you need to release your ego. After all, it is not
the ego that is important. It is the accumulation of the infinite
nuances of the elements involved in a work that are important. You are
not the master; work is the master, and in flow you can identify
yourself with your work in a joyous, symbiotic way. A serious pursuit of
personal objective is not unknown in Japan. Life is about coherence, and
it helps to have a sense of direction, a vision of life's goals, even
when one has small things to support one's ikigai. Indeed, coherence and
a sense of life's goals ultimately make small pieces of ikigai shine.

Among those who treasure antique porcelain in Japan, it is sometimes
said that "unconscious creation" produces the best masterpieces. It is
argued that in modern times artists have become too aware of their
individuality. In olden times, artists did not make their products to
claim their rights as creators. They just did their job, expecting
nothing more than that people would find these wares useful in their
daily lives. The porcelain remaining from ancient times exhibits a state
of purity and sincerity not found nowadays, say the connoisseurs. There
are anonymous expressions of beauty in these wares.

Being in a state of flow, released from the burden of the self, shows in
the quality of the work. The beauty of the starry bowls is so sublime
precisely because these items were products of unconscious endeavor. One
could argue that modern attempts to reproduce starry bowls have fallen
short of reproducing the serene beauty of the antiques, because of the
conscious action of wanting to create something beautiful and unique. We
perhaps intuitively know the truth of this view. In a world obsessed
with selfies, self-help, and self-promotions, this principle feels all
the more pertinent.

Japanese anime are now world famous. However, it is also common
knowledge that the animators are not well paid. Compared to more
practical jobs such as banking and retail, the wage of the average
animator is meagre. Despite that, working as an animator continues to be
many youngsters' dream job. Knowing perfectly well that they will not be
able to make a fortune, generation after generation of would-be
animators flock to the studios.

Making anime is a tough job. For Hayao Miyazaki, the great master of
Japanese animation known for works such as *Spirited Away* and *My
Neighbor Totoro*, film making means long hours of hard labor. Miyazaki
never stirs from his desk, drawing thousands of sketches that define the
characters and designate the scenes; and these are then worked on and
refined by animators of Studio Ghibli, the company that he co-founded.

I once had the immense pleasure of interviewing Hayao Miyazaki at Studio
Ghibli. He has received numerous accolades but, judging from his
remarks, the real rewards of his work come from the act of anime making
itself. Hayao Miyazaki makes anime in a state of flow, and it shows. You
simply feel the quality of bliss emanating from his works. A child is a
consumer of absolute honesty. You cannot impose something on a child, no
matter how educationally valuable you may deem it to be. Therefore, the
fact that a child, when shown a Studio Ghibli anime work, voluntarily
keeps watching, begging for more, is a great testimony to the quality of
films made by Hayao Miyazaki.

My theory is that this man understands the psychology of a child,
perhaps because he has an inner child alive in himself. Being in the
flow is all about treasuring the **being in the here and now**. A child
knows the value of being in the present. Actually, a child has no
definite idea of the past or the future. His or her happiness resides in
the present, as does Miyazaki's.

Miyazaki told me a story that left a strong and lasting impression on
me. Once, he said, a five-year-old child came to visit Studio Ghibli.
After the child played for some time at the studios, Miyazaki took the
child and his parent to the nearest station. At that time, Miyazaki
owned a car with a convertible hood. "This child would love a ride with
the roof down," Miyazaki thought. Just as he was trying to lower the
roof, however, a light rain began to fall. "Maybe next time," Miyazaki
judged, and drove to the station with the roof remaining shut.

Sometime later, Miyazaki said, he began to have a sense of remorse. He
realized that, for a child, a day is a day, and it never returns. A
child grows out of himself so rapidly. Even if the child returns one
year later, and is taken on a ride with the roof open, it is not the
same thing. In other words, the precious moment had been lost forever,
and because of Miyazaki's oversight.

Miyazaki's words were very sincere, and I was deeply moved. If ever
there needed to be proof of the existence of Miyazaki's ability to put
himself in the position of a child and produce masterpiece after
masterpiece of anime that would bewitch them, there it was. Miyazaki has
kept his inner child alive. The most important characteristic of a
child's existence is living in the present, here and now. The same
attitude is vital for the creative life.

In a sense, Walt Disney was another evangelist of **being in the here
and now**. He would have made animation in a state of flow, too, judging
from the sheer quality of the legacy he left behind. Despite his huge
success---fifty-nine Oscar nominations and twenty-two Oscars---he could
never have reached those heady heights without wanting to immerse
himself in the time-consuming and excessively intricate job of animation
itself. Once, Disney was told by someone that he was popular enough to
become president. Why on earth would he want to be president, Walt
retorted, when he was already the king of Disneyland?

Today, many people, young and old, experience flow while watching a
Disney animation, or enjoying a ride in Disneyland. Perhaps the greatest
legacy of Walt Disney was making the flow experience tangible and
sustainable, so that it could be shared by millions of ordinary people
who might otherwise have lost the magic of childhood forever.

In the context of the flow, or the relation between work and the self,
the Japanese attitude is perhaps unique, at least compared to the
standard concept in the west. People such as Disney are an exception.
Because unlike in the Christian tradition, where labor tends to be
regarded as a necessary evil (metaphorically a result of the expulsion
of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden due to Original Sin), the
Japanese embrace work as something of positive value in itself. The
attitude toward retirement is different in Japan; there salaried workers
look forward to doing some work even after they reach their company's
designated retirement age---and not because they are at a loss for
something to do.

Although Japanese working conditions are probably far from perfect, many
people enjoy working as opposed to retiring. Being in the state of flow
makes working sustainable and enjoyable. It is well known that Hayao
Miyazaki has announced his "retirement" in the past, only to resume work
on a feature-length animation (which involves a lot of labor) later. The
latest retirement announcement came after the completion of *The Wind
Rises* in 2013, prompting many to consider this the great director's
swan song. However, at the time of writing, rumor has it that Hayao
Miyazaki is at it again, working on a feature-length anime project. It
appears that Miyazaki simply cannot be separated from the workplace.

Csikszentmihalyi testifies that one source of inspiration for his work
on flow came when he observed a painter friend working on his artwork
for hours on end, without any prospect of selling the work or getting
financial reward for it. This particular state of mind, or work ethic,
where you just immerse yourself in the joy of **being in the here and
now**, without asking for immediate reward or recognition, is an
integral part of the Japanese concept of ikigai.

Let us look at the business of making Japanese whiskey. You will see
that the production of whiskey in Japan is a surprising example of the
fundamentally positive attitude toward labor. It is a labor of love,
coupled with the negation of the self. It also has a lot of resonance
with the state of flow.

When you think about it, there is no reason for Japan to make whiskey.
The country does not grow barley; it does not have peat. However, for
decades the Japanese have dedicated themselves to the task of creating
excellent whiskey, and now they produce internationally recognized,
award-winning spirits. Some whiskey experts even go so far as to count
Japanese whiskey among the five major whiskies in the world, along with
Scotch, Irish, Bourbon, and Canadian.

Take Ichiro Akuto, who operates modest premises with just two tiny pot
stills in the hills of Chichibu. The Akuto family has been producing
sake, Japan's traditional alcoholic drink, since 1625. It was in 2004
that Ichiro Akuto decided to start producing whiskey, with the new
distillery being completed in 2007. The first release of Chichibu single
malt was in 2011. Despite this very recent entry into the competitive
whiskey market, Akuto's whiskey is already very highly regarded in the
world market, and receives rave reviews. The Playing Card series
comprised fifty-four single malt whiskies, each with a distinct label
featuring a playing card, and was released over a period of several
years. The complete set fetched a price of about four million dollars in
Hong Kong. Akuto's single malt whiskey, released under the brand name
Ichiro's Malt, also fetches high prices. Many regard Ichiro Akuto as the
new rising star in the world of whiskey making.

Seiichi Koshimizu, the chief blender of Suntory, the Japanese brewing
and distilling group, has been involved in the intricate art of finding
the perfect blend for many years. He has been responsible for the
blending of premium brands such as Hibiki, and has won numerous awards.
But the fruits of his intricate works often become apparent only after
decades. Koshimizu, now at the mature age of sixty-eight, might never
get to see how the fruits of his current labor will turn out.

Koshimizu is a man of self-imposed customs. He eats exactly the same
menu (udon noodle soup) for lunch every day, in order not to disturb the
all-important tasting capacities of his tongue. His main weapon is his
steadfast reliability, unmovable like the barrels that remain still in
the rack house to mature the whiskey.

He once told me an interesting philosophy about whiskey blending. It is
not possible, he said, to predict how a whiskey in a particular barrel
will evolve over the years. Even if you put the same whiskey in similar
oak barrels, it will mature into different flavors and taste after years
of being kept in stock. According to him, it may happen that the
character of whiskey matured in a particular barrel is too strong to be
enjoyed by itself. When blended with other whiskies, however, the strong
character will be diluted and can give a surprisingly satisfying finish
to the blended whiskey.

Isn't it interesting how an element, which might not be appreciated by
itself, turns out to contribute to the overall quality when blended with
elements of different characters? It is like the essence of life itself.
The complex interaction between various elements in an organic system
makes life robust and sustainable.

The Japanese interest in wine is more recent, but today we are seeing
the same process at work, with many small producers seeking to create
wine of world standard. There is a common theme to whiskey and wine
making---the importance of working patiently for many years, without
expectations of immediate reward or recognition. Perhaps that is
something that the Japanese are good at, with help from a robust sense
of ikigai.

Being in a sense of flow is important to making your job an enjoyable
one, but, at the same time, attention to detail must exist in order to
improve the quality of the job done.

Being immersed in and drawing pleasure from the here and now, and
attending to the smallest detail while doing so, is the essence of the
mastery of the tea ceremony. It is extraordinary that Sen no RikyÅ«, the
founder of the tea ceremony who lived in the sixteenth century, arrived
at this concept in the Sengoku era, when the samurai warlords fought
each other in endless battle after endless battle, and in what was
presumably a very stressful time to live.

Tai-an, the only remaining tea house designed by Sen no RikyÅ«, is very
small, with barely enough room to seat the tea master and a few guests.
The tea house was intentionally designed to be compact so that the
samurai warriors, who were the main guests at the tea ceremony, could
have an intimate conversation. The samurais had to leave their swords at
the entrance, as there was quite intentionally no room for their
weapons. They even had to twist their bodies and bow low to get in.

The Japanese concept *ichigo ichie* (literally meaning "one time, one
encounter") originally comes from the tea ceremony tradition. RikyÅ« is
the most likely originator of this important idea. Ichigo ichie is the
appreciation of the ephemeral character of any encounters with people,
things, or events in life. Precisely because an encounter is ephemeral,
it must be taken seriously. Life, after all, is filled with things that
happen only once. The realization of the "onceness" of life's encounters
and pleasures provides the foundations for the Japanese
conceptualization of ikigai, and is central to the Japanese philosophy
of life. When you take notice of the small details of life, nothing is
repeated. Every opportunity is special. That is why the Japanese treat
the tiniest detail of any ritual as if it were a question of life and
death.

The tradition of the tea ceremony is very much alive today. Indeed, this
tradition is interesting in that all five pillars of ikigai seem to be
embodied within it. In a tea ceremony, the master carefully prepares the
ornaments in the room, paying the utmost attention to details such as
the kind of flower to be decorated on the wall (**starting small**). The
spirit of humility is the hallmark of the tea master and the guests,
even if they have long years of experience in the ceremony (**releasing
oneself**). Many wares used in a tea ceremony are decades, sometimes
even centuries old, and are chosen so that they resonate with each other
to leave an unforgettable impression (**harmony and sustainability**).
Despite the meticulous preparations, the utmost goal of a tea ceremony
is to be relaxed, to take pleasure in the sensory details within the tea
room (**the joy of little things**), and to be in a state of mindfulness
in which one takes the inner cosmos of the tea room into one's mind
(**being in the here and now**).

This all echoes what we found out about the ancient Japanese concept of
wa in [Chapter 2](../Text/2.xhtml). Wa is a key to understanding how
people can promote their own sense of ikigai while living in harmony
with other people. As previously mentioned, the seventeen-article
constitution authored by Prince ShÅtoku in 604 famously declared that
"Wa is to be valued." Since then, wa has been one of the defining
features of Japanese culture and one of the key ingredients of ikigai.
Prince ShÅtoku can be considered as one of the pioneers of ikigai in
this context.

Living in harmony with other people and the environment is an essential
element of ikigai. An experiment published by researchers at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology suggests that social sensitivity
is a determining factor in the performance of a team. Each person's
ikigai, when implemented in harmony with other people, promotes
creativity in the free exchange of ideas. By appreciating and respecting
the individual characteristics of people around you, you can realize a
"golden triangle" of ikigai, flow, and creativity.

When you are in a state of flow, in harmony with the different elements
inside and outside of yourself, you have the cognitive capacity to pay
attention to the various subtle nuances that come your way. When you are
emotionally disturbed, or strongly biased, you lose the mindfulness
necessary to appreciate the all-too-important details of things that can
tip the balance of life and work. You can pursue quality best only when
you are in a state of flow, a fact that Akuto and Koshimizu know only
too well.

The relentless pursuit of quality is evident also in Japanese bars, at
the consumption end of whiskey making. Est! is a legendary bar in
Yushima, Tokyo. Its proprietor is Akio Watanabe, who has been tending
the customers in this institution for nearly four decades. In my humble
opinion, the best bars in the world are to be found in Japan. I know
this may sound biased and ridiculous, but this is from the perspective
of someone who grew up in Tokyo, and later came to travel around the
world. I have been to a few bars in my life!

I had the fortune to visit Est! when I was a college student, just over
the legal drinking age of twenty years old. The moment I stepped into
the bar, somewhat nervous, I was to learn of a whole new world. The
inside of Est! is decorated with the general motifs of a Japanese bar,
with a hint of Irish and Scottish culture. Bottles of whiskey, rum, gin,
and other favorites line the shelves.

In Japan, a bar like Est! is sometimes called a "shot bar." It is
difficult to describe the unique atmosphere of a shot bar to somebody
who has not been to one. In terms of the elegance of its customers and
the tranquility of its ambience, a Japanese shot bar is like a wine bar.
In terms of being upmarket, it may share some qualities with the
American concept of a cocktail bar, but then the customers are not
necessarily singles or yuppies, nor is there any emphasis on elegant
interiors. The Japanese shot bar is in fact a genre of its own. There's
nothing quite like it in the world.

The elegance of Watanabe's cocktail making, the tranquil atmosphere, the
way Watanabe listens to and responds to his customers was all a
wonderful inspiration to me. It sounds like a clichÃ©, but I learned many
valuable lessons of life while sitting at the counter that evening,
sipping whiskey.

This is Watanabe's secret: the relentless pursuit of quality,
commitment, the focus on the small things without thinking about
recognition. For many years, Watanabe did not take any holidays, except
for a week at New Year and another week in the middle of August. The
rest of the time, Watanabe has been standing behind the bars of Est!
seven days a week, all year around. He gives attention to every single
drink that he serves in his bar, taking every drink very seriously.
Although Est! is highly regarded by its clients, who include actors,
editors, writers, and university professors, Watanabe never sought
social recognition. He is extremely shy of any press or media attention.
Once, I learned, from the casual comments of a customer sitting next to
me at Est!, that Watanabe, in his youth, once served cocktails to the
legendary novelist Yukio Mishima. In the thirty years I have frequented
that place, Watanabe has never told me about this remarkable encounter.
He is that kind of guy.

\* \* \*

Here's one last and remarkable example of people doing something without
any prospect of recognition. The Japanese imperial household
historically has a strong cultural tradition. Science and the arts have
been considered important parts of the imperial patronage. Music is
central to them. The musicians serving the Imperial Family have
designated roles in the provision of the special music for the hundreds
of ceremonies and rituals held in the Imperial Palace every year. These
traditional forms of ancient imperial court music and dance together are
called *gagaku*. Gagaku has been played at court for more than a
thousand years.

I once had a conversation with Hideki Togi, a famous court musician in
the gagaku tradition. Togi is from the Togi family, involved in gagaku
since the Nara period (710--794), that is, for more than 1,300 years.
Togi told me that the court musicians play at many occasions, such as
the 1,200-year anniversary of a particular emperor. When I asked who
would listen to such music, he simply replied "nobody."

He continued, "We play instruments, sing and dance, while no audience is
present, within the great tranquility of the Imperial Palace. We play
music late into the night. Sometimes, we feel as if the spirits of the
deceased emperors come down from heaven, stay for a while with us, enjoy
the music, and then go back." Togi said all this as if there was nothing
extraordinary in what he was saying. Apparently, for musicians of the
gagaku tradition, playing in the absence of an audience has always been
something that is taken for granted.

Togi's narrative is a very poetic and poignant description of the state
of flow, **being in the here and now**. Once you achieve a state of
blissful concentration, an audience is not necessary. You enjoy the here
and now, and simply go on.

In life, we sometimes misplace priorities and significance. Too often,
we do something for the sake of rewards. If the rewards are not
forthcoming, we are disappointed, and lose interest and zeal in the
work. That is simply the wrong approach. In general, there are delays
between actions and rewards. Even if you finish a good work, rewards are
not necessarily forthcoming: Reception and recognition occur in a
stochastic way, depending on many parameters out of your control. If you
can make the process of making the effort your primary source of
happiness, then you have succeeded in the most important challenge of
your life.

So make music, even when nobody is listening. Draw a picture, when
nobody is watching. Write a short story that no one will read. The inner
joys and satisfaction will be more than enough to make you carry on with
your life. If you have succeeded in doing so, then you have made
yourself a master of **being in the here and now**.

[]{#6.xhtml}

CHAPTER 6

Ikigai and sustainability

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_6_IseShrine.png)

[C]{._idGenDropcap-1}rucially, the Japanese conception of ikigai has
always been one of reservation and self-restraint, where harmony with
others is considered to be of primary importance. In a world where
economic asymmetries have led to a widespread social unrest, Japan has
traditionally remained a nation of modest means, despite its economic
success in the past. For a long time, a majority of Japanese perceived
themselves as belonging to the middle class. In recent years, with the
slowdown of economic growth and aging of the population, there has been
a growing awareness that economic asymmetry is increasing, and several
metrics are consistent with that perception. However, extravagant
spending by the rich or displays of exhibitionism by the famous are
relatively rare in Japan, at least in perception. Japan has only a
subdued celebrity culture. There are no Justin Biebers or Paris Hiltons,
although Japan does have its share of celebrities on a diminished scale.

Curbing individual desires and ambitions might have negative side
effects. Compared to the global success of such companies as Google,
Facebook, and Apple, startups in Japan in recent years have had a
relatively small impact. Maybe the Japanese spectrum of success and
glamour is too narrow to accommodate true game changers on a global
scale.

Closely connected to the subdued expression of individual freedom and
success, to reservation and self-restraint, is one of Japan's most
unique values: sustainability. The pursuit of individual desires is more
often than not balanced with the sustainability of society and
environment. After all, without a robust and healthy society and
environment, you cannot pursue your goals and aim to achieve your
ambitions.

As we have seen earlier, on an individual level, ikigai is a
motivational structure to keep you going, to help you get up in the
morning and start doing chores. In Japanese culture, in addition, ikigai
has much to do with being in harmony with the environment, with people
around you, and with society at large, without which sustainability is
impossible. The third pillar of ikigai, **harmony and sustainability**,
is perhaps the most important and uniquely developed ethos of the
Japanese mindset.

Let us consider the Japanese relationship with nature. The Japanese have
made the restraint of individual wants into an art form of modesty,
austere aesthetics, and elegant sufficiency. In Japanese idealism, there
is an abundance of understated beauty, *wabi sabi*. The smooth untreated
wood of a sushi counter is a quintessential example. The fragrant
*hinoki* wood used in baths, combined with the peeled skins of yuzu
orange fruit, is another one---and a heavenly one at that. The purpose
of such a bath is not just to be clean, but to relax. Bathing outdoors
in nature is quite popular, especially at *onsen* (hot springs). In
urban areas, bringing nature indoors to fill the interior with simple
luxury and comfort is very common. You will often find paintings of Mt.
Fuji on the walls of *sento* (public baths), for example---a very
popular artistic trick.

Forest breathing and mountain climbing are popular hobbies in Japan,
showing the respect and affection for nature felt by the Japanese. The
design of the Japanese garden is crafted to be aesthetically pleasing,
designed to grow into different scenes depending on the season.

Japan is a nation of sustainability. Sustainability applies not only to
man's relation to nature, but also to the modes of individual activities
within a social context. You should show adequate consideration for
other people, and be mindful of the impact your actions might have on
society at large. Ideally, every social activity should be sustainable.
It is the Japanese spirit to pursue something in a subdued but sustained
manner, rather than, in flamboyant fashion, seek short-lived
satisfaction of momentary needs. As a consequence, when something is
started in earnest in Japan, it is likely that it will be preserved in
motion for a *very* long time.

The Japanese emperor is the oldest hereditary monarch in the world. The
current emperor Akihito, whose reign began on January 7, 1989, is the
125th in the line. Many cultural institutions have been handed down over
the centuries: Noh (a classical Japanese musical drama), Kabuki (a
classical Japanese dance-drama), and other forms of performing arts have
been practiced over generations. But there are many other old families
in Japan, carrying the torch for different aspects of cultural and
economic traditions.

The term "family business" has a serious and historical significance in
Japan. Many families are known to be involved in a particular field of
cultural and economic activity, extending over centuries. The Ikenobo
family in Kyoto has been dedicated to the art of ikebana (flower
arrangement) since at least 1462, according to a historic document. The
Sen families, also in Kyoto, have been keeping the culture of the tea
ceremony active for more than four hundred years since the death of the
founding father Sen no RikyÅ« in 1591. There are three Sen families, with
tens of thousands of disciples practicing the tea ceremony all over
Japan and abroad. Toraya, a maker of traditional Japanese sweets
operated by the Kurokawa family, has been in business for nearly five
hundred years. KongÅ Gumi, founded in the year 578 by three carpenters,
specializes in the construction and maintenance of temples, and is the
world's oldest company currently in operation, with the KongÅ family
still at the helm.

Japanese culture abounds with memes and institutions implementing ikigai
as an engine for sustainability. In order to understand how the Japanese
perceive ikigai, one needs to understand the anatomy of sustainability,
Japanese style. And this is very apparent at the Ise Shrine.

In a deep and vast forest spreading over 21 square miles (5,500
hectares) in the Mie prefecture of western Japan lies one of the most
important institutions of Japan's indigenous Shinto religion, the Ise
Shrine. The Ise Shrine is considered to be the most sacred of Japanese
Shinto shrines, and is dedicated to the sun goddess Amaterasu. In the
Japanese legend, the Imperial Family is descended from Amaterasu. The
Ise Shrine has thus been closely associated with the Imperial House of
Japan. The role of the chief priest of the shrine has been traditionally
performed by members of the Imperial Family. It is so important that
world leaders who attended the Ise-Shima G7 summit in 2016 visited the
shrine.

The Ise Shrine is believed to house the sacred mirror (*Yata no
Kagami*), one of the three sacred treasures of the imperial household,
together with the sword (*Kusanagi*) and jewel (*Yasaka no Magatama*). A
*magatama* is a jewel indigenous to Japan, and is made of jade and
shaped in a form similar to the human fetus. At the time of the
ascending to the throne of a new emperor, the three sacred treasures are
transferred as the symbol of the dignity and authority of the imperial
household. The physical presence of the three sacred treasures has never
been confirmed, as nobody (except the emperor, perhaps) has actually
seen these artifacts.

The religious attitude of the modern Japanese is a secular one. Many
Japanese visit the Ise Shrine for worship, but it does not necessarily
mean that they are deep believers of the Shinto doctrines, or even know
the particulars of the belief system. Most Japanese regard a visit to
the Ise Shrine as a cultural experience. Shinto itself is not a religion
with strict rules and regulations. Independent of the religious context,
the tranquility of the deep forest and the serene beauty of the
buildings of the Ise Shrine are inspirational, resonating with
contemporary philosophies of the relationship between man and nature.

One of the most remarkable aspects of the Ise Shrine, and more relevant
to our search for ikigai perhaps, is the periodic rebuilding of the
shrine. There are two alternative sites for the inner and outer shrines
of Ise. Every twenty years, the shrine building is carefully dismantled,
and a new building of exactly the same structure is built on a new site,
using newly obtained wood. The current buildings date from the year
2013. The next rebuilding will take place in the year 2033. Records
suggest that this rebuilding process every two decades has been going on
for the last 1,200 years, with occasional irregularities due to battles
and social turmoil.

In order to sustain the exact rebuilding of the shrines, a number of
careful considerations and preparations must be put in place. For
example, the hinoki (Japanese cypress) tree must be grown many decades
in advance to be used as logs in the shrine buildings. For that purpose,
the Ise Shrine has reserves of hinoki trees all over the nation. Some of
the logs used for the Ise Shrine must be of a certain size, a role
fulfilled only by hinoki trees more than two hundred years old.

There are special carpentry techniques used for the Ise Shrine. For
example, the shrine buildings are constructed without using a single
nail. The support and training of skilled carpenters dedicated to the
shrine building is an essential part of the sustainability of the Ise
Shrine. One theory has it that the rebuilding of the shrine every twenty
years was designed to transmit the techniques and experience of shrine
building from one generation of carpenters to another. The Ise Shrine is
the pinnacle of the tens of thousands of shrines all over Japan.
Although smaller in scale and modest in appearance, these local shrines
are respected and preserved by people in the neighborhood. At present,
about a hundred Shinto priests and five hundred general staff support
the operations of the Ise Shrine. Then there are the people who support
the shrine in indirect manners, for example, carpenters, craftsmen,
merchants and forestry people. The organization and harmony (as per
Prince ShÅtoku's wa) of these people who support the shrine is another
important aspect of this venerable tradition of sustainability.

There was an undoubted genius in the conception and design of the Ise
Shrine. Its buildings are exquisite and beautiful. A famous Buddhist
priest, SaigyÅ (1118--1190), on his visit to the Ise Shrine, wrote a
traditional *waka* poem that could be translated as, "I don't know what
resides here, but my soul sheds tears touching its divine serenity."

Conception and design is one thing; maintenance of the original setting
over hundreds of years is quite another. Times are always changing.
Governments come and go. People with varied abilities and personal
traits will have been involved in its operation. It is simply a miracle
that the Ise Shrine has been kept in pristine condition for over a
thousand years.

Importantly, the Ise Shrine could not depend on the luxury of an
excellent staff supporting its operation. To be sure, the shrine staff
have a splendid reputation for reliability and ingenuity. I personally
came to know a few of them, and they are truly model, conscientious
workers, exhibiting aptitude. However, that is not the point. But for a
built-in and assured mechanism to keep its operation going, the Ise
Shrine could not have been kept going for more than a millennium.

For example, if you imagine how Apple would be operating for one
thousand years after Steve Jobs' death, you might start to appreciate
the difficulty of the task. Similarly, the internet has surely changed
the world, but nobody knows if it is sustainable for the next decades,
let alone for hundreds of years. Hackers, frauds, trolls, and
information floods are just a few examples of concerns about the
internet. The proliferation of fake news in the social media is putting
the democratic system in jeopardy. There are, in addition, genuine
worries about the increasingly savage race to lure people's attention
and engagement time. We all know how various internet services, for
example, Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, are shredding our
waking hours into a random agglomeration of short attention spans.

How can an individual realize sustainability in life through ikigai,
given his or her unique personality traits, in a world increasingly
obsessed with innovations? The excellent track record of the Ise Shrine
should be studied as a model for the realization of sustainability.
Clearly, harmony is the key to sustainability. The reservation and
humbleness of the Ise Shrine staff, against the backdrop of the
excellent job they and their predecessors have done over so many years,
make the Ise Shrine the apotheosis of **harmony and sustainability**,
the third pillar of ikigai.

There is another shrine in the heart of Tokyo, which provides another
unique case for sustainability. The Meiji Shrine, founded in 1920, is
dedicated to Emperor Meiji (1852--1912), who played a pivotal role in
the modernization of Japan. It is a popular site for visitors from
abroad. The display of sake barrels dedicated to the shrine is
particularly popular, with people taking selfies in front of the
colorful collection. People hang *ema* (wooden plaques) near the main
shrine building, on which they have written their wishes. Reflecting the
international popularity of the shrine, writings are found in various
languages, expressing wishes concerning good health, happiness, academic
achievement, and success in business.

Located in the heart of Tokyo, the shrine buildings are embedded in a
deep forest, encompassing 170 acres (seventy hectares). Strolling
through the forest on the way to the shrine is a popular activity for
the Tokyoites and visitors. You can rest for tea or have various meals
in the restaurants in the tranquil setting of the forest.

There is a colony of goshawks nesting in the Meiji Shrine grounds,
symbolizing the richness of this huge forest in the center of Tokyo.
There are many rare species found in the Meiji Shrine forest. Walking
through it, you have a feeling that you're breathing in a natural
environment that has been here for a long time. In fact, the forest is
artificial in its origin, conceived, planned and then executed by
botanists, notably Seiroku Honda, Takanori Hongo, and Keiji Uehara.

At the time the Meiji Shrine was conceived, the site was a treeless,
barren land. The three botanists put careful consideration into the
selection of tree species to be planted. Based on their knowledge of
ecological succession and how the species structure of a forest changes
over time, they designed and foresaw how the community of trees would
develop until it peaked and reached a steady state. Responding to the
announcement of the plans, 120,000 trees of 365 species were donated by
people from all over Japan to commemorate and pay respects to the late
emperor, and mark the end of an era.

Today, almost one hundred years later, the results are tranquil natural
surroundings in which one can relax and spend meditative time.

What Honda, Hongo, Uehara, and others did toward the founding of the
Meiji Shrine forest was clearly a work of great ingenuity. Preservation
of the forest then requires another tranche of work, which is equally
important. Because the Meiji Shrine forest is considered a sacred area,
people are not allowed to wander into it, except on designated paths.
Every morning, staff can be observed sweeping the path leading to the
shrine buildings, removing fallen leaves with great care and elegance, a
sight that gives much pleasure and inspiration to the onlookers. The
staff then put the fallen leaves carefully back on the ground around the
tree roots, rather than discarding them, thus replenishing precious
nutrition for the forest. Over time, the leaves are decomposed by fungi
and turn back to earth, contributing to the next generations of plants
and leaves. This respect for the sanctuary has certainly helped preserve
the goshawk colony that nests in the forest.

The Ise and Meiji shrines were clearly great instances of innovation, at
the time of their conception. They are also models of sustainability.
The Ise Shrine has maintained its rebuilding cycle for well over a
thousand years. The Meiji Shrine has been around for a hundred years,
and it is not difficult to imagine it being kept in its current
condition for hundreds of years to come.

Our ikigai would not be sustainable if we failed to appreciate the
efforts of the common people. In Japanese philosophy, what appears to be
ordinary and mediocre is not necessarily ordinary or mediocre at all.
The Japanese culture thrives because of the most simple and humble tasks
often taking them to a level of perfection. Without such a philosophy of
life, many things, from the rebuilding of the Ise Shrine to the
conception and maintenance of the Meiji Shrine forest, or the running of
Shinkansen trains and the wonderful food at sushi restaurants, would not
be sustainable.

Needless to say, a value system centered on just the top few cannot be
sustained, because somebody has got to be the underdog in order for
someone to be at the top. In today's world, where humans are
increasingly forced to compete in a global context, we need to consider
the implications and repercussions of this obsession with winning the
competition. A mindset with the drive to win can lead to great
innovations. The same mindset can also lead to excessive stress and
instability, both for individuals and society.

The problem is, it is in man's nature to think in terms of hierarchies
of winners and losers, leaders and followers, superiors and
subordinates. That is why we have made progress thus far as a species,
and that is why we might someday race to our own destruction. Studying
ikigai in the context of restrained and moderate expression of the self,
while considering the organic system that one finds oneself in, might
well contribute to a sustainable way of living.

Such a line of thought is clearly related to the traditional concept of
wa. Modulating one's desires and wants in harmony with the environment
will also reduce unnecessary conflicts. In other words, ikigai is for
peace!

Sustainability is an art of life, requiring ingenuity and skillfulness.
A man is like a forest, individual yet connected and dependent on others
for growth. The fact that someone has lived for a long time is quite an
achievement in the ups and downs of this often unpredictable world.
After all, in the long process of life, you sometimes stumble and fall.
Even at those times, you can have ikigai, even when you are on a losing
streak. Ikigai, in a nutshell, is literally from the cradle to the
grave, *no matter what happens in your life*.

So imagine you're in a tranquil forest. And take a deep breath. And then
consider what it would take to sustain that forest.

Whenever I visit the Meiji Shrine forest, I hearken to the beautiful
murmurs of sustainability. Ikigai is small-scale, patient, mundane, and
long-sighted.

[]{#7.xhtml}

CHAPTER 7

Finding your purpose in life

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_7_SumoWrestlers.png)

[A]{._idGenDropcap-1}s we have seen, ikigai is about the sustainability
of life. Unexpectedly, in Japan the world of sumo is one of the hidden
treasure troves of sustainability of life.

Sumo is a traditional form of wrestling that has a history dating back
to antiquity. The professional sumo came into being in the early years
of the Edo era, in the seventeenth century.

In the West, there is a prevalent (mis)conception of sumo as a pushing
and punching battle between two naked fat men with funny hairdos,
wearing strange belts around their waists. That image is often a comical
and (perhaps) derogatory one. There is naturally more depth to this
ancient athletic activity. Otherwise, intelligent and sophisticated
people would not go crazy over sumo as a spectator sport, let alone
devote a whole career to it as athletes, as is the case.

Fortunately, as sumo gets more popular internationally, and with an
increasing number of tourists from abroad visiting to see sumo wrestlers
in action, the subtleties accompanying sumo wrestling are gradually
beginning to be appreciated by a wider international audience.

The Grand Sumo Tournaments are held six times each year, three times at
the Sumo Hall (RyÅgoku Kokugikan) in Tokyo and once each in Osaka,
Nagoya, and Fukuoka. A Grand Sumo Tournament runs for fifteen days,
starting and ending on a Sunday. There is a strict ranking system of
Sumo wrestlers, with *yokozuna* (grand champion) at the top. The aim and
dream of every sumo wrestler is to climb up the ladder, although,
needless to say, very few make it to yokozuna. One of the earliest
yokozunas whose records survive was Tanikaze, who was active as a sumo
wrestler from 1789. Tanikaze had an incredible winning rate of 94.9
percent, second only to Umegatani, who had a winning rate of 95.1
percent (oh, yes, the Japanese did keep a detailed record of the sumo
bouts even in those times). Tanikaze was active until 1795, when a
sudden death from flu ended his incredible career. Many regard Tanikaze
as one of the greatest (or, arguably, *the* greatest) yokozuna in the
history of sumo.

Over a period of about three hundred years, there have been seventy-two
yokozunas, with four of them active at the time of writing. In 1993,
Akebono, from Hawaii, USA, became the first yokozuna born abroad. He was
the sixty-fourth yokozuna in history. Since the pioneering feat of
Akebono, there have been five yokozunas from abroad, including the great
HakuhÅ from Mongolia, who holds, at the time of writing, the record of
thirty-eight championship wins in the Grand Tournaments.

There are six ranked divisions in the hierarchy of sumo wrestlers. A
sumo wrestler belonging to the top two divisions is called a *sekitori*.
Approximately only one in ten sumo wrestlers makes it to sekitori.
Typically, there are about seventy sekitori wrestlers, while there are
around seven hundred sumo wrestlers in total at any given time.

There is a huge world of difference between a sekitori and lower-ranked
wrestlers. Not only do the lower-ranked wrestlers compete as fighters,
but they also have to perform functions as assistants to the
higher-ranked sekitori wrestlers.

The assistants carry the sekitori's clothes and belongings, while the
sekitori himself goes empty-handed. Out of the ring, the fashion
statement of a sekitori is that of *nonchalant cool*. He needs to appear
to be street-smart, taking it easy. It will never do for a sekitori to
sweat carrying heavy luggage. The younger sumo wrestlers carry that
weight, while doing other odd jobs as well. A sekitori is allowed to
wear a proper kimono, while the non-sekitori wrestlers are only allowed
to wear *yukata*, a simple robe typically worn after one has taken a
bath. It is then no wonder that every sumo wrestler aspires to be a
sekitori.

Based on the performance of the tournaments, the sumo wrestlers get
promoted or demoted. If you have more wins, you get a promotion.
Otherwise you are demoted. The arithmetic of sumo wrestling is that
simple. It is a classic zero-sum game situation. The more wins you have,
the fewer wins other sumo wrestlers enjoy. Sumo, in essence, is where
someone's success and promotion directly translates into the failure and
demotion of someone else. The world of sumo is overcrowded; you need
literally to push other wrestlers out of the ring to get promoted.

If you stay in the lower ranks, the economic reward you receive is
minimal. Your food and bed will be guaranteed as long as you stay in the
*heya* (training stable) where, typically, non-sekitori wrestlers sleep
together in a large room. However, marrying and supporting a family is
out of the question as the life of a non-sekitori gets tough with age.
Success as a sumo wrestler might be one of the sweetest of Japanese
dreams; the problem is that with the dream comes a high probability of
failure. Nine out of ten, to be precise.

One of the training stables, Arashio stable, has special information on
its website regarding the potential career choices of sumo wrestlers.
After stating drily that only one in ten wrestlers makes it to sekitori,
it offers three career choices, meant for someone who has spent five
years training as a sumo wrestler:

1\. One may choose to carry on as a sumo wrestler. In that case, after a
congratulatory ceremony commemorating the efforts over five years, he
will be encouraged to continue.

2\. One may be undecided, feeling inclined to continue as a sumo
wrestler, while acknowledging the need to consider a second career. In
that case, the stable will offer a year's consideration period, in which
the stable master weighs up various possibilities, while the wrestler
continues his efforts in the stable. After one year, the wrestler can
make a decision about his future.

3\. One may feel that he has tried enough as a sumo wrestler, and want
to enter a new stage in life. In that case, the stable master, together
with the supporters of the stable, will seek job opportunities. In the
process of the job search, the retired wrestler will be allowed to keep
living in the stable quarters for a period of up to one year, with food
and lodging provided.

The website then proudly states: "When you consider the strenuous effort
one must make to stay in a sumo stable, the retired wrestler will have
the character and resources fit to start a successful second career."

Sumo wrestlers can expect to have many second career jobs, sometimes
helped by people who traditionally support them (collectively called
*tanimachi*, after an area in Osaka from where such well-to-do
supporters originated). For example, retired sumo wrestlers often open
certain types of restaurant offering *chanko*, a special type of dish
that sumo wrestlers eat in the training stable to help build up their
body. A particularly famous dish is *chanko nabe* (chanko stew), where
various nutritious ingredients, for example, meat, fish, and vegetables,
are cooked in a tasty soup. Contrary to popular belief, eating chanko in
modest quantities does not lead to obesity. Many former sumo wrestlers
have opened chanko restaurants inside and outside Tokyo, with varying
degrees of success. The tanimachi sponsors typically provide the capital
money to start the business, and frequent the restaurant as regular
customers. There are other jobs offered to a retired wrestler, since the
general perception is that a person who has endured the arduous training
schemes of a sumo heya is ready to make his way in other fields of life
as well. Examples of post-sumo careers include chiropractor, corporate
worker, contractor, hotel manager, sports instructor, and even airplane
pilot.

Financially speaking, therefore, it makes sense to give it up and retire
into a potentially lucrative post-sumo career, with the possibility of
supporting a family. However, many sumo wrestlers who do not make it to
sekitori carry on with their career, even if that means living on a
minimum wage and having to carry out many strenuous chores as
assistants.

The most senior sumo wrestler as of June 2017, Hanakaze, is forty-six
years old. Hanakaze has a height of 5.97 feet (182 cm) and a weight of
240 pounds (109 kg). Hanakaze has been a wrestler for more than
thirty-one years, fighting in 186 Grand Tournaments with a mediocre but
not disastrous performance (605 wins and 670 losses). The highest rank
Hanakaze has ever achieved was two divisions below the sekitori.
Currently, Hanakaze is in the second lowest rank. Given his age and
track record, it is not likely that Hanakaze will ever make it to
sekitori. In an age-conscious nation such as Japan, and in a sport where
the possibility of success decreases rapidly with age, the fact that
Hanakaze keeps going despite his age is regarded as courageous.

Hanakaze has had a relatively respectable performance record.
Hattorizakura has not been so lucky. Hattorizakura is currently eighteen
years old, with a height of 5.9 feet (180 cm) and a weight of 150 pounds
(68 kg). Hattorizakura has fought in eleven Grand Tournaments, with the
performance record of 1 win and 68 losses. Hattorizakura currently holds
the record for consecutive losses as a professional sumo wrestler. He
drew media attention when in one bout, he was so afraid of his opponent
Kinjo, who had the reputation of using hard punches, that he appeared
deliberately to trip and fall to the ground, a movement that is
immediately considered to signal a loss in sumo, of course. The fact
that Hattorizakura looked so young and naive, and yet was a professional
sumo wrestler all the same, stimulated people's imagination.
Hattorizakura became a paradoxical star overnight. Needless to say, with
his very poor performance, he has consistently stayed in the lowest
division.

It is anybody's guess how long Hattorizakura will be able to (and
willing to) continue as a professional sumo wrestler. He may give up one
of these days, concluding that he is not fit for the sport. Otherwise,
it is entirely possible that Hattorizakura will keep going for the next
thirty years like Hanakaze. There is no rule in professional sumo that
says you are asked to leave because of your performance record, no
matter how poor it may be. It is up to each wrestler to decide whether
he would like to stay in the competition, even when there is apparently
no hope of promotion.

Why do sumo wrestlers like Hanakaze or Hattorizakura keep going when
their performances are disappointing? Why do they prefer to stay in the
world of a sport that does not treat them kindly? In other words, what
are the low-performing wrestlers' ikigai? Well, as a sumo fan myself, I
have an answer, or at least a hypothesis. It is all because of the magic
of sumo. You will understand the magic if you ever step into the Sumo
Hall in Tokyo, when the Grand Tournament is held. Once you become
addicted to the world of sumo, you don't want to leave it so easily. It
makes psychological sense to make small personal sacrifices, to stay
within the wondrous kingdom.

On the one hand, sumo is a serious full-contact sport. You need to train
yourself to the extreme limit. You have to overcome your fears and crash
into your opponent at full speed, a lesson the young Hattorizakura has
yet to learn. On the other hand, sumo is so very rich in cultural
tradition. A novice going to the Sumo Hall is amazed by the complexity
and richness of the lengthy preparations leading up to a bout of
wrestling. The bout itself ends in an average of just about ten seconds,
and rarely extends over a minute. The vast majority of time at the Sumo
Hall is spent in appreciating the subtle poetry of the sumo wrestlers'
actions, the dignity of *gyoji* (judges), and the choreographed
movements of *yobidashi* (ushers), who invite sumo wrestlers onto the
ring by calling out their names in a ceremonial style. It is the
combination of the no-nonsense crush of bone against bone and the
elegance of ritual that is intoxicating.

Satonofuji, a sumo wrestler who is thirty-nine at the time of writing,
has had a respectable if not remarkable career as a fighter. He has gone
through 127 Grand Tournaments, with 429 wins and 434 losses. Satonofuji
has a height of 5.61 feet (171 cm) and a weight of 245 pounds (111 kg),
a small physique for a sumo wrestler. The highest rank Satonofuji has
achieved is just below the sekitori threshold. Currently he is at the
second lowest rank. Despite his modest performance, every sumo lover
knows Satonofuji's name and his well-built but compact upper body. All
because Satonofuji performs the *yumitori-shiki* (bow-twirling) ceremony
at the very end of a day's bouts during the Grand Tournament.

In the tradition of sumo, the bow-twirling ceremony is performed by a
sumo wrestler from the same training stable as a yokozuna. Satonofuji
comes from the Isegahama stable, the same stable as the seventieth
yokozuna Harumafuji, who is from Mongolia. After the winner of the final
bout (usually involving a yokozuna) is announced, the spectators are
kindly requested to stay in their seats, to observe the bow- twirling
ceremony. Satonofuji holds and twirls the bow of about six and a half
feet (two meters) in length with incredible speed and precision, to the
applause of the audience. Finally, as Satonofuji bows and leaves the
ring, a day's activities at the Sumo Hall comes to a close. Observing
Satonofuji perform the bow-twirling ceremony, you realize that this is
perhaps his greatest ikigai.

There is a jinx in sumo that a wrestler who performs the bow twirling
cannot make it to the sekitori, a curse broken only by a few sumo
wrestlers so far.

However, for those who admire the sheer dexterity and elegance of bow
twirling by Satonofuji, his performance in the bouts hardly matters.
Rather, it is felt that Satonofuji has found a niche in the world of
sumo, a role that he can fulfill with joy and pride, a part of the rich
set of traditions that is sumo. It is fitting that Satonofuji finds
personal pleasure and joy as he twirls the bow, for the ceremony
originated as a dance of gratitude by the sumo wrestler who wins the
last bout of the day. (A sumo wrestler, even after winning a crucial
bout, does not express his joy himself, out of respect for the opponent,
who would be disappointed by the loss.) Even though Satonofuji is
unlikely to be promoted any further, he will be very happy, until the
end of his career as a sumo wrestler, to fulfill his role as the bow
twirler.

Sumo is an ecological system where you can keep being an active player,
as long as you find some niches, even if you keep losing in the bouts.
Hanakaze, Hattorizakura, and Satonofuji are all unsung heroes, having
reasons to be proud in their own right, even though their performances
are not good enough for them to be promoted to sekitori.

Sumo provides an inspirational case for the diversity and robustness of
ikigai. It tells a story of how one can find one's ikigai even in a
world where the rules describing wins and losses are extremely strict.
In many areas of human activity, value systems used to measure one's
performances are subtle and open to alternative interpretations, so that
one can even have self-delusions, and feel that one is doing alright.
Sumo wrestlers cannot enjoy that kind of ambiguity or self-delusion.
That does not, however, prevent them from having a sense of ikigai.

The ikigai of being a sumo wrestler depends on many things. Actually,
all Five Pillars of ikigai are involved, just as in the tea ceremony.
**Starting small** helps, as the training of a sumo wrestler depends on
very detailed body-building techniques, such as a particular way of
carrying one's feet on the ring. **Releasing oneself** is necessary,
when, as an assistant to an elder wrestler, one has to attend to the
needs and desires of the person one respects and serves. **Harmony and
sustainability** are the very essence of sumo as a traditional sport,
where many rituals and customs are designed to sustain the rich
ecological system. **Joy of small things** abounds in the world of sumo,
from the taste of chanko dishes to the cheering by the fans. Many
wrestlers testify that **being in the here and now** is absolutely
necessary in preparing for and fighting in a bout, as only by being
immersed in the present can one hope to sustain the state of mind for
optimum performance.

All these finely connected pillars of ikigai support a sumo wrestler, if
he is not very successful, or even if he is not at all successful, in
fighting the bouts. The ikigai in the world of sumo is very democratic,
even if the sport itself is pretty cut-throat and unforgiving.

\* \* \*

I am not claiming here that sumo is unique in the democratic provision
of ikigai to everybody. A similar democratic ikigai structure can be
found in, for example, the world of classical ballet.

As the host of a radio program, I once had the opportunity to interview
Manuel Legris, the French ballet dancer who was *Ãtoile* (principal
dancer) at the Paris OpÃ©ra Ballet for twenty-three years. When Legris
was just twenty-one years old, the legendary ballet dancer Rudolf
Nureyev promoted him to Ãtoile, after seeing his performance as the lead
role of Jean de Brienne in the ballet *Raymonda*. After that, Legris
performed various roles in such cities as Paris, Stuttgart, Vienna, New
York, and Tokyo. He is now the artistic director at Vienna State Ballet.

During the interview, Legris discussed the role of the corps de ballet,
the dancers who dance as a group in a ballet performance, excellent
dancers in their own right. It is extremely difficult to be selected for
the corps de ballet at such prestigious ballet companies as the Paris
OpÃ©ra Ballet, quite apart from making it to the rank of principal
dancer. Legris said, with a strong conviction, that the role of corps de
ballet is very important, as it constitutes an integral part of the
spectacle on stage. In fact, the dancers in the back rows have the most
important roles, with heavy demands on their skills. Legris then added
that every principal dancer is naturally sympathetic to members of the
corps de ballet, as he or she will have been a member of it at some
stage in his or her career.

The roles played by dancers in the corps de ballet might be artistically
important, but they are not necessarily well rewarded. A 2011 *New York
Times* article reported that "the Chicago-based Joffrey Ballet and the
Boston Ballet paid their dancers average salaries of \$829 and \$1,204
per week, respectively, over 38-week seasons. The Houston Ballet paid
its dancers \$1,036 per week over 44 weeks." These wages, while quite
respectable, do not compare with the rewards that principal dancers
receive. Thus, wage-wise, there may be a similar career structure and
challenges in the world of ballet dancers as with sumo wrestlers.

As so often in life, you need to accept what you're given, and then rise
to the situation. Biologically speaking, finding ikigai in an
environment, or, for that matter, in *any* environment, could be
regarded as a form of adaptation, especially in the context of mental
fitness. In any given environment, it is in principle possible to have
ikigai, the reason for living, no matter what one's performances might
be.

It is not only winners who have ikigai. Winners and losers can have
ikigai on an equal footing, in the great coordinated dance that is life.
Seen from the inner perspective of ikigai, the border between winner and
loser gradually melts. Ultimately there is no difference between winners
and losers. It is all about being human.

In the minds of many Japanese, the song of ikigai is sung for the
underdogs, or at least for ordinary people from all walks of life. You
don't have to be a top performer to have ikigai. Actually, ikigai can be
found at every level of the hierarchy of competitive standing. Ikigai is
a universal commodity, to be handed out to everyone with an eye for it.

In order to have ikigai, you need to go beyond the stereotypes and
listen to your inner voice. It will appear that you can find your ikigai
even when the political system of your home country is far from perfect,
to say the least.

In the hermit state of North Korea, "mass games" are a staple of
everyday life. They were originally conceived in Germany and then
developed in Japan as a school gymnastics activity. Today the genre is
regularly and conspicuously performed in North Korea, with a high degree
of sophistication.

The documentary film *A State of Mind* by British film director Daniel
Gordon follows the experience of two North Korean young female gymnasts
and their families in the course of participation in the 2003 Pyongyang
mass games. Such games have been performed in the country since 1946. Up
to eighty thousand gymnasts perform in a vast floor display. Through
coordinated efforts, they create the biggest moving picture in the
world.

Mass games is a format in which there is an organized subordination of
an individual's desires to the needs of the collective. The participants
train for a long period of time, for a minimum of two hours per day, to
cultivate the group mentality. Although the sight of mass games might
give an impression of mindless collectivism, the participants of the
mass games are, needless to say, individuals with their own desires and
dreams.

In *A State of Mind*, one of the young female gymnasts who participates
eagerly in the mass games recalls her excitement as she performed before
the "General" (the late Kim Jong-il, son of Kim Il-sung, the founder of
North Korea and father of Kim Jong-un, the current supreme leader of the
hermit state). Her joys and ambitions are quite personal, albeit
embedded in the social context of the state.

When watching *A State of Mind*, you realize that although the
performance in the mass games itself might be collective and mechanical,
the desires and joys a performer experiences during participation are
very passionate and personal. Here's the great paradox of the
relationship between an individual and the society, which a perspective
from ikigai could clarify.

It is certainly possible to live in a totalitarian state and have
ikigai. You can have an individual sense of ikigai even in a nation
where freedom is limited. You can find ikigai independently of the
particular environment you might find yourself in at a particular time.

Humans have the resourcefulness to find ikigai in any circumstances.
Even in the Kafkaesque worlds depicted in *The Castle* or *The Trial*,
the protagonists manage to have ikigai, actually quite a lot of it. The
characters in both novels barely have breathing space to express their
freedom. However, they have little joys to enable them to carry on with
their lives. For example, in *The Castle*, the main character has a lot
of success in finding lovers, even as he struggles to go through the
maze of an oppressive bureaucratic system.

If we keep looking at the arts, you'll discover that you might even be
able to find your ikigai, ironically, in successfully dropping an atomic
bomb, which would lead to the end of the world. In *Dr. Strangelove or:
How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb*, a 1964 film directed
and co-written by the American film director Stanley Kubrick, Major
Kong, commander on a B-52 bomber, becomes so obsessed with delivering
the atomic bomb that he enters the bomb bay personally, and mends the
electronic wiring. As the bomb is successfully dropped, Major Kong rides
on it like a cowboy on a rodeo bull, giving a yell of joy, while
bringing an end to human civilization.

Well, let's go back to the real world.

What have we learned? That ikigai is an adaptation to the environment,
no matter what the nature of that environment might be. From sumo to
classical ballet, people who find ikigai can find joys beyond the
simplistic value of wins and losses. Having ikigai contributes toward
making the very best of circumstances, which might otherwise be
difficult---regardless of the fact they might be difficult.

You need to find your ikigai in the little things. You've got to start
small. You need to be here and now. Most crucially, you cannot and
should not blame the environment for a lack of ikigai. After all, it is
up to you to find your own ikigai, in your own way.

In that respect, the famous Second World War slogan poster by the
British government, "Keep Calm and Carry On," could well be an ethos for
ikigai. Who would have thought it?

[]{#8.xhtml}

CHAPTER 8

What doesn't kill you\
makes you stronger

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_8_Tsunami_v2.png)

[O]{._idGenDropcap-1}ne of the benefits of having ikigai is robustness
and resilience---both strengths that are very necessary when tragedy
occurs. To be resilient in one's life is important, especially given how
increasingly unpredictable and even chaotic the world is becoming.

In 2012, I gave a talk at the TED conference in Long Beach California.
The topic was the resilience of the Japanese people, one year after the
Great Eastern Japan earthquake and tsunami of 2011 that took the lives
of more than fifteen thousand people.

The very moment the earthquake hit, I was on a Tokyo subway. The tremor
was like nothing I had experienced before, despite being from a nation
frequently hit by earthquakes. The train stopped, and I walked the long
way home.

On my smartphone, I watched in total disbelief the massive tsunami
attacking the Tohoku area. It was a terrible experience.

I gave my whole heart to that TED talk. I used the footage of tsunami
waves hitting the city of Kamaishi, waving a flag lent to me by a
fisherman in the devastated city as a symbol of courage and hope. I
talked about the Japanese spirit of resilience. Among Japanese
fishermen, there is a saying, "Under the board, there is hell." Once
Mother Nature rages, there is nothing you can do about it. Despite the
risks, a fisherman ventures off into the ocean, to do his best to make a
living. It was in that spirit, I argued, that people in the area hit by
the earthquake and tsunami were bouncing back.

Japan is a nation prone to natural disasters. Over the years, the
country has been struck by a series of catastrophes. Just like the
fishermen after the earthquake and tsunami, the people of Japan have
exhibited a great spirit of resilience after literally every disaster.

Volcanic eruptions are major causes of destruction for the nation. In
1792, Mt. Unzen erupted, collapsing one of its lava domes, causing a
megatsunami that claimed nearly fifteen thousand lives. The last
eruption of Mt. Fuji was in 1707, and it lasted for two weeks. Although
there were no recorded casualties from the eruption, volcanic ash fell
over a wide area, reaching Tokyo (called Edo at that time), and causing
serious damage to agricultural land.

The year 1707 was an annus horribilis for Japan. Just forty-nine days
prior to the eruption of Mt. Fuji, a major earthquake and tsunami hit
western Japan, resulting in nearly twenty thousand deaths. The
earthquake and the eruption of Mt. Fuji are likely to have been causally
connected. More recently, the Great Kanto earthquake of 1923, which hit
the area round Tokyo, resulted in the deaths of more than a hundred
thousand people. The experience of the quake provided a background story
for the 2013 Hayao Miyazaki film *The Wind Rises*. Ise-wan typhoon, or
Typhoon Vera in the year 1959, which made landfall near Nagoya, resulted
in more than five thousand casualties.

Given this kind of track record of natural disasters, it is difficult
for the average Japanese not to have been exposed to the brutal forces
of nature at some point in their lifetime.

In addition to natural disasters, there have been human ones, too.
Japanese houses were traditionally built with wood. Before the arrival
of modern fireproofing technology, these buildings burned down easily.
Consequently, there has been a series of major fires, bringing
destruction and death on a large scale. The Great Fire of Meireki in
1657, which according to a widely known legend was caused by an incident
involving a cursed kimono, spread to a wide area of Edo. Fueled by
strong wind, the fire ravaged for three days and destroyed 70 percent of
the capital, killing 100,000 people. The main tower of the Edo castle,
where the Shogun resided, was burned down, and was never rebuilt during
the Edo era, which lasted until 1867.

In the bombings of Tokyo during the Second World War, great damage was
inflicted on the capital. In particular, on the nights of March 9 and 10
in 1945, in what the Allied Forces called "Operation Meetinghouse,"
hundreds of B-29 bombers dropped cluster bombs, releasing
napalm-carrying incendiary bomblets. As a result, the traditional
downtown area of Tokyo was totally destroyed, killing 100,000 people.
This was particularly tragic when you consider it was less than
twenty-two years after the destruction caused by the Great Kanto
earthquake of 1923, which left exactly the same area virtually
annihilated.

Today, if you stand on a busy street in Tokyo, you would be amazed at
finding no trace of the unimaginable damage once inflicted upon those
areas. The areas affected by the bombing of Tokyo in 1945 today enjoy
the same peace and prosperity as the rest of the capital. One can only
hope that this will be so for the foreseeable future.

Where do the Japanese find the energy to carry on? Some people might
find sources and inspirations for resilience in social norms and ethics.
Education and financial security play important roles too, as do family
ties and friendships.

This message is taught at an early age in Japan. The *Weekly ShÅnen
Jump*, a manga magazine published by Shueisha, Tokyo, boasts a
circulation of over two million copies. Over the years, the world's
bestselling manga weekly has pledged three values to define the message
of the works it carries: friendship, struggle, and victory. These three
foundations of life were originally determined based on questionnaires
presented to fourth and fifth graders at primary school. Japanese kids
grow up with a keen awareness of the important values of life, where the
various patterns of coping with hardships and overcoming them through
collaboration with one's friends are fed into their brains through works
of manga. This helps contribute to the fact that Japanese children have
a clear sense of ikigai (friendship, struggle, and victory in the case
of *Weekly ShÅnen Jump*) when they are still very young.

But it is clear that religion plays and has always played a fundamental
part in the country's resilience. And it is a particular kind of
religion.

Historically, the Japanese approach to religion has been epitomized by
the idea of "eight million gods," where "eight million" stands for
virtual infinity. The Japanese people have traditionally cherished the
idea that there are infinitely more sources for religious meaning and
values in life, as opposed to a single one representing the will of a
deity.

There are worlds of differences between a single God who tells you what
to do and how to live your life, and the Japanese conception of eight
million gods. The single God tells you what is good and bad, decides who
goes to heaven or hell. In Shinto, where you believe in eight million
gods, the belief process is more democratic. Shinto is constructed of
small rituals, in which the mindfulness of nature and the environment is
expressed. And rather than focusing on the afterlife, which is a big
part of Christianity, the emphasis is more on the here and now, and how
humans are part of a web of elements that make the world what it is. The
Japanese believe that diverse elements, free from restrictions of strict
religious doctrines, need to enter the practical and secular aspects of
life, and the idea of eight million gods is a kind of metaphor for such
a philosophy.

It is important to acknowledge that there have been external influences
along the way. The mindfulness embedded in the Japanese philosophy of
life has been influenced by the Buddhist tradition of meditation,
promoting long-term improvement and good behavior. There is also a
rather surprising link between ikigai and values described in
Ecclesiastes, one of the twenty-four books of the Hebrew Bible, where
life is viewed as fundamentally vain and futile. Because of this,
Ecclesiastes recommends that we find pleasure in life's small rewards,
as being something handed down by God, which humans should receive with
humble appreciation---very in tune with the philosophy of ikigai.

There have also been impacts of Confucianism on Japanese culture,
especially with regard to how one should behave in the secular sense,
the relationship between the master and disciple and the respect you are
supposed to show for your elders. The concept of changing the outside
world by changing yourself, a point emphasized in the Japanese tradition
of Zen, is a culmination of such multitudes of influences.

In the world, everything is connected, and no one is an island.

The Japanese take it for granted that everything religious is put in the
secular, everyday context. Although most Japanese are not aware of the
historical background behind this seemingly frivolous approach to
religion, the idea of eight million gods, in which the Japanese see
deities in things surrounding them, from humans to animals and plants,
from the mountains to small daily items, surely provides the underlying
tone.

Japanese martial arts, be it a sumo bout or a judo match, begin and end
with a bow. When a sumo wrestler wins a bout, he does not express his
joys openly, out of respect for the defeated. The defeated wrestler, on
the other hand, admits his defeat with grace. Every sumo or judo
wrestler is a good loser by definition, at least ideally or on the
surface. It is all about mutual respect. This is an example of taking
pleasure and satisfaction in doing small things properly, for the
greater good.

In the mind of the Japanese, the application of the philosophy of eight
million gods is not limited to humans, or, for that matter, living
things. Lifeless items can treat humans favorably, as long as we pay due
respect. However, if we treat them in a careless and heartless manner,
they might harbor a grudge, and might strike back. A famous ancient
Japanese scroll featuring a hundred monsters (*Hyakki YagyÅ*) depicts
some old household items (such as bowls, brooms, and clothes) turning
into monsters and parading the streets. It was believed back then that
household items might become monsters after many years of use,
especially if humans didn't treat them with due respect. Those household
items that have turned into monsters are sometimes given the name
*tsukumokami*, or "ninety-nine gods," where "ninetyÂ­nine" (years)
symbolically represents a long time. Thus, there are gods inside
household items. That belief sets the unconscious undertone for many
Japanese today.

The Japanese concept of god, as in eight million gods, is different from
the Western conception of God. When a Japanese says he or she believes
that there is a god in a household item, what is implied is the
necessity to pay due respect to that item, rather than saying that a god
who created the whole universe is miraculously encapsulated in that
small space.

Attitudes are reflected in people's actions. A person who believes that
there is god inside an item will approach life differently from one who
doesn't. The belief might manifest itself to varying degrees in
day-to-day behavior. There will be people who express their beliefs in a
god of small things, while others might pay respect to and treat items
around them carefully, without necessarily consciously believing that
there are gods inside them. It is not uncommon to see baggage handlers
and airport staff bow and wave goodbye to departing airplanes, a scene
quite ordinary to many Japanese but a source of inspiration and wonder
for many people from abroad.

In the view of a typical Japanese, life is a balance of many small
things, rather than something to be dictated down from a unifying
doctrine. Although a flimsy attitude toward religion might raise
eyebrows in some societies, for a Japanese it is quite natural to have a
portfolio of religious motifs. From the Japanese viewpoint, religious
themes are welcome, as long as they contribute to the multitude of a
secular base for life.

The importance of secular values as opposed to strict religious value
systems is an important aspect of the Japanese way of life, which has
much to do with a robust construction of ikigai. The Japanese, even when
they express allegiance to some religious organization, seldom do so
with strictness, to the exclusion of other religions. It is not uncommon
for a Japanese to visit the Shinto Shrine on New Year's Day, celebrate
Christmas with a lover, get married in the Christian style, and attend a
Buddhist funeral. There isn't really an awareness of inconsistency. In
recent years, for many Japanese the holidays of Christmas, Halloween,
and Easter have become viewed as festivities where you can go out on the
street, shop, and have a good time. In other words, the Japanese
assimilate these religious traditions from abroad within the context of
eight million gods.

In the past, such a flexibility has been criticized as a lack of "true"
religious belief. However, in the context of the contemporary world
situation, where people from different religious backgrounds sometimes
clash with tragic consequences, the apparently religiously frivolous
Japanese mindset might be given the thumbs up. The pursuit of individual
ikigai Japanese style, with a full spectrum of values, can be seen to
contribute to a peace of mind in a world where extremisms tend to take
hold.

That is not to say that Japan has been completely immune to religious
conflicts. Throughout the history of Japan, there has been at times
brutal oppression of religion, especially when perceived to be in
conflict with secular values. In 1571, for example, in a series of
events now called the Siege of Mount Hiei, the samurai warlord Nobunaga
Oda (who killed himself in HonnÅ-ji temple, destroying the fourth starry
bowl on the way, as described in [Chapter 3](../Text/3.xhtml)) burned
down hundreds of temples, massacring more than twenty thousand monks and
civilians. Some historians claim that this atrocity effectively curbed
religious cults from having the power to overshadow the Japanese secular
ways of living.

Christianity was brought to Japan by a number of missionaries, most
notably Francis Xavier (1506--1552), who became the first missionary to
reach Japan in 1549. In the beginning, the samurai warriors welcomed the
newly arrived belief and culture, with its exotic flavor. There were
even some high-profile cases in which samurai lords converted themselves
to Christianity. After a honeymoon period, HideÂ­yoshi Toyotomi, a
powerful warlord, declared a ban on Christianity in 1587, and then again
in 1596. The ban had many loose ends, and some missionaries continued
their activities in Japan.

When given a choice between devout dedication to one principle and an
array of ideologies, a typical Japanese would choose the latter. This
has helped the nation to absorb many new things from abroad, as there is
little taboo limiting the curiosity of people. On the other hand,
looking at the balance of small things has made it difficult to stick to
one principle. In the Martin Scorsese feature film *The Silence*, an
adaptation of the masterpiece novel by ShÅ«saku EndÅ, the Jesuit priest,
Father Rodrigues, who apostates under pressure from the Shogunate
officials, likens Japan to a "swamp," where nothing can take firm root.
The priest goes on to say that even if Christianity appears to be
believed, it is something different from the original, modified and
digested in the Japanese way. In a land of eight million gods, the
Christian concept of God might have difficulty taking hold.

"Swamp" might sound derogatory, but in fact it is not necessarily so.
The derogation is in the prejudice of the observer, not in the nature of
the swamp itself. A swamp is a rich ecological system where many
microorganisms thrive. Life on earth probably originated from an
environment similar to a swamp. In our intestine, which in recent years
has been shown to play an important role in our immune system, there is
a rich ecosystem of microorganisms that are indispensable for the
maintenance of our health.

One's ikigai is actually like a swamp, if there is enough diversity and
depth to it. In short, there is a glory in the swamp. There might even
be eight million gods.

Ask yourself this: What are the small things in the swamp of your mind
that will carry you through a difficult patch? These are perhaps the
elements you want to focus on and keep very present in your mind.

[]{#9.xhtml}

CHAPTER 9

Ikigai and happiness

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_9_MangaMagazine.png)

[T]{._idGenDropcap-1}here is a popular conception, justified to some
extent, that the Japanese salaryman is a model of devotion and
self-denial. The word *karoshi*, which literally means "death from
overwork," has entered the international lexicon. However, the old ethic
of unquestioned devotion to one's company is becoming unacceptable, even
in a country like Japan.

We all know intuitively that strict adherence to the work ethic demanded
by an organization does not necessarily lead to happiness. In order to
have a robust sense of ikigai, you need to keep a balance between work
and life. New waves of alternative forms of ikigai, for example,
salarymen quitting their companies and starting their own way of life,
or househusbands doing the domestic chores for their working wives, have
arrived in Japan. They reflect the global trend of working freelance. At
the same time, there are some uniquely Japanese twists to these growing
trends.

For example, *datsusara* is a phenomenon in which a salaried worker,
usually employed in office work, decides to leave the safe but
unexciting life as company employee to pursue their passions.
Etymologically, *datsu* means "to exit," whereas *sara* is an
abbreviation for "salarymen." Sometimes, depending on the economic
situation, you might be forced into datsusara after getting the boot.
However, this has been relatively rare in Japan where, once employed,
your job is usually secured until retirement. The forms datsusara may
take are numerous: running a bar or a restaurant, becoming a farmer or
an artist. A common characteristic is that these occupations are most
often examples of extended ikigai---the former employee wishing to earn
some kind of a living while doing something they feel passionate about,
something they find interesting and fulfilling.

The ethos that you can have ikigai outside the context of your job
resonates well with that of datsusara. Even the sumo wrestlers, who need
to dedicate their lives to the punishing training of the sport, are
known to have various hobbies, such as singing karaoke or fishing, that
will help them in any post-sumo career.

Needless to say, the extracurricular activity as a source of joy in life
is not a phenomenon limited to Japan.

In the legendary Irish comedy series *Father Ted*, each of the main
characters has his or her own reason to live, apart from fulfilling
their respective job descriptions. The now classic comedy depicts the
lives of three Catholic priests and their housekeeper, living cozily
together in a parochial house on the fictional Craggy Island. Father Ted
Crilly is very keen on making money and gaining social recognition, and
has an eye on the fairer sex. Father Dougal McGuire tries to take it
easy in general, while Father Jack Hackett just goes after "drink!".
Mrs. Doyle is very fond of making tea, so much so that she stays up all
night in the parlor, just in case someone would like a nice cup of tea
in the middle of the night. The script, written by Graham Linehan and
Arthur Mathews, depicts the haphazard adventures caused by the
idiosyncrasies of these main characters.

Although they don't put it in so many words, the favorite activities of
the main characters of *Father Ted* contribute to their sense of ikigai.
In one episode, Father Ted is addicted to smoking, Dougal to
roller-skating, and Jack to drinking. They have a hard time giving up
these habits, while they never think of leaving the priesthood, which
does not interfere with their pursuit of their favorite pastimes anyway.

Although it is a work of fiction, the setup of *Father Ted* is
instructive in demonstrating some aspects of what ikigai entails. First,
ikigai does not have to be directly associated with one's professional
life. For the three Catholic priests, the reasons for living have
nothing to do with their obligations as priests (though, it is fair to
say, they do not do any priestly things in the first place). Second, a
reason for living could be something that appears to be strenuous and
unnecessary from the viewpoint of others. Although making tea involves a
lot of trouble, Mrs. Doyle simply cannot stand the idea of being
relieved of her task. In one episode, when Father Ted presents Mrs.
Doyle with a brand new tea maker, she secretly resents it, and sets out
to destroy the expensive machine when nobody is around, so that she can
continue to enjoy the misery of tea making.

Although the characters of *Father Ted* are larger than life, we can all
sympathize with their personal ikigai, even if it is for comic effect.

The Japanese, as ever, have their own agenda when it comes to pastimes.
Because employees in modern Japanese companies are often not fulfilled
by the work they do, Japan is a country of hobbyists, engaged in
pursuits unrelated to their day jobs. Enjoying hobbies in a big way is
in a sense an exaggerated case of **joy of small things**. People enjoy
a sense of achievement in seeing a task through to completion. To the
extent that ikigai activity produces something of worth, it seems that
the enjoyment of that end product is in the satisfaction of having done
something---for example, eating your own home-grown vegetables.
Satisfaction comes from creating something from start to finish, where
people take pleasure and satisfaction in both the process and the
result. An incredible number of people are actively producing their own
manga, selling them in the *comiket* (short for comic market) on the
weekends. In fact, participation in a comiket can be regarded as a prime
example of ikigai.

Although comiket as a general noun could refer to countless similar
meetings inside (and these days also outside) Japan dedicated to the
meetings of comic fans, the largest comiket, the Comiket, is held twice
a year (in August and December) at the Tokyo Big Site, an exhibition
hall complex in Tokyo's newly developing Odaiba area. Tokyo Big Site
boasts a futuristic robot-like appearance and, as a venue for Comiket,
has been a symbolic destination for devout comic fans. Starting from the
humble first meeting in 1975 with just 600 attendees, the Comiket has
now grown into a major fan and media event with hundreds of thousands of
participants each year. To date, Comiket is the largest meeting of such
a kind in the world, followed by the San Diego Comic-Con International
meeting, which attracted around 16,700 attendees in 2015. By comparison,
the 2016 Comiket winter meeting attracted around 550,000 attendees.

Participants in Comiket sell *dojinshi*, which are self-published works
of manga and related items. The sellers are called "circles." In a
typical meeting, there will be around 35,000 circles. As the space is
limited, there is a stringent selection and lottery process, determining
which circles are permitted to participate. In a typical meeting, the
acceptance rate is around 50 to 70 percent.

A seller pays a fee of about 10,000 yen (\$100), and is given an
exhibition space of 1.5 by 3 feet (45 cm x 90 cm). It may be a humble
stall in size, but for hopeful sellers and eager buyers it is the stuff
that dreams are made of. Although it does not happen often, a Comiket
seller may find their way up to the competitive professional market. A
rare and popular dojinshi work can fetch ten times or even a hundred
times the original Comiket price on the auction sites. The majority of
circles, however, are content with selling a modest number of dojinshi
to the attendees. Some of the circles have a devout fan base, with the
would-be buyers rushing to the stalls as the gates open in the morning.

The organization of Comiket is supported by amateur volunteers. In a
typical meeting, around three thousand volunteers work in an efficient
collaboration. An NHK documentary broadcast in 2015 showed how the
volunteers arrange around six thousand tables used for sales stalls
within an hour, in an impressive choreographic motion picture.

Apart from the dojinshi sales, a feature that has made Comiket
conspicuous and famous is cosplay (costume play) activity, in which
participants don costumes depicting famous anime or manga characters and
pose for spontaneous photo sessions. The cosplayers come to Tokyo Big
Site in their ordinary clothes (after all, it is not possible for
characters from *Dragon Ball* or *Naruto* to be on an underground train
without attracting embarrassing attention, even in Tokyo) and change
into character outfits once they are in the safe and sympathetic haven
of Comiket. In a typical meeting, it is estimated that there are
approximately 27,000 cosplayers, which makes up about 5 percent of all
attendees.

The cosplayers make incredible efforts to transform themselves into
characters of their fancy. Why would they do this? A girl featured in
the NHK documentary testifies that she enjoys the transformation she
experiences in the process of cosplay. Thus, a reserved working girl can
become an object of attention and admiration to eager fans, once she
completes the transformation into an anime character of her choice.

The Comiket is increasingly becoming an international event. In 2015,
about 2 percent of the visitors were from abroad. This figure is
expected to increase in coming years. There are multilingual volunteers
on site helping people from other countries. The Comiket website gives
instructions in four languages (Japanese, English, Chinese, and Korean).
International media such as CNN and the BBC have covered the event in
the past. Time-lapse video showing the incredibly disciplined and
rational calm of the crowd waiting patiently to enter the Comiket
exhibition hall has caused an international sensation.

Despite the increasingly global interest, there are many characteristics
of Comiket that have remained largely Japanese in nature. A study of
values and behavioral patterns exhibited by participants of Comiket
reveals an interesting array of morals and standards that are reflected
in the philosophy of ikigai.

The participants' incentives come mainly from the joy of doing the task
itself, rather than financial reward or social recognition. It is
certainly true that a successful cosplayer receives much attention
during Comiket. That does not, however, automatically translate into a
career or a financial windfall. A cosplayer, after enjoying fifteen
minutes of fame at the Comiket, would not quit their day job.

Participation in the Comiket provides a sense of ikigai in a uniquely
Japanese way. For example, there is no star system. Attention and
applause are given to each participant equally, even though, naturally,
there are variations on the sales figures and fan base. There are no
awards given out at the meetings, and each seller (circle) is treated in
the same humble manner (with their 1.5 by 3 feet of promotion space).

The way the Comiket is organized suggests how ikigai can be associated
with a general sense of happiness. Indeed, ikigai is closely related to
our conception of happiness. We all want to be happy, and you would feel
happier if you had some ikigai. How people perceive happiness is an
interesting scientific question, as well as a matter of practical
concern.

People tend to assume that there are some necessary conditions for
happiness. In the hypothetical formula for happiness, one needs to
possess, or have access to, several different elements, such as
education, employment, a romantic partner, and money. In fact,
scientific research suggests that there are few elements in human life
that are absolutely necessary for someone to become happy. For example,
contrary to popular belief, having a lot of money does not lead to
happiness. You certainly need to have enough to live comfortably, but,
beyond that, money cannot buy happiness.

Having children does not necessarily lead to more happiness. Marriage,
social status, academic success---those elements of life that are often
regarded as necessary to advance one's happiness actually have little to
do with happiness per se.

Researchers have been investigating a phenomenon called focusing
illusion. People tend to regard certain things in life as necessary for
happiness, while in fact they aren't. The term "focusing illusion" comes
from the idea that you can be focused on a particular aspect of life, so
much so that you can believe that your whole happiness depends on it.
Some have the focusing illusion on, say, marriage as a prerequisite
condition for happiness. In that case, they will feel unhappy so long as
they remain single. Some will complain that they cannot be happy because
they don't have enough money, while others will be convinced they are
unhappy because they don't have a proper job.

In having a focusing illusion, you create your own reason for feeling
unhappy. If unhappiness is a vacuum in which the required element is
absent, that vacuum is created by the biased imagination of the subject.

There is no absolute formula for happiness---each unique condition of
life can serve as the foundation for happiness in its own unique way.
You can be happy when married with children, or when married without
children. You can be happy when you are single, without a college
degree, or with one. You can be happy when you are slim, you can be
happy when you are overweight. You can be happy when living in a warm
climate as in California, you can be happy when living in Montana, where
you have severe winter conditions. As a sumo wrestler, you can be happy
when you make it to yokozuna, or you can be happy while remaining one of
the underdogs all your career, doing small chores, never giving up.

In a nutshell, in order to be happy, you need to accept yourself.
Accepting yourself is one of the most important and yet difficult tasks
we face in our lives. Indeed, accepting oneself is one of the easiest,
simplest, and most rewarding things you could do for yourself---a
low-budget, maintenance-free formula for being happy.

The epiphany here is that, paradoxically, accepting oneself as one is
often involves **releasing yourself**, especially when there is an
illusory self, which you hold to be desirable. You need to let go of the
illusory self, in order to accept yourself and be happy.

In Maurice Maeterlinck's play *The Blue Bird*, a girl named Mytyl and
her brother Tyltyl go on a trip to find happiness. They think the Blue
Bird of Happiness will be found in other places. Despite their efforts,
they cannot find the Blue Bird anywhere. Disappointed, they return to
their home. They are surprised to find the Blue Bird of Happiness right
in their house, tweeting briskly. In fact, the Blue Bird was in their
home, all along. What does that tell you?

\* \* \*

In 1996, researchers in Italy reported a major discovery in
neuroscience. While examining a monkey's brain, they accidentally
discovered that its neurons became active when the monkey was doing
something. The same set of neurons also became active when the monkey
observed others do the same action. Neurons with such properties were
consequently named "mirror neurons."

Mirror neurons have been discovered in human brains, too. Today, it is
thought these neurons are involved in various aspects of communication,
including mind reading, where we make estimations of other people's
minds. Mirror neurons are considered to be essential when we make
comparisons between ourselves and others, a step considered necessary in
order to realize what kind of people we ourselves are.

The mirrors in your bathroom reflect your physical appearance. In order
to appreciate your own personality, however, you need to have those of
others to reflect yourself. Only through realizing the similarities and
differences between yourself and others, can you come to a realistic
appraisal of your character.

The same was true for Mytyl and Tyltyl. Only after traveling in the wide
world, and comparing themselves to others, did they come to realize the
actual nature of themselves. Only then could they accept themselves as
they truly were. The fable of the Blue Bird of Happiness tells us that
we can find our happiness within the unique condition of each of us. The
grass might look greener on the other side, but that is only an
illusion.

People who come to the Comiket and interact with each other on an equal
footing know just that. They come to the Comiket, in search of the Blue
Bird of Happiness. And they find what they are looking for, nowhere else
but in themselves. After enjoying being a fantastic anime character in
cosplay, they remove their joyous outfits and come back to their own
selves.

[]{#10.xhtml}

CHAPTER 10

Accept yourself for who you are

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_11_Nikiniki_v2.png)

[T]{._idGenDropcap-1}omizo Yamaguchi is the current owner and master of
the famous Japanese sweets maker Suetomi. Suetomi has been producing
sweets for tea ceremonies and other occasions since 1893.

According to Yamaguchi, sweets representing flowers, for example, are
each made with slightly different shapes and colors. It is not that the
skills of the craftsmen are faulty so that they cannot reproduce the
same result. In fact, the craftsmen deliberately make the shapes
different, one by one, because no two flowers in nature are exactly the
same.

The most fundamental assumption of modern industry is that artifacts
need to be made with as constant qualities as possible. When you make an
automobile, for example, the mechanical and electronic parts produced in
thousands need to be copies of identical properties. Otherwise,
precision manufacturing of automobiles would not be possible.

This kind of approach would not do for creatures of nature, including
humans. As we know when we look around us, every person is different.
Even identical twins develop different personalities. People tend to
perceive individuals belonging to an ethnic group as being homogeneous
in character. However, if you look properly, you start to discern the
individual differences.

As Yamaguchi aptly observed, variation is one of the greatest hallmarks
of nature. To make every sweet slightly different from the other is
actually very realistic. Because of the significant roles played by
cultural influences and learning, humans certainly exhibit even greater
variation than flowers, leaves, or other living entities in nature. It
is no good trying to be like others, even if there is peer pressure. So
there is every reason to relax, and just be oneself.

The Japanese proverb *junin toiro* ("ten different colors for ten
different people") expresses the view that there are great variations in
personality, sensitivity, and value systems among people. In pursuing
your ikigai, you can be yourself, as much as you like. It is only
natural that you should be yourself, because each one of us has a
slightly different color.

The appreciation of diversity seems to go against the conventional
wisdom that Japan is a more or less culturally or ethnically homogeneous
country. Its government applies notoriously stringent restrictions on
immigration. The sight of salarymen packed in a commuter train, with the
station clerks trying to push the herd into the carriages, certainly
seems to be a far cry from the idea of respect for individuality. In
Japan, there is still a stereotyped image of marriage and family life,
and the Japanese government has been slow in adapting legislation
treating all kinds of genders and sexual minorities equally.

It is certainly true that the Japanese tend to think that theirs is a
unified nation. With globalization, the mindset of the nation is
changing, but the Japanese tend to think that they are a homogeneous
people. Having said that, there is an interesting depth to the
expression of individuality in Japanese society. The Japanese have a
series of small tricks for keeping individuality alive, while striking a
harmonious relationship with others.

There are some historical reasons for this. In the Edo era, which began
in 1603 prior to the modernization of Japan with the Meiji Restoration
in 1867, the Tokugawa Shogunate issued a series of executive orders to
maintain stability in society, as perceived appropriate in those times.
One of the issues often raised was the avoidance of luxury. As the Edo
economy grew, some merchants made a lot of money and became huge
spenders. Such exhibition of accumulated luxury was considered to have a
corrosive effect on social stability, caused by the widening asymmetry
between classes. The Shogunate thus issued a series of executive orders
prohibiting excessive spending. The rich merchants complied on the
surface, since there was no arguing with the Shogun in those days.
However, they did manage to keep their enjoyments secretly. One of the
techniques was to use costly clothing materials on the inside of their
attire, while outwardly keeping a subdued appearance. The idea of
keeping a low outward profile and making inner individuality flourish is
wisdom that the people of Japan have nurtured over the years. This
technique could be used in any society, especially when social scrutiny
is a problem. (Just think of the pressure from social media nowadays!)

The Japanese way of maintaining individual uniqueness while maintaining
subdued outside appearances is a mixed bag in the modern context. For
example, it has made disruptive innovations difficult to nurture and
develop in the country, since a disobedient personality such as Steve
Jobs or Mark Zuckerberg is not easily tolerated. New forms of services
that clash with established businesses, such as Uber or Airbnb, are very
slow to take hold in Japan. The inhibition of the expression of
individual uniqueness has stifled Japan's educational system, which
tends to stress conformity rather than diversity among individuals.

Most Japanese choose to pursue the ikigai of individuality in the
private domain, probably as the result of the social climate. This
hidden approach to the expression of individuality is not the only
solution, though we can at least say it is an interesting one.

To a casual observer, a salaryman might appear faceless. Inside his
uninteresting jacket, however, he might be hiding a passion for anime or
manga. On week days he might be an obedient clerk in a company. At night
and on weekends, he might be a star in a comiket or a lead singer in an
amateur rock band.

There is liberation in the idea that a seemingly conformist person could
nurture deep layers of individual personality, which may not be apparent
on the surface. In addition, the approach each individual adopts toward
his or her life might be actually quite unique. Individual uniqueness is
something to be discovered and worked on, not merely assumed and
preserved.

Defining the ikigai of being an individual in harmony with society at
large would reduce much of the stress of competition and comparison. You
don't have to blow your own trumpet to be heard. You can just whisper,
sometimes to yourself.

\* \* \*

A famous tofu maker based in a Tokyo suburb, Takeru Yamashita is a
hidden philosopher. He discusses the diversity in the beans, which
becomes the single important source material for tofu, as if he is
talking about the individuality of the human soul. "It is Aristotle
rather than Plato," Yamashita says. He also recites a Shakespeare work,
to the total bewilderment of the camera crew. Apparently, a masterpiece
of Shakespeare has as much to do with the art of tofu making as does the
selection of beans. Yamashita's idiosyncratic manner of explaining his
approach to tofu making is something you encounter quite often when
meeting somebody with a unique approach to ikigai, especially in a
country where the expression of individuality does not necessarily take
flamboyant forms.

Ikigai and happiness come from the acceptance of the self. Recognition
from other people would certainly be a bonus. However, it can also
hinder the all-important acceptance of the self if put in a wrong
context. As Yamaguchi observes, when referring to the way sweets in
Kyoto are made, everything in nature is different. We humans are also
different, each one of us.

Celebrate who you are! I had the pleasure of chatting with British
comedians Matt Lucas and David Walliams once when they were on a press
tour in Tokyo for the promotion of *Little Britain*. During our
conversation, Lucas confided that he used to be laughed at at school.
Therefore, in an action of creative self-defense, he started to make
people laugh before he was laughed at. Walliams agreed, saying that
laughter could be the best form of self-defense.

From a cognitive point of view, laughter is considered an instance of
metacognition, supported by the prefrontal areas of the cortex. In
metacognition, you look at yourself as if observing from the outside. By
doing that, you come to terms with your own defects and shortcomings,
and supplement your awareness with fresh insight seen from the outside.

You might be afraid to confront the true image of the self. In such
cases, a healthy dose of laughter, supported by a metacognition of the
self, would help. Sometimes metacognition does not lead to mirth
straight away. It is always good to have a realistic picture of oneself,
even if it is not a favorable one.

The greatest secret of ikigai, ultimately, has to be the acceptance of
oneself, no matter what kind of unique features one might happen to be
born with. There is no single optimum way to find ikigai. Each one of us
has to seek our own, in the forest of our unique individualities. But
don't forget to have a good laugh while seeking yours---today and every
day!

[]{#conclusion.xhtml}

CONCLUSION

Find your own ikigai

![](Images/Quercus_Ikigai_11_NoodleBowl.png)

[L]{._idGenDropcap-1}et us look again at the Five Pillars of ikigai:

Pillar 1: Starting small

Pillar 2: Releasing yourself

Pillar 3: Harmony and sustainability

Pillar 4: The joy of small things

Pillar 5: Being in the here and now

Now, having read the book, how do these pillars of ikigai appear to you?

- Do you have some insights that would help you sort out the problems in
  life?
- Are you more inclined now to try things by small steps, while not
  necessarily seeking immediate external rewards?
- Would you now see the crucial link between harmony and sustainability?
- Do you feel you would be more relaxed about the particularities that
  make you, while being more tolerant toward the idiosyncrasies of other
  people?
- Are you more likely now to be able to find pleasure in small things?

It is hoped that this introduction to ikigai will allow you to
appreciate the significance of these pillars with a renewed and deepened
sense of significance; that it will provide you with the insight you
need to sort out your specific issues.

The concept of ikigai is Japanese in origin. However, ikigai has
implications far beyond national borders. It is not the case that the
Japanese culture is anything special in this regard. It is only that the
particular cultural conditions and traditions in Japan have led to the
nurturing of the concept of ikigai. Indeed, it is quite possible that
among the thousands of different languages spoken in the world, there
are some concepts similar to that of ikigai. Every language is, after
all, on an equal footing in that it is the result of the strenuous
efforts of its speakers to live and let live, over generations.

Hideo Kobayashi, a respected literary critic in modern Japan, once said
that he wanted to live as long as possible. He believed, from his own
experience, that another day in life would bring yet another discovery
and more wisdom. According to his former editor Masanobu Ikeda,
Kobayashi often talked about the "universal motor," when he looked for a
metaphor to describe what is important in life. In every yacht, there is
a universal motor, according to Kobayashi. The universal motor does not
have much power, but is steady and reliable; in the event of an
emergency or adversity, the universal motor will take the yacht safely
back to harbor.

Ikigai is like Kobayashi's universal motor. No matter what happens, so
long as you have ikigai, you can muddle through difficult periods of
your life. You can always go back to your safe haven, from where you can
start your life's adventures all over again.

As we have seen in this book, ikigai does not come from a single value
system. It is not written in the orders of God. It comes from the rich
resonance of a spectrum of small things, none of which serves a
grandiose purpose in life by itself.

The values surrounding ikigai that you will have taken on board while
reading this book, it is hoped, will inspire you to try new things in
your life, and change things step by step. There shouldn't be a loud
fanfare to accompany your new beginnings, rather this change in
awareness will creep up slowly on you instead of jumping out violently.
In life, we need evolution, not revolution. Too often, an illusion
toward a revolution in life---where you are swept away by newly found
principles, novel ways of thinking and doing, and the idea of starting
life all over again---has led people astray.

Because ikigai just reinforces your already-held intuitions, the change
will be gradual and modest, like life itself.

[]{#abouttheauthor.xhtml}

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

![](Images/mogi_1.satoshi_masuda.png)

**K[EN]{.small} M[OGI]{.small}** is a neuroscientist, writer, and
broadcaster based in Tokyo. He has published more than thirty papers on
cognitive and neurosciences, and over a hundred books in Japan covering
popular science, essay, criticism, and self-help. His books have sold
close to one million copies. This is his first book in English.

[]{#copyright.xhtml}

A[WAKENING]{.small} Y[OUR]{.small} I[KIGAI]{.small}: *How the Japanese
Wake Up to Joy and Purpose Every Day*\
Copyright Â© 2017, 2018 by Ken Mogi

Originally published in Great Britain as *The Little Book of Ikigai* by
Quercus in 2017.

First published in the United States of America by The Experiment, LLC,
in 2018.

All rights reserved. Except for brief passages quoted in newspaper,
magazine, radio, television, or online reviews, no portion of this book
may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.

The Experiment, LLC \| 220 East 23rd Street, Suite 600 \| New York, NY
10010-4674\
[theexperimentpublishing.com](http://theexperimentpublishing.com)

This book contains the opinions and ideas of its author. It is intended
to provide helpful and informative material on the subjects addressed in
the book. It is sold with the understanding that the author and
publisher are not engaged in rendering medical, health, or any other
kind of personal professional services in the book. The author and
publisher specifically disclaim all responsibility for any liability,
loss, or risk---personal or otherwise---that is incurred as a
consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any
of the contents of this book.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this book and The Experiment was aware of a
trademark claim, the designations have been capitalized.

The Experiment's books are available at special discounts when purchased
in bulk for premiums and sales promotions as well as for fund-raising or
educational use. For details, contact us at
<info@theexperimentpublishing.com>.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon
request

ISBN 978-1-61519-475-9\
Ebook ISBN 978-1-61519-476-6

Cover and text design by Sarah Smith\
Illustrations by Amber Anderson\
Author photograph by Satoshi Masuda

Manufactured in the United States of America\
Distributed by Workman Publishing Company, Inc.

First printing January 2018\
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

[]{#BackAd.xhtml}

::: all
Thank you for purchasing this ebook.

Join our email list to learn about new releases, ebook deals, bonus
content and more from The Experiment.

[[Join]{.button}\
\[eepurl.com/cO86ZH\]](http://eepurl.com/cO86ZH)

You can also connect with us on:

[[Facebook]{.button}\
/experimentbooks](http://goo.gl/qEKC4)

[[Twitter]{.button}\
\@experimentbooks](http://goo.gl/YcI5b)

[[Pinterest]{.button}\
/theexperiment](http://goo.gl/vrHFq)

[![colophon](Images/colophon.png)](http://goo.gl/Yb8dL)
:::
