ALSO BY JEN SINCERO You Are a Badass Every Day: How to Keep Your
Motivation Strong, Your Vibe High, and Your Quest for Transformation
Unstoppable You Are a Badass at Making Money: Master the Mindset of
Wealth You Are a Badass: How to Stop Doubting Your Greatness and Start
Living an Awesome Life The Straight Girl's Guide to Sleeping with Chicks
Don't Sleep with Your Drummer

VIKING An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright Â© 2020 by Good Witch, LLC Penguin supports copyright.
Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an
authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by
not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form
without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to
continue to publish books for every reader. A Penguin Life Book Library
of Congress Control Number: 2020943738 ISBN 9781984877437 (hardcover)
ISBN 9781984877444 (ebook) ISBN 9780593296509 (international edition)
pid_prh_5.6.1_c0_r0

To Mother Earth

CONTENTS INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER 1. Who You're in the Habit of Being CHAPTER 2. Healthy
Boundaries: The Unsung Heroes of Successful Habits CHAPTER 3.
Shapeshifting into the New You CHAPTER 4. 21 Days to Badass Habits
CHAPTER 5. The Audacity to Be Yourself

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

INTRODUCTION

W

hen I first decided to write a book about habits, the topic seemed like
such a natural follow-up to the other Badass books. In the original You
Are a Badass, I mentioned this little truism: Our thoughts become our
words, our words become our beliefs, our beliefs become our habits, and
our habits become our realities. Habits are the only piece of the
equation I had yet to delve into deeply, and I couldn't wait to get
crackin'. That is, until the following conversation with myself crawled
up and sat on my chest: Me: Habits! Of course! Why, they're the very
sculptors of our realities! I'm going to write the fuck out of this
book. Me, enjoying a tower of onion rings, a few days after giving up
fried food: Are we going to write about how to purchase a gym membership
and never use it? Or how to not stop cursing? Because we could write the
fuck out of that. Me: Oh my God, that's so true. My habits suck. What
the hell am I thinking? I have the self-discipline of a toddler. I began
listing all of the reasons why I was unqualified, unable, and
unauthorized to write this book; how I was about to tank my brand,
insult my readers, and inspire my publisher to ask for its money back.
Then I realized, Oh look, I'm excelling at a habit right now, that most
unsavory of human habits: focusing on the negative. I'm blowing past the
fact that I haven't touched a cigarette in over two decades even though
I love smoking more than I love most people; that I'm a highly
accomplished flosser, hydrater, gratituder, writer, bed maker,
meditator, and show-up-on-timer; and that I'll take a backpack and a
high alpine trail over a stinky gym any day. Cursing and fried food,
however--- there's still work to be done around cursing and fried food.
I bring this up because if you're reading this book with any skepticism
about your stick-to-itiveness when it comes to habits, I want to remind
you that nobody is perfect. And that we really can do anything we set
our minds to (including

things we've fake-set our minds to in the past). And that we all tend to
sell ourselves short and focus on our failures instead of celebrating
our victories. Even people who are successful beyond belief admit to
occasionally letting negativity and feelings of inadequacy push them
around. I've heard some say that every once in a while they'll forget
how much they love what they do, ignore the standing ovations and rave
reviews they receive from the outside world, and focus all their
attention on that one stink-bomb hater on Instagram who thinks they
suck, hand him the bullhorn, and let his opinion drown out the cheering
crowds. Mastering the powerful, positive mindset that's required to keep
upping your habits game is all about staying aware, shifting your focus
when you catch yourself wandering down Woe-Is-Me Lane, and consciously
thinking thoughts that are aligned with where you want to go and who you
want to become. When it comes to building great habits and ditching lame
ones, your commitment to staying focused on who you're becoming
regardless of where you are/who you are right now is the mightiest power
you've got. Contrary to popular belief, habits are more about who you're
being than what you're doing.

One of the main reasons we don't stick to the habits we'd love to adopt,
or permanently give the heave-ho to the habits we'd love to lose, is
that we focus on taking action---which is important---but we don't get
on board emotionally and mentally, which is more important. Then, when
our new habits get challenging or boring (a favorite pastime of most
habits thanks to the fact that they're so repetitive), we abandon them
for something easier. Or something more fun. Or something that offers
more immediate gratification. Or something that tastes really good with
ketchup on it. For example, let's say you've tried over and over to
break your habit of spending more than you make. You've got a
well-paying job and you put part of each paycheck toward your credit
card bill and a little into your savings account and you carefully map
out your budget each month. Then, in spite of your careful planning, you
find yourself going on trips and forensically investigating furniture
sales and jovially shouting "Drinks are on me!" and before you know it,
your savings account is a ghost town and you're pleading on the phone
with Pat at the collection agency again. Chances are excellent that deep
down you're scared to stop overspending because you're trying to fill an
emotional hole with stuff and experiences. Or maybe you come from a
family full of spenders and

you subconsciously worry you'll be judged and/or abandoned by them if
you break with tradition and get your financial act together. It's
essential when building good habits to focus on the whole
enchilada---your head, your heart, and your hands---otherwise the
meditating stops; the fingernails start being bitten again; your calm,
sober repose at yet another passive-aggressive family gathering turns
into "All right, I've had enough. Who wants to play Tequila Truth or
Dare?!" My hope is that this book offers some fresh perspectives on
proven habitforming processes and helps you dethrone whatever obstacles
you've allowed to lord over you in the past. I also hope that it makes
the whole habit-building-andbusting experience easier by boiling down a
seemingly complex process and doling it out into manageable, bite-sized
exercises that you implement one day at a time. I want you to get
rolling and figure out which tools work best for you so you can start
seeing real results---the kind of results you've yet to behold---that
actually stick around. I'm a coach, not a scientist, so while
ensmartening you is a goal, nothing gets me all teary-eyed and verklempt
like the hallelujah of a dream realized. You see? You see that black
belt you just karated your way into? YOU did that. Here, hold my snacks.
I've got to get a picture of this. I'll start by briefly explaining what
habits are and how they work. I'll help you become aware of the habits
you've already got (the good, the bad, and the ugly) and figure out
which ones have got to go, which new ones you'd like to create, and who
you need to start being in order to pull this all off. I'll also get you
good at setting no-nonsense boundaries so you can alert your tribe, and
yourself, that your needs are now a priority, that you're creating the
space--- emotionally and physically---to allow yourself to fully
flourish, and that yes, this being good at setting boundaries thing is a
habit you're going to keep (perhaps amid the indignant screams and
protests of all those who are being booted out of first place). Once
we've got your heart and head on board, I'll help you pick one clearly
defined habit to work on for the rest of the book. I'll walk you through
a powerful 21-step process to either anchor in your new habit or
permanently banish an old one, depending on what you choose. Ideally
you'll take the process day by day over the course of three weeks in
order to keep the beast of overwhelm at bay, give your new habit time to
take hold, and keep the work as interesting as possible. The goal here
is to have an interactive experience. I want you to hit the ground
running and start becoming the person you're excited to become while
you're reading this book instead of just becoming someone who now has a
lot more information about what habits are. Or who understands the

science behind how habits work. Or who knows how it feels to fall asleep
with a book about habits lying on your face. Please get a new notebook
and dedicate it exclusively to the work we're about to do (no grocery
lists), and start cultivating your new habit with a clean slate,
focusing on the exciting new life that awaits you, as opposed to letting
failures you've experienced in the past cloud your confidence. Who you
desire to become is not only available to you but you're meant to become
this upgraded version of yourself, otherwise you wouldn't have the
desire in the first place and you sure as hell wouldn't be bothering
with this book. Trust that each new day holds untold possibilities and
remember: In every moment, you have the profound ability to make choices
that will completely change your habits and your reality, either right
away or over time.

Making powerful, life-altering choices is simply a habit, a habit that
you've already started mastering.

GAVE UP BEING A LAZY ASS AND GOT IN SHAPE, JULIE, 60 My doctor told me I
was headed for type 2 diabetes and that I needed to move more and try to
lose some weight. I didn't like the sound of needing to be on meds my
whole life and I also didn't like having a solid ten to fifteen pounds
of extra blub in my club. So I decided that rain or shine, I could
manage to exercise every morning before work on a yoga mat in my living
room for at least fifteen minutes. How hard is that to do for my health?
I found a great online workout that was a combo of yoga, stretching,
muscle strength, and cardio. Every morning I pulled that yoga mat out of
the closet and I found that after stretching and doing some basic yoga
moves, I was awake enough to do a little more. I did some
strength-training exercises using my own body weight, and thought, Geez,
if I weighed less it wouldn't be so hard to hoist my petard off this
mat! Three push-ups led to five to ten and now my daily routine is about
thirty minutes total. As soon as I started doing this I began to feel
better about myself. The thrills from the little wins will keep you
rolling toward victory. I felt stronger. It kept me motivated and I now
look forward to doing my workout at least five days a week. At the same
time, I started an online diet and health program that taught me about
the psychology of why I eat and how to change my lifelong habits. This
was an eye opener. "Mindless" eating versus "mindful" eating was huge. I
learned to actually look at the food I was eating, not at the TV, to
take a moment between bites and really taste what I was eating, not just
chuck it down my gullet. I also learned to understand my personal hunger
scale. When I wanted something to eat I would ask myself, Am I actually
hungry or just bored, stressed, sad, or agitated? Another tip was not
waiting until I was at Code Red--level starving on my hunger scale,
because that means you grab anything from a vending machine or dive into
the leftover donuts from the morning meeting. I learned other strategies
and hacks. A big one was to always have healthy, yummy snacks in my bag,
at work, and at home. If you're planning to eat dinner out, go online
and look at the menu ahead of time and figure out what the best choice
is and stick with it. Because otherwise, you'll see what everyone else
is ordering and fly off the calorie rails. The other big change of
behavior for me was to start writing down everything I ate every day to
be more mindful of what I was eating. And weighing myself every day.
Sounds hideous, but it worked. It's now two years later and I've lost
fifteen pounds (albeit slowly), but more importantly, I've

kept it off. I continue to weigh myself every day and track my daily
food. I have learned that this is what works for me. Of course there are
days I go way over my calorie target for the day, but I don't get upset
about it. I just adjust the next day. Believe me, I love food. And I
still eat what I want. I just monitor my portion sizes and always try to
tap into mindful eating, not mindless eating.

CHAPTER 1

WHO YOU'RE IN THE HABIT OF BEING

M

y brother Stephen and his wife, Jenny, came for a visit one year during
Fiesta de Santa Fe, a historical celebration that attracts thousands of
people to my New Mexican hometown every fall. We didn't participate in
any of the festival's festivities during their stay, but we did brave
the throngs of revelers in order to walk downtown and have ourselves
some margaritas. The walk took us about forty-five minutes each way, and
after a lovely afternoon of cocktailing we found ourselves back in my
driveway just as the sun was setting. We stood around, taking in the
reddening sky, slightly buzzed on tequila and the smug satisfaction of
having made it all the way there and back on foot, when out of nowhere,
Jenny started clutching at her throat as if she couldn't breathe. She'd
suddenly realized, with horror, that somewhere along the way her diamond
pendant had fallen off the chain around her neck and was lost. My
brother immediately flew into action. "I'll retrace our steps," he said,
his eyes thoroughly scanning the ground beneath Jenny's feet before he
slowly and methodically turned and headed back out my driveway. I began
protesting that it would be dark in a matter of minutes, that he was
high if he thought he could find her itty-bitty diamond among the sea of
fallen leaves and hordes of people, but Jenny turned to me and said,
"Let him go. He's weirdly amazing at finding shiny things. He's like a
crow." So we stood and watched as Steve headed down my street and back
into town, with nothing but his cell phone flashlight lighting his way
and the thrill of the quest lighting his heart. Meanwhile, Jenny and I
got in my car and headed back to the bar to crawl around on the floor
and see if we could find her pendant ourselves. On the way we passed
Stephen, who simply raised his free hand in the air and waved when he
heard us honk and holler, unwilling to take his eyes off the ground for
even a second. After about ten minutes of trying, and failing, to find a
parking place in the midst of the melee, I was about to give up and head
back home when we got a text from my brother that read: "Found it!" To
which I replied, "I don't believe

you," to which he replied with a picture of himself standing in the
middle of the street, each arm around a tourist he'd talked into posing
with him, proudly holding Jenny's pendant in his front teeth. I later
learned it had been kicked off the sidewalk into someone's driveway and
that he found it anyway. My jaw hit the floor and has remained there
ever since, but Jenny just shook her head and said, "I'm telling you,
he's a crow. He finds shit all the time." Steve used to have a job in
the diamond business as a sorter. He'd spend his days in a room called
"the pit" with a handful of other sorters, categorizing large piles of
not-so-large diamonds according to the three Cs---cut, carat, color---by
holding each one up to a light with a pair of tweezers and looking at it
through a loupe. While inspecting a diamond, it wasn't uncommon to
accidentally tweeze it a bit too hard and send it ricocheting across the
room---doink!---where it would land somewhere on the not-so-clean
linoleum floor, on a shelf, or perhaps in someone's hair. There was no
telling how many precious stones had gone missing in the pit over the
years, and finding them became a perpetual Easter egg hunt, one that
Steve participated in with vigor every time he put down his tweezers,
for the two years that he worked there. This is how, in the basement of
a diamond wholesaler on Forty-Seventh Street in New York City, Steve
became the Patron Saint of Lost Shiny Things. His impressive rÃ©sumÃ© went
on to boast of a diamond earring discovered on the floor of a crowded
deli; a tennis bracelet spotted next to an ATM machine; countless coins,
chains, keys, watches, precious stones; and one morning, while walking
to the train, he found the necklace that Jenny (the Patron Saint of
Broken Clasps) had lost three months before, nestled in the top of a
snowbank. Steve never zeroed in on the tiny, lost, and shiny until he
worked in the diamond business. But thanks to that job, always being on
the lookout--- consciously and unconsciously---became a habit. Habits:
no-brainers. A routine tendency or behavior. Knee-jerkery. Beliefs,
thoughts, and actions that one repeats on autopilot.

Here are some of the key elements involved in habit creation: 1. The
Trigger. Every time Steve took a pause from his work, it triggered his
habit of scoping the room for lost diamonds. Triggers send cues to our
brains that it's time to perform a habit. A trigger can be a sound (the
noise from an alarm clock triggers us to wake up and get out of bed), an
action (finishing dinner is a trigger to light a ciggy), a thought (It's
four o'clock, so I reckon I should feed the dog), a feeling (when the
temperature drops, you rub your arms to warm up), a smell (when you
smell your

neighbors BBQing, you casually swing by, Oh, I didn't realize you were
cooking, is this a bad time?), a sight (seeing a person on the street is
a trigger to say hello), or an emotion (feeling upset is a trigger to
eat a cherry pie). Triggers begin a chain reaction that results in the
completion of the habit. And the sequence goes a little sumthin' like
this: 2. The Sequence. Our bodies are expert problem solvers, running
around with a clipboard, making sure everything's working in the most
efficient and productive manner possible: moving blood where it's needed
most; breaking down food; healing broken bones and torn skin; sprouting
hair and toenails; taking down disease; unleashing a flood of tears and
obscenities when you accidentally drop your phone in the toilet. Habits
are the body's way of lightening the load on our brains, of putting
problem-solving on autopilot in order to free up room to take in more
information and perform more tasks. Habits work in a sequence of sorts
that starts with the trigger (getting in the car), which signals a need
(I don't want to die), which then leads to a habit or response (putting
on a seat belt), which then leads to the reward (I feel snuggly and
safe). Here are some more examples: Trigger: Your dog walks into the
room. Need: To physically experience his insane cuteness.
Response/habit: Smothering, kissing, acting like a moron. Reward: You
feel happy. Trigger: You're driving home from work. Need: To live a
longer, healthier life. Response/habit: Stop at the gym and work out for
forty-five minutes. Reward: You feel invigorated and have a sense of
accomplishment. Trigger: Your divorce lawyer calls. Need: To not throw a
plate at the wall. Response/habit: Pace around in circles and twirl your
hair around your finger. Reward: You feel calmer. These are all examples
of how triggers set your habits into motion, but triggers can also be
used to help you quit bad habits, and I'll show you how to do that later
in the book. 3. Repetition. Think of your brain as a jungle full of
images and ideas and feelings all growing and twisting and tangling
around one another as you gather more and more information throughout
your life. Now imagine that all of your thought patterns and kneejerk
reactions and beliefs about the way things are have cut well-worn paths
through this jungle in your mind, paths that you walk down every day,
doop de do, without even needing to look where you're going. When you
decide to make a change---Hey, I'm no longer gonna be a lazy,
out-of-shape person who secretly litters, I'm gonna step it up and get
me some different habits---repetition is the tool you'll use to hack
through the vines,

wrestle fallen trees out of your way, and forge a new path through the
jungle of your mind. Repetition of your new habit will require some
mental and physical effort at first, but the scales on the piano that
you struggle to remember and execute become second nature after you've
played them three hundred times; tying your shoes after decades of doing
it takes zero thought these days; answering questions with a You betcha,
tiger! unconsciously comes flying out of your mouth after making fun of
Grandma for saying it your whole life. I'm so in the habit of calling my
mother to check in on her when I get in my car each morning that I once
dialed her up while she was sitting right next to me, in town for a
visit.

When you repeat something enough times, you establish new neural
pathways in the brain that your habit flows through effortlessly and
automatically, allowing you to literally fuggetaboutit.

Take a moment right now to think about something you used to struggle
with that's now a habit---working your cell phone, shaving, hitting a
tennis ball, driving a car, respecting your neighbor Sarah's wishes that
you refer to her as Desert Flower from now on. It's nearly impossible to
remember all the little details you used to have to keep in mind when
you were anchoring in this-behavior-that's-now-a-habit, because you
literally changed the wiring of your brain through repetition. 4. Ease.
It's no big surprise to discover that the easier things are, the more
likely we are to do them. This goes for the habits we'd like to form,
the habits we'd like to break, and the habits we don't even realize
we've signed up for (which, believe you me, account for an alarming
amount of them---thanks, Mom and Dad!). My brother didn't set out to be
the guy who finds sparkly stuff that most people don't see; he developed
the habit because it was easy, it was fun, everyone around him was doing
it. He repeated the action of searching over and over again every day,
and he got a rush every time he found something good. Steve unwittingly
followed the golden rule of habits: The easier you make it to put them
on repeat (and the harder you make repeating the habits you want to
lose), the more success you'll have. This is why scheduling new habits
first thing in the morning often gets you the best results: It's easier
to do things before the distractions of the day worm their way into your
progress. This is also why who and what you surround yourself with is so
crucial: It's easier to quit drinking soda if you surround yourself with
people who don't drink it and if you never keep any in your house; it's
easier to go to yoga if the studio's just down the street; it's easier
to be successful if you hang out with inspiring, successful people; it's
easier to stop watching TV if you keep it in the garage; it's easier to
have a negative outlook on marriage if you're raised by divorced,
unhappy people; it's easier to accept fish as a breakfast food if you
live in Japan. 5. Patience. Most habits score woefully low in the
immediate gratification department. With the exception of things like
taking a shower (instant clean and refreshed body!), making your bed (my
room's suddenly so tidy!), or eating breakfast (I'm not hungry
anymore!), most habits take awhile to produce the desired result, which
makes them more difficult to

stick with because we humans love us some payoff. Eating lentils instead
of ice cream will eventually, hopefully, help lower your cholesterol;
lifting weights every day may or may not take forever to produce a tight
ab or the swell of a new muscle; meditating for thirty minutes a day may
one day make you instantly feel more calm and centered, but first it may
leave you wondering what the hell the point is for years. This is why
things like relishing the fact that you're showing up at all is so
important, why keeping track of the progress you've made so you can see
how far you've come is so helpful, why looking for the little victories
and rewards is so encouraging (I want to die after the fiftieth sit-up,
but I used to want to die after the thirtieth---woot!). Anchoring in a
habit is like moving a giant pile of pebbles from one place to another,
stone by stone: You make a tiny dent, hone your moves, it gets easier
and easier every time you do it, and eventually you will indeed be
staring at a new pile of rocks. You just can't always see your progress
as it's happening. Later in the book I'm going to give you tips that'll
help you practice patience and stay the course while your habit takes
its own sweet time to settle in, but right now I want to go deeply into
the most important tip for creating a new habit---and for making any
major upgrade in your life, really:

Shift your identity to match the habits you're adopting.

6.  Identity. Studies have shown that nearly half of the actions we
    perform every day are habitual: drinking a cup of morning coffee,
    praying, slouching, bitching, talking with our mouths full, looking
    for shiny things on the ground, etc. But habits are responsible for
    much more than just the actions we take. Our beliefs, thoughts, and
    words are also habits, habits that inform the way we perceive the
    world around us, mold our identities, and, yes, take the actions we
    take. One of the main reasons we fail to stick to new good habits
    and ditch negative ones is that we focus on changing what we're
    doing (or not doing) without also making sure that we embrace this
    habit as a new and valuable part of our identity. For example, if
    you decide you're going to lose thirty pounds, along with refraining
    from eating a bunch of crap, filling your fridge with healthy,
    low-cal food, working out, and getting a tattoo that says If it's
    fried, it's denied, you also need to become the person who weighs
    thirty pounds less, who struts around like, Yeah, this is my body,
    these are my excellent eating habits; it's no biggie, it's just who
    I am and how I roll. If you're identifying instead as the heavier
    version of yourself who somehow miraculously dropped thirty pounds,
    you'll most likely put the weight back on because you're still
    identifying as someone who has a weight issue. It's why people who
    win the lottery almost always wind up broke again---they still
    identify as broke (Me? Rolling in the dough? Who would have ever
    thunk it? I keep waiting to wake up and wind up back in my normal
    life, this amount of money doesn't even seem real, etc.) even though
    they've suddenly become rich. In Alcoholics Anonymous, along with
    laying off the booze, refraining from hanging out in bars, and
    calling your sponsor whenever you feel yourself slipping, you're
    also asked to anchor in your identity every time you speak at a
    meeting: "Hi, I'm Janice,

and I'm an alcoholic." By owning the fact that you're an addict and,
hence, cannot and will not touch a drop of alcohol, you're much more
likely to successfully dump your drinking habit than if you identified
yourself this way: "Hi, I'm Janice, and even though I wake up hungover
and unsure of where I am on a regular basis, I can handle the random
cocktail here and there, no problemo." By shifting your identity to
align with the habits you're working to adopt, you prepare yourself to
live in a totally new reality by erasing the inner struggle of I'm doing
X but I'm actually an impostor so it probably won't last because it's
not really who I am.

Changing your actions in order to form a new habit without also changing
who you're being is like running into the wind: Yes, it's possible to
put your head down, run as hard as you can, and gain some ground, but
you're much more likely to give up and return to your old ways than if
you run in the same direction as the wind.

Getting a handle on how you perceive yourself and the world around you
is critical because of a certain driving force that all but the most
highly evolved humans fall prey to on a daily basis: the human need to
be right. There are few things that make the human heart sing more than
getting every answer right on a test; than discovering that I, and not
my friend who kept me waiting for an hour, wrote down the correct time
to meet; than correctly guessing that Jill and Rob would be pregnant
within the year; than having your chosen candidate sweep the election;
than knowing Nirvana was cool before everyone else figured it out. We
literally kill one another because we righteously believe this land is
my land, not your land, that you should govern, worship, love, appear,
and generally just behave the way that I deem is the correct way. We're
so in love with being right we even gather in groups and swap stories of
our proudest, most rightest moments: "I told Sheila that if she stands
up in the canoe, she's going to fall in. So what does she do? She stands
up in the canoe. And what happens? Mmmmhmmm." There are three little
words that all humans long to hear more than any others: You. Are.
Right.

Our need to prove that our version of reality is real and right goes way
beyond our fragile egos' need for validation, however, and often touches
on something much more primal. Here's how our deep, down-and-dirty need
to be right works:

Human being + being right = I am safe. Subconsciously, I need to know
that X is true because it has formed my perception of reality. Having a
reality that is solid means I feel secure in spite of the fact that I'm
spinning around on a ball in infinite space, and that my impending death
is actually the only thing I can be absolutely sure of. Human beings are
scared shitless of change. Change dismantles the "known" and pulls our
sense of security out from under us. Change opens up a
never-beforeexperienced void of possibility that could actually be, and
oftentimes is, way more awesome than the known experience we're clinging
to. BUT, because change is unknown and threatens our reality, it makes
us very uncomfy, so we tend to take great precautions to stay as far
away from it as possible. Even the most daredevily among us have their
limits (although, erm, they may not easily admit it). If you're a person
who prides yourself on being a great adventurer, who's up for anything,
who claims to embrace change---I freakin' spoon change to sleep every
night, m'kay?---dig deep and own up to the excuses you fall back on when
a particular change is out of your comfort zone. Also realize that there
could be changes you've never even considered that could totally
blindside you (losing all your money, having your house float away in a
flood, finding out that your mom is a serial killer). There ain't no
shame in being human, and owning your fears is essential if you want to
move through them. Human beings would often rather adapt to the fun-free
familiar instead of risking the unknown. Until (and unless) the familiar
becomes so unbearable that they're willing to risk taking the leap into
the void of change.

Because of our hell-bent dedication to being right, when it comes to our
favorite topic---ourselves---we will defend our identities to the death
even if we're miserable and our identities aren't something we're proud
of. For example, back in the day, when I was perfecting the art of being
perpetually broke, I would get extremely grouchy if anyone questioned my
ability to be financially successful, because it threatened the rickety
identity I was familiar with. What do you mean I could make money if I
changed my attitude and did things differently? I've tried for FORTY
YEARS to make money as a writer and I'm living in a garage, cutting my
own hair, and sleeping on a futon on the floor. I suck at making money.
Trust me, I have a lifetime of proof. Even if we'd love to make a
change, we subconsciously fear that if we stop believing our stories
about who we are and what's available to us, the foundation of our
realities will disappear and we will disappear right along with it. A
tad dramatic, yes, but powerful enough to inspire people to spend entire
lifetimes stuck in jobs they hate and abysmal relationships and to
generally deny themselves the things and experiences that would have
them leaping out of bed in toe-stubbing excitement each morning. We are
constantly, whether we realize it or not, building a case for our
rightness. When I was broke and living in the garage, I was always on
the

lookout for proof that I couldn't make money: I spat on the ground about
all the evil things people did to make and keep their money so I could
prove that the quest for riches was amoral (as opposed to acknowledging
all the beautiful things people did for and with money). I surrounded
myself with other broke people who gave me tips on the best credit cards
to transfer my debts to, who told me where the good thrift stores were,
and who loved to bitch and moan about how expensive everything was too
(as opposed to people who would kick my ass to up my game). I was a
master at finding fire sales, the cheapest gas stations in town, and
roadblocks to my success (as opposed to terrifying/exciting/lucrative
opportunities that pushed me to grow and totally change my life for the
better). Our "realities" are determined by how we habitually perceive
ourselves and our worlds.

In every single moment there is an infinite number of ideas, sights,
sounds, smells, opinions, and opportunities swirling around us, and what
we choose to focus our attention on, and how we choose to think and
speak about it, is based on the reality we're participating in at the
moment. For example, four people can walk by a woman standing on a
ladder, painting the outside of her house, and each person can
experience this a completely different way. Let's say one of the people
walking by is newly engaged, and when she looks at the woman she feels
all fluttery and thinks, I can't wait to pick out a color to paint our
new house together! Let's say the second person walking by just got
cheated on by yet another in a long line of terrible girlfriends. He may
look at the woman, find her attractive, but then think, Don't fall for
it, man, she'll rope you in and then toss you out like an old rag. And
let's say the third person walking by is launching a business as a shoe
designer. She may look at the woman and think, That's such an
interesting place to put a buckle on a sandal. I wonder where she got
those. The last person, a busy mother of three who skipped breakfast,
might glance at the woman and think, Maybe I'll have a roast beef
sandwich for lunch. The first step to making any major change in your
life is always awareness. When it comes to matching your identity to the
habits you want to form or free yourself from, you're going to want to
start noticing the specifics of how you're behaving right now so you can
change anything that's not in alignment with where you're heading. Pay
attention to your words, thoughts, beliefs, and actions, and challenge
yourself with thoughts like Hmm, if I want to be a nonsmoker, maybe I
shouldn't beg my boyfriend to roll down his window when

we drive by someone smoking a cigarette so I can savor the secondhand
smoke. Perhaps I should ignore that person and simply ask my boyfriend
how his day was. Identities come equipped with matching habits.

When I finally decided that I was going to heal my relationship with
money (as in: go out and actually make some), I did everything I could
think of to crawl out of my hole---I read books about wealth
consciousness, went to moneymaking seminars, took classes, hired
coaches---but one of the most profound things I did was change who I was
being. I forced myself to stop identifying as a broke-ass loser and to
start identifying as someone who made money effortlessly. Nothing had
changed yet in my environment or my bank account, but I acted as if it
had. I started thinking, acting, and perceiving the world like the
person I wanted to become. For example, every time I had the impulse to
say I can't afford it (which was pretty much anytime anyone asked me to
do anything), I'd replace it with this thought: Money flows to me easily
and freely. I walked around saying this to myself all day long, and
because I am human and I love to be right, I started looking for proof
that money did indeed flow to me easily and freely. I'd find a dollar on
the street, I'd get a freelance job out of nowhere, I'd get twenty bucks
from Dad for my birthday---and instead of ignoring these tiny moments of
financial felicity or immediately falling back into focusing on what the
hell I was doing with my life, I celebrated that money was right then
and there flowing to me easily and freely. Habits define who you're
being at a certain moment in time; they're not who you are.

Not only did putting Money flows to me easily and freely on repeat make
me feel a whole lot more inspired but it opened my eyes to all the
things I couldn't see when I was so busy proving that I can't afford it
was the truth. I went after opportunities that before would have been
"out of my reach" or full-on invisible to me; I invested money "I didn't
have" on educating myself and starting a new business; I stretched
myself and took terrifying leaps into the unknown instead of hiding in
the snore-hole of whining and complaining about how hard everything was.
Adopting the identity of someone who was successful made me

look for solutions, whereas identifying as someone who was broke made me
look for excuses. It was large, Marge. "I am the greatest. I said that
even before I knew I was." ---Muhammad Ali

Pick an identity right now that you've often used to describe
yourself---it can be anything from being lazy to organized to punctual
to spontaneous to confident to musical to bad at math to a real people
pleaser. We're going to step back and notice how your habitual words,
thoughts, beliefs, feelings, and actions have helped you form this
identity, so that when you work on developing new identities and new
habits, you have an example from your own life to use as a reference.
Words: How do you talk about yourself in reference to this identity of
yours? Do you apologize for it? Celebrate it? Act like it's no big deal?
For example, I'm an extremely tidy person. I make my bed the moment I
get up in the morning, immediately unpack and put away my stuff when I
get home from a trip, and put my spices away while I'm still cooking
even though I almost always need to get them out and use them again
(grumbles at self). I also have a constant stream of houseguests and
often find myself saying, "I know, I can't help it, just ignore me,"
while gently pushing them aside so I can fluff the pillow behind them or
while neatly lining up all our shoes in the front hallway. I often make
announcements to anyone who will listen, such as "I'm glad I'm so
persnickety. It makes my life so much easier," as I pull my lipstick out
of the pocket in my purse where it always is because I always put it
back where it belongs. I like being tidy, I've always been tidy, I'm
into it and my words reflect it. Thoughts: What thoughts run through
your mind when you do things like walk into a room, meet a new person,
read the news, or drive down a new street as a result of who you're
being? For example, if I walk into someone's office and see a bunch of
stuff piled on their desk, I get anxious and can't fathom how they're
able to concentrate with all that crap all over the place. Clutter makes
me think about cleaning. Tidiness makes me think all is well. I like
tidiness in other people too. I notice right away when I walk into
someone's house if stuff is put away or not. Beliefs: What beliefs,
conscious or unconscious, are you buying into as a result of who you're
being? Being tidy makes my life easier because I always know where my
stuff is. I've got my own back. I have my act together. I'm in control.
Feelings: When you think about being X, what comes up for you
emotionally? Tidiness makes me feel calm, accomplished, happy, secure,
safe, cozy, and a little superior to people who aren't tidy. There. I
said it. Repeated action: What habitual actions do you find yourself
repeating because of who you're being? For me, it's straightening,
fluffing, folding, stacking, sponging off, organizing, repeatedly
walking into rooms I've just tidied up to revel in how great they look.

Now that you're aware of the specifics that go into making up an
identity, you are ready to use this information to create excellent new
habits and toss out lousy old ones. The ability to choose and change who
we're being in this life is a gift, especially since so many of the
habits and identities that we're walking around with weren't consciously
chosen by us in the first place. Science has shown that we're
genetically predisposed toward certain personality traits, and our
environment also influences the behaviors and beliefs we cling to. We
picked up the majority of our most ingrained and habitual beliefs and
identities from our parents (or from whoever raised us). We didn't, as
four-year-olds, think, Well, I agree, it seems like an excellent idea to
be disdainful of anyone who doesn't share the same religious beliefs as
I do. Disliking people who are different is totally aligned with what I
find fun and nourishing and meaningful---I'm in. When it comes to most
of our early habits, we kinda just pick them up while hanging around the
dinner table and watching every single move our parents make. Then we go
ahead and form our own versions of the truth in one of two ways: by
mimicking what we take in or by rebelling against it. When you were a
kid, the people who raised you were the centers of your universe. You
relied on them to keep you safe, to get you food, and to show you the
ropes of this big new world of yours. You were like a little mouse,
nibbling up every morsel of information you could get your paws on. As a
child, you hadn't developed any filters or analytical skills yet, so you
basically just internalized and categorized all this intel with a big,
awkward Yes/No switch, and either copied or did the opposite of what you
saw around you. What you lacked in analytical prowess, however, you made
up for in detail. My brother Stephen discovered just how astutely he'd
absorbed all the info from our parents when, as an adult, he
accidentally caught himself on video making sandwiches and hors
d'oeuvres while standing next to our dad. It was his daughter's
eighteenth birthday, and we were all at his house for her surprise
party. Steve set up a camera on the kitchen counter and pointed it
toward the door so he could capture the big moment when she walked into
the house. What he didn't realize was that he was also capturing himself
and Dad, so when he asked me over the next morning to show me the
footage, he prefaced it with "I had no idea. Why didn't anybody tell me?
I had no idea." He cued up the incriminating footage, and there they
were, Dad and Steve standing side by side at the counter, Big Me and
Mini Me with the exact same posture: shoulders up, head bent slightly
forward with a little jovial shake here and there, arms a little stiff,
holding their respective knives with the exact same fingers in the exact
same position, cutting with the same precise concentration, raising the
same right eyebrow while listening intently to the conversation around
them. Steve not

only set the camera up perfectly---Dad in the foreground, his
antipasto-platepreparing stunt double slightly off to his right---he
couldn't have imitated Dad better if he'd tried. It was the most
flawless and impressive performance I've ever seen. There's no fighting
it; we become our parents whether we like it or not. I don't know about
you, but I sometimes hear my mother's words come flying out of my mouth
with such hair-raising precision it's like she's hiding behind a bush
feeding me lines. I even find myself saying things I picked up from her
that I don't necessarily agree with or want to say, but lo and behold,
they come blurting out of my mouth by habit, like coughed-up hairballs
from my unconscious. Sometimes, though, we rebel against our early
conditioning, and we reject what we've taken in with the same dedicated
attention to detail that we employ when we're mimicking. I credit my
extreme tidiness to the fact that my mom was an avid stuff enthusiast:
Surrounding herself with clutter gave her a sense of security, perhaps
filling some hole from her lonely childhood. Mom was of the mind that if
you found a shirt you liked, you should buy it in every color; she had
about thirty-seven baseball caps fighting for space on the hooks in her
coatroom; papers, magazines, spare dog collars, and emery boards
teetered in piles on every available surface. One time when I was home
from college, I discovered a stockpile of old moisturizer bottles in her
attic, all with less than half a container left and all of them dating
back to somewhere around 1970. I asked her if I could throw them away,
to which she replied, "No." To which I replied, "Why on Earth are you
keeping them?" To which she replied, "Why on Earth do you care?" Fair
enough. Her attic, her crusty lotion. But to me, that kind of clutter is
the opposite of comforting; to me, it's a sinister evil that's intent on
unraveling the very fibers that hold together my soul. I became so
traumatized by her collecting that I developed the opposite identity,
honing a tidiness that has become so legendary that it once inspired a
houseguest to wake up screaming in the middle of the night after
realizing with a start that she'd left a dirty spoon on my spotless
kitchen counter. Living an awesome life is all about making choices that
make your heart sing, and in order to do this, you must become aware of
the choices you've already made. Trying to change your life without
being self-aware is like using a map to try to get somewhere you've
never been before: If you don't know where you're starting from, you
ain't gonna get very far.

Pulling back and taking stock of your habits, your beliefs, your
thoughts, your identity, your words, and your actions is some of the
most important work you can do, because it gets you out of victim mode
and puts you in control of your life. And living a life on purpose is
truly where the party's at.

GAVE UP REFINED SUGAR, ALICE, 32 The impulse to give up sugar was mostly
about my skin. I would get terrible breakouts and generally didn't feel
well after I ate it. When I do something, my approach is to go balls to
the wall---I made a big announcement, out loud, "I'm quitting sugar,"
and got rid of all the sugary products in my house. I did a lot of
research on people who changed their lives through food, I worked
alongside a doctor who was very inspirational to me, and I watched a
really interesting documentary called Fed Up that demonized sugar. I
also did something I call tweaking the addiction. I realized that I was
addicted to eating sugar and lots of garbage to reinforce how bad I felt
about myself. Once I distanced myself a little bit from sugar so it
wasn't habitual anymore, I was able to see how sugar was coloring my
life: I was very up and down emotionally, my skin would break out, and I
was like, Why am I doing this to myself? So then I started to align
myself with food that made me feel really good and I broke the addiction
to feeling bad. When you're not addicted to feeling bad about yourself
anymore, you change your habits. So instead I tweaked my addiction to
feeling bad about myself and became addicted to feeling good in general
and good about myself. I also got into a character like I was in a play.
I connected with images and internalized stories that represented me at
my best, truest self: I am not a person who eats sugar. I changed my
story; it's very method acting and very helpful. Because if you don't
think that you are something, how can you partake in the behavior
associated with it?

CHAPTER 2

HEALTHY BOUNDARIES: THE UNSUNG HEROES OF SUCCESSFUL HABITS

I

grew up in a suburban neighborhood that was teeming with kids more or
less my own age. We had trees to climb, woods to build forts in,
backyards with swing sets, and a steep incline at the top of our street
that was excellent for riding a bike or a skateboard down at alarmingly
high speeds. One late summer afternoon when I was about five years old,
a bunch of us were outside playing when Charles, my four-year-old
next-door neighbor, decided to ride his bike down the hill all on his
own and see how fast he could go. I don't remember watching him walk to
the top of the street or seeing him come down the hill; what I do
remember is the part where his tire hit a rock, his bike flew out from
under him, and he traveled a good six feet along the road on his face.
Everything after that happened in slow motion: all of us kids screaming
and running up the road toward our fallen friend; Charles peeling
himself off the ground, his face slowly erupting into a bloody, slobbery
howl; and our babysitter, Janet, probably only thirteen herself, with
her skinny arms flailing all over the place, grabbing Charles and
yelling, "Jennifer! Go get his parents!" The parents were all at a
cocktail party down the street at the Hayneses' house, gathered together
on their giant screened-in porch, sipping gin and tonics and luxuriating
in their temporarily child-free status. I ran all the way there but
slowed to an unenthusiastic stroll as I approached the house, realizing
with terror that I was about to walk into a roomful of adults. I made my
way around the side of the house to the dreaded porch, fully hidden from
view thanks to the fact that it sat high off the ground. Peeking inside,
all I could see was a sea of legs, so many legs of so many grown-ups who
would all stop talking and stare at me when I climbed up the three big
concrete steps, made my surprise entrance, and stammered out my news. I
was terrified of being in the spotlight, terrified of getting in trouble
for playing in the street, terrified of grown-ups in general, so I
reached up from my hiding place next to the steps and knocked ever so
inaudibly

on the very bottom corner of the screen door. Then I turned and ran all
the way to my house, got into my bed, and tried to conjure up the
stomachache that I was prepared to fake the second my parents got home.
This is how many of us deal with setting certain boundaries: When it
comes to getting clear on, and standing up for, who we are and what we
need, we timidly knock on the door, if we even show up to knock at all.
Then we slink off and curl up into a ball of our self-imposed suffering.
Like a little kid who's scared of getting scolded or who doesn't want to
upset anyone or who's just generally afraid of being seen, singled out,
or judged, we opt for No, that's fine, ignore this gigantic stack of
work on my desk, what can I do for you? and leave our own needs lying in
the street, crying out for help. (Charles ended up being fine and still
speaks to me, btw.) Personal boundaries define where you end and the
outside world begins. Having healthy boundaries means owning your
actions, emotions, and needs as well as not owning the actions,
emotions, and needs of others. You are responsible to other people. You
are not responsible for other people. Big diff.

Just as our skin is the boundary that defines our physical bodies, the
walls of our homes define our living spaces, and fifteen items or less
at the grocery store means fifteen items, people, not twenty, we have
personal boundaries that need to be clearly defined and respected as
well. For example, we need to be able to decline invitations we don't
want to accept, to confront people who make comments that cause us
discomfort, and to tell our boss to stop parking in our parking spot
already. We need to ask for help when we need it, to lose the
expectation that other people will fix our problems, and to quit bailing
out our financially irresponsible sister every time she goes on a
shopping bender and can't afford her rent. If we don't set our own clear
and healthy boundaries, we spill out and become messy, murky blobs,
intertwining our needs, roles, and identities with those of the people
around us. Healthy boundaries are especially critical when it comes to
creating new habits, because in order to stay the course, you can't
afford to have your time structured by outside forces, your beliefs
swayed by naysayers, or your attention consumed by your (often
unconscious) need to control those around you. Your guilt, shame, and
shoulds cannot run the show.

Habitually setting good boundaries lays the groundwork for all other
habits.

If you're developing the habit of becoming a better manager at work, for
example, you need to create solid boundaries by articulating your
expectations, laying down clear guidelines, allowing your employees the
space to flourish without hovering over them and micromanaging, and
being neither a friend nor a tyrant to those you manage. If you're
getting into the habit of not eating meat, you need to ask your friends
to meet at restaurants with good vegetarian options, take time to learn
new, meat-free recipes, and inform unamused dinner party hosts that you
don't eat animals. If you're going to regularly do Tai Chi, you need to
give yourself all the time you need to honor your practice, you need to
surround yourself with encouraging people to develop the dedication to
keep showing up, and you need to focus on yourself and your craft so you
can move in slow motion without falling over (or asleep). Your habits
define who you're being.Your boundaries define the space you require in
order to be who you're being.

To help you up your game with your new habit, take a minute to think
about how well you respect---and whether or not you're even aware
of---your own boundaries and the limits that other people set. Here are
some common areas where boundaries come into play and some examples to
help spark selfreflection: The bod: If you don't like being touched by
strangers and a yoga teacher comes over to adjust your pose, do you ask
her to please stop, do you move away, do you slap her on the wrist, or
do you say nothing and hope she backs off soon? What are your boundaries
when it comes to sex, the food you eat, the exercise you do, the clothes
you wear, and the conversations you have about your body and about
bodies in general? How do you respond to people who say hello by kissing
you on the lips (are you one of them)? How aware are you of other
people's body language? Do you automatically go in for the hug when you
meet someone or do you tune into what they're up for first? Do you raise
a disapproving eyebrow when your daughter, whom you consider to be
overweight, helps herself to a second donut? Do you encourage her to eat
the donut? Do you make fun of her? Do you leave her alone? Do you
notice? Stuff: Which of your possessions are off-limits to others and
which do you share freely? Are you tidy or messy in your own home, and
how do you behave in the homes of others? Do you live by the old adage
Ask for forgiveness, not for permission,

and help yourself to the apples on your neighbor's apple tree, the
clothes in your sister's closet, office supplies from the storage room
at work, or your spouse's toothbrush when you accidentally leave yours
behind on a trip? How would you respond, if at all, if the tables were
turned and people didn't ask for permission from you? Beliefs: Are your
beliefs easily swayed by the beliefs of the people around you or by the
media? Are you fairly solid in your beliefs yet still open to hearing
another point of view? Do you think people who disagree with you are
morons or that they're smarter than you or that they're just different
from you? Do you question your beliefs or the beliefs of others? Is it
important to you that in every confrontation someone is right and
someone is wrong, or can you hold space for the possibility that there
may be more than one right answer? Will you fight to the death to be
right about the fact that it was your husband, not you, who left the car
window open in the rainstorm last week (even though, erm, you're
actually not so sure it wasn't you now that you think about it)? Can you
admit when you're wrong? Do you need everyone within shouting distance
to know you were right when you're right? Do you refuse to hear anyone
out and never consider the other side of things? Does anyone actually
admit to any of this? Behavior: Do you go with the flow and behave
however you feel in the moment, oblivious to how it affects others? Do
you limit your behavior, constantly apologize, shrink down, and speak in
a barely audible whisper so as not to make waves or disturb others? Do
you take a stand if someone is being inconsiderate, bullying, making
racist jokes, or talking loudly during a movie, or do you stay silent or
complain about them behind their backs? Do you foist unsolicited ideas,
books, fashion suggestions, job opportunities, and blind dates on others
because you see such potential in them? How do you respond, if at all,
to unsolicited advice, rude remarks, a helping hand? Do you try to do
everything yourself? Do you try to get others to do everything for you?
Do you blame other people/society/your parents for your boring job, your
terrible taste in partners, your empty bank account, your fear of
flying? Do you communicate clearly, drop hints, think before you speak,
blurt it out, or hold it in until you explode/grow a tumor? Space: Are
you a bed hog or a road hog, do you sit with your legs spread wide apart
on a crowded subway? What do you do, if anything, when confronted with
people who are and do? Do you sit with barely even one cheek on the
couch to take up less room? Are you aware of the space you take up? Do
you give yourself and others room to work, room to think, room to
create, room to feel? Do you guard your privacy and respect the privacy
of others? Emotions: Do you empathize with others, over-empathize with
others and take on their pain as your own, or do you feel nothing when
it ain't your problem? Do you have screaming matches in airports with
the ticket agent who can't find your reservation, do you calmly discuss
the problem, or do your burst into tears of frustration? Do you bottle
up your feelings, share them with only those closest to you, or try not
to feel them at all? Do you act impulsively on how you feel or let your
emotions run their course before making a decision, and how do you
respond, if at all, to people who process differently than you do? Do
you adjust your behavior if someone around you is in a bad mood, a good
mood, a sad mood, and/or do you expect everyone to meet

you where you're at emotionally? Are you aware of other people's moods?
Do you try to fix other people's bad moods? Time: Do you respect your
time and others' by being punctual? Do you refuse to suffer those who
waste your time? Do you take the time to read your neighbor's entire
book about the local flora and fauna against your will, or do you tell
her you're too busy? Do you take guilt-free alone time for yourself? Do
you complain that you can't find the time to do what you want to do, do
you make time, do you waste time? Availability: Do you make yourself
available for intimacy, friendship, success, fun? Do you make yourself
available for verbal abuse, negative energy, toxic relationships, the
unappealing whims of others? Do you listen to your friend complain about
her job for the five hundredth time or do you tell her you can't hear it
anymore and to get her act together/tell it to someone else? Do you let
people you don't like into your life/home/book group because you don't
want them to feel bad/make a scene? Are you more available for the needs
of others than for your own needs? Are you aware of the needs of others?
Energy: Do you eat food, listen to music, participate in activities,
hang out with people who give you energy or deplete your energy? Do you
disengage from people and activities that drain you, or do you suck it
up and power through or find some "happy" medium? Do you pay attention
to who and what affects your energy? What do you bring to the party in
the energy department?

We first learn about boundaries as children. We test the waters with the
people around us, see how it goes, and base our understanding of how
things are after years of studying the results we witness. If we say no
to giving Aunt Lauren a kiss, are our wishes heard and respected, do we
get ignored and lifted up to her cheek for a smooch against our will, or
do we get punished and sent to our rooms? When we do what we're told and
go get ready for bed, are we rewarded with a story, do we get yelled at
for taking too long, or are we left upstairs by ourselves for hours?
When we test out the new snappy comeback we learned from the big kids on
the bus and call Mom a fucking bitch next time she asks us to clean up
our toys, we gain all sorts of valuable information from her response
(even though we still may have no idea what the hell we just said). Our
little brains take in all the information we get and then form "truths"
about which boundaries will best protect us and get us what we need. I'm
treated like a bad, mean person when I say no, so I'm never gonna say
that again, or Dad is always angry and tired when he comes home from
work, so being quiet, needing nothing, and not being seen is the way to
avoid getting yelled at. We may then go on to spend the rest of our
lives suffering from the bad boundaries we formed based on these
outdated "truths." We don't realize that what we've assumed to be simple
facts of life are actually just perceptions of reality formed through
our own experiences, and that many of these experiences took place

during a time when we hadn't yet learned to speak in full sentences and
thought that sticking peas up our nose was a great idea. Luckily,
there's another option, one in which we wake up and realize that we can
choose to question our beliefs rather than spend our lives blindly
playing victim to the ones that no longer work for us. I'm always the
one in our group of friends who organizes dinner parties, plans camping
trips, gets tickets to concerts, navigates cancellations, rearranges
things when people's schedules change, and guess what? I'm exhausted.
And grouchy. I caught myself fantasizing about collapsing in Costco,
being hauled out on a stretcher, and everybody having to take care of me
for a change. Shouldn't I be fantasizing about lying on a beach
somewhere, mainlining snacks? Why do I feel like if I ask for help I'm a
bad person? Is that true? As we move through life and uncover these
cranky old "truths," we can unhook ourselves from them, shift our focus
onto beliefs that support who we're becoming, and empower ourselves to
create the boundaries we need to grow: Denying my needs is a drag. I'm
going to stop acting like I'll be punished by Daddy for speaking up,
stop pretending I can do everything myself, and ask for some damn help
around here. What we choose to believe is true or not true dictates the
boundaries we do or don't set.

Whether or not we're aware of it, we're always making choices about
setting healthy boundaries, setting unhealthy boundaries, or setting no
boundaries at all. Depending on our upbringing, how evolved we are, the
situation, and how many cocktails we've had, we either stand up for our
needs and the needs of others or we throw our and everyone else's needs
under the bus. We've all got countless cringeworthy stories and creative
ways in which we've dropped the ball, but for the most part, our
boundary issues fall into one of three categories.

THE THREE COMMON TYPES OF BOUNDARY BUNGLE-RY 1. Too yessy. We say yes to
everything because we want to avoid confrontations, disappointing
others, appearing selfish, or missing out on the chance to feel needed
and important.

2. Too much no. We say no to everything for fear of being seen,
disappointed, disappointing, judged, inadequate, needy, or hurt. We put
up a wall to hide behind as opposed to creating a boundary that allows
us to fully flourish. 3. Too controlly. We try to control other people,
get them to take on our problems, and/or become overly involved with
their problems. We seek out those who will enable us and/or become
enablers ourselves because we don't want to fix our own lives; we want
to feel in control, needed, loved, and not alone.

Most of us participate in a bit of all of these behaviors to some
degree, depending on our issues, the circumstances, and who happens to
be the lucky navigator of our bad boundaries at the moment. For example,
we may say yes to all of the things that our boss asks us to do that are
outside our job description, to the point of exhaustion and resentment;
we may say no to invitations to parties and blind dates to avoid
awkwardness and rejection; and we may be controlly with our kids by
getting involved in areas of their lives that are none of our business:
"I got rid of those black clunky boots that you've worn to death and got
you something a little more . . . feminine." One of the premier causes
of unnecessary drama is bad boundaries.

Having bad boundaries doesn't make us bad people, it just makes us
regular ol' people who are trying to avoid feeling pain and isolation by
behaving in ways that ultimately cause us to feel the very pain and
isolation we're trying to avoid ---joke's on us! The excellent news is
that you simply need to become aware of where and when your boundaries
aren't so great, make the conscious decision to upgrade them regardless
of how uncomfortable and/or scary it may be, and take back some control
of your own life. Take back some control---ain't nobody ever gonna be
perfect or completely in control of anything, but we can certainly
improve the quality of our lives by getting better at making smarter
choices. Here's where we get confused when it comes to boundaries: we
want to be nice, to bring joy to others, to be good, helpful, agreeable,
compassionate, popular people---and we think that compromising our
boundaries is the best way to meet the most needs. We mistakenly
perceive boundaries to be bad, mean, unbending barriers that keep others
out. We fear that setting a boundary means

we're cutting ourselves off from others, delivering an ultimatum,
putting up a wall, being demanding, controlling, rigid, and worst of
all, selfish. Meanwhile, clearly defining who you are and what you're
available for isn't selfish but rather it's self-ish. For example,
telling your teenagers that they're unauthorized to disturb you unless
it involves the police during the thirty minutes you've set aside to
read and meditate every afternoon is indeed self-serving, but it also
benefits your kids. By setting a boundary and taking time for yourself,
your children not only get a more relaxed, attentive mother who values
herself but also an excellent model for how to set good boundaries
themselves and muchneeded practice respecting the boundaries of others.
Think about what a relief it is when someone tells you exactly what's on
their mind, what they need, and what they're available for. Even if the
boundary they set isn't the most convenient or beneficial to your own
needs, knowing where they stand beats the hell out of trying to read
their mind, walking around on eggshells, or trying to figure out if
their evening performance of slamming drawers and silently moving their
mashed potatoes around on their plate is about something you did or said
or if it's even about you at all. Good, clear boundaries are a gift to
everyone. Resentment, exhaustion, guilt, obligation, and
passive-aggressiveness are gifts to no one.

The problem is that, quite often, when we bravely take a stand and
declare that we are no longer available to make dinner every night of
the week because we now have choir practice, people don't exactly pick
up quickly on the gift aspect of the new boundary we've set. Especially
the people we care the most about. Over the course of the nearly ten
years that I've been speaking on the topic of badassery, rarely do I get
through a Q&A without this question rearing its head: What do you do
when the people closest to you don't support who you're becoming? The
reason this question is so common is that when you change who you're
being---which involves developing new habits and boundaries---your
transformation often upsets those closest to you because: 1. They no
longer get to be right about who you're being, and, as we know, since
they are human, they love to be right. If and when they understand and
accept the new you, they get to be right again and will feel better
about the whole thing. If they never understand and accept the new you,
they will act out (see below).

2. You've gone from a known entity to a new, unknown entity, and people
fear the unknown with the same zest they have for being right. On a
primal level, the new you changes an aspect of their "reality," and if
what they perceived to be real is now not real, it's upsetting. It also
suggests that more things about their reality could slip away---If my
best drinking buddy no longer drinks and has a boundary about no booze
being allowed in her house, what, dear God, what other things that I
rely on are going to disappear? 3. You're showing them that change is
possible. You're basically giving them unsolicited advice simply by
being---If I can better myself, so can you. If they're not available to
receive this information, if they'd prefer to cling to the familiar
things in their lives that aren't bringing them a whole lot of joy
instead of making the changes they know they need to make, they're going
to be grouchy, and perhaps snarky, around the new you. 4. In order to
shift who you're being and own the new you, you have to basically kill
off your old identity, and people get unpleasant when you kill the
people they love. This is why, should you decide to take your job more
seriously and start dressing more professionally, Joe at the deli, whom
you hardly know, will give you a high five and a Lookin' good! when he
sees you on your lunch break, and the people who allegedly love
you---your spouse/parents/besty---might say things like Look at you,
Mr.Â Fancypants, you too good for us now? 5. If you've been terrible at
setting boundaries your whole life and suddenly start sticking up for
your fine self and your needs, some people will be disappointed, knocked
out of first place, deprived of their doormat/servant/chef/chauffeur,
and might whine, plead, call you selfish, and explain that they will
perish if you stop doing everything for them.

The people closest to you have the most to lose by losing you, so they
are the most resistant to you changing.

To express their disappointment and fear (almost all of which is
happening on a subconscious level that they're unaware of, btw), the
people in your inner circle might make fun of you, worry about you, list
all the reasons why your big plans won't work, tell you you're no fun
anymore, and in extreme cases, stop speaking to you. There will, of
course, also be people close to you who cheer you on and/or who get
inspired to upgrade their own lives thanks to your fine example. But the
likelihood of those you love having a big ol' freak-out bears noting
because it's one of the main reasons we refuse to change the habits we
want to change and set the boundaries we need to set in order to change
them. Changing your habits and your boundaries takes courage, audacity,
and a whole lot of self-love.

Because we're uninterested in denying ourselves the things and
experiences that light us up, for fear of making others uncomfy, we're
gonna get really good at setting boundaries. In order to help you create
excellent boundaries that benefit you, give your new habit the space it
needs to take root, and help you connect more authentically with the
people in your world, let's break down the Three Common Types of
Boundary Bungle-ry: 1. Too yessy + any kind of even gentle confrontation
= saying yes when you want to say no. Constantly saying yes when you'd
really love to say no is the most famous boundary problem. It's the way
many people try to win love and acceptance, and it's especially common
in women, thanks to the patriarchal society in which we're raised, which
teaches us it's not ladylike to take a stand for ourselves and our needs
or to put ourselves first. We're just gonna go ahead and say a hearty
hell no and a fuck you very much to that memo from the patriarchy,
m'kay? M'kay. Here's what a yes-when-you-want-to-say-no boundary looks
like: Imagine you're out shopping with a friend and she's trying on a
pile of dresses for a big work event. You've spent a couple hours with
her already but need to get home because tonight your ex has the kids
and it's the only night that you've got time to pick up a fabulous
dinner, take a bath, give yourself a facial, unwind, and watch a movie.
You've been fantasizing about your night alone because you've been
taking care of your family and working your ass off all week, but you
let your friend talk you into staying with her in spite of yourself
(literally). She says things like I helped you pick out a dress for your
brother's wedding. You're so much better at knowing what looks good on
me than I am. This event is really important to me. I really need you
right now. It'll only take ten minutes, I swear. She lays on a thick,
gooey layer of guilt, and before you know it, you've taken on her need
to have a shopping buddy instead of holding the space for your own need
to get home and pamper yourself. Thanks to your bad boundaries, you wind
up spending another hour or two at the store, get home, shove some food
down your throat, and pass out, angry at her and angry at yourself, with
woefully unexfoliated skin. Meanwhile, you could have set a boundary,
told her what a great time you had, that you can't wait to see which
dress she winds up with, but that you have to get home early and that's
what you're doing. Setting this boundary makes her feelings and
reactions her responsibility, not yours. This boundary reminds you (and
her, even if she can't admit it or recognize it) that it's her choice,
and really none of your business, whether she chooses to be (1)
disappointed and/or angry, (2) impressed and inspired by your clarity
and dedication to self-care, (3) grateful for the time that she did get
to hang out with you, or (4) some combination of the above. Here are
some of the best ways to turn your unwanted yes into a no when you need
to: Take stock of your needs. Think about a new habit you'd like to
bring into your life and get clear on some boundaries you need to put
into place to support this habit. For example, if you're getting into
the habit of recording a podcast about your favorite bands every week,
you need time to do your research, get all the technical aspects
rolling, perhaps hire a producer/tech person, set up a studio, and make
the

recording. The main new boundary you're going to have to put into place
will most likely be around protecting your time, meaning you'll perhaps
have to start saying no to some of the demands of your family---always
doing the grocery shopping, being readily available to drive your kids
to the mall, listening to your adorable yet long-winded husband's
stories about Slushmouth Stan from work. You may also have to say no to
your friends, opt out of a regular lunch date with the girls, or cut
down on chatting on the phone. Then there are the boundaries you need to
set for yourself, like saying no to wasting time on social media and
looking at pictures of baby animals online and generally getting good at
organizing your time better. You're also going to have to toss some nos
at your self-sabotaging thoughts like Who the hell am I to have a
podcast and a voice? You'll have to say no to your fears of sounding
like an idiot in front of an online sea of strangers, no to worrying
that no one will show up to be a guest on your show, and no to your fear
that you'll give up on your podcast after the first few weeks. You'll
also have to say no to friends who suggest you interview their favorite
(sucky) bands and no to sucky bands that want to be on your show. Taking
a moment to figure out ahead of time where the difficult nos are going
to occur will help you be prepared instead of caught off guard when the
need to say no shows up, which will help you stand your ground. Deal
with your fear. Chances are excellent that some sort of fear will rear
its head when you take stock of your needs and the nos they require;
otherwise you most likely wouldn't have been yessing these nos all
along. An excellent way to defuse your fear is to break it down. Get
into the specifics of what your fear is---I'm scared if I tell my friend
Mary that I won't put her favorite pan flute band on my podcast, she'll
get mad at me. Then what? Then I'll feel guilty. Then what? Then it'll
be weird between us. Then what? Then I guess she'll eventually get over
it or she won't. Then what? Then we'll either go back to being friends
or she'll never speak to me again. Then what? Then, either way, I'll get
back to living my life. The exercise of dismantling your fear is almost
always very anticlimactic. And usually kinda embarrassing, because you
realize that if Mary gets over her disappointment, your fears are
basically unfounded, and if she chooses never to speak to you again
because you're making healthy choices about something that's ultimately
none of her business and is honestly so not a big deal, she's not really
the kind of person you want to be friends with anyway. I also want to
mention here that if you feel like your fears are too much for you to
overcome, if they have real, debilitating power over you, get your butt
into therapy. Some of our boundary issues run incredibly deep, and
because your're not screwing around about this changing your life thing,
if you're having trouble dealing with something that's holding you back,
going to therapy is some of the most important work you can do. Own your
nos. Saying yes when you want to say no is a habit like any other, so
start identifying as someone who says no easily. See yourself as someone
who takes a stand, as someone who values your own needs, as someone who
is more scared of living an inauthentic life than getting yelled at.

When you say no to the needs of others, you're being nice to yourself,
not mean to them.

Yes, we all have to make compromises in our relationships, but there's a
difference between compromising and constantly letting yourself down.
You can take care of the people you love AND take care of yourself, and
when you say yes all the time, you're leaving yourself in the dust (and
often enabling their bad behavior). Good boundaries are all about
self-love. Be the kind of person who loves yourself and who loves
others, and you will find that saying no will start to make you feel
powerful, not guilty. Know who trips you up the most. We all have people
in our lives we have a hard time saying no to, even when we desperately
want to. Get clear on the people who excel at winning arguments, laying
on the guilt, tugging at your heart, and scaring the hell out of you, so
you can brace yourself and have your firm, no-nonsense no at the ready
when they push back. Practice in a safe space. Practice saying no to
things that aren't terribly loaded for you. Say no to the lady at the
perfume counter who wants to spray you, say no to your nosy neighbor
next time she invites you over for cocktails and a complain sesh about
the Campbells across the street, say no to helping the PTA with their
annual fundraiser, say no to the saleslady who brings a stack of shirts
to your dressing room that she thinks will look great on you. Just say
no. It's fun! Extra points if you refrain from apologizing. Learn the
language of no. Getting your no on is all about clarity, kindness,
speed, consistency, and commitment. "No" is a simple, short word; it's
not full of long, drawnout explanations, justifications, apologies,
emotions, excuses, and backpedaling. Here are some general rules to
saying a real good no: Make it all about you, not them. It's not You
need to talk on the phone way too much, I can't take it, who the hell
has that kind of time, but rather I need to limit my phone time because
I'm getting really busy, so I can only talk to you once a week. Keep the
emotion out of it; don't try to second-guess what they're thinking or
worry that they'll get upset. You are responsible for your end of the
conversation, and if they get upset, that's their work, not yours. Use
direct language that gets straight to the point, such as Please call
before you come over. Thanks so much for coming to my party, but I'm
going to bed now, so y'all need to skedaddle. I'm not comfortable
hugging strangers, but it's nice to meet you. And the classic No thanks.
Powerful no-type phrases often begin with I need X, I won't X, I can't
X, I don't like X, I'm not going to X, I'd appreciate it if X. Give
yourself a cushion. Because you will be caught off guard sometimes, and
because getting good at saying no is a new muscle that you're
strengthening, if you're feeling nervous or flustered and a nice squishy
yes seems like the easiest way out, whip out an I can't decide right now
or a Let me think about it or Let me check my schedule and get back to
you. Instead of expecting yourself to be the master of no right out of
the gate, keep phrases like this at the ready to give

yourself time to pause so you can break the habit of agreeing to stuff
immediately in order to escape your discomfort. 2. Too much no + any
concept or idea that makes you uncomfortable = saying no when it would
serve you best to say yes. My mom is hilarious. She is the type of
person who can whittle a joke out of any situation, no matter how grim
or heartwarming or dull it may be. For example, one stunning spring
afternoon, Mom and I sat in my garden watching the birds twitter about,
luxuriating in the warm breeze, enveloped in a miraculous sea of flowers
in bloom. We sat in silent reverence, taking it all in, completely
overcome by peace and beauty and gratitude, or so I thought, until Mom
broke the spell with I'd hate to be a bird. You have to build your house
with your face. Mom's full of doozies, but like many people, she also
hides behind her humor to avoid pain and discomfort---she's always been
swift at letting one rip when presented with a difficult conversation or
when she's feeling something she no wanna feel. Mom was raised by
well-meaning yet rather hardcore WASPs who believed that showing
emotions is to be avoided at all costs, but should you insist on letting
one slip out, please, for God's sake, do it in the other room. Thanks to
years of therapy and forcing my quivery little heart to open up, I've
been able to stop participating in this family tradition of stonewalling
my feelings. Yet that being said, I'm no Olympian. I mean, I have
friends who, in the middle of a crisis or a meltdown, pick up the phone
and call me, sobbing so uncontrollably that they're barely able to
breathe or speak as I stand on the other end of the phone, instantly
frozen and dumbfounded, more shocked than if they'd shown up at my front
door sporting nothing but a ponytail. These friends almost always call
back, apologetic and embarrassed, but to me, this kind of vulnerability
is staggering, courageous, highly advanced. In other words, if you've
got a knack for the no, if you go it alone at all costs instead of
reaching out for the help you need, I feel you. When we err on the side
of saying no instead of yes, we're scared we'll push people away by
letting them see what we consider to be our weak, broken, needy,
burdensome sides. We don't want to risk being devastated by asking for
love and getting rejected. We don't want to risk opening ourselves up to
ridicule or finding ourselves smothered by other people's needs. We
prefer to "play it safe," to remain in control by keeping a tight grip
on our emotions, our surroundings, and our hearts. We build walls out of
I'm good, I got it, I'm fine, as we carry an elephant, metaphorical
and/or literal, up a staircase by ourselves.

Boundaries are not rigid walls. They breathe and move with the
complexities of life and the nuances of each situation.

It took me forever to hire an assistant, a COO, and a bookkeeper for my
business, even once I had money coming in, because I was fully
entrenched in the habit of doing everything myself and I didn't want to
surrender control. I've also moved entire roomfuls of furniture by
myself and once helped some friends plant their garden the day after
breaking up with my boyfriend, opting to run to the bathroom and
furtively sob and pretend I was grappling with a cold instead of letting
them know I was unraveling. Getting

older has worked wonders for my boundary-setting prowess, and ever since
hitting fifty I've noticed that saying yes, no, sounds like you've got a
problem there, get the hell off my lawn---whatever the situation calls
for---comes to me much more easily. My dad, who lived to be ninety-two,
said it best: I don't know if you get older and wiser or older and just
more tired. I think it's a bit of both: As we age, we (hopefully) gain
wisdom through our many experiences dealing with our own BS and other
people's. We also literally have less energy to tolerate the drama that
comes with having bad boundaries. But fear not, you don't have to wait
until you're walking around holding your sore hip all day to get good at
setting awesome boundaries. You can get started right now: Become aware
of what your patterns are, practice slowing yourself down in situations
where you're tempted to compromise the boundaries you truly need to set,
and bravely step up and claim your space. When it comes to having a
boundary issue of too much no, here are some good ways to break down
your walls and let the yeses flow in and out: Take stock of your needs.
If you're a person with a too-much-no boundary issue, you most likely
have trouble recognizing that you have needs at all. In order to unearth
some specifics and discover some places where you may need to let down
your walls, think of a habit you'd like to form and do this exercise in
the context of whatever habit you choose. For example, let's say you're
going to get into the habit of playing tennis five times a week. You're
obviously going to have to put yourself out there and find other people
to play with, and you're going to have to put yourself and all your bad
shots on display on the court for all to see. If you want to improve
your backhand, you'll need to ask a pro for lessons or perhaps approach
someone on a nearby court who's clearly got an amazing swing and ask
them for tips. You'll have to say yes to showing up to play on the days
when you don't feel like it, in order not to let your partners down.
You'll need to carve out time to play and might need to ask a friend to
pick your kids up at school or ask your partner to meet the plumber at
the house because you've got a game scheduled. Deal with your fear. Here
are some fears that might pop up around saying yes in the scenario
above: If you ask people to play tennis with you, they may say no and
you'll feel rejected. They may say yes and you may discover, after
playing with them a few times, that they can't hit a ball over a net to
save their lives or that they're intolerable windbags and now you feel
trapped. Or they may discover that you're not very good or that they
don't like you very much and you'll feel rejected. You may look stupid
in front of other people when you hit a bad shot, you may lose your
temper, and you may trip on the net in a mid-victory leap and never live
it down. You may feel needy and annoying by asking your friend and your
partner to help you out, and you may discover you think tennis is for
the birds and be irritated that you've wasted your time and money on
checking it out. Once you've got your list of fears, notice any that
really hit home for you. For example, let's break down the fear that
your new tennis partners discover that you're not very good and that
they don't really like you. What if this is true? Then we'll probably
have an awkward conversation where they tell me it's not working out or
I'll make an excuse to quit. Then what? Then I'll feel stupid and
embarrassed. Then what? Then I guess I'll have to find other people to
play with. Uncomfortable? Yes. The end of the world? No.Â Yet this
discomfort has, so far, kept you caught in the pattern of no, so this
next exercise about owning your yeses is really important.

Own your yeses. Saying no all the time has a lot to do with protecting
your ego, being terrified of criticism, rejection or being smothered,
and fearing loss of control and love. The more you can identify as
someone who doesn't take things personally, the easier it will be to let
down your guard. See yourself as someone who laughs off being rejected
or saddled with the task of having to inform an annoying tennis partner
you've found someone else who's a better fit. Lighten up. Realize that
saying yes is how you get in on life, and that life is much more
enjoyable when lived fully. Envision the word "yes" as light, fluffy,
and bright, and the word "no" as dark, solitary, and heavy. Be grateful
for all the ease and help and love and fun that yes will bring into your
life and start cracking yourself open. Know who trips you up the most.
Which people do you have the hardest time opening up to and why? Get
clear on the specifics, break down any fears that come up, and take baby
steps putting yourself out there. For example, if you have a friend
who's always looked up to you and you're scared to be vulnerable or weak
in front of them because you don't want to disappoint them, start by
sharing a small fear you have or a small problem and ask for their help.
If there's someone you love who you fear will smother you with their
neediness if you let them in at all, slowly open the gates, but only a
crack at a time. For example, tell them you only have ten minutes to
chat but would love to hear about their latest breakup. Identify the
people you're interested in moving closer to and come up with specific
things you can ask of them or things you can do for them, and tiptoe
your way into being more intimate. Practice in a safe space. Ask a
stranger to hold the door open for you, or get into the habit of opening
the door for others. Give an unexpected compliment to a good friend or
do an unasked-for favor for your partner and notice how great it feels.
Do as many little yes-type things as you can think of to rewire your
brain and make it understand that yes means good. Learn the language of
yes. Learning the language of yes means really getting to know and
recognize those moments when you will best be served by cracking open
the protective shell around your heart and sharing. Learn to ask for
help, advice, affection, and whatever else you need, and let others know
you're there for them in return. Slow down, tune in, and be a great
listener and a brave sharer of your own feelings. If you're going to
learn how to say yes, you're going to have to embrace a little bit of
cringe-y discomfort: Remember that while you're the star of your own
life, you're a supporting cast member at best in other people's lives.
Cry in front of the vet when they take Boots Rodriguez, your toothless
old cat, into the back for a biopsy instead of swallowing your tidal
wave of tears. They've seen people cry before; it's no big deal. Speak
your mind, articulate your needs. Tell someone you love them when you're
feeling verklempt. Admit you're scared, lonely, or could use a pal to
look over your online dating profile even though you're mortified about
posting it in the first place. As much as you don't think you need to,
learning to let the love in and let your love out will help you to free
up everything that seems rigid or stuck in your life.

Accept that communicating well is work. You're allowed to admit that
it's hard for you to open up, so cut yourself some slack and trust that
anyone who's worth being more intimate with will cut you some slack too.
3. Too controlly + the things/people/situations you want to control or
that want to control you = a whole slew of murkiness, isolation,
resentment, and bad behavior. My sister, Jill, is five years younger
than I am, and as in many big sister/little sister relationships, she
looked up to me and I spent much of my time rolling my eyes and trying
to shake her off my leg. Until I got hungry, that is. We used to play a
"game" where I'd tell her: Run downstairs, make me and my friend peanut
butter and jelly sandwiches, and grab us a couple of glasses of milk
while you're at it, and I'll time you. Let's see if you can beat your
record of, um, six minutes and twenty-seven seconds! Jill would tear off
to the kitchen while my friend and I resumed playing dolls who work at a
dentist's office, only to be interrupted by Jill and our lunch many
minutes later. I, of course, didn't bother to keep track of her time,
and made up some lame guess when presented with her eager, expectant
(and, in guilt-ridden hindsight, very cute) face. Oh yeah, six minutes
and fortyseven seconds. You came so close! I know you can beat it next
time. Now get out of my room. Controllers come in many forms. Some
controllers manipulate people into doing stuff for them that they
wouldn't normally do by making it seem fun; some are expert
guilttrippers or seducers; some excel at wearing people down until they
give them what they want; and some are full-on bullies. Controllers
generally don't give a hoot about other people's boundaries and have
lots of trouble hearing the word "no," as in, they don't really hear it
at all. Another fun form of exerting control is by inserting yourself
inappropriately into the lives of others by constantly offering
unsolicited advice, spending more time on bettering their lives than you
do on bettering your own, and/or fully interloping your way into someone
else's business: I'm going to take care of my newly divorced best friend
and her children, move in with them and cook for them, become
indispensable, and then get super angry and resentful when she finds a
new man and moves on. Take a moment to think about any ways in which you
have not-so-great boundaries around control. Pay attention to the sneaky
ways that control can mask itself as simply being helpful, as looking
out for someone, or as being a good friend. Investigate the roles you
play in other people's lives and start questioning your motives: Are you
truly trying to help them? Are you inserting yourself to feel needed?
Are you kinda obsessed? Listen to your intuition, and if it's telling
you that someone in your life has gotten a little too close for comfort,
trust that feeling. Start taking a deeper look at your actions and
motives around control, and take a moment to notice how the actions of
the people around you make you feel as we run through the exercise
again. Because boundary issues around control are a bit different from
the previous two we've worked through, I'm going to tweak the exercise
slightly: Know who trips you up the most. Get mighty honest with
yourself and think about the people in your life whom you try to control
or whose lives are most gooily enmeshed with yours. Is there a friend
whom you check in with every day, maybe even several times a day, whom
you use as a platonic substitute for an intimate relationship? Is there
anyone whom you constantly heap unsolicited advice onto and whom you
spend an inordinate amount of time thinking about how to "fix"? Do you
make your assistant do things like vacuum your office, answer snotty
texts from your

ex that you don't want to deal with, or other tasks outside their job
description? Do you smother your kid with your emotional needs, making
him or her, instead of a friend, spouse, or shrink, a sounding board for
your loneliness, fears, marital problems, and regrets that you didn't
experiment more in college? Take stock of your needs. What need are you
attempting to meet by trying to fix other people's problems? Does it
make you feel valuable, smart, seen, loved, or powerful? Are you focused
on saving your friend's marriage because you can't face focusing on all
the problems with yours? Does manipulating your neighbor into mowing
your lawn after he's done mowing his make you feel connected to him and
less isolated? What hole is your need to control attempting to fill?
Deal with your fear. What fears came up when you imagined letting go of
the needs you listed above? For example, let's say you backed off from
being so involved in your friend's troubled marriage. You're still there
for her, but you're no longer available to pick apart every text her
husband sends her, you don't listen to her cavalcade of complaints night
after night over a bottle of rosÃ©, and you don't spend your free time
researching hilarious cartoons about how stupid men are to send to her.
Instead, you set a boundary and tell her you'll discuss solutions with
her but you'll no longer wallow in the complaining. Taking the focus off
her opens up new space for you to face your own life. What fears come up
with that? Perhaps you've been putting off telling your spouse you want
to quit your lucrative job as an attorney to become a full-time glass
blower and that you need them to pick up the tab for a while? Or maybe
you're scared to admit that your marriage is joyless and that you need
to end it, or maybe you've got fears around not being valuable and
needed and "in control" of someone else's life? Get clear on your fears,
go through the process of breaking them down, and expose them as the
little pipsqueaks they really are. Own your surrender. Imagine yourself
leaning back and watching the person you hover over most doing their
thing without your input. Envision yourself as a relaxed, helpful,
loved, valued person who happily helps when needed and who lets others
learn lessons they need to learn on their own. See yourself as a
separate, whole, complete, loving person who is able to create whatever
you desire in your own life. Learn the language of surrender.
Recognizing and communicating from a place of surrender is all about
coming from a place of trust instead of fear. Practice interrupting your
impulse to fix, placate, call out, soapbox, push back against, or even
agree with something. Take a breath, slow down, and keep these things in
mind as you learn to ease into the surrender state: The language of
surrender is sometimes silence. Practice just listening instead of
offering advice and suggestions. Get good at saying phrases like Do you
need some help? How can I best support you? Do you want ideas or are you
just looking for someone to listen? Thanks for your offer to help but I
think this is something I need to do on my own, and I'm happy to help
with X but I can't help with Y. Learn to speak with and listen to more
than just voices. Pay attention to the body language and the, um, verbal
language of someone saying Back off, no thanks, mind yer own fucking
business, and then do as asked.

â¢ â¢ â¢ The better you get at setting healthy boundaries of your own and
respecting the boundaries of others, the more easy, successful, and
joyful your life and everyone else's will be. As we embark on creating
this new habit of yours, being able to identify, whip out, and
masterfully set into place whatever boundary you require will help you
cultivate the staying power that may have eluded you in your habit
attempts in the past. Badass boundaries are every habit superhero's
secret weapon.

QUIT BEING ENERGETICALLY TRIGGERED BY OTHERS, JIM, 45 I have to deal
with an intense, aggressive person on a regular basis and he triggers
the hell out of me. I really wanted to get some control over myself, to
not take the bait and to not get all worked up, so I decided to make a
habit out of staying aware and remembering to take a beat when I feel
this guy launching. I think to myself, This person is getting
squirrelly. . . . Let him, but don't participate in that squirrel
factor. It's easy when his intensity isn't directed at me, because it
doesn't feel like an attack and therefore I don't have the
"fight-or-flight" response. When it does become personal, which it has,
I have to really work hard at finding inner calm and resetting my
reaction ---very hard to do, as my inclination is to top his intensity
with my own. But the awareness of that involuntary response of wanting
to fight back is what actually stops me from doing so. That's my
trigger. Use the negative urge to react as a positive trigger: When you
feel yourself getting worked up, use it as a reminder to pause, take a
breath, and make a better choice. The trigger reminds me that I'm in
control of my responses and to be thoughtful about them. I feel myself
getting jittery, my hands get very cold, and my body gets tight, all at
the same time. And that physical discomfort causes me to have a quick
internal monologue. I remind myself to calm down, to slow my breathing
to counter the adrenaline rush. I recognize the feeling I'm having and
let myself disapprove of how that person is making me feel, but I don't
get entangled by the way I feel. Then I think about how the next words
out of my face are going to have an effect, and what do I want that
effect to ultimately be, which is to make me feel well and whole, but
also to be heard and respected. After the interaction is over, I feel
solid and empowered, whereas in the past I would be all jacked up and
upset for hours. I don't feel like this is passivity or acquiescence,
but rather strength, because I'm being self-aware and making evolved,
difficult, positive choices in the picosecond that this is all
happening.

CHAPTER 3

SHAPESHIFTING INTO THE NEW YOU

A

friend of mine recently called my attention to a habit I didn't even
know I had. Apparently, after I drink something particularly satisfying,
I follow it up with a lip smack and an ahhhh! I'm sure that my audible
celebration of a sip well taken started out as a joke, but because I did
it so often, my dramatic drinking became a habit that, to my
amuzehorror, I now realize I do even when I'm alone. What you make fun
of most, you become. Mock wisely.

We are all riddled with habits---habits we're aware of and habits we're
oblivious to, habits we love, habits we hate, habits we love/hate, and
habits that just kind of are what they are: Here I go, putting on
underpants again. I don't think very many of us spend a whole lot of
time thinking about the habits we do or don't have, but as you prepare
to create a new habit, taking stock of what you've already got going on
is beneficial because: It's inspiring to realize how many excellent
habits you have. Becoming aware of your not-so-great habits enables you
to change them. It's always nice to take the time to get to know
yourself better. You can pick up useful tricks and identify avoidable
obstacles by studying your existing habits, which will come in handy as
you create future ones.

In order to familiarize yourself with your habits, please get your
notebook and make three lists: five good habits that you seem to have
always had (behaviors that you don't consciously remember creating but
that are very much a part of your identity), five habits that you've
intentionally and successfully created and/or quit, and five habit
upgrades that you'd love to make.

At first you may have trouble coming up with stuff for your lists, but
stick with it and I promise you, the longer you sit there and think, the
more ideas will pop into your head. For example, here's what I came up
with for myself: Five good habits that I've always had: Being tidy,
being quick and consistent with my pleases and thank-yous, encouraging
others, being grateful, stopping to smell all flowers in my path. Five
intentionally created or ditched habits: Quitting smoking, hydrating
every morning upon waking, making daily check-ins on Mom, letting stress
go more quickly, being more emotionally in tune/available. Five habit
upgrades I'd love to make: Slow down, become a more active activist,
quit complaining, don't groan whenever I get out of a chair (another one
that started as a joke and that I now perform in public, loudly), sing
more.

Research shows that in order for us to really stick to a habit, we have
to believe in our ability to change. If you don't yet have evidence that
you can transform whatever habit it is that you're working on, even if
you have proof that you've tried to change and failed in the past, you
have to believe that you can do it anyway---or else you will seriously
half-ass creating this new habit, if you ass it at all. Look at the
first two lists you just made, the good habits you just naturally seem
to have and the habits you've been intentional about, and take a moment
to get a little stuck up about how inspiring and capable you are. You
chose to make these habits part of your identity, whether you realized
you were doing it or not, which means you can choose to welcome in the
habits you've got on your third list, the habit upgrades you'd love to
make. Believing that you're capable of doing something is easiest when
you've got proof. But if you're attempting something you've either never
tried before or have tried and failed to do, believing it's possible can
be achieved at first simply by making the decision to believe. Just
believing isn't as hard to accomplish as you might think. We humans
decide to believe stuff all the time, with little or no proof that it's
possible or real: We decide to believe in a god; we decided to believe
we can go to the Moon; we decide to believe that our new boyfriend is
not distant, unavailable, and uninterested in us because he's got really
nice arms and a boat. Belief is a muscle, and when you're changing a
stubborn old bad habit and really stretching yourself, a hell-bent
decision is the perfect personal trainer to get your belief in shape.
For example, when I became unavailable to be broke anymore, I had a
teeny, tiny inkling of belief that I could be financially successful
someday, but my

conviction was so wimpy and shaky that I needed to build a fortress of
determined decidedness around it to keep my belief from withering and
dying. In the early days, I decided to keep pushing myself to do all the
stuff I had to do that scared the hell out of me---get over my fraud
complex and announce to the world that I was a coach, put up a website
with a picture of myself wearing makeup on it, charge actual money for
my services---and to keep looking for proof that what I desired was
possible. This decision slowly but surely strengthened my belief that I,
Jen Sincero, would one day pay extra to check a bag instead of wearing
all my sweaters onto the plane and doing carry-on for free. I didn't get
started on my journey fully believing I could make money; at first I
decided just to believe I could. Commit to change and conviction will
follow.

Once you identify a habit that you'd like to work on for the remainder
of this book, I'll show you how to use your almighty power of decision
to help anchor it in. Refer now to the third list you made---the five
habit upgrades you'd love to make---and either pick a habit off this
list or choose something else that has real meaning for you. Ideally
you'll choose something that inspires you, but not something that's so
gigantic you give up before you make it through the work we're about to
do: I'm going to jog ten miles every morning starting tomorrow even
though I ran through the airport the other day and had to call for a
wheelchair halfway to my gate. I ran track in college, though, so I got
this. The purpose here is to give yourself the chance to fully
experience the habit-forming process and to see some real results---not
to get frustrated, quit, or pull a muscle your first day out. Please
pick one and only one habit that you're either eager to cultivate or
that you can't wait to drag to the curb, something that would give you:
a sense of being the person you know you're meant to be; a sense of
empowerment; an improved quality of life; a sense of accomplishment
(meaning this new habit feels attainable but still large and important
and bragworthy).

Before you get too attached to the habit itself, think about the desire
driving you to choose this habit, and do your best to make sure you've
made the wisest

choice possible. For example, if your desire is to lose thirty pounds
but you hate dieting and have never stuck with any particular diet for
more than a few weeks, maybe, instead of focusing on losing weight and
depriving yourself of your favorite foods, you need to focus on
developing the habit of eating what you like, but just eating less of
it. If your desire is to have a better relationship with your partner,
maybe achieving that isn't about getting into the habit of going on date
nights and cooking more dinners together, but about really listening to
them or telling them how much you appreciate them or noticing and being
grateful for all the reasons you chose to be with them in the first
place. I'm in the habit of having wine whenever I eat red sauce or a
steak, but I'm also in the habit of being a total pantywaist when it
comes to drinking these days---I can't sleep and I get hungover from
just one glass. I toyed with quitting drinking altogether, but that
seemed rather overdramatic considering I hardly drink at all, so now I
have a tiny little sake cup that I sip my wine out of (smack, ahhhhh!),
and this little thimbleful allows me to enjoy some wine without being in
pain the next morning. I met my desire not to feel awful by cutting back
(easier habit), not by cutting myself off completely (more difficult
habit), and it's done the trick. Take a moment to think about the most
successful way you can design this habit to reflect your desires instead
of just leaping in cold turkey, repeating past attempts that didn't
work, or thoughtlessly doing what everyone else does or tells you to do.
Once you've figured out what your habit is, lock into the decision to
make it happen by imagining all the details of how achieving this habit
will feel. Connect with the emotions that your desire to be this new
person calls up. Make this journey you're on much bigger than the new
habit itself (because it is). Step fully into the identity of the person
you'll be when you embody this habit and fall in love with who you're
becoming. Realize that becoming the kind of person who does what you're
setting out to do is an act of self-love and respect, that forming this
habit means you believe in yourself, and that you're doing what it takes
to give your awesome self everything you desire and deserve. Focus your
attention on the desires fueling the habit, not on the habit itself.

Deciding to change your life means you've made a tacit agreement with
yourself that you're capable of and deserve this new identity. Deciding
to upgrade your life is basically being super nice to yourself; it's
like saying, Self, you matter, and I'm gonna roll out the red carpet for
you. Sitting around doing nothing, ignoring your health and happiness,
and pretending you don't have the

discipline to change the things you'd love to change are also decisions,
decisions that mean you've made an agreement with yourself that you're
incapable of, uninterested in, or perhaps underserving of this new
habit. I know, right? Why would you be that way to your sweet self? I'm
assuming that since you've picked up this book, you're already on board
with the red carpet version, but lord knows we can all get wobbly in our
resolve, so we need to stay aware of, and work with, our whole selves,
not just the parts we proudly parade around for all to see. Being aware
of both of these possible identities---the you that's in love with
yourself and the you that's not feeling so special---will help you stick
to your decision to stay the course, which is why I want you to now
write down the details of what both of these identities look like, and
especially what they feel like. Write a day-in-the-life scenario for
both versions, from getting out of bed (or off the futon), making your
coffee, getting dressed: What stresses are running through your mind as
the sad-sack you? What are you excited about as you move through your
day as the upgraded you? Paint a real, detailed picture of each version
of your life to remind yourself that they're both totally available to
you depending on what you choose to decide. Use the fear and loathing of
the not-sogreat version to propel you out and away from it, and the
thrill and anticipation of the awesome one to lift you upward and toward
it. You will eventually cut ties completely with the old, less-motivated
you---you honestly eventually won't even remember what it feels like to
be that person once you've fully owned your new identity---but fear of
staying stuck in old bad habits can be a helpful tool in the beginning
to get you off your butt and do what needs to be done. For example, when
I decided to quit smoking, I no longer wanted to have a disgusting cough
and reek of smoke, but even more importantly, I wanted to be the kind of
person who respected my health, who showed my dear body that I loved it,
my body that, with pretty much zero help from me, managed to still work
and take me all over the world and provide me with incredible pleasure
in so many ways. I wanted to stop being that person who had to walk out
of movies early because my nicotine craving was tugging on my sleeve. I
wanted to be in control of my life, not controlled by some lame drug.
Now that I haven't smoked in decades, I barely remember how awful it
felt to be tethered to that old habit, but those icky feelings were very
helpful motivators on my journey to quitting. Good habits are about who
you decide to be, not what you decide to do, so get mighty clear and
worked up over the image of yourself succeeding, and mighty uninterested
and grossed out by the image of yourself staying stuck, and use these
feelings and emotions to help you stay on course.

We are creatures who are driven by the often opposing forces of emotion
and logic, and if it came down to a wrestling match, my money would
definitely be on emotions for the win. I mean, think about it---how many
times have you done something that you know in your sensible, grown-up
mind is a really bad idea, but in your heart it sounds insanely fun or
thrilling or irresistible: OMG, they're having an adoption fair? I know
we haven't ever discussed getting a dog but we have to adopt this puppy
even though we're so busy and our hands are already full with two kids
under the age of three because . . . look at that nose. And we
definitely need to get his sister while we're at it so he has a pal. You
need the double whammy of getting both your heart and your head on board
with your decision in order to lock in this new habit. We tend to give
much more airtime to our logical sides, so I really want you to make the
effort not only to feel into the details of your emotions but to revisit
them as often as possible. Your heart, not your head, is the keeper of
the flame beneath your fanny.

You know who quits eating French fries no problem? The guy whose doctor
tells him he'll be looking down the barrel of the great beyond in two
months if he doesn't knock it off right now. The goal here is to conjure
up a similar dedication, one full of heart, head, and Holy shit, I'm on
it, without necessarily involving such a pressing, mortal ultimatum.
Decide to embody the identity that represents the desires in your heart.
Decide to take risks, to fail, to look ridiculous, to be victorious, to
be as true to yourself as you can possibly be. Decide to love yourself
through all the trials and errors and false starts. Stay focused on your
brave decision to change your life rather than focusing on any
expectations of perfection or any desires to succeed right out of the
gate. Get clear on what will happen if you decide to pretend you can't
hear your heart; lay out the specifics. What are the consequences? Who
will you be stuck being if you tell yourself that you can't have what
you want or that going after your desires isn't worth the effort? How do
you want to ride out your one and only wild trip through the bananas
journey called life as the you who is you? I want to stress here that
this habit-forming, ass-kicking stuff is all about what you desire, not
what you think you should desire or what anyone else tells you you
should do. We're all different creatures, and one person's version of
success may be sitting around looking at birds all day with their fellow
ornithologicaltype pals while another person's version might be helping
feed the hungry children of the world. Your life, your choice. I also
want to stress that not

everyone has a quest that they absolutely know is the very thing they've
been put here to do. You may just be looking to feel a certain way or to
explore and discover what it is that turns you on. There is no right or
wrong; there's just tuning in to the compass that is your heart and
heading in the direction that it's pointing you. Here are a few last
thoughts for the road to keep in mind as we head into newhabit land: 1.
Stick to this one habit for the entire 21-day program. Do not pretend
the reason your habit is getting challenging or boring or me no wanna is
because you picked something that isn't right for you. Don't convince
yourself that you chose to make doing a hundred sit-ups a day your habit
when what you really should have chosen to do is make a gratitude list
every night. Anything worth upgrading in your life is going to be
challenging, or else you would've already upgraded it. The ever-popular
bait and switch is such an easy out and such a great way to make no
progress ever, because there will always be an unlimited supply of
"better," more novel, and not-yet-boring ideas that you can hop back and
forth among for the rest of your life. Do not stray and thou shalt be
victorious. 2. Get back on the horse immediately if you happen to fall
off. If you're quitting smoking but got a little boozy the other night
and took a drag off a cigarette, or if you ate a meatball at your
friend's wedding even though you're going vegan, forget about it and
start again right here, right now. The key to succeeding in spite of
slipups is jumping back in right away instead of wallowing
(luxuriating?) in your failure and bemoaning the fact that you're not
perfect.

Perfectionism is just procrastination in a fancy outfit.

If you hit pause on your new habit routine for more than a day or two
after a slipup, your old ways will come back so fast you won't even
remember that you were trying to change in the first place. Your old,
bad habits have the home-field advantage. They've been with you much
longer (your entire life?) than has this fabulous new habit you're
nurturing, so they have a much stronger support system, what with muscle
memory, familiarity, and your old identity all rooting for them. If you
give them an inch they will take a mile, so a speedy recovery is
epically important if you drop the ball. Every moment of every day you
have the chance to start over with a clean slate. Success is all about
forgiving, forgetting, tenacity, and getting your ass back on track
prontissimo. 3. If you've tried to adopt or ditch this habit before,
think about what you can do differently this time. And more importantly,
what you can do differently that is wildly outside your comfort zone.
For example, if you've tried in the past to start a regular practice of
swimming laps every morning and have stuck with it for a few months only
to eventually peter out, hire a swim coach who shows up a couple of
times a week and whom you (a) pay a lot, (b) set goals with, or (c) are
scared of. When you travel, research hotels that have pools or pools
nearby so you can keep your habit rolling. Sign up and train for a

race and tell all your friends about it. Go to therapy to explore any
psychological blocks you may have around successfully achieving your
goal. If you want to make this habit stick this time, do it differently
this time. Become the person who isn't screwing around, really identify
as the person who's already nailed this habit, and see yourself and your
swimming habit through their eyes.

When you change who you're being, you begin seeing everything through
new eyes: You suddenly notice awesome parts of yourself that you never
gave much credit to, and you realize that you're one mighty
motherfucker.

It's like waking up and suddenly grasping what your pals have been
ribbing you about for years---you're totally in love with your best
friend. Nothing about your friend has changed; you were just looking at
them through the eyes of your old self, who could only see them as your
buddy. 4. As you move through the day-by-day process, pay attention to
which suggestions work best for you and write them down in your notebook
so you can use them again and again.

Work through the 21 days as often as you need to until your habit's on
autopilot and you no longer need the training wheels provided by this
book. For example, once you finish your first round and get to Day 21,
if you still feel a bit shaky, start over from Day 1 and take it day by
day if that feels appropriate. Or, if you feel like there were standout
days in the course that really helped you and you don't need to do every
single day again, repeat just those days until your new habit is lodged
in your noggin. It's up to you; you know what works best for you. How
long it will take to cultivate your new habit is up for grabs---I've
read studies that say anchoring a habit takes twenty-one days, I've also
heard fourteen days, and I've also heard it takes sixty repetitions. But
in my experience, from what I've seen, each new habit takes as long as
that individual habit takes. For example, after fifty-four years of
half-assing it, I developed the habit of flossing my teeth religiously
every single morning in about fourteen seconds after my new dental
hygienist came at me wearing a face mask and those alarming,
seeright-through-to-your-soul dentist binoculars. She placed various
sharp and pointy tools on a tray while showing me photo after photo of
the diseased and decaying gums of those foolish enough not to heed her
dental credo of "floss or fester." Before that moment I was strictly a
post-corn-on-the-cob-type flosser, or I'd toothpick out whatever got
lodged in there after gnawing something off a bone; maybe I'd share the
wealth and hit the rest of my teeth while I was at it, maybe I wouldn't.
Now I flip over tables and chairs and push slow-moving seniors out of my
way in a rush to get home if I realize I forgot to floss.

I suggest we all head into this journey of self-transformation with
focus, excitement, compassion, and determination, and that we remember
to remain very impressed with ourselves for showing up day after day and
doing what it takes to make the world a better place. And, of course:
Trust that the Universe always delivers right on time.

STOPPED BITING HER NAILS, DIANA, 41 I started biting my nails at around
seven years old when my parents got divorced, so it really took some
psychological work to stop doing it, since it was pretty deeply buried
and related to that trauma. One of the things that really helped me stop
was going to therapy as an adult. I learned to manage depression and
anxiety in general, and also how to stop taking it out on my nails.
Along with going to therapy I started journaling, stream of
consciousness, every day, first thing in the morning. Writing helps me
with all my habits because it keeps me connected to my emotions and to
my psychological self and helps me get all that inner stuff out onto the
page, so I don't have to act it out in these unhealthy and unconscious
ways. In addition to the emotional stuff that was going on, I also had
to address the physical part of biting my nails, and that work needed to
be very conscious too. I decided to start getting manicures every week,
and that became almost religious, like my journaling. I crowded out my
gross old habit of biting my nails with my new habit of getting
manicures. Crowd out an old bad habit by creating a new behavior that
doesn't allow the old behavior to coexist. Not only did the manicures
get rid of the raggedy edges that invited me to bite them off, but they
made me think, Hey, there's polish on my nails, I don't want to eat
polish. Who knows what's in that stuff? Plus they looked so pretty, I
didn't want to mess them up. Then I started being happy with the way
they looked, which was a whole different relationship with my hands. My
hands were always painful, bloody messes and now they looked great and
didn't hurt anymore. I guess I also crowded out the habit of having
picked at, hurting hands with being in the habit of having beautiful,
healthy ones. Anyway, that was all decades ago and I haven't bitten a
nail since.

CHAPTER 4

21 DAYS TO BADASS HABITS

N

ow that we've gotten your mind primed and your habit picked out, we're
going to get down to bizniss. This section of the book is designed to be
used as a course that you move through one day at a time for 21 days. By
slowing your roll and taking it day by day, you'll prevent yourself from
going into overwhelm, you'll stay engaged, and you'll give your new
habit time to sink in. Think of this course as your accountability
partner who shows up every morning with a helpful tool, a new insight,
an impressed raised eyebrow, a hug of encouragement, and/or a loving
kick in the rear. Write down the habit you're going to work on in your
notebook. In all caps. This habit you've chosen is going to become your
obsession, your teacher, your muse for self-actualization. You will
focus on this habit and do everything you can to embody it, and then
once you do, it'll just be a regular part of who you are, it'll become
nothing special, you'll probably stop picking it up at the airport and
sending it flowers because you'll be so accustomed to having it around
you'll barely even notice it's there. And then, because we're all
creatures in a constant state of transformation, you'll shift your
attention onto some newer, fresher, even more compelling habit, and
you'll have the confidence, know-how, and tools to make it yours as
well. Alrighty, let's do this!

DAY 1: YOUR MANTRA OF MIGHTINESS

I

am pleased to report that one of the most powerful tools for habit
transformation is also one of the simplest---the almighty mantra. You
already use mantras all the time whether you realize it or not: I can't
lose this pregnancy weight, I have excellent parking karma, I hate my
ears, Life is good, I always date crazy people. You have already created
the "reality" in which you exist via the thoughts, beliefs, mantras,
habits, and actions you've repeated over and over throughout your life.
You will experience whatever you believe. And you will believe whatever
you repeatedly tell yourself is true.

Which is why ditching lame mantras and consciously creating and
endlessly repeating mantras that are aligned with what you'd like to
experience and who you'd like to become is a powerful way to change your
life. Our brains are just like eager dogs who want to please us. They'll
lap up whatever information we feed them, jump in the car and join us on
whatever road we're headed down, no matter how bonkers our itinerary may
be, and match whatever energy we put out: I have no idea what's going on
but the humans are dancing around and laughing so I'm gonna bark and run
in circles and maybe even pee a tiny bit about it. Training your brain
is like training a dog to sit or come or go lie down. It's all about
meaning, simplicity, treats, and repetition. For example, when I was in
the habit of being broke and finally committed to dumping my old "truth"
of I can't afford it, I began using the new mantra Money flows to me
easily and freely. This new mantra worked so well because the words
struck an emotional chord with me, I understood that money truly did
flow easily to some people, and although I didn't yet know how it would
flow to me, I was excited by the possibility and energized by the
challenge to stretch myself and make it happen. This mantra also trained
my focus to sniff out any crumbs of truth I could find that made me

feel hopeful and kept me looking for more and bigger crumbs, and because
of all this, I felt inspired to say it a million times a day until it
stuck. I also want to mention that Money flows to me easily and freely
sounded insanely lofty and corny to me at first, but it worked like a
charm because it challenged my specific issues around money. (I'm going
to break down how it did in a second.) As we embark on designing the
perfect mantra for you, I want you not to focus on any eye-rolls or
as-ifs that the words may conjure up but rather on the emotions they
cause you to feel and how masterfully they nail your negative talk to
the wall. No matter how far-fetched and stupid your mantra may sound
today, you will give nary two craps about that when you're luxuriating
in the reality it describes down the road. Trust me, there ain't nothing
corny or lofty about money flowing to me easily and freely now that it
does these days. To come up with a mantra for the habit you're about to
create, it's helpful to look at opposing mantras and the unhelpful
beliefs you're currently, and very often unconsciously, lugging around
in regard to this habit. So grab your notebook and let's clean out the
crazy corners of your mind. Sit quietly and imagine yourself embodying
your new habit. Bring up as many details as you can, and really feel
what it's like to be this new and improved version of yourself. What
specific aspects of your day-to-day life have changed as a result of who
you've become? How does your body feel? What gets you pumped up? What
are you able to do as this new person that you weren't able to do
before? How do you describe yourself? How do you look? How does this new
habit positively affect the people in your life? What else has shifted
in your life as a result of this habit? While you absorb all the
specifics of embodying this habit, be on the lookout for the excuses and
objections that rear their heads and write them down the second they
appear. To use my former financially challenged self as an example, when
I decided I was going to get serious about making money, I sat and
imagined what it would feel like to have a consistent stream of
two-thousand- and five-thousand-dollar checks arriving in the mail every
week. I imagined driving the Audi I wanted to buy. I visualized paying
off my credit-card debt. I saw myself leaving huge tips, donating money,
surprising my friends and family with flowers, plane tickets, and
ponies, and I luxuriated in the relief of finally being financially
free. At first, imagining this future felt thrilling, but as I sat there
leaning into the specifics of what having money meant to me, other
voices began bubbling up from my subconscious swamp: There's no way I
could ever make that kind of money. Where the hell would it come from?
The Unicorn Bank? I can't afford to get that car, plus it's going to
cost a fortune to fix and it takes premium gas--- hello?! I'm not the
kind of person who makes money. And even if by some

miracle I did make money, everyone who knows me would think I sold out.
My friends would make fun of me, resent me, or suddenly act like I'm too
good for them and dump me. I'd have to do stuff I hate to make money, it
would be really hard, and I don't trust that it would stick around
anyway. I'm going to be sleeping on a futon for the rest of my life. I
wrote several pages' worth of negative spewage about my nonability to
make money, how gross I felt about money, and how losery I felt about
myself, and I must admit, it was pretty damn sobering and sad. I was
already aware of how helpless and frustrated and unsuccessful I felt,
but lordy lord, to sit and stare at the mental toxins I'd been
unconsciously pouring all over myself and my world---it was quite the
wake-up call. Taking the time to write stream of consciousness about an
area in your life where you're feeling stuck is one of the best ways to
smoke out the sneaky, sucky, hidden beliefs that are holding you back.

I took my many pages of pathos, read through them again, and highlighted
the gnarliest beliefs that triggered the deepest, most upsetting
reactions from me. Then, in order to write my mantra, I followed five
basic rules: 1. Take three to five of the most loaded/heartbreaking
specifics of all your objections and write those down. (It can be a bit
Sophie's Choice, so follow your emotions---really feel into everything
you've written and notice which things piss you off/make you
cry/confound you the most.) 2. Write the opposite of these negative
beliefs, using words and phrases that have meaning and emotion. 3. Start
brainstorming new mantras, keeping your words positive (it's not I feel
so good not smoking but rather I love my pink, healthy lungs). Make
every word count. Make every word loaded with the feels. 4. Keep your
writing in the present tense. 5. Keep your mantra short.

For example, here are the specific beliefs and objections that triggered
me the most when I read over the pages I wrote about my relationship
with money: 1. Making money isn't in the cards for me; it's never going
to happen. 2. It's always going to be hard/fun-free for me to make
money.

3. If I do somehow miraculously make money, it will be a fluke and the
stream will eventually dry up. 4. It's not safe for me to make money;
I'll lose friends and family and be heartbroken.

Once I had my short list of most meaningful/hurtful beliefs, I started
flipping them around to write my new mantra: 1. Making money isn't in
the cards for me; it's never going to happen became I am surrounded by
money, it's all over the place, and it flows to me effortlessly and
joyfully. 2. It's always going to be hard/fun-free for me to make money
became Money is easy and fun to make, I love making money, and I'm great
at making money. 3. If I do somehow miraculously make money, it will be
a fluke and the stream will eventually dry up became Money is my pal,
it's meant for me, it's here for me, and it flows to me consistently. 4.
It's not safe for me to make money; I'll lose friends and family and be
heartbroken became I can have both money and love; my friends and family
will be happy for me; money and love are meant for me.

Then I extracted all the new, positive sayings and edited them down,
taking out words that felt repetitive and/or not as charged as others,
and added new words that had more juice. (Hang in there; this is
important and we're almost done.) My new list looked like this: 1. I am
surrounded by money and it flows to me easily. 2. Money is easy and fun
to make. I love making money. 3. Money is meant for me. 4. I can have
both money and love. I am free to make money.

Now, we could all have mantras that are several paragraphs long if we're
going to fully address all the issues we've got around the stuff that
really trips us up (right? I'm not the only one?), but we want a mantra
that's tiny yet mighty so it's easy to both repeat and remember. In
order to keep whittling my mantra down, when I got to this stage I felt
into it and realized that ease and freedom were the concepts that really
hit home for me---and that were alluded to in every positive statement
I'd crafted. I felt so constricted by not being able to afford anything;
so heavy, stuck, and blocked by the belief that money wasn't available
to me somehow; and so frustrated by how hard it was for me to crack the
code on how

to make it. I mean, complete idiots made money all the time, what the
hell was my problem? I singled out the words "money," "easy," "fun,"
"love," "free," and "flow" because they felt the most charged---they
were light and powerful and liberating and they countered the dark,
hard, heavy feelings I had. I took those words and messed around with
mantras like: Money is fun to make. I love it and it flows to me easily.
I'm free to make money. It's easy and I'm in the flow with it. I make
money freely and easily. I'm in the flow and it's fun.

I kept moving the words around until I finally landed on something that
felt both doable and insane at the same time: Money flows to me easily
and freely. This mantra was like the foot that quickly flew into the
slamming door and kept me cracked open whenever I can't afford it tried
to sneak back and cage me in. Write down as many versions of your
mantra-in-progress as you need to, adding and switching words around
until you hit on something that feels right. Don't try to address all
your negative beliefs in this one mantra---the essential element here is
that your mantra makes you feel energized, hopeful, inspired, and maybe
a little crazy for having the audacity to believe such magnificence
exists for you. Here are some quick examples to help you create your own
mantra: New habit: Flirt with someone hot every day. Objections: I suck
at flirting; I'm scared of getting stuck talking to someone who turns
out to be a drip; I'll be rejected and humiliated; I'll look desperate
and stupid. Mantra: I am sexy, open, and lovable; I attract my perfect
mate with playfulness and ease. New Habit: Quit smoking. Objections:
I've tried so many times already and failed; It's hard; I'm so addicted;
I love doing it; Smoking comforts me. Mantra: I am happy and healthy and
I love being in control of my life. New Habit: Be a better listener.
Objections: I don't even realize I'm talking so much; It's hard to catch
myself; People can be so boring. Mantra: I love to listen and learn; I'm
grounded, aware, and in control of my actions. New Habit: Take action
every day to help save the rain forests.

Objections: I'm already overwhelmed; What the hell can I do that will
make a difference?; I'm an ignoramus when it comes to politics; I don't
know where to start or what to do. Mantra: It's easy to make a
difference; it fills me with joy and I learn as I go.

Writing your mantra is all about coming up with specific words that
counter your negative beliefs and that bring up positive, meaningful,
exciting emotions. This part is key---your mantra must really affect you
in a deeply moving way or else you'll find yourself saying a bunch of
annoying words over and over that don't inspire you to go out and make
the changes you need to make. IMPORTANT MANTRA NOTE: Don't worry if it's
hard to believe your mantra at first---as long as you can feel a ping of
thrill (which is your higher self doing a cartwheel), you'll know you're
on the right track. Simply decide to believe it until you actually do.
Once you come up with your mantra, write it down and say it every day,
all the time. Say it out loud while you're driving, in your mind waiting
for takeoff, while you're walking the dog, feeding your kids, brushing
your teeth, pretending to listen to someone who won't stop talking,
doing the dishes, in a box with a fox. The power is all in the
repetition, connecting with the feeling of excitement that the words
conjure up and basking in the glory of the new reality that's hurtling
toward you. The more you hang out in the energy of that which you
desire, the more effortlessly you will attract it to you.

FINAL IMPORTANT MANTRA NOTE: If objections continue to arise as you say
your new mantra, fret not, this is a good sign. The fact that your old
identity is rearing up and fighting for its life means that things are
shifting and that your old self feels threatened. Use your new mantra as
a club to beat your objections back into their sad little holes.

DAY 2: SET YOURSELF UP

O

ne of my favorite words in the English language is "ease." Even saying
it feels good. It's like letting out a huge, relaxing exhale while
slowly reclining backward as you undo your pants. You know who else
loves the word "ease"? Habits. The easier you make it for them to show
up, the more regularly they will. Like so many things in nature, habits
follow the path of least resistance: Water is pulled by gravity around
rocks, over waterfall ledges, and down streambeds in an effortless flow;
birds ride air currents, updrafts, and jet streams to get where they're
going with the fewest number of flaps; my movers carry my mattress
through the living room, over my new white carpet, and into the bedroom
instead of going around via the uncarpeted kitchen because the white-rug
route takes less time. Put some thought into structuring your new habit
to make it as effortless and as easy as possible while you're at the
beginning of your journey, and you'll be more likely to find yourself
successful on the other end. And please, go beyond the obvious. Get
creative---there are so many ways you can set yourself up physically,
emotionally, spiritually, and intellectually. Sometimes the littlest
things can make the most gigantic difference, so as you're
brainstorming, make sure you consider no tweak too tiny. For example, if
your new habit is to get yourself to the gym at six o'clock every
morning, lay out your workout clothes the night before; put your coffee
maker on a timer so it's already made when you get up; prepare snacks
that you can pop in your mouth when you return home; get everything
ready for work so all you have to do afterward is shower, grab your
stuff, and go. Do whatever you can think of, and because this time is
different, because this time you're unavailable for failure, because
this time you're not screwing around . . . go beyondo. Buy new workout
clothes that feel special instead of schlepping off to the gym in old
sweats and a ratty T-shirt, find a picture of what you want your body to
look like and tape it to your alarm clock, tell a pal that each time you
fail to make it to the gym you will give her three hundred dollars, find
a gym as close to your house as possible, bask in the glory of your
morning workout all

day long, and wear a new ring that reminds you to say your mantra every
time it catches your eye. Push past where you'd normally stop and find
all sorts of new ways to make this habit as easy, and involve as little
thought, as possible. Organization, scheduling, convenience,
accountability to other people, constant reminders, repeating your
mantra, connecting energetically with being who you're becoming, fear of
looking like a moron---all of these seemingly little details will help
set you up for success when creating a new habit.

Conversely, when you're quitting a bad habit, you're gonna want to
create as much friction and lack of ease as possible. Eliminating bad
habits from your life is all about difficulty, inconvenience,
discomfort, fear, loathing, expense, repeating your mantra, connecting
energetically with being who you're becoming, not wanting to look like a
moron, accountability to other people, constant reminders of how much
better off you are without it---the more repulsive and impossible you
make this unwanted habit, the better. Let's say you're going to quit
drinking. Yes, get rid of all the alcohol in your house; pack up and
hide any champagne flutes, shakers, flasks, shot glasses, and pictures
of yourself doing beer bongs in college. But also plan to meet friends
at coffee shops instead of bars; tell a pal that if you slip up and take
a sip, you will give her three hundred dollars each time; experiment
with other fun, nonalcoholic things to drink; go to AA meetings;
research all the disgusting and destructive things alcohol does to your
body; and tape a picture of your cute face on your refrigerator to
remind yourself how much you love and want to take care of yourself. Get
your notebook and make a list of at least fifteen things you will do to
set yourself up for success. This goes for you quitters too---make a
list of fifteen things you will do to make participating in your
ex-habit as revolting and as big a pain in the ass as possible. And then
go out and do them. Today. Tiny tweaks add up to big changes.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 3: TRACK YOUR PROGRESS

H

ave you ever sat on the open tailgate of a truck, pulled your sore,
throbbing feet out of their hiking boots, looked up at the mountain you
just climbed, and thought, Holy frijoles, I was just all the way up
there? Or have you ever stood at the base of a skyscraper, looked up,
and marveled at the miracle towering before you that humans made with
their hands and their minds? Climbing the mountain and building the
skyscraper happen step by step and floor by floor, but when you're the
one hiking or the one hammering, you don't really experience much of the
progress as it's happening. You're in the process of creating it, and
much of the ground you gain is fairly invisible to you until you hit an
overlook on the trail or finish off a substantial number of floors or
stand back when you're done, point at your grand accomplishment, and
regale everyone in earshot with endlessly detailed stories about how you
did it. This is much the same way our habits roll out---day by day,
plank by plank, rice cake by rice cake---until we suddenly realize one
day, Well will you look at that, I'm a size six! It's much easier to
stick to a habit if you feel like you're making progress, but I'm sorry
to report that the majority of habit-building-and-busting routines don't
offer a damn thing in the visible accomplishment department for quite
some time.

But you know what is immediately satisfying? Tracking your habits
(marking each day that you show up). While you may not see the actual
results of the actions you take every day, you will see how many days
you've stayed on course with your new habit, which is a huge
accomplishment in itself. Today I'd like you to get a calendar, an
old-timey paper calendar or datebook, and dedicate it to this journey
you're on. Each day that you successfully participate in your
habit---eat 1,700 calories, walk three miles, say not one snarky thing
to your mother, do yoga, refrain from constant apologizing, learn a

new vocabulary word---mark that day off on the calendar. Use something
ceremonial to mark your calendar with, like a special pen or a gold star
sticker or a heavily lipsticked kiss or perhaps, if your habit's really
intense, your blood. The simple task of acknowledging a job well done is
very satisfying, and being able to look back over days and weeks and
months of successfully doing what you promised yourself you'd do is even
better. Tracking your habits will help you stay the course because
you'll become more invested in your progress (because you can actually
see it), you'll experience the fun little treat of marking it off each
day, and you'll build your confidence because you now have solid proof
that you're in the process of making something good happen for yourself.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 4: MOOCH OFF ANOTHER HABIT

I

make my bed religiously every morning. I can't enjoy my day if my bed's
not all tight and tidy and tucked in. I even make my bed when I'm
staying in a hotel, before housekeeping comes, because what kind of
animal gets up and brushes her teeth with all that twisted, wrinkled
chaos just lying there staring at her? We all have a plethora of habits
built into our everyday lives, and one of the best ways to introduce a
new habit is by attaching it to one that already exists. It's like
carpooling: You're heading that way anyhow, might as well take another
habit along for the ride. Refer back to Chapter 3 and look at the good
habits you're already participating in and see if you can barnacle a new
habit, or several new habits, onto any of them. Also, write a new list
of things you just happen to do every day that may not have made the
original habit list (drive to work, sit down at your desk, pick up your
kids, make lunch, feed the cat, put on your shoes, turn off the lights,
figure out where the hell you left your phone), because these can be
useful opportunities for new habits to glom on to as well. Here are a
few examples of habit sharing to help spark some ideas for you: While
sitting on the toilet in the morning (existing habit), floss your teeth
(new habit). Leave the floss by the toilet so it's right there (ease,
trigger). While you're still groggy, head back to the bedroom and
meditate for ten minutes (another habit added to the carpool). Set an
alarm on your phone, which you've silenced, so you know when your
ten-minute meditation is up (ease, organization). When you're done
meditating, stretch and do a ten-minute workout (another carpool
participant). Set an alarm for this too. If you're a coffee drinker and
want to hydrate more, piggyback the drinking of water onto your existing
coffee habit. Leave a giant water glass by the coffee maker (ease,
trigger) so when you make your morning coffee you first fill up the
water glass and down it. Make a rule that every time you have a cup of
coffee, you also have a giant glass of water. You could even step it up
and hydrate every time you walk by the coffee maker. Leave a bottle of
vitamin E oil by the sink (ease). After washing your hands (existing
habit), rub the oil on your beautifully unbitten fingernails (ditched
habit).

When you get behind the wheel of a car and turn it on (existing habit),
pause for a moment (awareness), take a breath, and remember to stay
present and calm and visualize that an older person going five miles an
hour in a thirty-mile-an-hour speed zone is your frightened, confused
grandpa whom you love (new habit) instead of flying into a rage-filled
temper tantrum (ditched habit). Every time you get a text and go to read
it (existing habit), say your mantra (new habit). While changing into
your pajamas at night (existing habit), run through a gratitude list in
your head (new habit). When you make your kids' breakfast (existing
habit), visualize fitting into the beautiful dress you bought for your
sister's wedding (new habit), say your mantra in your head (another new
habit), and resist putting their leftover French toast into your mouth
(ditched habit). As you walk through the door to your office at your
ho-hum job (existing habit), list the reasons that you're grateful to
this job (new habit), say your mantra in your head (new habit), and
embody the feelings of the new, awesome career that you're in the
process of creating (new habit).

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 5: REFUSE TO PARTICIPATE IN NEGOTIATIONS

I

don't like to play favorites but I find the concept of nonnegotiation to
be one of the most powerful tools when you're adopting a new habit or
breaking a nasty old one. The practice of nonnegotiation involves your
mind stepping in like the stud it is, adjusting its holster, and
politely ordering everyone to please move aside and clear the way while
it takes full control of the situation. Here's how nonnegotiation works:
You decide that you are the kind of person who shows up everywhere on
time, who is open to receiving romantic love, who is full of gratitude,
who has a successful weekly podcast, who fights for the rights of
others, who speaks in a curse-free, wholesome way---whatever your habit
is, own it fully right now in the present moment. Now, when (not if)
temptation rears its head, because you are so no-nonsense and have
already identified as the person you are becoming, the things you used
to enter into negotiations with do not compute anymore (I'll just take
one tiny puff; I'll blow off journaling just this morning; I'll call my
congresswoman tomorrow; I'll share just this one little morsel of
gossip). If you're dumping the habit of smoking pot, you do not
negotiate about whether or not to get stoned, ever, because you are not
a pot smoker, just as you wouldn't waste your time negotiating whether
or not to drink a bottle of vodka for breakfast because it's not who you
ARE. It's like someone making fun of you for being bald when you have a
full head of hair---when you embody who you're becoming, these old
negotiations seem ridiculous and unworthy of a thought, let alone a
response, because they have nothing to do with who you are. The rapid
speed with which you bypass these negotiations is paramount--- use the
zero-second rule.

For example, instead of reading about all the various pizza toppings
they offer at a restaurant and comparing them to the salad options, pick
the salad you're

having and shut the menu immediately. You don't investigate pizza
options because you don't eat dairy. The moment the intruder of
negotiation cracks open the back door, you choose to stay fully embodied
in who you are and kick the door shut. I'm just gonna quickly check
Facebook to see . . . SLAM. Moving on. I'm just gonna hit snooze and
sleep . . . SLAM. Moving on. Ooh, is that a coconut cream pie? . . .
SLAM. Moving on. Awareness, speed, and zero tolerance are called for
here. To recap: Beware of the negotiation the moment it appears, lock
into the perception of yourself as the fabulous creature that you ARE,
realize this negotiation has nothing to do with you, you couldn't be
less interested, in fact, you barely even noticed it because you can't
relate to it at all. Move on immediately to the next thought.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 6: ANTICIPATE YOUR EXCUSES AND DISTRACTIONS Have you ever had a
conversation like this with a friend (or, you know, yourself)? Your
friend: I can't believe Sharon told everyone I had gastric bypass
surgery. Your thought: You can't? She told your garbageman you thought
he was hot after you swore her to secrecy. You said, and I quote, "I'm
never telling that gasbag anything again." Your mouth: That's awful.
Your friend: I know! It was very personal and I trusted her. I'm never
telling that gasbag anything again. Your thought: Check please! Your
mouth: Good idea. So often when we're trying to upgrade our habits or
accomplish something challenging, we fall prey to well-known, and hence
easy to avoid, methods of self-sabotage and then act all, How is it four
o'clock already? Have I really spent the past two hours prepping my
vegetable-garden beds when I was supposed to be memorizing my clarinet
fingering chart? Luckily, the excellent thing about being you is that
you know what your dirty little secrets are. You're the expert on your
A-list excuses and distractions (most of which are also habits, btw),
which means you can be an expert at anticipating your excuses and
distractions and head them off at the pass. If you're making writing for
an hour every morning into a new habit, for example, and you know that
drifting off into the captivating and endless world of online shoe
shopping is your jam, turn off the internet for that hour. As in go
downstairs and unplug it (it's too easy to just turn it on and off on
your computer). If you're giving up meat and you drive past your
favorite rib joint on

your way home from work every day, take a different route. If you're
serious about learning the clarinet and you know you can't resist the
charms of puttering in your garden, take your clarinet to a park/a
friend's house/a practice space or sit in your car and run your scales
there. There are so very many simple ways to avoid the things, people,
situations, activities, wafts of smoking pork that derail you, so use
your valuable insider info and get proactive. And while you're at it,
don't feel gross or self-loathing or ashamed of how intimately you know
your excuses and past failures and weak spots; they're simply another
part of who you are and part of what makes you an interesting person. Be
grateful that you're on such intimate terms with your escape hatches,
because now you can move some heavy furniture on top of them while you
head out to kick some butt. Get your notebook, think about the habit
you're working on, and write down every single thing you can think of
that you'll use to throw a banana peel in your path---screwing around on
Twitter, suddenly making a lasagna, running errands, doing the dishes,
brushing the dog, dusting off your lighting fixtures, alphabetizing your
spice drawer---and block your ability to participate. Please also make a
list of the people in your life who may be too partylicious to be around
while you give up drinking and drugs, too pessimistic to hang out with
while you do your part to help end world hunger, too gossipy to chat
with while you quit gossiping, too small-minded to be around while you
get your new business off the ground---and make a point to limit your
time with them. I also want you to once again sit in the feeling of
eager expectation around your new habit and write down any objections
that come up. We all have triedand-true arguments that we use over and
over to knock ourselves off track, so along with your mantra, come up
with a one-liner that will put your most familiar excuse in its place.
For example: I've tried going vegan a million times and it never sticks.
= Those times were practice; this is the real deal. I have no willpower,
who am I kidding? = We've put a man on the Moon. I can do this. I can do
anything. I don't really care about getting in shape. I'm out! = I love
my body, I love myself, and I love feeling good. I don't need to
meditate/work out/floss/make a gratitude list every day. Once in a while
is good. = This goes way beyond this habit. It's about being in control
of my life, my happiness, my way of showing up in the world. This isn't
doing anything/is taking forever. I give up. = Successful people never
give up. I deserve success. I am doing this.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 7: REWARD YOURSELF

H

abits with instant results are easier to stick to than the habits that
seem to take forever to make any difference. Brushing your teeth, for
example, immediately makes your mouth feel fresh and clean, so it's easy
to do it on a daily basis. Flossing your teeth is more of a slog,
however, because what do you walk away with after flossing? The
occasional bloody gum? Not exactly a big draw. When our brains
anticipate or experience pleasure, they release the cracklike chemical
called dopamine. We become addicted to that sweet dopamine rush (I don't
know about you but I go to sleep some nights fantasizing about the cup
of coffee I get to have the next morning), and we look forward to the
habits, both good and bad, that come with some zing attached.
Unfortunately, most of the habits we're trying to adopt around here
don't really knock it out of the park in the dopamine department, or
else we'd most likely already be participating in them; so in order to
keep ourselves engaged, we have to get creative. One great way to make
even the most ho-hum of habits something to look forward to is by
attaching some sort of reward to it. Think about your habit and come up
with something you can entice yourself with while you're actively doing
it, or that you can look forward to after you've successfully
accomplished it, or stayed away from it, as the case may be. All things
that bring you pleasure are game, even guilty little pleasures---we're
going for the gold here, so do whatever it takes as long as it's not
illegal, harmful to yourself or others, or counterproductive (eating a
tub of ice cream isn't the best reward for sticking to your diet, for
example). Here are some suggestions I've collected from habit-forming
superstars that will hopefully inspire you to come up with a compelling
insta-treat for the long haul. Once you've decided how you'll be
rewarding yourself, write down the details of what you'll do and commit
to treating yourself every single time you perform, or stay away from,
your habit.

When you sit down to eat your healthy, low-cal meal, then and only then
can you check your social media. After writing for two hours each
morning . . . chocolate. Get an accountability buddy who's also on a
quest to go to the spiritual gym each morning (meditating, journaling,
studying self-help books). Send each other an email the night before
with a love note, a quote, a quick encouragement, an inspiring article,
or a video of a cat eating a bag of potato chips---you get to open the
email only after you've successfully shown up at the spiritual gym the
next morning. After a cigarette-free day, you get to masturbate.
Otherwise, can't touch this. After you swim your laps, stop off and play
with the puppies at the pound on your way home from the pool. Watch the
next episode of your favorite bingeworthy show only while running on the
treadmill. Find a friend who's on a quest to build her business too. You
each get points for the number of sales calls you make each day. At the
end of the week, whoever has the most points takes the other out for
dinner. After successfully participating in your "stranger-a-day"
commitment to flirting with one new hot person per day, blast your
favorite song and think about how hot and sexy and lovable you are.
After an entire day of successfully not complaining, take a hot bath
with all your fancy bath salts and candles and perhaps a barricade in
front of the door so your kids can't get in and disturb you.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 8: SURROUND YOURSELF WITH GREATNESS, HUMAN AND OTHERWISE

W

hen I was seven years old, we took our first big family trip to my dad's
hometown of Naples, Italy. The majority of our relatives still lived in
the cluster of houses where my dad grew up, a compound of sorts built
into the side of a mountain overlooking the Bay of Naples. The
experience of flying across the ocean in a plane with two decks
(hello!), getting to stay up as late as we wanted every night (hello
again!), and tasting my first sip of wine (disgusting), offered to me by
a woman (my aunt) who looked just like my dad (same huge nose), was
staggering. But the thing that really blew my tiny mind was my nonno's
chicken coop. Right there, on the edge of the communal Sincero vegetable
garden, was a little henhouse complete with roosts for the birds to
sleep on, a tiny fenced-in yard, and a nesting box where they laid eggs
that rolled down a ramp and into a padded crate. I sat in that stinky
hut and stared at that crate, motionless, for hours each day, waiting
for a hot, blue egg to magically appear, and then I'd run screaming up
to the house waving it over my head like a live snake. I could not
believe my parents never told me: Regular people can have chickens. Real
chickens that lay real eggs. Regular. People. Like. Me. Immediately upon
our return home I found the perfect place in our yard for a coop (shady,
far from the swing set so they wouldn't be disturbed, visible from my
bedroom window so I could keep a twenty-four-hour watch). I spoke of
nothing else, drew and redrew plans for the structure, and after endless
tearful and persistent negotiations, my parents finally brushed me off
with a barely acceptable "Fine, when you're fourteen you can have a
chicken coop." They were, of course, counting on the fact that I'd lose
interest by then, and foolishly scoffed at my threat to take legal
action if they didn't honor the contract that I wrote up and made them
sign. The fact that my parents were correct and I ended up being more
interested in boys than chickens by age fourteen is beside the point. I
spent the next few years obsessed with all things raising chickens,
wrote a paper for my Earth Science

class on the endlessly fascinating cloaca (one hole, so many jobs!), and
made a chicken coop diorama that hung above the fish tank in our
playroom for years. Having that experience in Italy woke me up to
possibilities and parts of myself that I didn't know existed before
then, which is why I will now encourage you to be very aware of, and
proactive about, the environments you put yourself in whilst cultivating
your new habit. We are enormously influenced by who and what we surround
ourselves with; our environment can make or break us faster than almost
anything.

If you want to stop gambling and you hang out at Gamblers Anonymous
meetings, for example, you're much more likely to be successful than if
you try to stop gambling and still hang out with poker obsessives and/or
at casinos. No duh, right, but . . . how are you hanging? If you want to
be happier and more optimistic, hang out with happy, optimistic people
and pay attention to how they speak, think, perceive the world, and
react when the stray dog they picked up along the highway chews a hole
in their car seat. If you want to get into the habit of doing something
every day to help the planet, put recycling bins next to all the garbage
cans in your house, go to and listen to lectures on climate change,
volunteer at your local community garden, or join a park pickup day.
Insert yourself in any environmentally conscious environment where you
can not only help out but where you can be around like-minded people who
will give you even more ideas on how you can make a difference.
Remember, you want to make your good habits easy to participate in and
your bad habits a pain in the butt, and making smart choices about your
environment is one of the most effective ways to do this. Because we're
only interested in you succeeding at your habit, and not at all
interested in you succeeding at being overwhelmed, please start by
picking one aspect of your surroundings in each of the four environments
below and commit to upgrading it. If you have the time and enthusiasm to
do more, go for it, but start with making one change in each area. And
please write down the changes you're going to make, include the details
of who, what, where, and when, and then go make it happen. YOUR HUMAN
ENVIRONMENT

Pick a stellar human being who is currently where you desire to be in
regard to your habit (or beyond) and hang out with them on a regular
basis; become

accountability partners; or hire them as a personal trainer, a coach, a
workout buddy, someone who guards your refrigerator and sounds a
bullhorn every time you open the door. Or take a class, join a support
group, or go to a seminar and make as many connections as possible.
Extra credit: While you're upgrading your posse, limit your exposure to
people who will knock you off track, tempt you to stray, or throw a wet
blanket on your enthusiasm. You know who they are. Tell them you're
really busy. YOUR PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

Hang up pictures that remind you of the body you're working toward, the
trip you'll take when you make the money, the soul mate you're calling
in, the mountain you'll climb when you're in shape, the candidate you'll
help get elected. Go test-drive the car you'll buy, walk through the
part of town you'll live in, stare at the marquee that your name will be
on, strut around in the cowboy boots you'll buy and strike a pose for
everyone in the shoe store. Clear out a space to exercise in, to
meditate in, to paint in. You want your surroundings to mirror back to
you the kind of person you're becoming, so make them as inspiring,
welcoming, and good-looking as possible. YOUR SPIRITUAL ENVIRONMENT

Join a meditation group, listen to guided meditations, read inspiring
books, do kirtan, yoga, or transcendental meditation. Take at least five
minutes every day to get quiet and go inward. Silence your mind and sink
into the understanding that you are a hugely powerful creature able to
make manifest anything you set your mind to. Breathe. Shut yer piehole.
Imagine light running down through your head and out your feet. Allow
the Universe to flow through you. Get your doubts, fears, and negative
self-talk out of the way. Taking five minutes every single day to
connect to your higher self can make all the difference in the world.
YOUR EMOTIONAL ENVIRONMENT

Listen to music that pumps you up and makes you happy. Read, watch,
participate in, and listen to things that make you laugh, give you big
ideas, boost your confidence, educate you, inspire the crap out of you,
fill you with joy, put a skip in your step. Surround yourself with
pictures of the people in your life who love you. Do things that feel
good to your body, talk about yourself and others fondly, hang out with
people you love, pet cute animals, walk around in nature,

ponder the sky, surround yourself with things and people and sounds and
smells and tastes and sights that delight you and build your confidence.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 9: CREATE A RITUAL

I

went to college with this guy named Dave. One day I walked into his dorm
room to find him sitting at his desk all dressed up in a suit and tie,
shiny shoes, hair just so, maybe even some cuff links. He had a bunch of
open textbooks in front of him and appeared to be studying. I instantly
chastised myself for not knocking, as this was clearly a private, odd,
and awkward moment, but Dave was unfazed. "I've got a big economics test
tomorrow," he explained. "I find I focus better if I get dressed up. You
gotta look good to be good!" I was utterly blown away by such an
advanced and respectable commitment to success. Especially since I no
doubt had a big test the next day too and was probably there to buy pot
from his roommate. Ritual is an ancient and powerful practice used to
pray, give thanks, and mark such important milestones as weddings,
deaths, quinceaÃ±eras, harvest seasons, bat and bar mitzvahs, full moons,
high tides, and, according to Dave, big economics tests. Rituals bring
purpose, renewal, ceremony, and celebration to our lives and can be very
helpful to you as you hone your habit. For starters, rituals can help
you focus on and engage more deeply with what you're doing. One of the
reasons some people light a candle when they sit down to meditate is
because it marks the beginning of an important event, pulls their focus
toward what they're about to do, and acknowledges their forthcoming
conversation with the almighty Universe as the big fat deal that it is.
Without lighting the candle, they might be tempted to just plop on down
in the middle of a busy day with this thought in the back of their mind:
Welp, I may make it through the whole twenty minutes of meditating, I
may not. The candle represents commitment, focus, respect, not screwing
around. Rituals around our habits also act as nods of appreciation. They
communicate that we're taking ourselves and our commitments seriously.
It doesn't matter if your goal is to stop burping out loud or if you're
taking daily steps to help end human trafficking; you must consciously
honor the fact that you're showing up for yourself and that this is a
sacred act.

The more you appreciate yourself, the more likely you are to stick to
habits that are good for you and lose the ones that aren't.

I've heard that Tom Cruise has a ritual of beating his chest and
hollering about how awesome he is before he goes on camera, to psych
himself up. Some families hold hands and say grace before eating to show
thanks. Certain Native American tribes perform dances to call for rain.
My dog sits at my feet, solemnly bows his head, places a paw on my knee,
and prays to the God of Walks. Here are some examples of rituals to help
inspire you to come up with the perfect one for you and your habit: If
you're getting into shape, look at your body in the mirror before your
workout, appreciate all it does for you, and thank it for its faithful
service all these years. If you're studying French every day for an
hour, make a special cup of coffee or tea or pour a glass of juice to
mark the beginning of your session. After you take your first sip, say
out loud "Je suis amazeballs." If you're getting into the habit of being
more present, every time you sit down to eat, pay attention to each bite
of food you take, chew slowly and taste all the flavors, feel the
nutrients nourishing your body when you swallow, and be tearfully
grateful that you have the great gift of food to feed yourself and the
teeth to chew it with. If you're quitting smoking, take three deep
breaths every morning and visualize your happy, healthy lungs getting
even happier and healthier. Do this also when you get a craving. If
you're making a habit of being more loving and appreciative of your
partner, put on a bracelet, a pair of earrings, or a watch each morning
to acknowledge your open heart, your gratitude for all the amazing
things they bring to your life, and your intention to love them like
they ain't never been loved before. If you're walking to work every day
with a friend, come up with a special handshake you greet each other
with that acknowledges your commitment to your health and your
friendship. If you're quitting the habit of biting your nails, move a
ring from one hand to the other each morning to announce a new day of
victory. If you're getting into the habit of becoming more aware, kind,
and compassionate, carry a special rock in your pocket to remind
yourself to connect with your heart. If you're getting into the habit of
writing a gratitude list every morning or evening, sit down slowly, feel
your butt hitting the chair, and recognize that your body is presently
on a planet whizzing through infinite space and that you are about to
harness the profound power of gratitude with your magic pen.

Saying your mantra every day is also a ritual. Let's go ahead and do
that right now.

DAY 10: FOCUS LIKE A FIEND

M

any moons ago when I lived in Manhattan, a friend of mine and I were
sitting on a park bench eating lunch. We were so busy talking that we
didn't notice the alarm that was going off at the bank right across the
street from us, and it wasn't until the noise suddenly stopped, after
blaring away for a good fifteen minutes, that we finally came to and
thought, Wow, it's so nice and quiet! We were so used to noise and chaos
that the silence was more alarming to us than the alarm. That was the
moment I realized, You know, I reckon it's about time I moved out of the
city. We get into the unconscious habit of accepting thoughts and
beliefs that literally cause us alarm, hold us back, and make us feel
terrible about ourselves. We treat these thoughts and beliefs as if
they're the truth---I'm a fraud; I'm unlovable; My memory sucks; I'll
always be overweight; Nobody listens to me; I have a face like a
foot---until we come to and realize, Hey, wait a minute, these beliefs
stink. I have the power of choice. I'm gonna train my focus on beliefs
and thoughts that bring me joy, success, and peace instead. As discussed
in Chapter 1, what you focus on you create more of, so as you master
your new habit, it's important to adjust and strengthen the mighty lens
of your conscious mind to make sure it's serving you well. This is why
we're dedicating today, all day, to sharpening the profoundly
transformational tool known as your focus. All day today, be a
helicopter parent to your brain and strictly monitor what you tune in
to. Tie a string around your wrist, draw an eye on the back of your
hand, put notes all over your house to remind yourself that today is the
high holy day of positive focus, and: 1. Commit to finding things in
your environment that reinforce your new identity. For example, choose
to notice all the different kinds of people who are in great shape if
you're starting a habit of regularly working out. If you're getting into
the habit of being in a healthy relationship, be on the lookout for
happy, loving couples. If you're quitting dairy, zero in on all the
incredible dairy-free options in the supermarket, as well as all the
other delicious foods that don't involve dairy that you get to eat. If
you're getting in the habit of saying only good things about yourself,
notice all the reasons you're so staggeringly special and really hear
and digest the compliments other people give to you. Or if you're

giving up junk food, revel in the glory that is a perfectly ripe peach.
Build a new foundation of proof that this habit of yours is possible,
available, and basically stalking you right now. 2. Focus on the fact
that you're doing yourself a favor rather than feeling like you're
denying yourself something. For example, instead of focusing on how
you'd love to lie in bed all morning, acknowledge how much you're
improving your life by getting up early to walk before work. Instead of
getting caught up in your craving for bread, be proud of yourself for
dodging the bloating that haunts your relationship with wheat. In order
to refrain from explaining to your bestie, in colorful detail, what a
chowderhead your stereoblasting, nocturnal neighbor is, celebrate your
choice to talk about meaningful things, not the jackassery of others,
during your precious time with her. Think about all the pluses of
participating in your new habit, write them down, and notice what a
great friend you're being to yourself. 3. Make a section in your
notebook where you'll keep track of how it feels when you enjoy your
habit, and be on the lookout today for these moments. No matter how dull
going through the motions of your habit may seem, there will be times
when it's enjoyable. When I meditate, for example, I sometimes feel a
twinge of excitement in my gut: Holy crap, I'm hanging with the big guy!
When flossing my teeth, I realize that I'm cleaning them, that I'm a
good person who cares about her gums, that I've trained myself to do
something that's boring . . . and it feels good. I tend to feel
excitement in the base of my stomach, and I want you to figure out not
only where you connect physically to the emotion of joy but what
thoughts are running through your head when joy happens in relation to
your habit. Write down the specifics in your notebook and call up these
details ---run the words through your head and put a hand on the place
in your body---before or while you participate in your habit. This will
help you stay the course when you really don't feel like it, and the
more you repeat this exercise, the more automatically you'll associate
the feelings of joy and anticipation, instead of boredom/dread/laziness,
with your habit. 4. Pull back and focus on the bigger picture. It's so
easy to get caught up in the drama and minutiae of our lives, but we
always have the choice to see things from a more expansive, far more
profound viewpoint. If you found out your best friend hooked up with
your boyfriend or girlfriend, for example, you'd probably stew on it
rather animatedly for a long while. But let's say that at the peak of
your stewing you narrowly escaped a shark attack or somehow survived a
plane crash---suddenly you'd see things from a different perspective and
your romantic situation wouldn't be such a big fat deal anymore. Your
gratitude for simply being alive would take center stage, and images of
the two of them naked in bed together, while understandably unappealing
and painful, would start fading into the background. Luckily, you don't
have to suffer a harrowing experience to pull back and appreciate your
life; you just have to remember to make the choice. Widen your scope and
appreciate that this day-to-day habit exercise isn't just about this one
day but rather that it affects your whole life. All your good habits add
up to you being the best version of yourself.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it,

become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right before
you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 11: TAKE TINY BITES

W

hen I'm writing something large and lengthy, I have this bananas habit
of stopping myself right when I realize that the words are rolling and
I'm in the flow---I immediately stand up and get a cup of coffee; check
my email; decide I should learn to play the trumpet, right now; clean
out my garage; or build a tree house. It's Self-Sabotage 101, but
thankfully I'm aware of it, so I've learned to keep my need to distract
myself in its cage by chunking down my time. I set an alarm for twenty
minutes on my phone and during that time I'm unauthorized to get up and
pee, snack, check a text, doodle a doodle, basically do anything other
than write, no matter how much I squirm. Then I take a little break.
Then I set the timer for another twenty minutes. Sometimes, once I've
calmed myself down and proven that I won't burst into flames if I focus
on writing, I start upping my time chunks to twenty-five minutes, thirty
minutes, etc. Sometimes I stick with twenty-minute chunks all day long.
It's not the size of the chunks that matters, it's the fact that I take
them seriously and refuse to budge. And taking a break isn't mandatory,
btw; if I'm in the flow, I keep writing past my chunked-out time, OMG
check it out, I'm still writing and I don't even have to be. How is this
even happening?! I know that if I start treating my time chunks as
anything less than what they are---the collective building blocks of my
entire reality---and allow even the weensiest excuse to squeak its way
in and squander my minutes, I am screwed. All the little moments in our
lives add up to the whole of who we are.

Our tiny moments decide if we're generally successful or unsuccessful,
if we're healthy or unhealthy, if we're happy or unhappy, if we sit down
to write an entire book or merely eke out a helpful pamphlet. Get into
the habit of treating the stepping-stones to your success like the great
leaps forward that they are if you want to find yourself standing in a
reality you're extremely psyched about.

Plus, come on, twenty minutes---how hard is it to do anything for twenty
minutes? Our dear sweet brains go into overwhelm so easily, especially
when we set out to make positive changes in our lives. Why does it seem
like there's always so much to DO? On top of all the things I'm already
doing, now I have to journal and focus and say my mantra and lay out my
clothes and haul my ass to the gym on time every day? Adopting new
habits can seem daunting, especially if you're going for something
that's really shifting a way of being that you've been participating in
for the majority of your life. This is why the practice of taking things
one day at a time is so magnificent and liberating: It takes the drama
of forever out of the equation and allows us to more softly put aside
old ways of being as opposed to dramatically chopping them off. It also
allows us to step back and practice imperfection, process, and patience
by acknowledging that change takes time. You will have good days, and
you will have bad days; the key is to stay focused on the good and to
forgive the bad. Take a moment now to think about your habit and come up
with a way to shrink it down into a tiny, bite-sized task or chunk of
time. Here are a few examples to help spark some ideas: Sit and write
just one page of your book. Swim just one mile this morning. Practice
piano for just five minutes. Next time you sit down do it for seven
minutes. Then ten. Say not one bad thing about anyone throughout your
entire lunch date with your friends. Do just ten sit-ups. Next time do
twelve, then fifteen. Make just three sales calls before getting up from
your desk. Refrain from cursing just for today. Floss your teeth just
this morning. Leave your phone in the cupboard just for tonight while
you enjoy dinner with your family.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 12: TAME YOUR TRIGGERS

O

n Day 5 we discussed becoming unavailable to participate in
negotiations. Today we're going to take that one step further by not
only refusing to negotiate but by using the negotiations to trigger a
positive activity or thought. Now the urge to negotiate will go from
being a negative temptation to a positive reminder. For example, when
the craving for a cookie seizes you, use your desire to negotiate, or to
indulge in an exception, as a cue to drink a big glass of water. When
you start negotiating about blowing off your morning meditation, use
your squirminess as a reminder to say your mantra five times before
sitting your butt down to meditate. Instead of opting out of your
volunteer gig as a reading tutor, use your longing to be lazy to
reinforce your commitment; use the impulse to call in sick as a trigger
to conjure up a mental image of the excited little faces on the kids
when a new word sinks in and they suddenly "get it." When you're gripped
by the temptation to stand by the cheese platter at a party and pop
cheddar cubes into your mouth, visualize your unwanted weight melting
off your body. If the urge to make a self-deprecating joke comes up, pay
someone a compliment, yourself included. They key is to have a specific
replacement in mind so that when, not if, you're tempted to stray,
you're ready. Come up with a positive activity or thought, write it down
in your notebook, and whip it out the next time a negotiation has the
audacity to approach you and your habit. You have a choice as to how you
receive whatever input comes your way. Make the conscious decision to
use your triggers as positive reminders, not as habit killers.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 13: REMEMBER TO REMEMBER

T

oday we're celebrating the fact that you're more than halfway to
completing your 21 days by taking a moment to remember what a powerful
creature you are. Let's start by appreciating what you've accomplished
over these past few weeks: You've shown up over and over again; you've
learned about your strengths and weaknesses; you've gotten specific
about your desires, thoughts, and actions; you've opened yourself up to
failure; you've positioned yourself for success; you've taken
responsibility for your own happiness; you've decided to create what you
want; you've cast asunder your tried-and-true excuses; you've gotten
uncomfy; and you've shown that you believe in yourself and love yourself
enough to do what it takes to change your life. You can literally
accomplish anything you set your mind to. It doesn't matter how many
times you've messed up, because your failures and face-plants are all
part of your journey.

You get to choose whether you perceive your mistakes as proof that
you're a moron or proof that you're in the game or proof that you had a
lesson to learn or proof that you're growing or proof that you stuck
with it anyway or proof that you're never gonna let that happen again.
You understand that where you choose to place your focus determines how
you perceive your reality, and while you sometimes lose sight of this
truth, you're getting better and better at remaining aware. Remember
that your desires were given to you because they're meant for you.
Remember that you were given the means to make manifest these desires by
believing in the not yet seen, by focusing your thoughts and words on
the hollerings of your heart instead of on your fears, by surrounding
yourself with extraordinary people, by consciously shifting your habits
to align with who you're becoming, and by repeatedly taking action that
makes you groan a bit.

You are part of an infinite Universe---you are mighty and magnificent,
and to think that you can't or shouldn't or don't deserve the desires
that light up your heart is as ridiculous as a tree thinking it
shouldn't grow or the sun thinking it shouldn't set or a sheep thinking
it shouldn't bleat. When you step it up and decide to create awesome
habits, you are reminding yourself (literally resetting your mind) of
who you truly are.

You are here to blossom into the most authentic, joyful, bright, shiny
version of yourself, and by doing this you not only live a far more
merry life than you would sad-sacking away in the shadows but you shine
light on everyone in your orbit. By being your best self, you light a
fuse within others, inspire them, and show them what's possible for them
too. Congratulations. A million thanks. Please keep the torch lit.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 14: SPEAK IT INTO BEING

A

nyone who thinks words aren't powerful never knew my high school
basketball coach. She could talk anyone into anything, including my
sixfoot-tall, basketball-hating freshman self into being on her varsity
team. As someone who excelled at being neither popular nor coordinated,
I was terrified to be around those older girls while putting my gangly
lack of athletic ability on display. My skill for accidentally bouncing
the ball off my sneaker and shooting at the wrong basket was of no
concern to my coach, however. All she saw was a girl human with octopus
arms who was taller than most of Westchester County. Adult men included.
"Rebound and pass. Do not dribble, do not shoot, just get the ball and
pass it. You're our secret weapon, Sincero, you will make us state
champions!" Her pep talks also included such intoxicating words as
"star," "special," and "pizza parties," so in spite of my excruciating
shin splints and the new nicknames that I knew my unlikely sports career
would inspire from my bullies (Lurch, Gigantore, Sigmund the Sea
Monster), I spent the better part of my freshman year loping up and down
the basketball court in my ill-fitting uniform, my bulbous knees
knocking together on my skinny legs like coconuts. I somehow managed to
make it through the entire season, and I might have let her sucker me
into joining the following year had she not completely blown her
credibility by convincing me, against my protests, that it would be a
great idea to dress up as Big Bird for Field Day. Suffice it to say,
towering over my costumed classmates as we marched onto the football
field wearing nothing but bright yellow tights, a leotard covered in
feathers, and a beak fashioned out of a traffic cone was not something
my tenuous social status could withstand. Having officially reached my
threshold for humiliation, I finally became immune to my ex-coach's
advances, and the varsity girls' basketball team wound up two coconuts
short of making it to state the next year. I've also been talked into
buying a gigantic television that I neither needed nor wanted; I
convinced my little sister that my parents adopted her from the scary,
drunk guy who hung out on the deli wall in town; and most of us have, at

least once in our lives, gone into a salon for a trim and left with a
mortifying hairdo that the pushy hairdresser insisted would look
fabulous. Watch your words. And everyone else's.

Your words anchor in your reality, so if you talk about how lazy you are
or how much you suck at remembering people's birthdays or how you love
love love that cigarette with your coffee or how you have no willpower,
so it shall be. Today I'd like you to focus on the words that come out
of your mouth and that roll around in your head. Again, if you need a
visual cue to jar you out of robotic thinking mode, tie a string around
your wrist or leave notes around your house or put a sticker on your
phone---whatever helps you remember that today, yer all about the werd.
You've been saying your mantra every day. How else can you employ words
to support the new you? Well, I'll tell you. Start by getting into the
headspace once again of the person you're becoming and imagine yourself
speaking as they would speak all day long, like you're a hand puppet on
the end of their arm. What would my habit hero say? Then please do the
following: Be on the lookout for the following phrases: I can't I wish I
want I will I suck at I'm trying to I hate And replace them with these
phrases: I love I can I do I am I create I excel at I'm so grateful I
Notice any habitual ways of speaking and thinking that don't represent
the big, badass new you and knock that shit off. And while you're at it,
replace the negativity with opposing, empowering words and thoughts.
Using the powerful phrases listed above, write down three things that
the person you're becoming would say and find a way to use those phrases
today.

Extra points if the phrases contradict something the old you would say.
Be intentional about the words you receive. If you're exposed to any
toxic, icky, or bullying words that might throw you off track, turn off
the television, put down the paper, close the document, remove yourself,
ignore it, or if you're stuck in the presence of a negative blowhard,
drown them out by repeating your mantra over and over in your head.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 15: CULTIVATE YOUR CONFIDENCE

C

onfidence means to confide in yourself, to trust in your own strength
and smarts, to believe that I got this. Even when you kinda don't really
know what the hell you're doing, you still have confidence that you'll
figure it out. When it comes to bringing healthy new habits into your
life, you must have confidence in your ability to succeed or else the
complainers and the doubters and the couch cushions and the smoking
sections and the donut shops of the world will swallow you up---and all
your best intentions right along with you. The good news is that you
were born confident. Confidence isn't something you need to go out and
get; it's already who you are. You just need to move your unhelpful
thoughts out of the way and let your true self come blazing through. Any
fears, doubts, or worries you have about yourself and your fabulousness
were learned from the people around you and from your own temporary
failures. They are not the truth.

I suck at yoga; I can't sing; I have a horrible temper; I'm a slob---all
of these are simply beliefs, and one way to shift these beliefs is by
bolstering your confidence, which is what we're going to do today. â¢ â¢ â¢
Here are some of my favorite tips for boosting your belief in your
badass self: 1. Let your body lead your mind. Our minds and our bodies
are total BFFs. They're in constant communication; they share everything
and love nothing more than being samesies. When our minds are full of
stress and dark thoughts, for example, our bodies commiserate by filling
with dis-ease, getting headaches, picking at cuticles, feeling faint and
stumbling around, clinging to furniture. When our minds are happy and
full of hope, we have energy, glowing skin, big dopey grins, and high
fives for everyone. Conversely, if our bodies get hit by a car or bitten
by a snake, our minds fill with fear, sadness, and

desperation, and if we're in shape, well-fed, and wearing super-cute
shoes, we feel happy, sexy, and invincible. All day today, adopt the
body language of a confident person and your malleable mind will follow
suit: walk tall, sit up straight, smile, breathe slowly and deeply, push
your shoulders back, and stand with your feet shoulder-width apart.
Controlling your posture is one of the simplest and most powerful ways
to strengthen your confidence, so please really do this and notice how
much mightier you feel. 2. Act as if you're confident. Revisit this idea
of acting like the person you're becoming and focus on the fact that
you're oozing confidence. Throughout the day today, and especially right
before you practice your new habit, or disengage from your old habit,
imagine yourself in your new, fully confident identity. You're so
self-assured, worry-free, matter-of-fact, poised, and in control that
you barely even register the habit at all. Of course I'm going for a
run; it's what I do and I do it well. What plate of warm cookies? All I
see is my sunny kitchen and my adorable kids gathered around the table
having a snack. I don't even remember struggling to meditate, it's so
second nature to me. You mean to tell me that people actually struggle
with it? Create a character out of the confident person you're becoming
and strut around in their fancypants all day long. 3. Compile proof. Get
your notebook and write down three instances in your past when you
overcame your doubts and proved that you could do something. Write down
anything from getting the job you didn't think you could get to dating
someone out of your league to taking the trip on your bucket list to
moving your entire family across the country to beating your neighbor
Billy "the Brain" McClain at chess. Three. Write them down. See? You're
already confident. 4. Practice. Build your confidence muscle bit by bit
by taking tiny actions. If you're adopting the habit of being a better
salesperson, practice by selling your kids on the many advantages of
going to bed on time. If you're getting into the habit of being a better
listener, spend the first five minutes of your next conversation with a
stranger offering nothing but eye contact, understanding nods, and
investigative questions. If you're getting into the habit of being more
outgoing, practice smiling and making eye contact with yourself in the
mirror. The key is to practice in a safe space, where the outcome isn't
hugely loaded, and to do things that push you outside your comfort zone
but not completely off the cliff. Come up with three little practice
activities to build your confidence and do them today. 5. Make it about
serving others. When it comes to lacking confidence, the most common
culprits that keep us down are fear of looking stupid, being rejected,
and losing everything we've got (money, dignity, friends, jobs,
self-respect). Which is why taking the focus off yourself and instead
making your quest for confidence all about what you can offer other
people is so powerful. One of the best pieces of advice I ever got, from
a speaking coach who was helping me with debilitating nerves before
getting onstage, was to see myself as a conduit for the information I
was meant to deliver (rather than as someone who was in desperate need
of approval). I would, of course, do my best, but it was none of my
business whether or not the audience thought I was amazing or a total
yo-yo. My job was just to deliver the information as best I could. Stand
tall as the you that you're becoming and imagine the gifts you're meant
to give flowing out through your fingertips, the confident energy
radiating out of your body, powerful words spilling forth from your
mouth. See yourself as a conduit for the mighty

messages the Universe needs your fellow earthlings to receive, and
picture all the people you will help by improving yourself. 6. Surround
yourself with cheerleaders. As discussed on Day 8, your environment
greatly affects your perception of yourself, of what you believe is
possible, and of how easy or difficult it will be to refrain from
drinking beer for breakfast. Your environment also greatly affects your
ability to remain confident, so please be aware of what you've got going
on and upgrade where necessary. Read inspiring books; hang out with
like-minded people who think you're brilliant and hilarious; don't hang
out with people who can't see your glory or in places that will derail
you, bring you down, or offer you free cookies with your salad. Listen
to, look at, eat, wear, and participate in things that make you feel
happy and confident; the more consciously you design your surroundings
to bolster your confidence, the more confident you will be. 7. Remember:
Nobody really knows what the hell they're doing. Are some people
generally more confident than others? Sure. Does everybody have an
Achilles' heel of insecurity? You betcha. I can't tell you how many
people have said to me, while trading stories of being in high school,
"I had friends but I didn't really belong to any one group. I was an
outsider." We've all been honing feelings of less-than for decades, but
I am here to tell you that even some of the popular kids in high school,
yes, even Tiffany Fanucci, whom I bumped into last time I was in my
hometown, have confessed to feeling like outsiders. It's easy to think
that everyone else is much more together, more confident, happier, or
taking better vacations than we are (thank you, social media), when in
reality we're all winging it to some degree. This is not to say life's a
competition or a game of comparison; I'm a fan of neither. I just want
to remind you that nobody has it all figured out. Yourself included. So
don't hold your sweet self to an impossible standard. Instead please
appreciate the unique individual that you are and enjoy the learning
process that is your one and only life.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 16: BOOK IT

H

ave you ever charmed your way into a job with no prior experience,
immediately panicked---I have no idea what the hell I'm doing. These
poor people are paying me! Can I go to jail for this?---and then figured
things out as you went along? Or have you ever booked a trip with no
idea how you'll find the money to pay for it or the time to go, only to
find yourself sunning on a white sand beach a few months later, cocktail
and selfie stick in hand, after stubbornly making the time and money
present themselves? Or have you ever had a report due, blown it off for
weeks, sat down to fake-write it day after day, clocked in more hours
than you care to admit freaking out, complaining to friends, quietly
weeping in the fetal position, only to crank it out the night before
with flying colors? When we're faced with deadlines, ultimatums, the
option to sink or swim, even if we can't see any real way to stay
afloat, most of us eventually figure out how to keep our heads above
water. There are few better accountability partners than panic,
nonrefundable expense, and the threat of public humiliation.

Today's assignment is to put something in place that will hold you
accountable for sticking to your habit. If you're starting a habit of
jogging every morning, for example, sign up for a marathon that you will
proudly train for and complete, and make sure to tell all your friends
to save the date so they can make T-shirts with your face on them and
cheer you through the finish line. If you're learning piano, book a gig
to perform at a friend's party or at a club or on Facebook Live. Throw
yourself a big anniversary party celebrating six months of no
smoking---send out the invites, put down the nonrefundable deposit on
the band that will play, ask for the time off from work. Celebrate
thirty days of uninterrupted Pilates classes by buying tickets to an Ice
Capades performance happening a month from now.

Come up with some future sort of something and spend today booking it,
buying it, and inviting all your friends to it, and let the deadline
work its harrowing magic of holding you to your habit.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 17: GIVE THANKS

I

could write volumes on the power of gratitude, but today I'm going to
focus on how it can help you stick to your habit and inspire you to
become the kind of person you're ready to be. As discussed, in every
single moment you have a choice as to where you place your focus and how
you act, and the key to firing up this almighty power of choice is
awareness. Take a moment now and look back on your life: Was there ever
a situation that made you think something along the lines of Damn, I
wish I'd let myself have more fun in high school instead of feeling so
dumpy and insecure and terminally undatable? Or have you ever gotten
yourself all worked up, spun out, and stomachachy over a conversation
you were terrified to have or a move you were scared to make, only to
have it turn out to be no big whoop-de-do? And can you imagine how
incredible it would have been in those scenarios to have placed your
focus on all that you had to be grateful for instead of on fear and
loathing? Yes, in the midst of life's many mucky moments, we experience
fun-free feelings, chaos, and the humiliating results of our terrible
choices. But imagine if you were able to feel all the things and
struggle with the struggles and learn the hard lessons without
forgetting that you may also choose appreciation and gratitude and
grace. Gratitude isn't about denying your difficult feelings; it's about
not being a prisoner to them.

Making room for both gratitude and grouchiness is like looking in the
mirror, unenthusiastically taking in all the wrinkles on your face, and
then remembering to remember that you'll never be this young again; you
don't have to pretend that you love how your wrinkles look, but you
don't have to let them take you down either. You can appreciate how
beautiful you are right now, thank your wrinkles for being proud proof
of a life full of laughter, see them as wisdom watermarks, and notice
all the skin on your face that is presently wrinkle-free.

Take a moment right now to close your eyes, breathe deeply, and come up
with ten things you're grateful for. Think about the people who love
you, the fact that you can read, your health, flowers, the food in your
fridge, music, laughter, life lessons, all of it. Really sink into your
gratitude and notice whether you feel lighter, whether you feel more
centered, relaxed, connected, powerful, loving, and flabbergasted by how
blessed you are. Also notice whether you feel a tingle of joy somewhere
in your body, and if so, put your hand there and spend a moment
connecting with that physical sensation of gratitude. Extra points if
you can conjure up some tears. Think of how different your life would be
if you walked around in this energy on a regular basis. This feeling is
always available to you---you just have to remain aware enough to make
the choice to participate in your gratitude, which is what we're going
to practice today. Write down ten reasons why you're grateful that you
get to do your habit, not that you have to do it, and tap into how this
makes you feel physically and emotionally. As the days wear on and the
novelty of your habit wears off, remembering to be grateful instead of
grumpy can be the difference between sticking with it and throwing in
the towel. For example, you can be focused on how hellishly boring it is
to be all healthy and eat yet another leaf of spinach, tortured by
thoughts of how you'd rather have a loaf of toast, how if you hear the
word "organic" one more time you're going to scream, how stuffing your
face with a burger and fries just this one day is no big deal in the
grand scheme of things, OR you can focus on being grateful that: You
have this miraculous body that knows how to pump blood through its
veins, and can dance, grow hair, heal, feel pleasure, taste a delicious
glass of wine, and knit an awesome scarf. You're mastering the art of
manifesting the reality you choose to live in rather than settling for
what you can get. You get to nourish your one and only beautiful body.
You're privy to the magic trick of manifesting what you desire through
focus and taking the right action. You're changing your life for the
better right this very moment. You're making your neighborhood a happier
place to be by running through it every morning looking so cheerful and
fit and healthy. You're inspiring everyone around you by showing them
that if you can end your love affair with Fritos and take better care of
your body, they can make positive changes too.

You have the power and choice to become anybody you choose to become. I
mean, think about that---that is one hell of a gigantic birthday present
from the Universe, if you ask me. Practice being grateful that you get
to make conscious choices, that you've experienced temporary failure so
you could learn from it; be grateful for your mind, body, and soul and
for the person you're becoming. Use this feeling of gratitude to stay
motivated and to defy boredom so you can victoriously lock your habit
into place.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 18: PAY IT FORWARD

I'

m writing this book as the COVID-19 pandemic tears through the globe,
holed up in my house with who knows what version of life awaiting us all
on the other side. I bounce around from feeling sick to my stomach to
grateful to focused to human to lying facedown under my desk to creeped
out to human to angry to floating in a soap bubble through outer space
to determined to devastated to human. Yes, we all feel many of the feels
all day long, but everything is heightened right now, and for me, this
sense of being human--- mortal, mindful, a member of the human family,
and one with the collective consciousness---is especially large and
center stage, more so than ever. For the first time in my life, every
human on Earth is united in the fight against a common enemy (granted,
with vastly different resources), and the threat of losing everything
from our livelihoods to our lives has stripped existence down to a
single profound opportunity to come together, to comfort and protect one
another, and to help however we can. Where we are now reminds me of when
I lived in Los Angeles and every so often we'd have an earthquake. The
planet would literally shake us awake, yank us out of our heads, and
remind us of the preciousness of life, the uncertainty surrounding us in
every moment, and all the many things we take for granted that we could
be so grateful for. Once the shaking stopped, everyone would leave their
homes in a daze (and usually in a bathrobe) and gather in the streets.
I'd meet neighbors I'd never met before, hug strangers, talk to everyone
like we all went to summer camp together, all of us hovering in this
suspended reality--- the priorities of connection, general well-being,
and gratitude having risen to the surface above the din of our normal
concerns, petty obsessions, and social fortresses. This boiling down of
your focus to what's most important and being in an altered state of
blisslike appreciation for yourself and your habit is what I'd like to
focus on today. It may seem rather highfalutin to attach such profundity
to your goal of habitually making your bed every morning, but your
commitment to bettering yourself, to consciously shifting your reality,
to making manifest the

desires in your heart goes way beyond well-fluffed pillows and expertly
tuckedin hospital corners. Stop and think about all the lives you'll
impact by becoming a better version of yourself. While you're not in
control of how others perceive you or how they act, you are in control
of what you model for them and of the opportunities you give them to
wake up to their own magnificence. Imagine the message you send out to
the world by being a nonsmoker versus being a smoker. Think of how
you've shown your friends and family the power of the human mind and of
how psyched they are to be free from the stink and the carcinogens.
Think of the energy you walk into a room with when you're in shape,
eating healthy, appreciative of your miraculous body, versus being
schlumpy, in denial, and treating your body like a trash can. Think
about what you've taught your children by breaking yourself out of the
habit of being broke and becoming someone who rakes in the dough.
Studies have proven that people feel much more satisfaction and
happiness when they give gifts than when they receive them, and today
I'd like you to use your natural generosity to anchor in your habit and
stay on track. All day today, practice feeling into how much you're
giving to the world around you by becoming the best version of yourself.
Remember that every action you take is like a raindrop in the ocean; no
matter how tiny what you're doing may seem, it influences the whole.
Write down whose lives you're positively affecting by upgrading your
life and how you're affecting them. Go way beyond the people immediately
surrounding you and take into consideration the ripple effect you'll
have on social media, on strangers on the street, on the human race as a
whole. All day today, tap into how it feels to give to others, to
inspire them, and to offer up the proof that if my mocha-latte-lovin'
ass can successfully give up caffeine, you can do anything. Stop, get
quiet, and breathe into the gratitude you feel for who you are, for the
countless gifts you've been given, and for your ability to offer a
motivational kick in the butt to your fellow humans. Go about performing
your habit today with the awareness that the Universe is working through
you. Keep in mind that your desires were lovingly given to you so you'd
have an exciting purpose to carry out during your stint here on Earth.
Remember that by pooh-poohing your excuses and bringing your A game to
your habit, you're shining a light that makes it possible for others to
see their true selves as well.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it,

become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right before
you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 19: STICK LIKE GLUE

A

ny change worth making is going to be challenging because it requires
you to leap into the unknown. No pain, no gain, as 'twere. It's like
when I was busy growing to my full height of six foot one over the
course of several short years in high school---I'd wake up screaming in
severe charleyhorse pain most nights, frantically detangling myself from
the sheets to leap out of bed and stretch against the wall. Once I was
done growing, the pain stopped and my new height became normal,
unremarkable, noticeable to me only when people comment on how tall I am
(every day), when I stand at a concert next to a shorter friend who sees
only necks and backs, or when I head out on the daunting quest to find
and purchase pants long enough to fit me. At some point, your habit will
also become normal, automatic, just another admirable part of who you
are. The key is staying the course through the difficult times, which is
what we're focusing on today. Tenacity is the number-one thing
successful people talk about when asked how they got to where they're
at. They credit their success to repeatedly leaping over hurdles; to
being the last person standing; to rebuilding when it all falls apart;
to turning a deaf ear to the naysayers; to refusing to quit, ever, no
matter how gnarly or boring or humiliating things get. Success favors
the stubborn.

Here are some of the best ways to tap into your most superbly stubborn
self: 1. Anticipate and defuse the discomfort. Change is challenging for
us humans, which is an unfortunate fact considering that the only
constant thing in our lives is change. If you can't beat change, which
you can't, you might as well join it by expecting it, embracing it, and
not being so freaked out by it. Your new habit is changing an old way of
being, so prepare yourself by meeting your bubbling drama with calm
expectation instead of a whole lot of craziness---Oh look at that, I
want a cocktail so bad I'm crawling out of my skin. I'm going to wait
until this feeling passes instead of alerting everyone to how much I
want a drink and how hard this is for me right now. Oh look at that, I'm
still ten push-ups

away from finishing my workout routine for the day. I want to scream but
I reckon I'll just keep going instead because this will all be over in
about two minutes. Oh look at that, I'm about to freak out because I've
been sitting here writing for ten minutes and each word sucks harder
than the next. I'm going to keep writing instead of spiraling off into
darkness and self-loathing because eventually something brilliant will
hit the page.

Drama dies without an audience.

Meet your drama with unimpressed expectation and it will lose its power
to entangle you. 2. Practice patience. I will never forget a sign that I
saw in a restaurant when I was visiting India ages ago that read:
REMEMBER THE THREE TS: THINGS TAKE TIME. I also remember waiting five
hours for a train in Udaipur, taking a two-hour bus ride to Delhi from
Agra that lasted eight hours, and hanging out in some government office
in Delhi for two days to get a replacement visa when I lost my passport.
Things did indeed take time, but because I was so excited to be there
and because everything was new and because sometimes an elephant walked
by, I found it fairly easy to fend off my impatience and revel in the
moment. I'm in India! How cool is this?! The opportunity to choose
patience is always available to us. For example, we can choose, while
waiting for over twenty minutes for our spouse to finish up his damn
phone call so we can leave for dinner, to be patient and think: Right
now he's talking to someone halfway across the country via cell-phone
waves or whatever the hell they're called. Invisible waves that carry
our voices all the way around the world! I'm in the presence of a
full-blown miracle!

Patience is a choice.

Today I want you to practice focusing on the magnificent details, the
many miracles in each moment, instead of focusing on how long it's
taking to drop the pounds or how bored you are by keeping your house
tidy and organized or how tedious it is to go over your finances every
week. Notice instead how your brain is working to lock in the list of
French vocabulary words you're memorizing and marvel at the fact that
you can learn an entirely different language. Notice how healthy your
body is becoming and how good your skin feels now that you're eating
well. Notice how tight your butt cheeks are getting now that you always
take the stairs instead of the elevator. There are infinite things to be
grateful for in each moment. Practice focusing on these gifts and on
lifting your spirits instead of twisting into a knot of impatience by
focusing on what's irritating you. Please also stay aware of your
impatient words today. Stop declaring that you're sick of not partying
or whining about how you'd rather take a bullet than another yoga class
or how it's taking forever to get your website up. Conversely, please
also stay aware of declaring victory too soon and setting yourself up
for a crash. Just stay in the moment today by training your thoughts,
actions, and words on being grateful for what is. One last tip for
becoming a master at patience: breathe. Remember to breathe deeply,
relax, and lighten up. Habits take time; choose to enjoy the journey.

3. Find a tool. We humans are famous for our love of tools, and today I
encourage you to look around and see what some brilliant earthling and
fellow habit honer came up with to make life easier and help y'all stay
the course. For example, have you tried using a Fitbit and keeping track
of your steps, if you're getting into the habit of walking more? Have
you looked into joining Weight Watchers or online business classes or a
Zen center or a hiking group to help yourself stay accountable? What
about apps? There's literally an app for everything---exercise apps,
meditation apps, accountability apps, calorie-counting apps, breathing
apps, apps that watch you sleep. . . . See what's out there and download
something to help you. Chances are excellent that you're not the first
human to take on whatever habit you're taking on right now.

Enjoy the camaraderie of knowing that others have gone before you, and
that some are attempting the very thing you're attempting right now.

Be grateful that someone who's already headed down the habit highway
faced the same issues you're facing and perhaps came up with something
to lighten the load. Spend some time researching what tools are out
there instead of trying to reinvent the wheel or making things harder on
yourself. You are not alone and help is all around you. 4. Fine-tune the
friction. Revisit the exercises from Day 2 and see if you can come up
with some way to make your habit easier if you're adopting a new one or
harder if you're breaking a bad one. Really push yourself to come up
with one more thing, because ease and friction are some of the most
powerful tools when it comes to habits. Can you set up a daily check-in
with someone or delete your social media apps or put your coffee maker
on your writing desk to help you stay on course? Please come up with one
more way to set yourself up for success today and put it into place. 5.
Make struggle your pal. The Universe gave you the desire to become who
you're becoming, the means to create what you desire, and some very
creative obstacles to make you strong, to help you learn, and to keep
things interesting. Practice being grateful for every temptation, every
hiccup, every squirm, by realizing it's there for your benefit. Trust
that everything happens for a reason, find the lesson, and appreciate
the opportunity to grow instead of feeling angry or frustrated or sorry
for yourself. You don't have to love swimming sixty laps or chewing on
yet another raw carrot or ordering a Shirley Temple, but you also don't
have to whine about it. Our choices make us who we are, so if you want
to be someone with excellent willpower, get good at choosing to focus on
the benefits rather than on the buzzkills of the obstacles in your path.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 20: SURRENDER

I

recently heard a great story from a former client of mine named Carla
who, along with trying to get her book published and her chiropractic
practice up and running, was struggling with her teenage daughter. Her
kid was lethargic, monosyllabic, and interested in nothing but playing
with her phone, talking to her friends, and sleeping. Carla tried
everything she could think of to get her daughter to engage; she had
countless talks with her, sent her to therapists and nature camps, read
articles, took away her phone, gave it back, screamed, wept, pleaded,
demanded, and grew some premature gray hairs. Carla was consumed by
worry and frustration, and for years nothing seemed to change, until one
day she finally threw up her hands, sent her daughter off to a strict
boarding school, and hoped for the best. I'm not going to pretend I'm an
expert in child psychology (far from it), but I do know that, along with
showing up fully and doing everything we know how to do, we also must
surrender, release the need to control, and energetically make room for
the Universe to give us what we're asking for. Have you ever had an
experience where you're pursuing someone you want to date or you're
trying to get pregnant or you're obsessed with getting on a certain
podcast or getting a foot in the door to some job and no matter what you
try, it just ain't happening? So you finally let it go and stop trying
so hard and all of a sudden the person who never gave you the time of
day asks you out, the pregnancy test comes back positive, the
producer/human resource person calls and asks if you'd come in? When
we're working toward manifesting something that's important to us, if
we're not careful we can, often unconsciously, become obsessed with
thoughts that it's taking too long or that it's not working or that
maybe it will never happen for us. Once you surrender, however, you
unhook yourself from the negative energy of these thoughts---as if
you're being electrocuted and someone shoves you away from the deadly
current with a twoby-four---and suddenly you're no longer held captive
by desperation, doubt, and disappointment, and a whole new world opens
up you.

Carla told me that not only was her daughter getting good grades at the
new school, engaging with the other students, and basically coming back
to life, but her own professional life was suddenly thriving. She said
it was almost creepy--- the moment she dropped her daughter off at
school, surrendered the need to manage her daughter's life, and set them
both free, Carla started getting new clients out of the blue, the money
started flowing in almost effortlessly, and her book, which she'd spent
the past year diligently trying and failing to get published, was
eagerly scooped up by a publisher who was not only a huge fan of her
writing but who specialized in precisely the kinds of books she was
interested in writing. Carla's also on better terms with her kid; the
time apart gave them some much-needed breathing room to reconnect, and
Carla's now back to going gray at a normal rate. Get out of the way and
into the flow.

Today I want you to trade in any doubts, frustration, and impatience you
have around your habit for ease, joy, and trust in the universe. What
you focus on you create more of, so I want you spend the day focusing on
the fact that you don't have to focus on your habit because it's part of
who you are. Do the delicate dance of taking action while also remaining
detached from the outcome by: 1. Acting as if. We've worked on acting as
if you're already the person you're becoming, but today I want you to do
it as you perform your habit (or refuse to perform an ex-habit). As you
go through the motions of your habit, give it as little thought as
possible. Treat it like Oh this old thing? Ignore it. Confidently assume
that of course you behave this way because it's who you are. 2.
Practicing gratitude. Be grateful that you're already who you strive to
be, that this habit is a part of you, that you're effortlessly living
the life you set out to live, that everything you desire is hurtling
toward you right now. Being in a state of gratitude is one of the most
powerful ways to surrender because you can't be in a state of gratitude
and be desperate at the same time. Gratitude puts you in the present
moment and raises your frequency above any judgments about failures in
your past and any anxiety about screwing it up in the future. Gratitude
basically allows you to lean back, quiet your mind, and finally receive
everything you've been working toward. 3. Practicing trust/letting go.
Surrender and rigid control are opposite sides of the same energy.
Control is resistance. Surrender is acceptance. Control is believing you
know what's best. Surrender is believing the Universe is working through
you. Control is fear. Surrender is faith. When we forcefully go after
what we want, white-knuckle it, push push push to the point of
exhaustion, we risk losing our connection to our desires and connect
instead to our fear and lack. What you resist persists---when you resist
the temptation to

sleep in, resist eating a bowl of macaroni and cheese, resist the urge
to binge-watch TV, you are focused on what you don't want/can't have
instead of what you're excited about. Surrendering allows you to detach
from fear and open up and focus on infinite possibility. Again, this is
a delicate dance because we absolutely need to take focused action to
achieve our goals, but we must do it from a place of surrender and trust
and excited expectation. Today as you practice your habit, be on the
lookout for any fear of failure, fear of past mistakes repeating
themselves, or frustration that it's taking too long, and retrain your
focus on more powerful thoughts of progress, your incredibly ability to
change, and the great gift that is your life. 4. Practicing meditation.
Yep, once again, ye olde sit down and shut up is the road to success.
Even five minutes of meditating a day can help you connect to the peace
and power that's always available to you (as opposed to staying hooked
by the distractions and the fear). Close your eyes, keep gently moving
aside all the thoughts that come into your head, and surrender the reins
to the Universe.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

DAY 21: RINSE, REVIEW, REJOICE, REPEAT

T

a-da! Today calls for a celebration. Whether you made it all the way
through the 21 days with flying colors or dropped a few balls here and
there, the important thing is that you're still showing up. Celebrate (I
mean it) by coming up with some sort of meaningful something---run a
victory lap around your living room or go out for a fancy dinner or
announce your success to your social media minions or send yourself a
fruit basket. We've become experts at beating ourselves up for our
failures and yawning in the face of our achievements--- 'tis somehow
nobler to self-deprecate than to self-celebrate---so do let's make the
choice to flip this around right now. Remember, habits are all about who
you're being, so be the kind of person who's in the habit of forgiving
your failures and appreciating your awesomeness. Write down how you're
marking this momentous occasion and then go do it. Today I'd also like
you to read through your notebook and make a cheat sheet of which
exercises worked best for you so you have all of your most powerful
tools in one place---making a bet with someone terrifying, tracking your
habits, leaving your cell phone in the car while you work, or landing a
gig on a cruise ship to perform your as-yet-unwritten stand-up routine.
Get clear on the specifics of each daily exercise that helped you stick
with this new habit and repeat them until your habit becomes a
no-brainer. Maybe you've decided you need to do all 21 days again, maybe
you've boiled your routine down to a handful of exercises, maybe you've
mastered your habit and are ready to fly solo---wherever you're at, the
clearer you are, the more successful you will be. Lastly, please review
your mantra, and if you need to upgrade it, do so. You're no longer at
the beginning of this process, and the words in your mantra that once
struck an emotional chord with you may not be so powerful now that your
habit's been on repeat for a few weeks. For example, let's say your
mantra is Money flows to me easily and freely and, thanks to you and
your not-screwingaroundness, you've anchored in the habit of bringing in
more money on a regular basis. You may not yet be where you desire to be
financially but you've ditched your cranky old belief that it's hard for
you to make money and are now the kind

of person who makes it pretty easily. Go back to Day 1 and feel into
your desire to make more money and see what comes up for you now that
you've peeled back the first layer of It's hard for me to make money.
Maybe now that you've got the money coming in, you realize you're scared
it won't stick around or will stop coming, so your new mantra is
something like Money flows to me consistently and is always here for me.
Figure out where you're at now---new level, new devil---and if your
mantra needs a face-lift, get on it. We're all in the school of life,
and you're spending your one and only shot at being the you who is you
going for an A instead of hanging out on the smoking patio and
convincing yourself it's cool to settle for a B or a C+. That right
there is something to celebrate.

Please say your mantra right now. Say it out loud, say it to yourself,
say it all day long. Feel it, see it, love it, believe it, rejoice in
it, become it, repeat it, and then repeat it some more. Say it right
before you fall asleep and first thing when you wake up.

GOT INTO THE HABIT OF SETTING GOALS, LISA, 36 I always thought goals
were what type A personalities had, and and that's so not who I am. I
didn't want to be pigeonholed into having a baby in five years or
becoming a successful what-the-fuck-ever in two years. But then I found
myself in a bad relationship and I couldn't leave because I was working
in nonprofit at the time and didn't have the money to move out, so I had
to really think about how I could take care of myself and change my
situation. So I realized, Shit, I have to set some goals. I didn't even
realize it but I was in the habit of just taking things as they came. I
was in denial about the fact that I wasn't in control of my life; I
didn't want to face my problems and take responsibility, and as a result
I wound up in a miserable situation. So I made the decision to set goals
and get into the habit of making conscious, smart choices about my life
instead of blowing off dealing with things and just hoping it all worked
out. My first goal was to take a real estate course and pass the
test---did that. Then I made myself commit to one year of this new
career to see if I liked it. I kept focused and was patient and took it
one step at a time. It's not easy creating a new path for yourself. . .
. It's painful and uncomfortable but so worth it, RIGHT?! The biggest
change I made was around my mindset. I am as cynical as they come, but I
actually did a fucking vision board. It's true. I clipped tiny pictures
of things like the pizza I wanted to eat on my trip to Italy and the
house I wanted to live in, pasted them on cardboard---and sure enough
that shit came true. I decided that I could be open to new ways of
thinking, open to exposing my insecurities and asking for help, I could
even be open to yelling I'M READY into the air surrounded by strangers
if I had to. Whatever it took, I did it. It's usually the stuff you want
to do the least that changes your life the most. I set goals around the
amount of money I wanted to make; I made a goal of selling at least one
house per month, starting a 401K, buying a house, traveling, and giving
more money to charities. I started to meditate and send good energy to
myself so I could pull off my goals. I started to articulate my goals
and stopped thinking money is evil. I started donating more. My
selfworth changed in many ways, and I was able to leave my relationship
and have space for myself to grow. Now I'm even more successful than I
set out to be. I actually love my job, doubled my original goal, and now
sell at least two houses a month. I just

took my qualifying broker's license so I can start my own business and I
set new goals all the damn time. Big ones. Don't stop believing. Cue
soundtrack.

CHAPTER 5

THE AUDACITY TO BE YOURSELF

I

remember being in my twenties and hanging out in my Manhattan apartment
with my boyfriend at the time, looking through a giant bowlful of
photographs that I kept on a table in my living room. I'd dumped a
couple of hundred pictures from various parts of my life in there, and
while we sat and drank beers and sifted through them, I was actually
only fake-sifting through them. What I was really doing was sneaking any
picture where I looked sexy or cool or world-travel-y to the top of the
pile so he'd be sure to see it. To my great frustration, however, he
kept digging deep into the bowl, oblivious to my offerings, and ended up
pulling out a picture of me at around age sixteen, standing in my
friend's driveway with ratty long hair, twiggy arms, not a breast yet in
sight, wearing a blue T-shirt that said TO A TENNIS PLAYER, LOVE MEANS
NOTHING. In the picture I'm also eating a bag of Doritos, helpless
laughter exploding through my big, nacho-cheesy smile. I tried to
casually insert a picture of myself onstage wearing a miniskirt and an
electric guitar into his hand. OMG, I have to tell you the craziest
story about this night . . . but he just moved the one he was already
holding even closer to his face to get a better look. "What is so
fascinating about that picture?" I asked, not caring at all. "I don't
know," he said, "there's just something I love about it. I guess it just
really looks like you." This whole self-development thing---upgrading
your habits, pushing yourself outside your comfort zone, expanding your
perception of reality, being a badass ---isn't a competition or some
socially dictated finish line you cross that means you've finally "made
it." Nor is the quest to better yourself supposed to make you feel like
a loser if you're not thinking positive thoughts, or staying laser
focused on your clearly defined goals, or clicking your heels with
overflowing self-love and happiness 24/7 (can you imagine how annoying
that person would be to be around?). All this work is about giving
yourself the room, the means,

the information, the motivation, and the permission to be the most
authentic expression of who you truly are. Being authentic means loving
who you love, pursuing the stuff you're interested in, laughing at the
shit you find funny, and fighting for what you think is right. Being
authentic also means giving yourself permission to change your mind, to
make mistakes, to be a jerk, to beg forgiveness, to be sad, lonely,
stupid, and lazy. True authenticity means embracing your whole self, the
you who's wearing a miniskirt rocking out onstage and the you that's
eating a bag of Doritos wondering when the hell puberty is going to show
up. As you do this work, see the habits that you're cultivating as
opportunities to let the rare gems of your authenticity shine through,
instead of viewing them as proof that you're finally becoming a
disciplined, and therefore more socially acceptable, person. Forming
good habits isn't about being perfect; it's about being more of who you
are.

For example, getting into the habit of writing every morning is about
expressing your desire to connect with other people through your words,
words that are in your voice and that bravely share your wild and weird
perspective on the world with your readers. Getting into the habit of
eating better and losing weight is about your desire to feel lighter,
healthier, and more connected to the physical manifestation of your one
and only self, otherwise known as your body. Even getting into the habit
of doing the damn dishes every night is about your desire to restore
order to your life, to treat yourself and your surroundings like they
matter, to make the world a better, more ant-free place. As you go
through the habit-forming process, you will hit oil slicks on your road
to success---you'll stay snuggly in bed and blow off running on the
treadmill before work and you will erupt into a tirade of expletives
behind the wheel of your car, contrary to your no-being-an-a-hole
decree. The question is not whether you'll slip up but how you'll choose
to respond when you do. Getting back on track with your habit ASAP is
critical, but how about if you also spend the time you usually reserve
for beating yourself up or whining about what a dope you are on
immediately forgiving yourself instead? What if you included, with all
future habits that you embark on, the bonus habit of allowing yourself
to be human and therefore flawed?

What if you had the kind of compassion for yourself that you tend to
reserve for other people?

I've peppered this book with stories about real people who recognized a
habit they wanted to change and got their mindset into a place where
they could attack that goal like their pants were on fire. And while I
love hearing all the inspirational details of how we humans pull off
success, keep in mind that it's easier to see the progression of a
process like habit forming/breaking when you've got the advantage of
hindsight and the ability to leave out the details of the massive
slipups and buffoonery that we all experience along the way. Not only
were these people able to look back and see how their habit anchored in
but they could notice how even some coincidences and activities that
seemed totally unrelated at the time served to reinforce the new
behavior pattern they were pursuing. When you're bravely forging through
this process, you might not be able to recognize the tricks that help
you sidle past obstacles, or how your new obsession with waking up and
charting the progress of the anthill behind your garage is helping you
get centered before sitting down to study every morning. Trust your
intuition, don't question stuff that feels good if it's not harming your
progress, and remember that just showing up and giving it your best shot
is an act worthy of a round of applause. We live in a culture obsessed
with achievement and goals. And while I loves me some good, solid
gettin' 'er done, I do not love it at the expense of our own self-worth.
We need to deny the overpopular trend of smearing fear and shame all
over ourselves and instead celebrate compassion, colossal screwups, and
vulnerability. Think about the people in your life who you love. You're
inspired by them when they do great things, you're blown away when they
face their fears, and you dance around them in circles when they ace the
bar exam. But you also love your peeps for the fact that they don't
realize they have some salsa stuck to their lip and that they cry at
graduations and that they look so scared and lost when faced with
downloading a new operating system onto their computer. Real human
connection happens when we're vulnerable, not when we're being handed a
gold medal. I believe that this natural pull toward vulnerability is why
we literally can't stop staring at babies. Babies are cute and all
(usually; I've certainly seen some that look like turtles or fat truck
drivers), but I think we're mesmerized by how fragile, exposed, and
helpless they are. Staring at a baby is like plugging into the
motherlode of human vulnerability; it's a force so compelling we
literally can't take our eyes off it until the baby's mom yanks at

the stroller, hurries off, and shoots us a look like she's memorizing
our face, just in case. We all have a little fleshy baby inside of us
that we've covered up over the years in order to survive. And while a
world full of adults stumbling around all openly vulnerable and helpless
would not serve anyone well, we've swung too far the other way. We've
made a habit out of being scared and ashamed of these softer parts of
ourselves, which cuts us off from the connection, serenity, and
happiness we so deeply desire. Use this journey of forming habits that
you love as a way to go beyond just the noble achievement of a goal and
to forge a more intimate relationship with your most authentic self.
Understand that embracing who you truly are is about accepting yourself
through all of it---when you're at your most victorious, your most
irritable, your most temper-tantrumy, and your most vulnerable.
Self-love isn't about being perfect.

Give yourself the permission to be, to do, and to have whatever lights
up your heart and practice forgiving your screwups along the way. Loving
your whole self is simply a habit, a habit that's definitely worth
having.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to all you badasses who keep showing up to do the
work. When you change your life, you change countless lives around you,
and you sure as hell have changed mine so thank you thank you thank you!
Thanks to everyone who contributed their personal stories and helped me
write this book---those whose stories I included and those I didn't. For
anonymity's sake I won't name names, but I couldn't have done this
without you and I so appreciate you taking the time to do me this
massive favor. Thanks to my amazing editor, Laura Tisdel, who has
birthed books with me through thick and never thin. I do believe this
time around was the thickest (and yet still so fun)! Thanks to my
brilliant agent, Alexandra Machinist, for always having my back and for
making doing business feel like having cocktails with my bestie. Thanks
to Team Amazeballs: Nate Meltzer, Shannon Twomey, Lydia Hirt, Ciara
Johnson, Shelby Meizlik, Brooke Halsted, Gabriel Levinson, Jason
Ramirez, Jane Cavolina, Cassandra Garruzzo, Hilary Roberts, and Meredith
Clark. Thanks to Rembert and Squiggle Block, the best pandemic pals
ever, for keeping me company and somewhat sane while writing this book.
Thanks to my incredible biological and chosen family for your love and
support over the years. There are too many of you to mention but I'd
like to thank a few in particular who have helped me become a better
writer and speaker and whom I borrow (steal?) zingers from on the reg:
Mom, Dad, Steve, Jill, Bob, Cynthia Greenberg, Tania Katan, Elissa
Breitbard, Kim Green, and Tami Abts. Thanks to Gecko for, among so many
other things, keeping me grounded during all the writing/touring/home
renovation storms. Thanks to Shannon Waldner, my first witch.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR Jen Sincero is a world-renowned author, success coach,
and motivational speaker who's spent over a decade helping people
transform their lives and their bank accounts.

What's next on your reading list? Discover your next great read! Get
personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.


