Designing the Mind: The Principles of Psychitecture Introduction Chapter
1: The Theory and Practice of Psychitecture Chapter 2: Cognitive Biases
and How to Rewire Them Chapter 3: Values and the Methods of
Introspection Chapter 4: Cognitive Self-Mastery and Wisdom Chapter 5:
Emotional Algorithms and the Art of Restructuring Chapter 6: Desires and
the Keys to Modulating Them Chapter 7: Emotional Self-Mastery and
Equanimity Chapter 8: Self-Direction and Its Impediments Chapter 9:
Behavioral Algorithms and Self-Control Chapter 10: Self-Mastery
Acknowledgments Notes

DESIGNING THE MIND First published by Designing the Mind 2021 Copyright
Â© 2021 by Designing the Mind, LLC. All rights reserved. No part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical,

photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise without written
permission from the publisher. It is illegal to copy this book, post it
to a website, or distribute it by any other means without permission.

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction The year is 2084. You're playing a game of four-dimensional
basketball, and one of your teammates makes a backhanded insult about
your free throw skills. Immediately, a few things happen in your
mind. 1. You feel pain. 2. You have the urge to reach through your
virtual reality brain implant and make the guy regret his smug little
comment. 3. Your self-esteem spends the next few days/weeks in a
tailspin, causing you to ruminate over the insult, imagine and reimagine
how you wish you had responded, and suffer. But in the midst of this
process, you think to yourself, "Wait a minute - it's 2084. We have
technology for this." So you open up an application through your neural
interface that allows you to quickly modify your own brain. You sit
through a few mind advertisements, try not to think any thoughts the
government wouldn't like, and then you're in. With just a few brain
clicks, you are able to tell the software to remove your tendencies to
suffer, seek revenge, and ruminate when someone insults you. You even
add a

feature that allows you to actually feel joy when you are insulted and
to quickly respond with a witty and goodnatured retort. Your new
automatic response allows you to diffuse hostile situations and look
like a rockstar, instantly making that awful sting of an insult a thing
of the past. By the year 2084, it is entirely plausible that we could
have a method for directly modifying our brains to remove the
maladaptive tendencies that hold us back. But unless this book has stood
the test of time unreasonably well, you are most likely reading in an
era in which this process will sound like science fiction. We can't just
remove our mental bugs with a few clicks. Our ingrained psychological
limitations are set in stone for the time being, right? We are not as
powerless as you may think. With the right cognitive tools, it is
possible for anyone to make modifications to their own psychological
software: their mind. Our unwanted psychological tendencies really do
break down into what can be compared to software algorithms. In this
case, the insult is an input which triggers a kind of mental program.
This program initiates a distorted thought cycle that causes you to
reevaluate your self-worth in response to disrespect from your peers.
This thought cycle then outputs emotional and behavioral responses which
cause you to feel terrible and react impulsively. Because these
responses were programmed into us eons ago, humans have had a very long
time to study them. Though they lacked our modern technological
metaphors,

ancient thinkers began examining and developing counteralgorithms for
many of our problematic mental modules. These thinkers had the
forethought to write their insights down for posterity, and their
wisdom, however scattered and diverse, is the open-source code we can
use to program our own minds. My long-term goal is to curate and
systematize these tools of software self-optimization and distribute
them to as many people as possible. I want to do the next best thing to
giving you an instant brainmodification implant. I want to provide you
with a handbook for designing and optimizing your own psychological
software. Most people who read books to improve themselves do it because
they want to advance their careers, lose weight, or make more money.
"Why am I designing my mind?" you may ask, "What am I getting out of
it?" If this is you, I will go ahead and weed you out by announcing that
this book will not directly help you attain or achieve anything out
there in the world. It won't turn you into a master of seduction or a
champion of your conference room. It will not get you abs. This book is
for those who find the idea of building a better mind thrilling in and
of itself. It is for those who are impassioned by the thought of
cultivating greater wisdom, self-control, or tranquility - who are drawn
to the philosophies of Buddhism and Stoicism or the fields of humanistic
psychology and psychotherapy. We all want to be happier, healthier,
better people. But only a few grasp

that all of our highest aims can be reached by placing our focus
directly on our minds. If this describes you, you are what we will call
a psychitect. You are among a collective of rare individuals who are
excited by the idea of overcoming the seemingly fixed parts of
themselves. You view the default state of your mind as an invitation to
intervene and transmute. You want to unflinchingly look reality in the
eye and find ways to alter it. You want to live a great life - not a
normal one. If this is you, read on. What do you dislike about your
mind? Which patterns emerge when you examine your life - patterns you
feel have held you back? Does fear prevent you from pursuing your
ambitions? Does jealousy ruin your relationships? Do you allow
distractions to rule your life? Do you have an inner critic whose
expectations you are never able to meet? This book will make the bold
claim that the human condition as you know it - is optional. That it is
possible for you to unplug from your own mind, examine it from above,
and modify the very psychological code on which you operate, permanently
altering these limiting patterns. You will learn to build unshakable
peace and levity into your mind so you can embrace whatever life throws
at you while responding with effective action. You will develop the
skills to think with razor-sharp clarity, overcome your own distortions
of judgment, and cultivate wisdom so you can make the right decisions in
your life. You will learn to build

the habits, lifestyle, and character which will gradually enable you to
become your ideal self. And to begin this process, you won't have to
wait one day for futuristic technology to arrive. You can rewire the
default behaviors, emotional responses, and biases that hold you back.
You can learn the principles and practices for building a mind better
than you ever thought possible, one algorithm at a time. Most
importantly, you can internalize a mindset that will allow you to take
this process beyond what you read in this book. And as you scale the
heights of selfmastery, you will gradually come to resemble the
legendary figures who have unlocked radically superior states of mind.
This is not yet another book promising useful tricks for happiness like
gratitude journals and cold showers or singing the praises of positive
thinking, neuro-linguistic programming, or mindfulness meditation
(although that one will have its place). I will refer to ideas and
techniques which have been viewed through the lens of spirituality. But
every mindset and method you find in this work is rational,
psychological, and empirical. This book is based on the time-tested
insights of ancient thinkers, the science of neuroplasticity, and
findings within cognitive, affective, and behavioral science. It looks
at the ways ordinary (and extraordinary) people can modify the
"software" of their minds to dramatically impact their lives today. The
ways we can structure our minds directly for wisdom, well-being, and
character, and to reach toward our highest visions for ourselves.

The first catalyst for this book came about a decade ago. I don't
remember the exact event, but ultimately, it was what happened right
after that matters. The event was something bad, ostensibly. Some
moderately-sized mistake or setback in my life. I had faced many of
these before, just like everyone else. But this time was different. The
negative emotion which was supposed to proceed from this setback didn't
come - no grieving, no anxiety, no frustration. I did something in my
mind that caused me to bypass the emotion I was supposed to have, and
then I continued on with my life, responding to the event only in my
actions. What I did in my mind was not suppression or repression or
denial, for you fellow armchair psychologists. It was a form of
effective emotional self-regulation, and it turns out the ancient Greeks
beat me to it a couple thousand years ago. No, I was not unique in this
experience - only in the obsession I developed as a result of it. It
became clear to me that this experience was only one example of what
seemed to be a dark art one could master to become immune to problems
some spend entire lives wrestling with - path for continually upgrading
the basic elements of my mind. As I studied the human mind, its
limitations, and its potential, I found a striking coherence. All the
mental problems with which I struggled boiled down to automatic and
systematic mental phenomena - chains of triggers and responses, inputs
and outputs. More interestingly, the solutions to these problems that
worked all fit into the same

framework. I labeled these patterns algorithms, and the sum of these
algorithms became psychological software. Within this software
framework, my mental challenges began to make sense. I started applying
a new methodology to solving my problems - one centered less around
changing my life circumstances and more on changing the psychological
patterns at their source. I found that the problems which once seemed
perpetual could be permanently extinguished. The version of my mind that
once seemed out of reach could be iteratively approached, and
ultimately, eclipsed by new, even better versions. I coined the term
psychitecture to refer to this practice of designing and optimizing the
software of one's mind. And concurrently with my practice, I was finding
more and more evidence within cognitive, affective, and behavioral
science that this framework wasn't just a metaphor. This was actually
how the mind worked. This discipline has grown beyond my initial sights.
Lots of research has confirmed to me that the art of emotion regulation
and restructuring is very real and very effective. But the pursuit of
self-mastery has further developed to encompass three major components:
cognitive, emotional, and behavioral. And the more I reflected on them,
the more I realized that these three domains encompass the core
competencies required for well-being and success in life. Furthermore,
incompetence in any of these three areas represents not only foolishness
and weakness, but what some call evil. All of the "bad actors" in
society can be

explained in reference to deficiencies in one or more of these areas.
This is why helping others to develop selfmastery in all its forms has
become the greatest source of purpose in my life. The self-mastery triad
will provide the organizational backbone of this book, and the chapters
will teach you the principles and practices needed to master all three
realms. I am not the spiritual guru or venerated professor you may be
seeking. My formal background is in the design of systems - physical,
digital, and theoretical. But my most relevant credential is a lifelong
appetite for introspective investigation, ravenous reading, and
obsessive selfoptimization. I don't tend to focus on myself in this book
because I find the ancient teachers, practical philosophers, and
cognitive scientists who have inspired it to be far more interesting. My
philosophical mentors have included Lao Tzu, SiddhÄrtha Gautama,
Aristotle, Epicurus, Diogenes, Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, Seneca,
Michel de Montaigne, Rene Descartes, Friedrich Nietzsche, Abraham
Maslow, Victor Frankl, Aaron Beck, and many more. My contemporary
influences are too many to name here, but you will be introduced to them
along the way. Though they did not use the term themselves, I will refer
to many of these individuals as psychitectural thinkers or visionaries.
I'm no more a teacher of their wisdom than a student. My role has simply
been to study, curate, and synthesize these insights into a

modern framework, which I present to you in the following chapters. You
can join the community at designingthemind.org to receive more
psychitectural insights and to participate in the discussion. This book,
and DTM's growing community of psychitects, represents a living,
breathing body of ideas which will continue to take shape over time. I
invite you to take part in its evolution.

OceanofPDF.com

Psychitect's Toolkit FREE PSYCHITECT'S TOOLKIT

In addition to this book, readers can download a free, 50-page guide on
psychitecture, which includes: â¢ An overview of the basic concepts of
psychitecture and psychological algorithms â¢ A breakdown of 8
psychotechnologies you can start using to reprogram your mind â¢ 64
incredible book recommendations related to self mastery and
psychitecture â¢ A list of 16 websites, blogs, and podcasts that can aid
in self-optimization â¢ Quotes from the great psychitectural visionaries

Just go to designingthemind.org/psychitecture to get your Psychitect's
Toolkit.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1: The Theory and Practice of Psychitecture Mind as Machine In
the past, we humans have learned to control the world outside us, but we
had very little control over the world inside us. - Yuval Noah Harari,
21 Lessons for the 21st Century Every era attempts to explain the human
mind in the terms and metaphors of its dominant technologies. For Plato,
the mind was a chariot. For Descartes, it was a mechanical clock. For
Freud, it was a steam engine. Today, the most common analogue for the
mind is the computer. Although it's true that our brains are not
literally digital computers, built on silicon circuits and binary logic,
the modern metaphor of the mind as a computer is by far the most
powerful and comprehensive one we've ever had. Our hardware is the
brain, the physical substrate made up of neurons, chemicals, and
electrical impulses. Our software is the world of our experience - the
mind. Our sensations,

emotions, and thoughts are all experienced internally in the mind, but
all have physical phenomena behind them and can be influenced by
external events, chemicals, and technology. Our minds don't generate
emotions or cognitions arbitrarily: there are patterns coded into this
software, inscribed by millions, or even billions of years of natural
selection.1 No word we speak or action we take is an isolated event,
however spontaneous it may seem, and the same goes for the purely
internal processes of thinking and feeling. They all flow from a
determined system in the same way the outputs of a computer spring from
the algorithms built into it by its programmers. The reason we cannot
perfectly predict human behavior is that our minds are the most complex
machines ever to exist (so far). They do not run a simple loop, but an
intricate system which factors innumerable inputs and calculations into
its behaviors. The brain, like it or not, is a machine. Scientists have
come to that conclusion, not because they are mechanistic killjoys, but
because they have amassed evidence that every aspect of consciousness
can be tied to the brain. - Steven Pinker, "The Mystery of
Consciousness" The fact that our minds are machines does not preclude
the vast richness of experience of which they are capable. It simply
means that at its core, the ineffable complexity of

human existence boils down to an operating system we can study and
increasingly understand. Furthermore, to compare our minds to machines
is not to suggest that they have been set in stone by evolution and are
now doomed to iterate themselves perpetually until death. Our genes
don't determine everything we will become, but they do determine how
much we can be shaped by experiences during early childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood, which, for all, is quite a bit.2 It is
possible for you to alter your brain in ways that result in functional
changes. Modern medicine has developed drugs and surgical procedures for
treating diseases, disorders, and injuries to the brain. Prescription
drugs are available to treat everything from ADHD to obsessive
compulsive disorder to severe anxiety. Implants can even be placed into
the brain to help rehabilitate stroke patients or stimulate nerves for
treating Parkinson's or depression.3 Healthy people can also utilize
technologies and practices to further improve their brains. Your
lifestyle behaviors like sleep, diet, and exercise have a massive effect
on brain health and function.4 Growing evidence suggests that
mindfulness meditation can increase concentration, self-awareness, and
overall well-being.5 Some evidence even suggests that devices such as
the transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) which are now

offered as consumer products are able to improve learning, sleep
quality, and mood.6 You can take nootropics, which are typically readily
available chemicals which have demonstrated an ability to enhance
cognition, increase focus or memory, boost energy, or even heighten
creativity.7 You could even consume psychedelic drugs like psilocybin
and LSD, which modern neuroscience indicates can stimulate new neural
connection, ease anxiety related to death, and treat addiction and
depression.8 There is an entire movement known as transhumanism
concerned with modifying the human body, brain, and mind, and taking the
evolution of human nature into our own hands. It is defined by the
Humanity+ organization as: The intellectual and cultural movement that
affirms the possibility and desirability of fundamentally improving the
human condition through applied reason, especially by developing and
making widely available technologies to eliminate aging and to greatly
enhance human intellectual, physical, and psychological capacities.9
Transhumanist thinkers believe that some day in the notso-distant
future, we will be able to augment the brain and mind in ways nearly
inconceivable today. Future pharmaceuticals and microscopic brain
implants could rapidly repair, regenerate, and revamp brain cells.
Genetic engineering could alter the mind biologically, increasing

intelligence, creativity, or any other desired quality. Virtual or
augmented reality technology may become so advanced as to be
indistinguishable from reality, connect directly into our nervous
systems, and allow us to live in worlds currently unimaginable.
Furthermore, an advanced understanding of the mind may allow us to
perfectly simulate the human brain through digital computers and upload
our consciousness to the cloud. Organizations such as DARPA10 and Elon
Musk's Neuralink11 are already working to create brain-machine
interfaces. These devices would allow our brains to connect directly to
computers, convert our thoughts into bits and back again, and augment
our intelligence, communication, and more. Theoretically, this could
allow us to effectively merge with artificial intelligence, or with
other people to form one radically intelligent and capable mind. When
transhumanists refer to "technology" as the primary means of effecting
changes to the human condition, this should be understood broadly to
include the design of organizations, economies, polities, and the use of
psychological methods and tools. - Max More, "The Philosophy of
Transhumanism" As fascinating as the potential for future modification
of the mind may be, most of it is inaccessible to us today, leaving us
only to wait and contemplate. But there is

another type of modification, a kind of software transhumanism, which is
already available. There are tools that can be unlocked right now, by
anyone, without any external technology. We might call these tools
psychotechnologies. The most powerful way to improve the brain at this
point in history is through its software: Through your thoughts and
actions. Many of us would love to program our minds to work according to
our preferences just as we might program computer software. Our organic
brains, however, do not work in exactly the same way computers do. They
don't simply do what they are told; we have to understand and work
around their nature if we want to change their programming. Rather than
keyboards and command lines, we have our cognition - which can be a
robust tool if used properly. Although it may seem like common sense to
anyone who has ever learned something new or developed a skill, the idea
that the brain can change has become fashionable in recent years.
Neuroplasticity refers to the brain's ability to change and reorganize
throughout the life of an individual. The ability to adapt to changing
conditions has always been crucial to our survival, so this capacity has
been hardwired into the mind of all higher life forms. You can build new
neural pathways, and reinforce or diminish old ones through learning,
conditioning, and practice. In fact, it would be impossible to prevent
the modification of your mind.12

Everything you do or experience alters your mind. Even sharing pictures
of your food is a form of practice that will strengthen the connections
between certain neurons at the expense of others. Multi-linguists,
professional musicians, and academics with encyclopedic knowledge are
living proof of the incredible human capacity for neuroplasticity. Even
more so are the victims of brain injury whose brains amazingly find ways
to rewire themselves so that another part of the brain takes over the
functions of a damaged area.13 All animals have software which is
modified on a daily basis. Every animal learns. However, most animals
don't try to learn. No creatures besides humans are familiar with any
kind of deliberate practice. It is doubtful that a chimpanzee or a
dolphin ever determined that there was something wrong with its own mind
and attempted to modify it. But humans do. We modify our minds because
our software lacks some desired function (speaking Italian), or because
it has undesirable functions (speaking with a stutter). The capacity for
this modification appears to be virtually limitless, but few people
utilize it to its full potential. The modern fascination with
neuroplasticity has led many to try to optimize their intelligence,
memory, and concentration. People obsessively track and optimize their
sleep, nutrition, and exercise regimens. But people who obsessively and
directly optimize the structure of their minds for flourishing are less
common. This book is less concerned with intellectual learning or
general competency

development and more with psychological adaptivity and well-being. The
default human mind is an inherently disorderly place to be. The odds of
being well adapted to this world by default are virtually none. The
reason kids cry and scream so much more than adults is not just because
their brains are less developed. It is because experience in the real
world forces you to develop coping strategies over time that give you
increased control over your mental state. The tantrums, agony,
irrationality, and impulsiveness of childhood represent the epitome of
being a slave to one's own default software.14 15 Societal pressures
work to pull you up to the line of psychological adequacy, and
psychotherapy can be used when society falls short. But these aims are
far too low. Falling within the current normal range of psychological
health is nothing to aspire to. We are interested in far exceeding this
line - in psychological greatness. We want to structure our minds in the
ways that will lead to our deepest fulfillment. But there is no such
force that naturally pulls you above this line. That is why we have to
carve out the path toward the peaks of psychological well-being
ourselves.

OceanofPDF.com

A New Vision of Enlightenment Any man could, if he were so inclined, be
the sculptor of his own brain. - Santiago Ramon y Cajal, Advice for a
Young Investigator You probably fall into one of two camps. In one camp,
we have those who believe there is an experiential state we might call
spiritual enlightenment. This state represents a complete transcendence
of ego, illusion, attachment, and/or suffering. After its attainment,
the enlightened can finally see "the true nature of existence," break
free from the limited survival mode of the mind, and blow out the candle
of suffering. It is typically thought to be achieved through years of
dedicated meditation, and eventually, a sudden click into a radically
new state. In the other camp, we have those who think this is bullshit.
No such liberated state exists, and anyone who thinks it does is
drinking the generic fruit beverage of spiritual lunatics and
charlatans. We may be able to get a little better at dealing with life,
but not radically transformed. The realities of ongoing suffering and

dissatisfaction are inevitable, and the ancient claim of enlightenment
is mythology. My goal is to propose that perhaps both of these camps are
wrong... or right. We've just been thinking about it all wrong. Imagine,
if you will, that we live in an alternate world in which there is only
one musical instrument. The instrument is called the piano pod, and in
this alternate world, everyone has one in their living room. The piano
pod is exactly like a piano, except that in order to play it, you have
to open a door on the front of it, sit down inside a room only large
enough for one, and shut the door behind you. You'll have to set your
claustrophobia aside for this one. The piano pod has completely opaque
and soundproof walls, so only the person inside can see or hear her own
performance. Being that the piano pod is otherwise exactly like a piano,
most people who sit down to play find that it is incredibly difficult to
create music that doesn't cause them to envy the deaf. You may find that
even when you persist for months, you remain in a state of frustrating
incompetence. To make matters worse, the piano pod world is full of
obvious con-men claiming they can help you become amazing at the
instrument overnight if you'll just hand over some hard-earned money.
While some seem more credible than others, it is clear that anyone who
claims to have achieved piano pod greatness could be lying
opportunistically, trying to impress others, or delusional.

Unlike in our reality, it is entirely reasonable within the piano pod
world to believe frustrating incompetence to be the only possible state.
Not being able to witness someone playing the instrument with incredible
artistry and skill makes it easy to believe such people do not exist.
The piano pod world represents our current reality, and our minds are
the instruments. We don't know what is going on in other people's heads.
We don't ever know for sure how another person's subjective experience
compares with ours. The most we can do is observe their behavior and
take their word for it. But neither our frustrating incompetence nor the
quick fixes promised by sleazy gurus are proof that the rabbit hole of
psychological optimization does not exist. And the great innovation of
pod-less pianos in our world reveals just how musically masterful it is
possible to be. We have all heard brilliant musicians who make it very
hard to let ourselves off the hook. Having heard the work of great
musicians, you may still conclude that these virtuosos have some kind of
genetic gift the rest of us lack, and that playing this instrument
skillfully simply isn't possible for you. Although it's true that
genetics plays some role in musical ability, we simply don't observe
regular people putting thousands of hours into musical practice and not
getting really, really good. We know it is possible to become great on
the keys by practicing diligently and applying the right methods. And we
can see that the path of artistic mastery goes deeper and deeper, never
really reaching a limit besides the laws of physics.

The "10,000 hour rule" popularized by Malcolm Gladwell suggests that the
great talents of people like Albert Einstein, Bill Gates, and the
Beatles are not simply the innate gifts they are often assumed to be.
They can be understood as the result of many hours of development, often
falling around 10,000 hours.16 It may not be a mathematical theorem
which infallibly dictates success in any field, but the rule goes a long
way to explain just how crucial practice and diligence are, even for
seemingly supernatural ability. It has even been demonstrated that the
very belief in neuroplasticity, in the idea that our abilities are not
fixed, can be the determining factor in our success. People who view
their strengths as malleable are found to be more successful in their
endeavors and more fulfilled in life.17 I see no reason the principles
of neuroplasticity should not apply to the improvement of our
subjectivity. Our neurons don't play favorites in terms of the tasks
which can be improved. It would require more of a leap of faith to
believe that the principles of human psychology made an exception for
this particular area. If our sights are clearly set on the reworking of
our own thoughts, emotional reactions, and behaviors, what is stopping
us from gradually rerouting the neural pathways of well-being? No,
neuroplasticity does not prove we can suddenly click into a state of
undisturbed bliss. The story of the ego and its transcendence is
seductive enough to warrant careful scrutiny. We all love single-cause
explanations of our problems and their solutions. But this sudden shift
beyond

our limits simply is not consistent with a modern understanding of human
psychology. I think some of the ancient mystics may have been right
about their own radically superior subjective experience. They were just
wrong in the particular way they conceived of it. Psychological mastery
can be systematically pursued in fully rational terms without any
difficult concepts, or the transcendence of concepts entirely. Just as
the concept of suddenly snapping into a state of musical mastery after
years of practice seems incompatible with current psychological
understanding, doing the same with our minds seems implausible. The
Buddha may have been the Beethoven of his psychological state, but
Beethoven got to where he was gradually, and still fell somewhere on the
endless continuum of musical mastery by the end of his life. Our mental
behaviors were selected to serve specific functions. We get jealous
because it helped our ancestors retain mates.18 We dogmatically accept
flawed beliefs because it allowed our predecessors to bond with their
tribes.19 We get addicted to substances because the compounds within
them offered a higher chance of survival.20 There doesn't have to be a
core defect at the root of all of our problems or a single solution to
free us from it. We can modify and optimize the individual functions,
features, and flaws of our minds a la carte, and this process, when
practiced over time, can lead to the algorithmic enlightenment I'm
proposing.

Neuroplasticity gives us the ability to gradually improve at things
through consistent and sustained effort, and mastery is a relative term
which does not indicate that one can reach a point at which no further
progress can be made. By becoming intimately aware of the mistakes that
we would like to relinquish - by working out the disadvantageous habits
and building advantageous ones, we can develop the ability to
increasingly determine our own subjective experience. Although humans
did not in any way evolve to play any instrument, it has been shown that
with enough deliberate practice, we can overcome our incompetence and
move closer and closer to mastery. The trained musician can play music
in a way that looks and feels so natural that the audience would swear
it was what she was made to do. And the biological forces which
developed our minds, though our values and well-being were not their
concern, have placed no barriers to reprogramming our psychological
operating system toward a new purpose. The path of self-mastery can be
followed to great heights with enough practice. The only problem is that
until now, we haven't known what we were practicing.

OceanofPDF.com

Overture to Psychitecture To make ourselves, to shape a form from
various elements -- that is the task! The task of a sculptor! Of a
productive human being! - Friedrich Nietzsche, unpublished notes The
central practice and framework of this book is called psychitecture.
Psychitecture is self-directed psychological evolution - the act of
deliberately reprogramming your own psychological operating system. We
will see that psychitecture applies to everything from breaking a bad
habit to rebuilding an entire worldview. Though it is a new term,
psychitecture is not a new practice. For millennia, thinkers such as
Aristotle, SiddhÄrtha Gautama (the Buddha), the Stoics, and many others
have directed their pupils to place their focus on optimizing their
minds and consciously constructing their character. But this book
attempts to provide a modern vocabulary and framework for understanding
these internal battles. As stated above, we all engage in psychitecture
at certain points in our lives. But calling it out and giving it a name
can change our perspective on it. The mind's software can be understood
as a system of interconnected and interacting behaviors and tendencies.

This system determines who you are and how you live your life. And when
delusion, distortion, or tampering affect parts of it, the resulting
problems can corrupt the entire operating system. But making
improvements can have a chain reaction as well, and we will look at the
mechanisms for consciously embedding positive functions and programming
out the undesirable functions.

The process of psychitecture, and the structure of the following
chapters, is organized into a triad: cognitive, emotional, and
behavioral. The cognitive realm will deal with beliefs and biases,
introspection, and wisdom. The emotional realm will deal with coping
mechanisms, feelings,

and desires. And the behavioral realm will look at actions, temptations,
and habits. We can actually see this same division in the work of
Descartes, in which he outlined the goals of an ideal life. 1.
\[Cognitive\] Use reason for its highest purpose: to evaluate and judge
the best possible course of action, as free as possible from passion and
bias. 2. \[Behavioral\] Have an unwavering will for executing whichever
actions were judged to be the best. 3. \[Emotional\] Understand that
beyond clear reasoning and a resolved will, everything is outside of
one's power, and should be no cause for stress or regret. - Rene
Descartes, Letter to Princess Elisabeth We will use the concept of the
algorithm to model our automatic thoughts, emotions, and actions. For
those who don't know anything about algorithms, except perhaps that they
are apparently coming for your job, an algorithm can be defined as "a
step-by-step procedure for solving a problem or accomplishing some
end."21 In our minds, the problems our algorithms were meant to solve
are biological problems. A person with an algorithm causing him to be
afraid of presenting in front of large crowds would be less likely to
publicly embarrass himself, alienate himself from his social group, and
lower his chances of passing on his genes.22 But like many others, this
genetically useful algorithm can act against our own highest goals,
preventing

some from becoming the inspiring TEDx speakers they are capable of
being. Perfectly clear reasoning and stable emotions may have gotten in
the way of our survival and reproduction. But the "solutions" these
default algorithms provide are actually the source of most of our
psychological problems today. Our thoughts, emotions, and behaviors can
all be understood in terms of algorithms, and this model will serve you
well in your attempts to optimize your mind. Our goal is not freedom
from the algorithms that make up our minds, but the autonomy to
transform the algorithms which don't serve us into algorithms which do.
In order to make these transformations, we must learn to think about our
psychological problems algorithmically. We can't be vague about our
issues. What specific habit or emotion or error of judgment is the
problem? What does the whole chain look like? How can it be programmed
out? This algorithm model is not a superficial metaphor. Our bad habits
and harmful behaviors are effectively if-then programs triggered by
real-world inputs that result in undesirable outputs.23 Our cognitive
biases and fallacies are reflexive inferences which flow systematically
from preprogrammed rules below our ordinary level of awareness.24 And
modern psychology tells us that our emotions are mechanically generated
by automatic thoughts which can be restructured.25 These reflexes all
chain together to result in our habitual state of existence. Although
some of these tendencies may

vary from one individual or culture to another, by and large the bad
algorithms that plague us are found across our species. Confirmation
bias, procrastination, and thanatophobia (death anxiety) are all
universal enough that we can understand our own minds by studying these
ubiquitous human tendencies.26 And promisingly, there is strong evidence
that we can deliberately reprogram these bad algorithms.27 28 29 Here is
how we will visually represent an algorithm:

An algorithm is made up of dots representing inputs and outputs, and a
line connecting them. Simple enough, right? Eventually, we will look at
algorithms that look more like this:

But we'll work our way there gradually. Modern self-help books often
center around a few major algorithms to be banished - automatic
tendencies like blaming yourself when things go wrong, making
assumptions without evidence, or retreating whenever you experience
fear. But the psychitectural perspective takes a step back. Instead of
simply providing you with a few key algorithms to optimize your mind,
this book attempts to provide you with a framework to codify the wisdom
you come across in other books or stumble upon yourself. It offers you a
new perspective and a methodology to become the collector, curator, and
programmer of adaptive algorithms. And this new way of looking at your
own mind will remain with you long after you have finished this book. It
is important to emphasize the "system" part of "psychological operating
system." Aristotle viewed a person as the sum of his habits. This
understanding of habit far exceeded the narrow notion of morning
routines and ingrained compulsions. An individual's entire being could
be

represented by his habits. A person's disposition was not decided at
every moment and in every isolated action. His words and actions flowed
from his habits, which in turn were reinforced or broken by his actions.
In this way, his disposition could be cultivated and perfected. The
aggregate of all his habits was his character.30 31 It is not hard to
imagine that if Aristotle had possessed our software framework, he would
have found it even more useful than his habit model. What are habits,
after all, if not a collection of if-then statements determining one's
behavior? The sum of these habits, what Aristotle called character, we
call software. The way your mind is structured will determine the person
you become, the life you live, and the fulfillment you realize. When you
modify your mind, you edit the operating system at your core and change
your personal trajectory. And when you make a persistent occupation of
this endeavor, you become the architect of your own character. If you
want to take on this project, you have to orient yourself toward gradual
optimization. Psychitecture is an often slow process of recognizing and
iteratively compensating for errors in perception and action. Your great
satisfaction should be the feeling of making one tiny optimization,
inching one step closer to your ideal. This perspective is not unlike
the best dieting advice available. Trying to constantly muster willpower
to bring about a result can't compare to gradual and habitual
optimization.

Kaizen is a Japanese term often used in business, meaning continuous
change for the better - an ongoing endeavor for incremental
optimization. This concept can be applied to the psychological operating
system just as easily. Individual thoughts, emotions, and actions are
never the problem, in the same way that the individual drops of water
leaking through your roof are not the problem. We are interested in the
source - in the structural patterns. Psychitecture is a kind of
self-improvement, but not the vague self-improvement that leads people
to take up yoga or yo-yoing for no particular reason. When you engage in
psychitecture, you begin by acknowledging of the current state of your
mind and envisioning the ideal one. You work backwards from this vision,
through broad strategies - all the way down to individual algorithmic
optimizations, each of which is one small step toward that vision. When
you practice psychitecture, you design your mind's structures such that
your goals come about naturally. You move to the adjacent possible using
your highest ideals as your beacon.

Psychitecture's aim is to reform biologically ingrained habits and
tendencies of all forms. It's goal is to rewire the mental biases,
distortions, and assumptions that cause us to make mistakes, the
unnecessary suffering we fall victim to on a regular basis, the
mentalities that hold us back in life, and the impulses that lead us
away from our ideals. It is a high-level design and implementation
process - creative problem-solving for the subjective experience. When
utilized persistently, it can take a mind that is like a prison and
gradually transform it into a palace.

OceanofPDF.com

Unplugging from Your Software When you have cultivated mindfulness, life
becomes richer, more vivid, more satisfying, and you don't take
everything that happens so personally. Attention plays a more
appropriate role within the greater context of a broad and powerful
awareness. You're fully present, happier, and at ease, because you're
not so easily caught up in the stories and melodramas the mind likes to
concoct. Your powers of attention are used more appropriately and
effectively to examine the world. You become more objective and
clear-headed, and develop an enhanced awareness of the whole. -
Culadasa, The Mind Illuminated Before we dive into the many methods for
modifying our minds, we need to acquire a tool that will be
indispensable for our progress. In order to modify the structure of our
minds, we need to observe and analyze their rules and patterns. We need
to closely examine our thoughts, emotions, values, and drives, as well
as the relationships among them, and correct the misperceptions which
have been built into us.

It's as if you have just taken a job as a programmer where your role is
to redesign a poorly built program. The original programmer failed to
comment the function of each part of the software, and he is not
available for questioning. So you have to figure out how this thing is
structured by studying it. You have to go through the algorithms one by
one and figure out how they work to determine how they can be reworked.
In order to effectively analyze our software, we have to step outside of
it. And the tool that allows us to do this is called metacognition.
Metacognition has been defined as "knowledge and cognition about
cognitive phenomena"32. You could view it as thinking about your
thinking or awareness of your own field of awareness, and the
metacognitive perspective is the foundational viewpoint for
psychitecture. Redesigning the mind without stepping outside of it would
be like trying to repair your glasses without taking them off. Although
you obviously never actually exit your own mind, when you practice
metacognition, you essentially lift yourself up out of the system on
which you normally operate so you can look down on the tangled mess of
wires and begin the process of rewiring.

Closely related to metacognition is the now-popular concept of
mindfulness. Mindfulness is a metacognitive strategy which has been
defined as "the awareness that emerges through paying attention on
purpose, in the present moment, and non-judgmentally to the unfolding of
experience moment by moment."33 Though the term is often misunderstood,
and has lost some of its meaning in the process of becoming a cultural
fad, it is a crucial method of psychitectural intervention. Mindfulness
allows us to press pause on our software so we can step in and reprogram
it. We will look at methods for increasing mindfulness, but I have found
that making a priority of objective introspection and metacognitive
awareness can be enough to cultivate it.

Simply deciding to start noticing your thoughts without judgment or
engagement may cultivate this habit in the same way that deciding to
enter the housing market causes you to start noticing "for sale" signs
in suburban lawns. If mindfulness does not come easily to you and you
are not accustomed to noticing the thoughts and emotions you experience
in any given moment, you may need a practice for cultivating it.
Vipassana meditation is one of the most common of such practices, and
many people, as well as some preliminary research, have found it to be
beneficial.34 This practice will gradually guide you to a non-attached
awareness of your own internal processes, often beginning with physical
sensations like the breath and working up to thoughts and emotions. It
trains you to notice when your attention gets sucked back into the
captivating narrative your cognition presents to you. Many books have
been written describing how to meditate, so I will only include a
concise guide from Sam Harris's Waking Up: 1. Sit comfortably, with your
spine erect, either in a chair or cross-legged on a cushion. 2. Close
your eyes, take a few deep breaths, and feel the points of contact
between your body and the chair or the floor. Notice the sensations
associated with sitting--- feelings of pressure, warmth, tingling,
vibration, etc. 3. Gradually become aware of the process of breathing.
Pay attention to wherever you feel the breath most

distinctly--- either at your nostrils or in the rising and falling of
your abdomen. 4. Allow your attention to rest in the mere sensation of
breathing. (You don't have to control your breath. Just let it come and
go naturally.) 5. Every time your mind wanders in thought, gently return
it to the breath. 6. As you focus on the process of breathing, you will
also perceive sounds, bodily sensations, or emotions. Simply observe
these phenomena as they appear in consciousness and then return to the
breath. 7. The moment you notice that you have been lost in thought,
observe the present thought itself as an object of consciousness. Then
return your attention to the breath--- or to any sounds or sensations
arising in the next moment. 8. Continue in this way until you can merely
witness all objects of consciousness---sights, sounds, sensations,
emotions, even thoughts themselves---as they arise, change, and pass
away.35 Possibly the most important benefit of mindfulness is that
developing it causes your mental processes to become direct objects of
examination. It trains you to suspend judgment on your own thoughts and
emotions and view them as the reflexive instincts they are, rather than
as incontestable facts.36 37

Meditation seems to train you to stop automatically identifying with all
of your thoughts, so that, for example, when the thought 'John's a jerk'
pops into your head, you don't assume that John necessarily is a jerk.
You take the thought as something your brain produced, which may or may
not be true, and may or may not be useful. - Julia Galef 38 As we will
soon explore, the thoughts your brain outputs are generated
automatically in response to real-world events, generally without your
consent. The chains these thoughts form are stories which often embody
both the emotional dramatization and banality of a soap opera. The
default mind accepts these repetitive tropes as legitimate, and often
even identifies with them.39

Attention will be represented by the gaps between points in an
algorithm. The less attention you are paying to your own mind in any
given scenario, the more powerful the links will be. The more attention
you are paying, the weaker the links will be. This means that
mindfulness can always serve

as a psychitectural tool, as awareness of the active algorithms at any
time is the first step to modifying them.40 41 Although his work
contains its fair share of new age pseudoscience, Eckhart Tolle captures
and distills some of the wisdom which the ancient Eastern sages taught:
The mind is a superb instrument if used rightly. Used wrongly, however,
it becomes very destructive. To put it more accurately, it is not so
much that you use your mind wrongly - you usually don't use it at all.
It uses you. This is the disease. You believe that you are your mind.
This is the delusion. The instrument has taken you over. - Eckhart
Tolle, The Power of Now SiddhÄrtha Gautama and others have argued that
our perceptions of self are illusory - that you are not the self you
typically identify as, or even that there is no self at all.42 The self,
like all concepts, is a fluid, man-made construct, and it is best not to
take it as a rigid reality. This book will urge you, however, not to
eliminate your sense of self, but to choose to identify as the designer
of your mind rather than as your mind itself. Imagine looking down on
your own mind, observing, analyzing, and ultimately shaping and rewiring
it. Stepping off of our rogue psychological roller coaster often
provides momentary relief, which is what people mean when they talk
about "living in the present." But more

importantly, it gives us the distance and clarity needed to actually
observe the function of this roller coaster. It allows us to
increasingly cease to identify with our minds, and to see our inner
experiences for what they are.43 Before you unplug, beliefs are simply
the truth. Values are good and bad. Goals are automatically worth
pursuing. Emotions unconsciously color our experience. Desires are in
control. But after unplugging, you gain the ability to step back and
observe what is really going on. Once you've unplugged, notice how
things look from here. Notice that thoughts are just thoughts, beliefs
just beliefs, emotions just emotions. All are simply the reflexive
algorithms of a robotic mind - not reality. The mindfulness/meditation
movement stops with what I consider to be the prerequisite step of
psychological optimization. It tells you to cultivate the objective,
nonattached awareness of your own internal processes... and then do it
some more. I would speculate that a leading reason some people seem not
to benefit from meditation is that they are not instructed to analyze
and modify the automatic processes they observe during meditation. This
is exactly what we are going to do. The following nine chapters will
examine the most commonly problematic algorithms in the cognitive,
emotional, and behavioral realms. They will teach you the methods for
reprogramming them and nearing your ideal software. You will become a
skilled psychitect, and by aiming your constructive efforts toward the
structure of your

mind, you will learn to terraform it into a truly habitable, delightful
place for its sole inhabitant.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2: Cognitive Biases and How to Rewire Them Understanding
Cognitive Bias Dogmatism is the greatest of mental obstacles to human
happiness. - Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness We begin our
psychitectural journey in the cognitive realm. Without mastery of this
realm, our minds are riddled with false beliefs, recurring biases, and
dissonance between our models of reality and reality itself. But the
importance of the cognitive realm does not stop here. Cognition is the
gatekeeper of virtually every function of our software. Our decisions,
emotions, and actions are all rooted in our beliefs, so if we do not
first work to develop clear and objective thinking, our distorted
thoughts and beliefs will

sabotage our psychitectural efforts.1 2 3 We will see why a lack of
self-awareness and rationality will result in bad decisions and a faulty
compass for navigating your life. We will learn why failing to detect
and correct false beliefs and distorted cognition is detrimental to
emotional well-being. And we will come to understand why a lack of
clarity into your values will prevent you from realizing the deep
wellbeing you are capable of attaining. Our chief cognitive concern is
to perceive reality as clearly and accurately as possible. To develop a
functional map which aligns as closely as possible to the territory it
aims to portray. This chapter will cover many of the mechanisms behind
our beliefs and cognitive tendencies, as well as the methods for
optimizing and reprogramming them, and many of the concepts and methods
covered here will be foundational to those in later chapters. There may
be some things you just know are true. If someone asked you how sure you
are, you would answer one-hundred percent. But the truth is the feelings
of absolute certainty we have about some things are completely
independent of the actual property of truth. These feelings are
experienced in entirely different brain regions from our rational
faculties. We determine what we are sure of intuitively, and then we use
reason to justify it.4 Despite how certainty feels, it is neither a
conscious choice nor even a thought process. Certainty and

similar states of "knowing what we know" arise out of involuntary brain
mechanisms that, like love or anger, function independently of reason. -
Robert A. Burton, On Being Certain Though it may be the most brilliantly
complex thing in the universe, the human mind is riddled with false
assumptions, perceptions, and beliefs. Everyone knows this, but few
people recognize the full extent of distortion in their thinking. If you
are like most people, you look around and see others who are confused,
dogmatic, and irrational. You, on the other hand, have mostly found the
correct beliefs and learned to think clearly. If everyone else would
just listen to you, the world would be a much better place. But we tend
to see the distorted thinking in everyone but ourselves. Even when we
genuinely want to think and see clearly, our desires and emotions
dominate us beneath our awareness. We feel strongly that some things are
true and others are false. The problem is that truth can be tricky.
Everyone has had the disorienting experience of finding out they were
wrong about something of which they felt certain. And many have grappled
with the fact that every statement of apparent truth can be made "more
true" by providing a more comprehensive and detailed explanation. In
order to get to the bottom of this thing we call truth, it can be
helpful to make a distinction between the map and the territory.

The territory represents what is real independent of our beliefs and
interpretations.5

The territory is infinitely and incomprehensibly complex. In order to
grapple with it, humans have to convert it to a form of lossy
compression called concepts, and we organize these concepts into our
belief system, or map.

Just as a geographical map would be useless if it contained every single
detail of the territory it portrays, our belief system must simplify the
territory to be comprehensible or useful, compromising accuracy in the
process. A child's belief system is crude and pixelated compared to an
adult's.

As we develop cognitively, we continually reassess our beliefs, sharpen
our distinctions, and accumulate more refined and less pixelated
concepts. But concepts and models, even the most sophisticated, are
always inherently pixelated, and our beliefs are always incomplete. So
it's possible for us to develop models which more and more closely
approximate the truth without ever reaching "perfect truth."

But beliefs can also be wrong. And often when they are, they are the
product of a systematic mental cause. Cognitive algorithms are sometimes
known as inferences. Here is how we will represent cognitive algorithms
in their most basic form:

It can be read either as "if x then y," or "x, therefore y." The input
is a starting premise or raw perception about the

world. The output is a cognition - a thought or belief. These algorithms
are triggered and run automatically, and the rules they follow are
uniform. Sometimes that is perfectly fine, useful even. But many of
these algorithms are fundamentally flawed and distorted, which can have
consequences ranging from amusing to catastrophic. These faulty
algorithms will be shown with an angled portion representing the
distortion:

These bad algorithms are generally called biases, or systematic flaws in
our thinking. Biases are reflexive inferences which invalidly flow from
premises without our conscious awareness - hidden patterns which result
in mistaken beliefs and faulty decisions and will continue to result in
the same mistakes indefinitely unless they are identified and programmed
out. We will cover many biases and the principles behind them throughout
this chapter, so feel free to skim for the main ideas and come back to
the specifics later. Some of the simplest and easiest to recognize
biases fall into the category of logical fallacies. Take this argument:

All humans are mammals Ryan Seacrest is a mammal Therefore, Ryan
Seacrest is a human. This is called the fallacy of the undistributed
middle. Just because all humans are mammals doesn't mean all mammals are
humans, and just because we know a conclusion to be true does not mean
it logically follows from its premises (belief bias). Given our
premises, it is entirely possible that the beloved television
personality could be another type of primate, or even a large rodent.
And it has been found that 70% of university students get this type of
problem wrong when challenged with it.6

We don't often hear such formal arguments in ordinary life, but anyone
who follows politics or media is guaranteed to encounter informal
fallacies regularly. These arguments often succeed in distracting the
listener from the relevant aspects of an argument. An ad hominem
fallacy, for example, attacks the character or authority of the person
making an argument rather than the argument itself. An

appeal to consequences distracts from the validity of an argument and
focuses on whether the implications of that argument are desirable or
not. And an appeal to emotion may use persuasive rhetoric and anecdotes
to stir up fear, indignation, or sympathy in the listeners - glossing
over bad logic or insufficient evidence. There are many other common
logical fallacies. A slippery slope argument claims that a small step
will inevitably lead to a whole chain of undesirable consequences, such
as parents arguing that if they let their daughter learn a card trick,
there will be no stopping her from pursuing a career as an illusionist.
A false dichotomy claims that if one extreme is rejected (capitalism has
no flaws), another extreme must be the only alternative (communism it
is). And the post hoc fallacy causes us to assume that correlation
equates to causation, such as the belief that the sun rising actually
causes your drinking problem. Once you have familiarized yourself with
the full list of common fallacies, they start appearing everywhere. It
is hard to imagine what political debates would look like if candidates
knew they would be called out for every red herring or faulty
generalization committed. Not all of our biases are errors in logic per
se, and some of the trickiest mistakes occur in the places we don't even
think to look. Our view of the past, for example, is far less accurate
than we generally assume. We all know our memory declines as we age, and
we frequently fail to recall

things we once knew. But contrary to popular belief, memories do not
neutrally depict events as they happened, but reconstruct and change
those events every time they are evoked.7 Have you ever looked back at
your emails or social media posts from years ago and found it hard to
believe that was you? Consistency bias causes us to conform our views of
our past actions and attitudes to those of our present. We remember
events that are humorous, disturbing, or otherwise emotionally salient
much more easily than those that are mundane, even when these qualities
don't align with the importance of the issue. Memories can be
fabricated, or even intentionally implanted in another person's mind.
Our view of the future is even more distorted, as we are also imperfect
in our assessments of probability and prediction. We tend to think past
events affect future odds when they don't, such as believing a streak of
flipping heads or scoring in basketball makes it more likely (hot hand
fallacy) or less likely (gambler's fallacy) that we will do so again in
the future. And have you ever heard someone defend dangerous behaviors
by making the argument that some people are killed because they were
wearing seatbelts, or some smokers live to be 100? We sometimes neglect
probability entirely and make decisions based only on anecdotal
evidence. Our present evaluations, even the ones we reflect deeply on,
are much less coherent than we tend to think. We

overvalue information which is readily available (availability bias),
presented first (primacy bias), frequently (frequency bias), or recently
(recency bias). And various expressions of loss aversion, such as the
endowment effect cause us to demand more to give something up than we
would pay to acquire it. Homo sapiens is a storytelling animal, that
thinks in stories rather than in numbers or graphs, and believes that
the universe itself works like a story, replete with heroes and
villains, conflicts and resolutions, climaxes and happy endings. - Yuval
Noah Harari, 21 Lessons for the 21st Century Our minds were built to
find patterns. Pattern recognition is highly advantageous from a
biological perspective, as we would not be able to identify predators,
find food, or recognize our family members without it.8 But our brains
have limited bandwidth, so they have to cut corners. We make hasty
judgments, oversimplify the factors at play, and quickly construct
narratives and explanations for the complex outcomes in our world. Of
course every story, including the one this book is telling, is false -
in the sense that it necessarily oversimplifies reality, but we have a
tendency to cling to our stories as if they were perfect representations
of reality. In pathological extremes, this delusional over-recognition
of patterns manifests in disorders like schizophrenia.9

Some light examples of pattern recognition gone haywire are found in
optical illusions and pareidolia, the tendency to see patterns like
faces in abstract images or hear voices in noise. We hear our house
creak and believe we've encountered a ghost, attributing agency where
there is none. Some more concerning examples are some of the heuristics
and generalizations we regularly employ. We stereotype, assuming that
all individuals in a group share certain characteristics which may only
be true of the group on average or may be completely fictional. The
clustering, frequency, and recency illusions cause us to find meaning in
a repetition or grouping of similar things, such as a man who believes
the universe wants him to apply for a new job because he hears the words
"multi-level marketing" three times in one week. Our tendency to seek
meaning in things which may be entirely devoid of it is at the root of
superstition and conspiracy thinking. It is also at the root of the most
destructive ideologies in history. Far too many wars and atrocities have
been committed because powerful people were overly confident in the
oversimplified narrative systems to which they subscribed, whether in
the form of a political system, a prejudice, or a religion. The most
concerning aspect of these biases is that they can chain together, and
their effects can be compounded. Beliefs don't exist in isolation. They
are entangled with one another, so changing one belief may threaten a
large portion of the full map. Belief systems are essentially

complex chains of cognitive algorithms, and when those algorithms are
heavily biased, they make up massively warped worldviews. When people
take action according to their distorted worldviews, they can cause
great damage and harm in the name of doing good. (Belief systems may be
simplified for demonstration purposes)

OceanofPDF.com

Methods for Cognitive Debiasing You should take the approach that you're
wrong. Your goal is to be less wrong. - Elon Musk Perhaps as you read
over these biases you accepted the consistently irrational tendencies we
all share. Or maybe, you thought to yourself, "Well, I can see that most
people would have that bias, but I don't think I have that one." Well,
I've got another one for you. Bias blind spot refers to the tendency to
believe one is immune to the same biases which plague others. The
question you may be wondering now is, how can we program out our faulty
cognitive algorithms? Removing biases is not a simple task, but there
are a few leverage points which allow us to intercept and reprogram
these algorithms. If you want to overcome distorted cognitive
algorithms, the first and most obvious step is to familiarize yourself
with the most common biases found across the human race. This chapter
only provides a primer on cognitive biases - not an exhaustive list by
any means. You can find a more

exhaustive list in the Wikipedia entry for cognitive biases,11 and John
Manoogian III and Buster Benson created a nice diagram that breaks them
down.12 But even these excellent resources remain hopelessly incomplete.
Spending some time on the blog LessWrong will demonstrate to you just
how complex the web of human bias really is. You will need to make a
discipline of studying the biases you discover from a variety of
sources, as well as uncovering them within your own mind. Memorize them
until you can recite them in your sleep, and learn the types of
situations which can trigger them. But do not assume that awareness of a
bias makes you immune to it. In some, but not all cases, being aware
that a certain bias exists has proven to counter the bias.13 14
Correcting a bias will typically require an awareness that a
bias-triggering situation has arisen in your life. You need to build the
habit of noticing these situations, which is largely a function of
metacognitive awareness. Mindfulness has been found to decrease
cognitive bias by bringing deliberate attention to otherwise habitual
cognitive patterns.15 Being aware of times when you might be
particularly prone to mistakes, such as when you are tired, angry, or
even hungry can also help you counteract your biases, or at least
postpone decisions until you are in a more optimal state.

Before you can question your intuitions, you have to realize that what
your mind's eye is looking at is an intuition---some cognitive
algorithm, as seen from the inside---rather than a direct perception of
the Way Things Really Are. - Eliezer Yudkowsky, "How An Algorithm Feels
From Inside" Once you are aware of a bias or bias-triggering situation,
your next goal will be to design a better alternative algorithm to the
faulty one. Let's look at an example algorithm known as the planning
fallacy, which causes us to (often greatly) underestimate the amount of
time certain tasks will take to complete. This algorithm will lead you
to habitually underestimate timelines for your entire life and turn you
into a perpetual deadline-misser. But it is possible to program this
bias out and solve it for good. "When do you think you can have this
done by?" someone asks you.

Under normal circumstances, the planning fallacy would be activated: You
would consult your intuitions and output the conclusion "one week from
now." We'll call this mode of reasoning the "inside view." But if you
have sufficient metacognitive awareness and familiarity with this bias,
you will have the opportunity to step in, design a counteralgorithm, and
rewire the bias, which we call cognitive revision.

Daniel Kahneman, a psychologist and pioneer in cognitive bias research,
suggests a workaround for this particular bias: Using such
distributional information from other ventures similar to that being
forecasted is called taking an 'outside view' and is the cure to the
planning fallacy. - Daniel Kahneman, Thinking Fast and Slow

In other words, if you have to determine how long a project will take
you, don't look at how long you feel like it will take. Look at how long
this type of project typically takes you, how long other people take to
do the same type of task, and how these compare with your intuitions.16
If you feel that you will be done in a week but experience says it will
actually take you three, this will probably be a much closer guess. In
this case, you are replacing the algorithm "If I feel like it will take
one week, then I believe it will" with the algorithm, "If this type of
project usually takes me three times longer than my intuitions suggest,
then I believe it will take three weeks." Eventually, this outside view
will become your habitual approach to estimating deadlines, and the
original algorithm will have officially been reprogrammed.

This example makes the process seem simple, but every bias is different
and may require you to design a different creative solution. Though lots
of research has been done on cognitive biases, the process of removing
them is fairly new territory. Numerous studies have confirmed the
efficacy of

debiasing methods, but no single process has been shown to be
universally effective.17 18 19 There are many thinking tools you can add
to your arsenal of alternate algorithms. By internalizing models and
principles for specific domains of reasoning, you can replace old bias
patterns with better, more accurate ones. There are many logical,
statistical, and economic principles you can learn to maximize accurate
beliefs and good decisions. Coming to grasp principles like probability
theory, counterintuitive ideas like compound interest, and cognitive
tools like systems thinking can transform the quality of your judgments.
Bayesian reasoning has been called the gold standard of rationality.
Although there is a formal theorem for calculating Bayes' rule when
precise numbers are available, the type of reasoning it can be most
readily applied to is far less formal. The root of many biases is the
failure to take prior probabilities into account when forming beliefs. A
commonly given example is that when trying to predict the profession of
a shy and timid individual, people assign a far higher likelihood to the
possibility that he is a librarian than a salesman. The reasoning goes
something like this:

This default algorithm is biased, as it fails to consider how common
librarians are compared to salesmen. As it turns out, there are
seventy-five times as many salesman in the population as there are
librarians.20 With Bayes' Rule in your thinking toolkit, you can replace
this type of algorithm with a more accurate one. To make use of Bayesian
revision, or updating, you would assign a likelihood to an existing
hypothesis or belief and probabilities to reflect those likelihoods.
When you come across new evidence, you try to determine how much this
new information should alter your confidence.

In the case above, you would first estimate the ratio of librarians to
salesman, and then adjust this estimate based on the person's
temperament.

In each case, you must be aware of the relevant faulty bias, pause and
notice that you are in a bias-triggering scenario, and design and
implement a better alternative algorithm. You need to make it so the
same type of input will trigger a different algorithm in the future.
Once you have programmed out a certain type of bias in a few different
scenarios, the more rational algorithm can become your habitual
response. You can internalize the better pathways of reasoning and
gradually restructure your worldview to resemble reality more and more.
You need to work to build the habit of noticing the indicators of flawed
thinking and beliefs. The feelings of confusion, surprise, and lack of
clarity surrounding some views should sound alarm bells, triggering you
to further investigate. Consider the reasons why your initial judgments
might be flawed before forming important views. Simply adding the prompt
"consider the opposite" to the default algorithm has been found to
counter anchoring, overconfidence, and hindsight bias.21 Some biases can
be mitigated or eliminated by finding outside factual information, so
take every opportunity to distance yourself and put your reasoning and
beliefs to objective tests to remove as much human bias from the
equation as possible.

Not-knowing is true knowledge. Presuming to know is a disease. First
realize that you are sick; Then you can move toward health. - Lao Tzu,
Tao Te Ching

OceanofPDF.com

Understanding Motivated Bias Humans were not directly selected to
process information, nor to store it, learn it, attend to it---nor even,
in fact, to think. - Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology People who have
learned of these biases and the methods for countering them often refer
to themselves as critical thinkers, freethinkers, or rationalists. These
people often make use of the debiasing methods we have covered to
attempt to see the world more clearly, and these methods can be
effective in the right circumstances. But the counterintuitive truth
that has become clear to me is that critical thinking skills are not
enough to prevent being deeply biased. Most people recognize the need
for critical thinking. Even most schools and universities try to teach
these skills. But they miss the point. Learning critical thinking skills
is no more likely to cause someone to think critically than it is to
provide them with ammunition for arguing against whatever ideas they
don't want to accept. The tools of rationality are identical to the
tools of rationalization.

If you wish to program out your biased algorithms, you must understand
their deeper underlying principles. Many of our biases, including some
mentioned above, seem to be artifacts of the simple truth that our minds
were not built to understand, remember, and predict complex, modern
phenomena with perfect accuracy. These goals are all biologically beside
the point. But some of our biases can be linked directly to biological
pressures, meaning it was in some way advantageous to our genes for us
to systematically misperceive reality.22 The most pernicious biases have
this in common: they stem from desire. I refer to these as motivated
biases. We may want to develop an accurate view of reality, but this
will to genuinely understand is imperceptibly overpowered by other
motivations. In these cases, we can modify our representation of the
cognitive algorithm to include this role our motivations play. Here, a
desire is playing a major direct role in the cognitive distortion.

Desires are always present, but we don't show them in the diagram when
they are in alignment with our explicit

goals - in this case, clear reasoning. When shown in this type of
diagram, the desire is misaligned with our goals to think clearly. Many
of our desires, or drives, relate to the world and how we view it. We
desire for the world to make sense to us, so we strip it down and make
our decisions based on our simplified simulations which may bear little
resemblance to reality (attribute substitution).23 We desire for the
world to be be fair and just, so we assume victims of injustice must
have deserved their fate (just-world hypothesis).24 And we desire a
positive future, so we allow wishful thinking to determine our
predictions (optimism bias), sometimes going to the extent of completely
ignoring the negative (ostrich effect).

And as always, these biases can compound and result in harmful
effects.25

Another set of desires which colors our perceptions is of a social
nature. We speak of young people being impressionable as if adults had
all grown out of this trait. But we are all far more socially
impressionable than we would like to admit to ourselves. Just as our
brains are optimized to find useful patterns over accurate ones, we were
built to seek companionship and community over truth.26 The bandwagon
effect refers to our tendency to come to conclusions and make decisions
based on what is popular, though we often find ways to rationalize these
decisions to ourselves. We are swayed by authority and social proof. We
acquire our beliefs through dogmatic inheritance and imitation. As a
human being, you are embedded in the collective mesh of society. You are
not wired to develop impeccably clear views, rational insights, and
wisdom. You are built to inherit your views, values, and judgment from
your tribe - to flow with the wave of your culture. We want to belong.
We want to be accepted, respected, and liked, and this desire bends our
beliefs to its will. The problem is that this desire,

if unacknowledged and unchecked, can result in delusional decisions and
deviation from our values. Some of the most pervasive motivations behind
our biases stem not from how we want to see the world, or how we want
others to see us, but how we want to see ourselves. The desires related
to our sense of identity can be the hardest to change.27 Our desires to
be special and to maintain a positive view of ourselves result in the
over-inflation of our own positive traits. The fundamental attribution
error and selfserving bias cause us to attribute our own positive
behaviors and successes, as well as the failure of others, to individual
character. Correspondingly, we blame our negative behaviors and
failures, and the successes of others, on luck and circumstance.
Illusory superiority is the overestimation of one's positive qualities
and the underestimation of negative ones.27

Our desire to be in control of our lives creates the illusion of
control. An interesting finding is that people with clinical depression
believe they have less control over external events, demonstrating a
more accurate and less biased perception than healthy people in this
regard. This may, however, be the effect of the negativity bias
characteristic of depression counterbalancing the original bias.27 The
desire which quite possibly distorts our view the most also has to do
with our identity, but this one poses so well as the desire for genuine
truth that it is incredibly hard to spot. I'm talking about the desire
to be right. The minute we form a belief, we start developing
attachments to it. From this point forward, it is our mind's default
behavior to stack up the evidence in its favor. Our goal in an argument
is almost never to determine what is correct, but to prove to ourselves
and our opponent that we were right all along.28 Confirmation bias is
responsible for the fact that we tend to look only for information that
confirms our existing theories, beliefs, and worldview at the expense of
those that conflict with them. We get so attached to these views that
even when conflicting evidence is forced upon us, it often only makes us
defensive, strengthening our original belief (backfire effect). This
tendency ultimately results in groups on two sides of an issue slowly
moving further and further apart, known as attitude polarization.

Worse, the modern world reinforces biases by structuring incentives so
as to confirm our beliefs. Search engines, entertainment platforms, and
social media websites are rewarded for getting clicks and views, so it
is in their interest to pander to the desires of their readers rather
than to determine the truth. The digital algorithms distributing
information further distort our cognitive algorithms by funneling us
into reality tunnels and echo chambers.29

OceanofPDF.com

Methods for Motivational Debiasing The truth may be puzzling. It may
take some work to grapple with. It may be counterintuitive. It may
contradict deeply held prejudices. It may not be consonant with what we
desperately want to be true. But our preferences do not determine what's
true. - Carl Sagan, Wonder and Skepticism The second, deeper layer of
cognitive psychitecture is motivational. Motivated biases are not little
bugs in the system. They are the system functioning as intended. I am
not just talking to conspiracy theorists or religious fanatics or
political ideologues here. Everyone has cherished beliefs. And we can't
simply will these beliefs away. We have to unplug the desires that
perpetuate them. In order to do this, you need the habit of not only
noticing the triggers for common biases, but of taking stock of your
desires to hold certain beliefs, and the intensity of these desires.
Notice which ideas you are attached to and which ones you resist. The
areas you tend to turn your curiosity away from - that make you
defensive when they are called into question. Perhaps you feel highly
resistant to

questioning a certain belief because you are a part of a group which is
based on that belief. Or maybe you feel like one belief provides you
with a critical coping mechanism one that you would be lost without.
Write these observations down. You can then use the method known as
Socratic questioning to identify potential holes in your beliefs. Treat
your beliefs as if they were someone else's beliefs you were arguing
against. Build the best argument you can against them, and identify the
assumptions and weak points of your views. What evidence do I have for
this belief? Could I be misinterpreting the evidence? Can I think of any
counter evidence? Continue to ask probing questions and flag the beliefs
which may not be fully supported.30 A related approach to wrangling
desires is called counteraction. This tactic entails attempting to
cultivate an equal and opposite desire to balance the first one. When
you have an equal desire for two opposing possibilities, you will be
able to evaluate them objectively according to evidence because either
possibility will suit you just fine.

If you believe the world is fundamentally just, and you notice that you
strongly want to hold this belief, consider possible advantages to the
belief that there is no such innate justice. Though this belief forces
us to confront our own vulnerability, it also opens up our ability to
understand and empathize with victims of misfortune instead of blaming
them. It can provide purpose by giving us something to work toward
instead of lulling us into the impression that everything is as good as
it can be.

The goal here is not to switch to the alternate belief, but to confront
it and realize that it wouldn't be so horrible, and might even be good
if it were true. Then you can decide on beliefs based on the what the
evidence suggests is most likely. I am not here to tell you which
specific beliefs are true or false. It is my goal to encourage you, on
behalf of the

many great psychitectural thinkers, to seek truth wherever it leads.

There is a common conviction that some false beliefs may be worth
believing in. It may be fun to check your horoscopes from time to time,
even to believe them, but the ability to think for yourself and
differentiate between fact and fiction has much higher stakes than your
entertainment. Irrationality, dogmatism, and ignorance are the cause of
a massive proportion of global problems.31 People are killed every year
because they believe that completely untested medicine will heal them,
or that proven medicine is more likely to harm them than help.32 The
reason our environmental problems haven't been solved is because people
have been fed, and have swallowed the lie that these problems do not
exist or pose no threat to us.33 Major decisions are made for millions
based on deeply flawed ideas and deliberate deception. And far too many
atrocities have been caused by actors with perfectly good intentions and
unquestioned ideologies.34 The dangers of not thinking clearly are much
greater now than ever before. It's not that there's

something new in our way of thinking -- it's that credulous and confused
thinking can be much more lethal in ways it was never before. - Carl
Sagan, 1996 As technology becomes exponentially more powerful, the
consequences for faulty thinking and dogmatism will rise exponentially
along with it. Nuclear weapons, bioengineering, nanotechnology, and
artificial intelligence are all quickly advancing. All will become more
powerful, less expensive to create, and easier to wield. And all will
pose threats to the very existence of humanity. If we are unable to
conquer the human tendencies to believe and act according to dogma and
desire, the same forces which cause destruction and war today will cause
total extinction tomorrow.35 But even the most selfish sociopath has
plenty of reason to view the world as clearly as possible. Rationality
is a core building block of wisdom. Good decisions in your life, your
relationships, and your career or business depend on the ability to
think clearly and learn properly. On his excellent blog, Wait But Why,
Tim Urban provides an analysis of Elon Musk, the billionaire founder of
Tesla and SpaceX.36 He suggests a key factor of the entrepreneur's
success is his ongoing endeavor to optimize his own mind. Musk sees
people as computers, and he sees his brain software as the most
important product he

owns---and since there aren't companies out there designing brain
software, he designed his own, beta tests it every day, and makes
constant updates. That's why he's so outrageously effective, why he can
disrupt multiple huge industries at once, why he can learn so quickly,
strategize so cleverly, and visualize the future so clearly. In this
mindset, we see the essence of the psychitect. Most people strive to
preserve their beliefs at all cost - to protect them from the constant
threats that seek to undermine them. But if you are a psychitect, all
beliefs are really just temporary experiments. Every day is a mental
beta test - an opportunity to iterate, expand, and upgrade your
cognitive software. To uncover and question assumptions, test new
conceptual models, and throw the obsolete ones out. No belief is safe.
The strength of a person's spirit \[can be\] measured by how much truth
he could tolerate... to what extent he needs to have it diluted,
disguised, sweetened. - Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil If
your happiness is dependent on false beliefs, it means you have become
reliant on coping structures which have been built on a bad foundation,
and as soon as storms come in and reality crashes against your shoddy
models of it, you'll be hit with pain and confusion. Anything that
contradicts your beliefs, real world experiences or the

arguments of others, will present a threat to your identity and will
damage your balance of mind.37 You can choose to take on a slow and
gradual process of rebuilding your foundational beliefs and replacing
your current coping structures with those more closely resembling
reality. Your mind is not a delicate garden that needs to be protected
from all threats, but a powerful, antifragile immune system. And by
questioning all of your beliefs and assumptions, you can inoculate
yourself against the pain and confusion of facing the facts, and your
worldview can become more and more robust.38 The conclusions you form
can be troubling at first. But after you have taken your hard-to-swallow
pills, you get to enjoy their invigorating effects. You will grow to
find beauty, comfort, and joy in the understanding which is thought by
some to be unbearable. You will not only learn to live with the truth,
but to assimilate it. To make it a part of you and feel immense
gratitude and awe for it. The key to overcoming your biases is found
deep within your intentions. Overcoming and optimizing yourself must be
more deeply embedded in your desires, in your identity, than the desires
that threaten to undermine it. The desires to be competent, to be
unique, and even to be right, must all fall short of the desire for
self-mastery. You must come to pride yourself, not on the accuracy of
your current beliefs, but on your willingness to abandon your beliefs
for new, more accurate ones. When you insist on

finding the real truth first and learning to love it second, you can
become the master of your own cognition.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3: Values and the Methods of Introspection Do You Want What You
Want? It isn't normal to know what we want. It is a rare and difficult
psychological achievement. - Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality
So maybe our beliefs about the external world are flawed, but if there
is one thing we know, surely it is what is best for us, right? We tend
to take for granted that we know what we want. Much like the beliefs we
examined in the previous chapter, we all like to think we are directing
our lives well. But the evidence suggests it is surprisingly easy to be
delusional about our own self-interest. Though there is less research on
them, ancient and modern thinkers have uncovered many errors we all
share which limit our acquisition of wisdom. The algorithms which most
often lead people astray in life are not

simply distortions of memory, prediction, or pattern recognition in the
external world, but distortions of introspection. And now that we have
laid the groundwork for the mechanisms that bias our beliefs about the
outer universe, we will build on it to reveal the biases of the inner
universe.

We saw in the previous chapter that the illusion of control causes us to
believe we have more control over our circumstances than we actually do,
and to attribute unrelated outcomes to our own actions.1 But we are also
wired to falsely believe we know which outcomes would make us happy.
Anyone who has seen a film in which a protagonist's most desired wishes
are granted by a genie or David Bowie can tell you the problem with this
confidence. Our tendency to reduce complex situations to oversimplified
simulations plays out in our pursuit of happiness, where it

gives us a false confidence in our prediction of wanted or unwanted
outcomes. The butterfly effect states that there are certain systems
which are so complex and sensitive to initial data that precise
prediction of outcomes becomes impossible. This theory explains why our
ability to predict the weather is still so mediocre despite our
advancement in other areas. It has been said that "a butterfly flapping
its wings in Brazil can cause a tornado in Texas."2 But this difficulty
in complex prediction applies to our happiness as well, and the bias
here is our tendency to vastly simplify the complexity of these
real-world events. Philosopher Alan Watts recounts a relevant Chinese
parable: Once upon a time there was a Chinese farmer whose horse ran
away. That evening, all of his neighbors came around to commiserate.
They said, "We are so sorry to hear your horse has run away. This is
most unfortunate." The farmer said, "Maybe." The next day the horse came
back bringing seven wild horses with it, and in the evening everybody
came back and said, "Oh, isn't that lucky. What a great turn of events.
You now have eight horses!" The farmer again said, "Maybe." The
following day his son tried to break one of the horses, and while riding
it, he was thrown and broke his leg. The neighbors then said, "Oh dear,
that's too bad," and the farmer responded, "Maybe." The next day the
conscription officers came around to conscript people into the army, and
they rejected his son because he had a broken leg. Again all the

neighbors came around and said, "Isn't that great!" Again, he said,
"Maybe."3 We often look back on past events and see them with the same
wise perspective we see in the Chinese farmer. We see that the things we
thought were so terrible at the time actually ended up being good for us
in the long run. But almost no one talks about their lives in the moment
with this type of insightful ambiguity. We are always sure of what is
desirable or undesirable at the time. We insist on chasing what we want,
oversimplifying the complex mechanics of the world to an absurd degree.
Relying on our internal lifesimulator to guide us through life is like
relying on a child's crayon map to guide us through New York City. Watts
adds: The whole process of nature is an integrated process of immense
complexity, and it's really impossible to tell whether anything that
happens in it is good or bad --- because you never know what will be the
consequence of the misfortune; or, you never know what will be the
consequences of good fortune. The psychological study of affective
forecasting shows that we not only oversimplify the world, but our
prediction of our own emotional state. Daniel Gilbert, a leading
psychologist studying affective forecasting, discovered that humans
share an algorithm he called impact bias, which

causes us to poorly forecast how we will feel about a certain event or
decision, how intense that feeling will be, and how long it will last.
In other words, our internal emotionsimulator is just as flawed as our
life-simulator.4 In his book, Stumbling on Happiness, Gilbert names
several principles behind our shortcomings. The principle of realism is
"the belief that things are in reality as they appear to be in the
mind." Our brains constantly weave their biases and fabrications into
reality, filling in the gaps so quickly and seamlessly that we don't
even notice anything is off. If you are trying to decide between
attending a college in San Francisco or Seattle, your brain will start
conjuring mental images of both experiences. The image of sunny beaches
and happiness in California may be so lifelike that you fail to consider
that temperature isn't the only determinant of your well-being.5

The principle he calls presentism is "the tendency for current
experience to influence one's views of the past and the future." After
we've eaten a massive stack of pancakes, we can't imagine being hungry
again. When we are happy, we have a very hard time imagining what it
would be like to be sad, and vice versa. So when you're having a blast
cruising in your Hummer stretch limo, it will be hard to relate to your
future self whose house is under water.6 Rationalization is "the act of
causing something to be or to seem reasonable." We experience anxiety
and dread around adversity and loss, believing they will cause us to
feel worse and for longer than they actually will. Our emotional
predictions don't account for the psychological defenses that allow us
to reason away inescapable circumstances. Gilbert provides numerous
examples of unlucky individuals, from twins conjoined at the head, to
prisoners, to people paralyzed from the neck down. And he points out
that despite how terrible we think all these fates are, all of these
people he lists claim to be deeply satisfied. Studies have shown that
one year after their respective incidents, lottery winners and
paraplegics have roughly equal levels of life-satisfaction despite our
deeply contrary intuitions.7 All of these findings tell us that we are
bad at achieving our desired outcomes, bad at accounting for the
complexity of those outcomes, and bad at predicting our emotional
reactions to them. The human condition is starting to make perfect
sense. We're just really bad at things.

OceanofPDF.com

The Right Way to Introspect So what is the moral of this story? That we
don't understand our own well-being and never will? It is momentarily
tempting to simply stop striving in all of our endeavors after
confronting all of these compounded biases. We may briefly consider
becoming a Tibetan monk before realizing we're hungry and need to do
something about it. But I don't think this story ends here. I agree that
most people only stumble onto happiness, but I think there are tools and
practices which can lead us, not only to wrap our mind around our
delusion, but to overcome it and reverse its effects. Introspection has
gotten a bad rap in recent years. It has come to be viewed as an act of
self-absorbed navel-gazing, and some have pointed out that it is often
ineffective. In her book about self-awareness, Insight, Tasha Eurich
points out some counterintuitive findings. Introspection appears to be
generally correlated with lower well-being, higher anxiety, lower
attitudes about oneself, and most surprisingly, lower self-awareness.8
In truth, introspection can cloud our self-perceptions and unleash a
host of unintended consequences. Sometimes it may surface unproductive
and

upsetting emotions that can swamp us and impede positive action.
Introspection might also lull us into a false sense of certainty that
we've identified the real issue. Buddhist scholar Tarthang Tulku uses an
apt analogy: when we introspect, our response is similar to a hungry cat
watching mice. We eagerly pounce on whatever 'insights' we find without
questioning their validity or value.8 But this "pouncing" problem is not
unique to introspection. It is highly reminiscent of the "natural
philosophers" who "pounced" on the belief that the earth was flat and
was made up of only four elements. Scientists have to be trained not to
take their initial hypotheses to be true until they are corroborated by
evidence, but most of us are not scientists. We are never taught not to
take our introspective hypotheses as reliable fact without good reason.
We resort to the same types of oversimplified stories for understanding
our own minds as we do when trying to understand the world. We form
conclusions and explanations about ourselves and our lives based on
intuitive hunches and narratives, failing to break our mental phenomena
down into their basic algorithmic units and account for our biases.
Eurich says those who introspect by asking "what" questions are far more
effective than those who ask "why" questions. But it isn't hard to
change a question to start with a different word without really changing
the question itself. The real key to the "what" questions is that they
tend to be more objective than "why" questions. Although our self-

reflections are necessarily subjective, we can work to make them far
more objective. It has actually been found that meditation experience
predicts introspective accuracy by giving us the distance and
objectivity necessary to see our own minds more clearly.9 And just like
the biases in the previous chapter, we can study the common errors in
introspection that lead people astray. Much like rationality,
introspection can be problematic when done incorrectly. Yet failing to
do it simply is not an option. You cannot live a coherent life without
investigating your own internal variables and factoring them into your
decisions. So like rationality, we must learn to use the tool of
introspection properly. We must apply the same methods and principles
that helped us overcome bias in the previous chapter to introspection.
All truly great thoughts are conceived by walking. - Friedrich
Nietzsche, The Twilight of the Idols If the best position for meditation
is sitting with an upright posture, the best position for reflection is
walking. Walking doesn't just provide valuable exercise and vitamin D.
It provides the perfect amount of stimulation while still allowing you
to quietly reflect. It is difficult to simply sit and reflect for more
than a few minutes without opening up a tab on your computer or pulling
out your smartphone.

Walking takes away the often irresistible temptation of constantly
filling your attention with something.10 Bring a notepad, an app, or
some other way to take down thoughts. The best introspection method I
have used corresponds closely with a technique known as focusing, which
was developed by philosopher Eugene Gendlin. Through his work with
humanistic psychologist Carl Rogers, Gendlin came to believe that
failing to focus on unclear body senses was the key reason some people
seemed not to benefit from therapy.11 To practice it, begin your walk by
listening to your mind without imposing any questions or topics. Relax,
and see if anything comes to you automatically. If not, you can begin to
ask yourself some basic questions about your current state. Gendlin
suggests, "How is my life going? What is the main thing for me right
now?" Talking through these questions out loud is a great way to ensure
you won't be bothered by overly-friendly strangers. Rather than rushing
to answer these questions, let a sense develop in your body. Allow your
attention to turn to a particular problem or area in your life. Maybe
you will be drawn toward uneasiness about a forthcoming transition in
your life, or maybe irritation toward a particular person. Take in all
of the feelings that arise in your body. Try to generate words or images
which describe the feeling, and continue doing so until you come across
one that intuitively captures the feeling. Ask yourself what it is about
this transition or person or idea that makes your chosen phrase or image

resonate so closely. Gendlin says, "Be with the felt sense until
something comes along with a shift, a slight 'give' or release." This
shift should feel like an "ahah!" moment and is the sign of an
introspective breakthrough. By repeating this process on your walks, you
can develop a much clearer sense of your intuitions. You can ask
yourself about which qualities you admire, the current balance of your
lifestyle, or your future aspirations. Get in touch with your "felt
sense" in response to these questions, and be sure to take notes when
you make a realization. You can develop enough clarity into yourself to
build out conceptual maps of your sense of identity, passions, or
ambitions. Anything which can help you escape your habitual thoughts and
conclusions can help you attain more insight. Altering your own state of
consciousness through practices like meditation, chemicals like
psychedelic drugs, or even changes to your routine like travel can
unlock previously hidden depths of your mind. There is no light without
shadow and no psychic wholeness without imperfection. - Carl Jung,
Dreams These depths can be disturbing when first encountered, and this
causes some to avoid being left alone with their own thoughts whenever
possible. But you must explore even the dark places in your mind and
become your own

friend. Failing to understand yourself, your flaws and vices, or your
strengths and potential can hold you back immensely. Spending time alone
is not just for introverts; it is one of the least discussed and most
essential parts of any healthy life.12 The most important relationship
in your life is your relationship with yourself. And like any
relationship, it will degrade if you don't ever dedicate quality time to
it. The best way to stunt your personal growth is to decide that you
have made it - that your beliefs about yourself are correct now, and you
don't need to upgrade them anymore. This decision will disconnect you
from the continual cycle of trial and error, learning and adaptation,
that initiates your own personal evolution. Believing you are not the
creative type will prevent you from taking on creative projects and
proving yourself wrong.13 If you believe money is a scarce resource,
your risk-averse decisions will ensure you miss the abundant
opportunities in front of you.14 The belief that you are unattractive
will make you far less secure and confident, and hence far less
attractive.15 Your self-limiting beliefs might just be the single
largest factor separating the best and worst versions of you.

OceanofPDF.com

The Value System This inner nature is not strong and overpowering and
unmistakable like the instincts of animals. It is weak and delicate and
subtle and easily overcome by habit, cultural pressure, and wrong
attitudes toward it. - Abraham Maslow, Toward a Psychology of Being
There is one area of our minds which we must understand deeply in order
to live great lives - or even to know what that means. One of the great
psychitectural guides, Abraham Maslow, thought each person had a
biologically inscribed inner core in his mind, guiding him in the same
way an acorn is guided toward becoming an oak tree. This inner core was
partially unique to the individual and partially shared among all
humans. And the inner core was the key to achieving deep satisfaction
and the state he called self-actualization. Unlike the much louder
forces of desire, this inner core could easily be ignored or neglected
by the individual to his own detriment.16 I will use the term value
intuitions to refer to the evaluative impulses which cause us attribute
"goodness" or "badness" to certain actions and outcomes. And getting
deeply in touch with our felt sense of these intuitions will

play a key role in the better alternative to the default approach to
life. When we identify patterns in our value intuitions and arrange them
into labeled concepts like "honesty," "compassion," or "discipline,"
they become values, or ideals. And the sum of these values is our value
system, a full conceptual map of what matters to us.

In the previous chapter, we saw that the aim of our belief system was to
build a map of reality that corresponds to reality as closely and
usefully as possible. When it comes to our value system, the goal is to
build a map of our value intuitions which corresponds to those value
intuitions as closely and usefully as possible. Just like with our
belief system, our values can be more or less pixelated, and more

or less accurate. And we can easily be deceived about our own core
values by those around us. If you have never engaged in deliberate
introspection, self-examination, or philosophical inquiry, it can be
said that none of the values with which you identify are actually your
own. You initially inherited your moral framework and direction in life
from those around you. Humans learn by imitation through childhood, and
they do not develop the cognitive capacity to truly question what they
have been taught until adolescence.17 Even after this point, though,
there is no guarantee that a person will actually initiate this process
of questioning. Maybe around this time you rejected the political views
of your parents or the morally dubious actions of your friends. But you
may have merely converted from one brand of dogma to another. To truly
be able to claim that your values belong to you, you must go through an
extensive process of uprooting the relics of your early indoctrination
and examining them with critical rigor. The unexamined life is not worth
living - Socrates, Plato's Apology It is strange that the quote above is
the quote most often associated with the field of philosophy, which
today primarily consists of theoretical and linguistic analysis. But the
word philosophy literally means "love of wisdom."

Originally, philosophers were concerned above all with living a good
life, and studying the ideas of these thinkers can vastly increase your
capacity to do so. If you think philosophy is boring or irrelevant to
your life, it is likely because your early encounters with it were
exactly these things. But the study of philosophy is an indispensable
tool for anyone trying to live the best life possible. Studying the
ideas and values of other thinkers may seem like it would only
indoctrinate us to their ways of thinking, but the thoughts of others
can give us great insight into our own minds. Although we all have our
differences, there are many aspects of our minds which are more or less
true of all people.18 We can study the values acclaimed by the most
reflective thinkers in history for guidance into our own. The key to
finding out which of your values are truly yours is the process of
taking a philosophical wrecking ball to them and seeing what refuses to
fall.19 Philosophy, though unable to tell us with certainty what is the
true answer to the doubts which it raises, is able to suggest many
possibilities which enlarge our thoughts and free them from the tyranny
of custom. Thus, while diminishing our feeling of certainty as to what
things are, it greatly increases our knowledge as to what they may be;
it removes the somewhat arrogant dogmatism of those who have never
traveled into the region of liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our
sense of

wonder by showing familiar things in an unfamiliar aspect. - Bertrand
Russell, The Problems of Philosophy The process of exploring what is
truly important to you can be an incredibly rewarding experience and can
save you from spending an entire life pursuing things that don't matter.
This process of self-examination is never complete, but it is possible
to construct a highly coherent path for your life without the confusion
and conflict that most people never escape.

OceanofPDF.com

Cultivating Value Insight You may be surprised by what you find when you
subject what you thought were your values to critical rigor. Our
capacity for self-deception does not stop short of our values. When we
want or enjoy something enough, we frantically search for rationalized
loopholes to justify it. Albert Speer, master architect of the Third
Reich and top adviser of Adolf Hitler describes his own gradual
corruption in his memoir: In normal circumstances people who turn their
backs on reality are soon set straight by the mockery and criticism of
those around them. In the Third Reich there were not such correctives.
On the contrary, every self-deception was multiplied as in a hall of
distorting mirrors, becoming a repeatedly confirmed picture of a
fantastical dream world which no longer bore any relationship to the
grim outside world. In those mirrors I could see nothing but my own face
reproduced many times over.20 You must ask yourself which historical
atrocities you are contributing to today. Which of your actions have you
been lulled into believing are benign? What has popular opinion or your
own convoluted arguments convinced you is acceptable, or even positive?
By popular opinion, I don't mean popular on the other side, I mean
popular within your

circles. What are the socially acceptable "concentration camps" of the
modern day? Factory farms? Fracking sites? Immigration bans? Prisons?
Fraternities? Abortion clinics? Too far? Did I touched on something
sacred for you? Were you hoping I would pick only practices which were
already fashionable to condemn? Are you trying to figure out my
political views? If you aren't finding uncomfortable truths about your
values, you haven't gone far enough. If you or your groups consider an
issue to be obvious, ethically simple, and taboo to question,
questioning it is exactly what you must do. Conformity will not just
lead you to make bad life choices. The laughing spectators of the Roman
Colosseum, the supportive majority in Nazi Germany, and the Godfearing
and ruthless slave owners of the American south were all conformists.
And if you had lived in these periods and regions, you likely would have
found a way to justify these atrocities.21 Social influence can cause
you to impose pseudo-values on top of your deepest intrinsic values.22
It can bring about horrifying behaviors, and the unreflective individual
will be ignorant to the source of his resulting self-hatred. Convincing
yourself that something does not violate your values does not change the
content of those values. You will slip away from your ideals no matter
how intricate or eloquent your justifications. Some of our value
intuitions relate to how we treat others, but the majority of our values
don't actually fall into

the category we sometimes call "moral." They have to do with beauty,
truth, originality, competence, discretion, etc.23 When you observe
another person taking an action, you may experience a positive emotional
impulse of admiration, or you may have a negative emotional impulse
letting you know that something has violated your values. After enough
life experience, you accumulate enough value intuitions to be able to
find patterns within them. It is the ongoing task of each person to
observe her value intuitions and synthesize her own values into a
coherent system. In order to create a refined value system, you will
need to sit down and map out your intuitions. Create a document, ideally
a highly editable one so you can easily rearrange what you write down.
Create a list of people you deeply admire. These can be people in your
life, ancient historical figures, or even strangers you have only
briefly observed. You do not have to admire everything about these
people.24 Don't do any labeling yet; simply write down the particular
tendencies or example situations with as much precision as possible. You
might write down that you admire one person's tendency to manage
difficult situations with levity, or another person's ability to
captivate the attention of everyone in a room. Your list can be
stream-ofconsciousness at first, but eventually you will want to place
similar examples into organized clusters. Don't stop until you find that
you have covered the full territory of what is

important to you. Create your own titles for each category, trying to
avoid vague virtues like "kindness" or "honor."25 Ultimately, you will
end up with an organized list of your highest individual values. Single
words often fail to fully capture your values. It can be beneficial to
express them in mission statement form, through key phrases such as
"always act as if the whole world were watching, but tell the story as
if I were the only one listening" or "accept, embrace, and adapt to all
of life's challenges, and convert them into opportunities." When done in
parallel with philosophical investigation, you can sort out which of
these values represent cultural dogmas and which ones are based on your
genuine value intuitions. I find that a map of your value system needs
to be updated about every three years. Over time, your experiences pile
up and shed more light on your intuitions, enabling greater nuance and
refinement in your categories. You should never have total confidence in
the value system you have constructed. This map represents an
everevolving and improving draft. You always have to keep inquiring and
synthesizing in order to get closer to your genuine value intuitions.
You observe things you admire or disapprove of, try to extract the
precise aspects you admire, and synthesize these observations into
integrated principles. The value systems you form are clunky early on,
but you will develop a greater capacity for nuance as you accumulate
observations. Perhaps you find that you admire

Tiger Woods' perseverance but not his promiscuity, rather than
idealizing or demonizing the man as a whole. Eventually, these isolated
observations will coalesce into a unified understanding. To get the most
out of this value system you can anthropomorphize it as your ideal self.
Your ideal self is a conglomerate of your highest value intuitions and
admired qualities.26 And this ideal is the north star in your
psychitectural journey. Your ultimate goal, of course, will be to
diminish the gap between your actual self and your ideal self to the
highest degree possible. In order to do this, you need to develop a more
coherent and comprehensive view of your actual self and integrate your
experiences, character traits, values, and drives into a unified whole.
And this ideal will serve a crucial guiding role in proper goal-setting.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4: Cognitive SelfMastery and Wisdom The Decoys to Well-Being The
goals that you have set for yourself may be ones sold to you by the
larger culture - 'Make money! Own your own home! Look great!' - and
while there may be nothing wrong with striving for those things, they
mask the pursuits more likely to deliver true and lasting happiness. In
this case, your priority should be to discern which goals will make you
happy in the long term and to follow them. - Sonja Lyubomirsky, The How
of Happiness In the previous two chapters, we have looked at the methods
for developing rationality and self-awareness. This chapter is about how
these two qualities come together to form wisdom. Wisdom is the pinnacle
of cognitive selfmastery, the first pillar of the self-mastery triad.
Despite the dry manner in which it is normally portrayed, wisdom is not
some consolation prize for aging. The sooner you begin

the endeavor to acquire wisdom, the greater your ability to increase
your satisfaction in life. The word "wisdom" has been used to mean many
things, including the acceptance of spiritual dogmas, the theoretical
understanding of reality, and even the tendency to speak in the form of
enigmatic riddles. Here, we use the term in a very specific way. Wisdom:
The capacity for judging rightly in matters relating to life and
conduct; soundness of judgment in the choice of means and ends. - Oxford
English Dictionary Wisdom is practical insight - knowing what is good
for you - strategic self-interest. Wisdom is about taking the most
rational and insightful beliefs and forming goals based on them. Our
culture is highly goal-oriented in that it advocates setting and
pursuing goals as effectively as possible. But it places much less
emphasis on ensuring that one is setting the right goals. We naturally
acquire beliefs about which goals are worth striving for from our
culture just as we acquire beliefs about the world, and every culture
has its own "success" narrative.1 This narrative assigns arbitrary
milestones that deem people "successful" after they meet them. And we've
all heard our culture's success narrative a thousand times. You are
born, given a name, and also given a cow name and a goat name. You are
given head massages to elongate your skull to make you appear to be a
strong warrior. From

an early age, culture tells you to herd goats. You are told to plow the
fields, learn to raise beehives, and steal livestock from other
communities. If you are a man, you are told that in order to be
"successful," you have to have your head partially shaved, get rubbed
with sand to wash away your sins, and get smeared with cow dung. You are
told to strip naked, jump onto the back of a cow, and then jump across
the backs of a row of fifteen cows, which have also been smeared with
dung. You must do this four times without falling, and are told that
falling off will deem you a failure and a shame to your family. Success
will allow you to marry a woman you have never met, but not before you
accumulate 30 goats and 20 cattle in order to purchase the marriage from
her family. The more wives you accumulate, the more you are deemed a
"success" by your culture. If you are a woman, you are expected to meet
men who have gone through this process, and to beg them to brutally whip
you, not showing any pain the whole time. Cultural narrative dictates
that you marry a man twice your age who has been assigned without your
vote. If your family fails to find you a husband, you have to watch all
of your friends receive phallic-shaped necklaces, indicating their
"success," while you wear only an oval, metal plate on your head. If you
become pregnant outside of marriage, your child will be considered
cursed, and your peers will encourage you to abandon it. If you do get
married, your husband will beat you routinely for no apparent reason
until you have had two

to three children. The more scars you receive, the more "successful" you
will be considered by your tribe. Not the story you were expecting? Oh,
you must not be a member of the Hamar community of southwestern
Ethiopia. I guess I just assumed. Yes, these are all very standard
practices in the Hamar community, and they are not even the most bizarre
traditions we see in cultures around the world.2 What is really hard to
grasp is that the Hamar would likely view our culture's definitions of
success to be just as strange and arbitrary as we find theirs. The
special thing about the western narrative is that every industry which
can make itself vaguely relevant is fighting for a piece of it. Just as
our culture builds onto our genes and creates new decoys to well-being,
our economic system builds onto culture and introduces more diversions
still. Businesses capitalize on the great tourist traps of life - the
things which are presented as highly desirable by culture and industry,
but are not necessarily good deals at all. And in order to sell these
fantasies, they have to find ways to shape culture to tell us what it
means to be "successful."3 My goal here is not to suggest that getting
married, buying nice cars, or climbing corporate ladders are bad
decisions, nor is it to offer a tired critique of capitalism,
consumerism, or popular culture. None of these decisions are invalid in
and of themselves, and if I told you they were, I'm sure you wouldn't
listen anyway.

I do not regret my decision to attend college. I don't regret spending
time working in order to make money, spending money on vacations, being
in a relationship, or any of the other choices I've made that happen to
mesh with the success narratives of my culture. And that is because I
have not done these things out of blind conformity to a social script.
Being an unconditional nonconformist is no badge of honor. What
ultimately matters is the foundation underlying your aspirations.

OceanofPDF.com

The Goal Hierarchy We start trying to be wise when we realize that we
are not born knowing how to live, but that life is a skill that has to
be acquired. - Alain de Botton, Essays in Love This is a goal:

Goals are pretty simple on their own. But goals tend to chain together,
like this:

Some of our goals are end goals, and others serve as the instrumental
means to reach them. The goal hierarchy is a structure of motivations
with abstract goals like "raise financially responsible children" at the
top, strategies like "teach children about Roth IRAs" in the middle, and
individual actions like "figure out what a Roth IRA is" at the bottom.4
As you can imagine, the interactions of our goals can form hierarchies
far more complex than we could visualize, but we can capture the basic
idea.

"Why am I doing this?" When you ask yourself this question, you are
effectively examining your goal hierarchy.5 And when you don't have a
cogent answer, you are examining a goal hierarchy that needs work. The
goal hierarchy of most animals is hardly a hierarchy at all. All actions
are taken because immediate drives compel the organism to take them.6
This structure looks something like this:

That symbol at the bottom represents a conglomerate of the organism's
drives. Due to the incredible ability of humans to strategically
orchestrate the satisfaction of their desires, the default goal
hierarchy for humans is far more complex.

Basic drives determine which goals are to be pursued, but reason is used
to determine effective methods for achieving them. Default goals are
automatically set in a bottom-up fashion by our drives. By default, our
goals are set up to serve genetic purposes, including everything from
eating to keep ourselves from dying to doing favors for others to
increase our social status. The default goal hierarchy does not result
in a particularly coherent life - it is a patchwork of desires which is
modulated by biology and the popular opinions of our culture and social
circles.7 Author Ted Chu cites a relevant story: There is a story about
a reporter who went to a remote village and interviewed a young shepherd
about the meaning of life. 'Why do you shepherd a herd of sheep?' asked
the reporter. 'Because I want

to accumulate wealth,' the shepherd answered. Then the reporter asked,
'Why do you want to accumulate wealth?' The reply: 'So that I will be
able to get married.' 'Why do you want to get married?' 'So that I can
have a son.' 'What do you need a son for?' The shepherd stopped and
thought for a while, and answered, 'So he can continue to shepherd the
sheep.'8 None of us like the idea of having incoherent goals - of
spending our entire lives working toward things that don't matter, even
to us. We would prefer to have goals which make sense and connect
together in a coherent fashion. Fortunately, goal construction is like
breathing - it happens automatically by default, but can also be done
reflectively and coherently.9 So how do we go about setting good goals?
There has been a long-standing debate on the relationship between reason
and the passions, a term which generally combines emotions and desires.
Plato argued that reason was like a charioteer, and the irrational
impulses and emotions were the horses which pulled in often conflicting
directions. Desire for wealth may pull an individual in one direction,
and the desire for social status may pull in another. Bodily impulses
for food and sex may pull in other directions still. It was the role of
reason to keep them in check and guide them in the right direction.10
And it has been found that those who are capable of resisting the
temptation of desire and delaying gratification in favor of a

more rational choice are more successful and happy in life, suggesting
that Plato may be right.11

But there were those who disagreed as well. David Hume argued that
reason could not possibly be a motive for action, and that every act is
ultimately motivated by emotion. He famously claimed that "Reason is,
and ought only to be the slave of the passions."12 What he meant by this
is that reason can be used to determine the best means to a desired end,
but cannot generate an end or motivate a person to action by itself.
Other, later philosophers like Nietzsche have taken Hume's side of this
debate. Studies of people with neurological disorders, such as one
famous patient named Elliot who suffered ventromedial prefrontal cortex
damage, shed light on a life unmotivated by emotion and desire. These
people fail to process emotions in their decisions, which results in a
total inability to make decisions at all, even those as simple as which

restaurant to go to for dinner.13 Neuroscientist Antonio Damasio
concluded that 'well-tuned and deployed emotion... is necessary for the
edifice of reason to operate properly.'14 These findings suggest that
Hume's side is right.

So which is it? Should we follow our heads or our hearts?

OceanofPDF.com

The Dukkha Bias For countless generations our biochemical system adapted
to increasing our chances of survival and reproduction, not our
happiness. The biochemical system rewards actions conducive to survival
and reproduction with pleasant sensations. But these are only an
ephemeral sales gimmick. - Yuval Noah Harari, Homo Deus During a trip to
South America, I was once struck by how frequently the word "quiero"
appears in Spanish music. "Quiero" means "I want," and I would guess
that the phrase "I want" is no less common in American music.
Television, film, and music all reinforce the idea that we should get
what we want. That our desires are valid and there is something wrong if
they are not satisfied. That our only chances at true fulfillment lie in
immediate pleasure, romantic passion, material possession, power, and
prestige. And we all know it would be nearly impossible to create a
great film in which everything is just as it should be and everyone is
pretty much cool with it. Our software was programmed for specific
genetic purposes, and it was very important for these purposes that we
follow our desires without questioning them too much.15

These drives have the nifty feature of automatically setting our goals
for us, and biased cognitive algorithms convince us that their
gratification will make us happy. But the major problem with this
approach to life is this: Desires don't point to happiness, and their
gratification is no more likely to result in it than their denial. It
may seem strange that desires wouldn't be indicators of desirability,
but we will see that it is true. We find it incomprehensible that
lottery winners and paraplegics would have the same levels of
satisfaction because we want to win the lottery and don't want to lose
the use of our legs. Our desires are very good at posing as guides to
genuine satisfaction. We are programmed to tie these separate phenomena
together. We are built not to notice how little our actual emotional
satisfaction corresponds to the objects of our desires. You may have
heard of the neurotransmitter dopamine, which is strongly connected with
desire and pleasure. Dopamine is a major part of the brain's reward
system, so it is understandable to assume that it is the reward. It is
popularly referred to as the pleasure chemical, after all. But this view
is incorrect. Dopamine is the primary chemical behind desire and
anticipation, but it isn't the pleasure chemical - it is better
understood as the promise chemical.16 Dopamine is responsible for the
anticipation of pleasure that compels us to act. The feeling we
typically call "pleasure" is primarily caused by endogenous opioids and

endorphins. Dopamine is the craving and the compulsion which causes us
to take another hit or try our luck on the slots one more time. It has
no obligation to deliver on its promise, and very often, it doesn't.
Mice are normally very eager to drink sugar water, but mice who have
been modified to be incapable of producing dopamine do not seem to crave
or actively pursue this delicious drink. Interestingly, when they are
fed sugar water, they experience the same amount of pleasure and
enjoyment as a normal mouse, but they will not mind when it is taken
away.17 Deep brain stimulation implants have allowed people to give
themselves a hit of dopamine at the push of the button. Although these
people do press the button many times per day, they have reported the
feeling as being less one of pleasure and more of uncontrollable
compulsion.18 These findings lead us to the conclusion that wanting and
enjoying are two entirely separate phenomena.19 Desire can be programmed
by pleasure, but just like in the training of a dog, it is the immediate
pleasures that reinforce these desires.20 Even though we may leave the
casino feeling deeply disappointed, the quick and immediate spikes of
pleasure we feel each turn we take on the slot machine condition our
desire to want to do it again. These all serve as examples that our
cravings, short-term or otherwise, are decoys to well-being.

Around the 6th-century BCE, a man known as Siddhartha Gautama left a
life of luxury to seek enlightenment. After apparent success, The
Buddha, as he was thereafter known, began teaching and disseminating his
path to liberation.21 SiddhÄrtha taught that ordinary human life is
inherently characterized by something called dukkha, or
"unsatisfactoriness." He was partially referring to the "bad things" in
life - the inevitable suffering we all face at some point or another in
the hands of unpleasant living conditions, sickness, and loss. Losing or
failing to attain what we want undeniably results in pain.22 He was also
referring to the impermanence of even the "good things" in our lives.
All things which seem to make us happy are impermanent. As soon as we
attain something which brings us joy, we become dependent upon it. And
when the tides inevitably shift, we become vulnerable to the suffering
which comes with loss. When we long for things we do not have, or long
not to lose the things we do, we are craving - grasping for control and
permanence in a world in which these things can never be attained.23 But
the Buddha argued that unsatisfactoriness was built into the very
structure of desire. When it comes to satisfying our cravings, the
pleasure we experience and the pain that comes later are inextricably
tied together. Not only are many of the things for which we long
impermanent, but even permanent achievements do not result in permanent
satisfaction.24

We are built with a very clever mechanism which causes us to become
quickly dissatisfied with our achievements and possessions and begin to
look for ways to get even more (hedonic adaptation).25 At some point, it
is inevitable that even the luckiest person will have nowhere to go but
down relative to her own expectations. In Why Buddhism Is True, Robert
Wright outlines a basic principle of Buddhism: Humans tend to anticipate
more in the way of enduring satisfaction from the attainment of goals
than will in fact transpire. This illusion, and the resulting mind-set
of perpetual aspiration, makes sense as a product of natural selection,
but it's not exactly a recipe for lifelong happiness. So yes, loss or
failure to attain desired outcomes results in very real spikes of pain.
And success at attaining desired outcomes results in short spikes of
pleasure, but this pleasure quickly turns to pain when we lose what we
previously gained. And even when we manage to attain semi-permanent
achievements, we quickly adapt to our success, and the failure to live
up to our new expectations results in more pain. But the real essence of
dukkha is not that life is suffering, as it has been interpreted before.
It is that we are not built to reap real satisfaction from the
attainment of our desired goals, but we are built not to notice this
fact.

Most of us don't consider our lives to be all pain. Many of us do feel
relatively satisfied with our lives. Hence Gilbert's book title,
Stumbling on Happiness. We have to stumble onto happiness because our
well-being fluctuates independently of desire gratification. We aren't
just bad predictors. We're operating within a faulty framework - a false
theory for how psychological well-being works. In order to attain
genuine fulfillment, we have to learn to quit trusting our wants as
valid indicators of what will genuinely satisfy us. If we could learn to
ignore our desires, or better yet, use them, and understand the real
mechanics of satisfaction, we could take our well-being out of the hands
of chance and maximize it.

OceanofPDF.com

Setting Defined Goals Anyone who has not groomed his life in general
towards some definite end cannot possibly arrange his individual actions
properly. It is impossible to put the pieces together if you do not have
in your head the idea of the whole... The bowman must first know what he
is aiming at: then he has to prepare hand, bow, bowstring, arrow and his
drill to that end. Our projects go astray because they are not addressed
to a target. No wind is right for a seaman who has no predetermined
harbour. - Michel de Montaigne, The Complete Essays The second type of
goal archetype is called the defined goal hierarchy.

The defined goal hierarchy is constructed through a topdown
determination in which our reflective mind calls the shots. It is
developed consciously and shaped to be coherent, unified, and
purposeful. The symbol at the top represents the preponderance of your
values, and in this case, those ideals are the determinants of all other
goals. Your goal hierarchy probably isn't adequately represented by
either of these archetypes. It probably looks more like this:

Our goals are typically a mixed bag - some have been set reflectively
and others reflexively. But when you ask "Why am I doing this?" you take
a step toward building a better goal hierarchy. When you realize that
you are pursuing something arbitrary, the ends that your drives or peers
or parents told you were worthwhile, you have the opportunity to take
corrective measures. The problem with the Plato-Hume debate is that it
simplifies the passions a bit too far. There is a useful distinction to
be made between drives, the "hot" motivational forces which compel us to
act, and values, the intuitive ideals which tell us what is actually
important to us. Both could be called "passions," but it is important to
separate the two qualia.

Value intuitions and desires can be easily confused. Both could be
described as preferences of an affective nature, but they are different
in meaningful ways. When you reflect on your values, you don't feel a
sense of craving, a motivational force pulling you toward them. They are
always there, but unlike desires, they allow you to neglect them if you
choose. Desires are the screams you can't ignore, but values are the
whispers it is often hard to notice.26 In the ideal mind, desires are
modulated: bent to our will so they serve our values (we will learn how
to do this in a few chapters). Values are to be uncovered, worked
toward, and embodied. By reintroducing reason at this point, we can
reconcile the two seemingly correct views espoused by philosophers. Our
values are at the top. Reason is in the middle, and is used to determine
which goals will most effectively serve those values. And our drives at
the bottom are used to get us there.

Desires are like the gas in a car. They are what fuel us, but they
should always be subordinate to reason. Reason is the steering wheel
that coordinates the aimless and often conflicting sea of drives in a
strategic and coherent direction, but reason must always be subordinate
to our values. We have to use reason to set rational goals, but those
goals have to be guided by our emotional values to be worthy ends. Our
values are the compass, or perhaps the GPS coordinates for our
direction. Our ideals determine the ideal direction, and our rational
mind and desires work together to get us there. Mixing up any of these
relationships can be catastrophic. Values are great for deciding what is
important, but they won't take you there. You can spend a life dreaming
about your ideals without ever moving closer to embodying them.
Similarly, attempting to use pure reason to determine your aims or
motivate you to achieve

them is like sitting in a parked car turning the steering wheel. You
would remain motivationally impotent and perfectly static in your life,
just like Elliot. And we can all see that flooring the gas pedal without
using the steering wheel will only guide you into the nearest lamppost.
Using our drives as a guide to our direction in life, or to determine
the most effective strategy for getting there, is a recipe for a life
full of impulsive mistakes.

Strong desires can be a great thing.27 Having a car with a powerful
engine is only a bad thing if you don't have the skill and control to
wield that power without wrecking. Although we all look to our emotions
to determine desirable goals and evaluations, making decisions with your
emotions and without reasoning is known as the affect heuristic, and
results in some of the most profound mistakes humans make.28 Some people
will argue that there are some decisions you should make with your head
and others you should make with your heart. But this dichotomy is
problematic. All decisions must be made with your head and your "heart,"
but each has a very specific

place.29 Contrary to what your Enneagram test may have told you, there
aren't really rational people and emotional people. There are people who
are better at thinking clearly and coordinating their desires in the
direction of their values, and those who are worse at it. Our goals are
informed by both our values and cognitive rationality. We determine the
best ends in our lives by introspecting and consulting our values. And
we determine the best means by developing the most accurate views about
the world possible and using reason to strategize. These two capacities
come together to form wisdom. Meaning if you harbor biases distorting
either your rational understanding or introspective inquiry, your goals
will be distorted as well. This makes the process of eliminating
arbitrary goals and constructing wise ones in their place a complex but
crucial psychitectural pursuit.

There are only a few who control themselves and their affairs by a
guiding purpose; the rest do not proceed; they are merely swept along,
like objects afloat in a river. - Seneca, Letters from a Stoic When you
reflect on your life, ask yourself if you really chose it. If you are
living it because it truly allows you to reach your ideals, or because
the housing industry wanted you to think it does. If you really want to
pursue that prestigious career as a notary, or if your parents just
convinced you that you do. If your life is genuinely the product of a
top-down goal strategy in which your decisions are directed toward your
ideals, you'll get no criticism here. But if you look around you and see
a life that looks like a

cookie cutter - one that would seem to the Hamar community like blind
conformity to arbitrary "success" milestones, it may be time to pause,
reflect, and make use of wisdom. The demarcation between a positive and
a negative desire or action is not whether it gives you an immediate
feeling of satisfaction but whether it ultimately results in positive or
negative consequences. - Dalai Lama XIV, The Art of Happiness Wisdom
allows you to understand that investing in your education is probably a
better means to becoming a billionaire than investing in lottery
tickets. But even more crucially, wisdom allows you to question whether
becoming a billionaire is a worthy end in the first place. The heart of
the pursuit of wisdom is that you can be easily deceived about your own
well-being.

Wisdom is all about having a coherent hierarchical tree of reasons for
all of your actions, not a fragmented set of rules. Most people have
been taught that there are things which are right and things that are
wrong, independent of context. That these moral concerns represent a
separate consideration from practical ones. But the truth is that moral
rules are like training wheels for people who haven't yet developed
adequate wisdom.30 If you have cultivated wisdom, you may refrain from
lying, not because it's "wrong," but because you have learned that
telling a lie almost always results in more complications, damaged
relationships, and worse outcomes.31 You try not to hurt others, not
because that would be "wrong," but because you have made the

introspective observation that these actions make you feel worse about
yourself. When you take any action, you must carefully observe the
satisfaction it brings and how long it lasts. Just as the feeling of
cognitive confusion should raise a red flag in your mind, the dissonance
between your expected emotional consequences and actual ones should grab
your attention. If you expect that your new Segway will result in
powerfully and enduringly increased satisfaction but it only excites you
for a few days and then makes you regret selling your car and losing
friends, you must notice and reflect. You have to recall this unexpected
experience the next time you contemplate a major purchase. Maybe the
desire for revenge leads you to react to an act of aggression with
vengeance, and it only causes you guilt. Maybe a passionate affair
doesn't leave you feeling more satisfied with your life after it has run
its course. What makes wise people wise is that they notice this, and
they change their goals in the future. You cannot keep living your life
without adjusting the algorithms which led you to faulty decisions. You
must revise your beliefs about your own well-being to prevent yourself
from making the same mistakes indefinitely.32 The wise have carefully
observed and learned of the pitfalls of emotional prediction. They have
developed an understanding of their own well-being trajectory. They have
learned, from their own experience, that of others, or reflection, that
the thing which seems like the best idea can

be illusory. They are perceptive into their own well-being, and are not
only able to observe these intuitions, but able to synthesize them into
"rules" to guide their behavior when similar patterns emerge in the
future. They have identified counter-intuitive practical truths, and
crucially, make the decision to listen to them rather than making the
same mistakes when they know better. As you adjust and refine your
cognitive algorithms, you elevate your degree of cognitive self-mastery.
You free yourself from the confused life which culture prescribes for
you, and you set your course for a truly fulfilling and intrinsically
rewarding life in alignment with the vision of your ideal self.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5: Emotional Algorithms and the Art of Restructuring Controlling
Your Feelings Men are disturbed not by things, but by the views which
they take of things. - Epictetus, Enchiridion The second realm of
psychitecture is emotional. This chapter bridges the gap between the
cognitive and the emotional by showing the relationship between the two.
Emotional self-mastery is just what it sounds like: the ability to
control one's own emotional experience. For some people, emotional
self-mastery will sound like fiction. The idea that we cannot control
our emotions has become quite fashionable in popular culture. Music
tells us you can't help how you feel. Folk psychology and self-help tell
us that attempting to control your emotions is the same as running from
them. Popular self-help author Mark Manson

says "People who believe that emotions are the be-all-endall of life
often seek ways to 'control' their emotions. You can't. You can only
react to them."1 The argument typically goes that emotions are meant to
teach us something. Yes, every ice cream-binging self-pity session you
have is trying to guide you someplace very special in your life.
Apparently, trying not to feel a certain emotion you were "meant" to
feel is like running away from destiny and blinding yourself to all of
the valuable lessons in store for you. And if you would prefer to learn
your lessons in life without the accompanying anxiety, anger, and
despair, well you must be a coward. The arguments are all very mature
and reasonable. There is just one problem with them. They're dead wrong.
The fact that you can control your emotions is well-established
psychological fact.2 You don't just learn how to deal with, channel, or
react to your emotions. You change, modulate, and control them. If you
had failed to learn how to control your emotions at all from childhood
to adulthood, you would most certainly have a severe developmental
disorder.3 There are a few things we can grant to those who oppose this
view. First, it is true that our natural emotions can sometimes, even
often serve our goals. Trying to socialize and form relationships, for
example, without the help of our emotions would be utterly impossible.4
But because our emotions were developed to benefit our genes, not us, in
the world of our ancestors, not the world we live in, there is

no guarantee they are always best for us.5 Emotions often lead us in the
opposite direction of our highest goals, cause us to act in ways we
later regret, and force us to suffer when there is absolutely no benefit
to doing so. That is why we not only can learn to control our emotions,
if we want to live a great life, we must. The problem with the emotions
is not that they are untamed forces or vestiges of our animal past; it
is that they were designed to propagate copies of the genes that built
them rather than to promote happiness, wisdom, or moral values. - Steven
Pinker, How the Mind Works Critics would also be correct in stating that
suppression, the brute force "willing away" of emotion, is ineffective
and often backfires.6 I also would not recommend denying your bad
feelings or attempting to hide them from others at all times. But these
are far from the only methods to this expansive art. For those who
disagree, the science of emotional self-regulation would like a word.
Emotion Regulation refers to shaping which emotions one has, when one
has them, and how one experiences or expresses these emotions. - James
Gross, Handbook of Emotion Regulation

According to James Gross, one of the leading researchers in emotion
regulation, there are five ways that people effectively control their
feelings. The first three are quite obvious: we can choose the
situations we enter (situation selection), change those situations once
we are in them (situation modification), or choose only to pay attention
to the things which make us feel the way we want to feel (attentional
deployment). The fifth one is pretty straightforward as well: We can try
to change our emotional response by listening to some music, getting
drunk, or just getting some much needed sleep (response modulation). The
fourth method, and the one we are most interested in here, is called
cognitive change. In other words, we can make changes in our minds,
perfectly healthy changes I might add, which allow us to determine our
emotional experience from within.7 Practicing this art will allow you to
gradually stop being upset by setbacks. Mastering it will put your
emotional experience completely in your hands. If you take it on, you
should expect to start hearing about how composed you remain in
difficult situations. But this interpretation doesn't quite do justice
to the psychitectural habits you will develop. You will learn how to
rewire your emotions in real time, and the speed at which you can
neutralize or reverse negative emotions will increase. No, you will
never have perfect, one-hundred percent control over your emotions.8 But
you can develop a truly surprising and increasing amount of control by
mastering a

few powerful psychotechnologies. This is not some esoteric, dark art
that takes a lifetime to learn, nor is there anything fundamentally
mystical or spiritual about it. You can learn how to make the changes in
your mind which will allow you to take control of your emotions and feel
the way you would like to feel more and more of the time.

OceanofPDF.com

The Principle of Cognitive Mediation I saw that all the things I feared,
and which feared me had nothing good or bad in them save insofar as the
mind was affected by them. - Baruch Spinoza, Ethics Let us look at the
emotional algorithm. We may be tempted to present it as a simple "if x
then y" like, "If I get cut off in traffic, then experience anger."

Given this representation, the default approach to dealing with emotions
makes perfect sense. How else could we possibly control our emotional
state besides trying to change our external circumstances? As you study
the inner workings of your mind, and the wisdom of some of the greatest
psychitectural visionaries, I think you will find that

the actual structure of emotional algorithms is not quite so simple. As
mentioned above, our attention plays a major role in our emotional
responses. There are some cases in which the best route to getting rid
of a negative emotion is to simply stop thinking about an issue and
divert our attention to another activity. Engaging in a hobby or talking
to a friend can be quick ways to short-circuit a rumination spiral
before it takes control of your mood.9

One of the most highly touted benefits of mindfulness is its ability to
pull a person out of undesirable emotions. A person who has cultivated a
high degree of mindfulness can focus deeply on the sensations that
constitute emotional experiences, taking away much of their impact.10
But though useful, mindfulness is not the most thorough solution to
unwanted emotions. When you circumvent an emotion through mindfulness,
the original emotional algorithm remains unchanged, and similar
situations will continue to trigger it. In order to understand how to
change these algorithms for good, we have to go deeper.

When we detect a stick that looks like a snake, it may cause us to jump
out of fear before we even know why. This is because it was advantageous
for the brain to build a direct neural route from our visual cortex,
which processes visual stimuli, to our amygdala, which activates
emotional responses like fear.11 But for nearly all of the harmful
emotions that challenge us today, our perception of events goes through
our rational prefrontal cortex before reaching the emotional limbic
system.12 The cognitive interpretation the mind forms of this stimulus
is called an appraisal, and our appraisal of a situation determines our
emotional response.13

Emotional algorithms can actually be illustrated by building onto
cognitive algorithms. Emotions arise from a discrepancy between a
desired goal and our perceptions of our current status in relation to
it. We suffer when we perceive reality to move away from our desired
reality, and we experience positive emotion when reality nears our

desired reality.14 An understanding of this model will illuminate two
major leverage points for controlling our emotions: Changing our
perceptions and changing our desires. This chapter's focus is on
changing our perceptions. The ancient Greek philosophy of Stoicism was
founded by Zeno of Citium in the 3rd-century BCE, and its ideas were
further developed by later philosophers including the Greek slave
Epictetus, Seneca the Younger, and Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius.15
Stoicism advocated for seeking satisfaction in life, not through the
satisfaction of one's appetites, but through their relinquishment.
Unlike the Epicureans, the Stoics rejected pleasure altogether, and
thought that emotions and desires were pathological. The school of
thought placed strong emphasis on the sharp distinction between
circumstances which are in the control of the individual and those which
are beyond it.16 Of all existing things some are in our power, and
others are not in our power. In our power are thought, impulse, will to
get and will to avoid, and, in a word, everything which is our own
doing. Things not in our power include the body, property, reputation,
office, and in a word, everything which is not our own doing. Things in
our power are by nature free, unhindered, untrammeled; things not in our
power are weak, servile, subject to hindrance, dependent on others. -
Epictetus, Enchiridion

The ideal Stoic would refrain from any qualitative judgment of an event
or circumstance and view it with total objectivity. Everything from good
fortune, to insult, to our closest relationships should all be viewed
with indifference.17 Though seemingly harsh, there are some aspects of
the Stoic philosophy which have proven to be powerful antidotes to
suffering, and which have even influenced modern therapy.18 The Stoics
were some of the first to point out that our environmental stimuli seem
not to have direct control over our emotional experience, and that our
thoughts must be complicit in any emotional reaction. Epictetus said,
Remember, it is not enough to be hit or insulted to be harmed, you must
believe that you are being harmed. If someone succeeds in provoking you,
realize that your mind is complicit in the provocation. - Epictetus,
Enchiridion This perspective was reexamined in the late 20th-century and
has come to represent a core principle of our current psychological
understanding. The idea that our cognitions mediate our emotions is
critical for explaining the variation of emotional responses we observe
among individuals. This cognitive model is the foundational premise
underlying the

most effective therapeutic method ever devised, cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT).19 Aaron Beck is known as the father of cognitive therapy,
which in conjunction with Albert Ellis's rational emotive behavior
therapy, led to the development of modern CBT. Beck observed that all of
the main psychotherapeutic methods of his day, from the psychoanalytic
to the behavioral, shared the assumption that neuroses arise through
impenetrable forces outside of the individual's awareness or control.
Whether these forces were of chemical or historical origin, they
required a trained healer to resolve. Beck proposed an idea which was
not at all new, but was foreign to psychotherapy at the time: Let us
conjecture, for the moment, that a person's consciousness contains
elements that are responsible for the emotional upsets and blurred
thinking that lead him to seek help. Moreover, let us suppose that the
patient has at his disposal various rational techniques he can use, with
proper instruction, to deal with these disturbing elements in his
consciousness. - Aaron Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional
Disorders It is very likely that you experience certain negative
emotions habitually in response to the events in your life. But as you
introspect, you will find that these repetitive feelings are always
preceded or accompanied by thoughts.

A thought which interprets an event to be good will result in a positive
emotion, and one that interprets it to be bad will result in a negative
one. In other words, when our cognitions (accurate or not) conflict with
our desires, we become unhappy, and vice versa. Depending on whether
someone appraises a stimulus as beneficial or detrimental to his
personal domain, he experiences a 'positive' or 'negative' reaction. -
Aaron Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional

Disorders What you may not realize is just how much power you have to
choose the interpretation of these events. Cognitive therapy says that
the cognitive catalysts for our emotional reactions are called negative
automatic thoughts.20 These cognitions are habitual interpretations of
patterns in our experience. Does this description remind you of
anything? These automatic thoughts, just like the biases from the
previous section, are the harmful algorithms which get in the way of our
goals. In this case, our happiness. Cognitions may be triggered by real
world events, but they are ultimately the product of our beliefs and
desires. The emotional algorithm is triggered by the cognitive habits
which may or may not be accurate representations of reality. And very
often, Beck found, they are not accurate at all.

Beck observed that each person in his studies with depression and
anxiety experienced predictable cognitive distortions. Mildly neurotic
people had subtle misperceptions; severely neurotic people had massively
warped worldviews. All of these errors can be corrected, regardless of
severity. Today, CBT is used to treat depression, several forms of
anxiety, OCD, PTSD, and just about every other emotional disorder.
Furthermore, CBT is the most empirically effective therapeutic method
ever devised, beating out even the best antidepressant medications for
some disorders. And even more impressively, studies have found that
simply assigning patients to read Feeling Good, a selfhelp book by David
Burns which distills the concepts of CBT, is just as effective in
treating depression as a full course of anti-depressant medication.21
One study found that after

simply reading Feeling Good and completing some of its exercises,
seventy-five percent of the depressed patients studied no longer
qualified for the disorder.22 Our research reveals the unexpected:
Depression is not an emotional disorder at all! The sudden change in the
way you feel is of no more causal relevance than a runny nose is when
you have a cold. Every bad feeling you have is the result of your
distorted negative thinking. Illogical pessimistic attitudes play the
central role in the development and continuation of all your symptoms.
Intense negative thinking always accompanies a depressive episode, or
any painful emotion for that matter. - David Burns, Feeling Good Though
not all cases of depression may fit this simplistic template, Dr.Â Burns
is right in pointing out the central role distorted thinking generally
plays in the disorder. The biggest problem I see with CBT is the T:
Therapy. The vast majority of people do not consider themselves to be in
need of therapy. Though some of these people are prevented from going to
therapy by pride or fear, many of them are right in thinking they are
relatively healthy, normal individuals. But we saw in previous chapters
that healthy, normal individuals suffer from countless biases. Some of
these biases are bound to manifest in one's emotional life in the

form of negative automatic thoughts. This explains why the belief that
we cannot control our emotions is so prevalent. We don't learn the
methods for overcoming our lack of emotional control because the
inability to control one's emotions is considered normal. No clear line
separates healing from upgrading. Medicine almost always begins by
saving people from falling below the norm, but the same tools and
know-how can then be used to surpass the norm. - Yuval Noah Harari, Homo
Deus You may think that because you haven't been diagnosed with
depression, the methods found in a therapeutic method would be
irrelevant to you. But let me ask you this: When is the last time you
experienced an unwanted emotion, if you're honest? In the last week? The
last day? The last hour? Chances are, you experience emotions you would
rather not experience regularly. What if you could identify the roots of
these emotions and unplug them for good? Cognitive therapy offers a
basic toolkit for dealing with emotions to people who lack it. But it is
entirely possible to take these methods to an advanced level and master
them.

OceanofPDF.com

Emotional Alchemy Indeed, in humans the cognitive apparatus can greatly
shorten, prolong, or otherwise modify the more 'hardwired' emotional
tendencies we share with the other animals. - Jaak Panksepp, Affective
Neuroscience Immediately after an emotional response, our rational mind
has the opportunity to reflect and reinterpret the information before it
feeds back into our emotions. Reappraisal, also called reframing, is the
act of reinterpreting the meaning of an emotional stimulus, altering the
resulting emotional trajectory. In other words, every time we experience
a negative emotion, we are given the gift of reinterpretation, and this
reinterpretation is a key leverage point to controlling our emotions.23
Reappraisal has been found by both self reports and functional imaging
studies to reliably increase positive emotion and decrease negative
emotion, though it can also be used to do the opposite if desired.24 Its
use is also correlated with enhanced memory, closer interpersonal
relationships, and overall mental health. It must be stressed that
reappraisal is not the same thing as the positive

thinking which is so popular in today's self-help section. Thinking
positive thoughts will not force the negative ones away, nor will the
brute force suppression discussed earlier, which has been shown to
increase painful emotion and depressive symptoms.25

Reappraisal is an active process of replacing old pathways of reasoning
with new, more accurate ones. Reframing is often quickly glossed over as
an antidote to emotional pain, but the skill of reappraisal can be
developed to an expert level. I have found that as you practice this
skill, you get quicker and quicker at finding adaptive interpretations
of situations. You can actually become so quick at reappraising a
situation that you bypass the negative emotion altogether.26 You pause
and remind yourself that the person who cut you off in traffic was not,
in fact, trying to make you wreck, and is just doing their best. That
the loss of your job does not make you a total failure, and may
ultimately lead to a better outcome for you. You can

gradually eliminate entire emotional categories, such as jealousy27 or
self-blame,28 preventing them from ever afflicting you. Reappraisal is
an in-the-moment strategy we can use any time we are dealing with an
undesired emotion. But in order to build a truly better mind, we are
going to have to go a bit deeper to the core of emotional psychitecture.
We don't simply want to become aware of our harmful emotional reactions
or change them as we are dealing with them. We want to remove them on a
systematic level. We want to reprogram the cognitive algorithms which
gave rise to them.

OceanofPDF.com

Restructuring Your Emotions My students and I have found that truly
happy individuals construe life events and daily situations in ways that
seem to maintain their happiness, while unhappy individuals construe
experiences in ways that seem to reinforce unhappiness. - Sonja
Lyubomirsky29 Wouldn't it be nice if we automatically chose the adaptive
interpretation of events as soon as they happened? In order to reprogram
bad emotional algorithms, we have to examine the beliefs at their root,
identify the distortions, and practice their rational rebuttal until it
has been internalized. This method for obliterating bad emotional
algorithms and replacing them with adaptive ones is known as cognitive
restructuring.

Cognitive restructuring is the fundamental tool of emotional
psychitecture, and psychological research has found it to be highly
effective for eliminating negative emotional responses.30 The first step
is to keep a log in the form of a notepad or a smartphone app.31 Try to
take a note of every undesirable emotion you notice - anything from
minor annoyance to severe anxiety. The simple act of keeping a log
should cause you to notice many more of these emotions than you normally
would. Every time you log an emotion, take a note of the situation which
triggered it, and if possible, the chain of thoughts which immediately
preceded it. Over time, you will begin to notice patterns and trends.
You will find that certain lines of reasoning dominate your emotional
experience. You may find that a certain kind of mistaken reasoning is
responsible for a huge percentage of

your daily struggles. By correcting the mistaken reasoning, you can
permanently reprogram the algorithm and eliminate the undesired emotion.
Just like in the cognitive section, in order to reprogram the faulty
algorithms, you must memorize the most common problematic ones. Here are
the top ten found in cognitive therapy patients: 1. All-or-Nothing
Thinking The tendency to think in extremes like "always" and "never"
without considering nuanced degrees between. "My boyfriend broke up with
me; I always ruin my relationships." 2. Overgeneralization The tendency
to make broad assumptions based on limited specifics. "If one person
thinks I'm stupid, everyone will." 3. Mental Filter The tendency to
focus on small negative details to the exclusion of the big picture. "My
A+ average doesn't matter; I got a C on an assignment." 4. Disqualifying
the Positive The tendency to dismiss positive aspects of an experience
for irrational reasons. "If my friend compliments me, she is probably
just saying it out of pity." 5. Jumping to Conclusions The tendency to
make unfounded, negative assumptions, often in the form of attempted
mind reading or fortune

telling. "If my romantic interest doesn't text me today, he must not be
interested." 6. Catastrophizing The tendency to magnify or minimize
certain details of an experience, painting it as worse or more severe
than it is. "If my wife leaves me, then I will never be able to recover
from my misery." 7. Emotional Reasoning The tendency to take one's
emotions as evidence of objective truth. "If I feel offended by someone
else's remark, then he must have wronged me." 8. Should Statements The
tendency to apply rigid rules to how one "should" or "must" behave. "My
friend criticized my attitude, and that is something that friends should
never do." 9. Labeling The tendency to describe oneself in the form of
absolute labels. "If I make a calculation error, it makes me a total
idiot." 10. Personalization The tendency to attribute negative outcomes
to oneself without evidence. "If my wife is in a bad mood, then I must
have done something to upset her."32 Try to identify which of these
patterns characterizes a particular cognition, and add it to your log.
The next step is

to use the method called Socratic questioning to challenge these
distorted cognitions. Positive psychology researcher Courtney Ackerman
offers some basic questions to ask: Is this thought realistic? Am I
basing my thoughts on facts or on feelings? What is the evidence for
this thought? Could I be misinterpreting the evidence? Am I viewing a
complicated situation as black and white? Am I having this thought out
of habit, or do facts support it?33 Examine the evidence supporting or
challenging the automatic thought, and decide whether your automatic
thought is rational or not. For example, imagine you become sad and
anxious because you have the thought "I'm totally incompetent,"
triggered by a failure to remember an appointment you had scheduled.
Look for evidence supporting the claim that you are totally incompetent
and look for conflicting evidence showing that you are competent. You
may be tempted to argue that you never really believed the thought in
the first place. But the fact that the thought even made it far enough
to enter your consciousness is a sign that some part of you was not
convinced of its irrationality.34 Let's look at an example. Let's say
you land an interview for your dream job. You pour countless hours into

preparation, nail the interview, and begin fantasizing about your new
role as assistant to the regional manager at your local video rental
store (it's a weird dream job, but I'm not here to judge). Days and then
weeks pass before you get an email saying the position was given to
someone else. At this point, there are two different ways you might
respond. You could 1) spend weeks sulking, speculating about why you
didn't get the job, castigating yourself for your failings, and
convincing yourself that you will never get a good job and are
fundamentally inadequate. Or you could 2) ask your interviewers for
feedback, work to make the necessary improvements to your interview
skills or portfolio, and move on to the next job without wasting a
moment to suffer. We would all rather be the person who takes option 2,
but not everyone does, or even readily can. We may tend to think that
acting in the right way is simply a matter of being mature and
responsible. But the difference between taking option 1 and option 2
fundamentally boils down to complex chains of psychological algorithms,
and these chains must be understood before they can be reprogrammed.

So you accurately conclude that you did not get the job after reading
your rejection letter. You then come to the distorted conclusion that
this one rejection is indicative of a much greater and permanent
problem. If I'm rejected for this position, then I'm never going to get
a good job. After confronting this fact, you have the thought that you
are fundamentally inadequate as a person, triggering a wave of despair.
When you see it written out, the absurdity of the inference becomes
obvious. But these thoughts often find their way into our belief systems
without our full awareness. So let's go through some of the methods of
selfregulation. You could have used situation selection and never
applied for a job to eliminate the risk of rejection. You could put down
the letter, divert your attention away from the rejection, and try never
to think about it again. I would not recommend either of these
strategies in this scenario.

Alternatively, you could practice mindfulness to hit pause on the
negative emotions and observe them for what they are, or you could
engage in cognitive restructuring (better yet, combine the two). Once
you understand that your painful emotion is the result of a distorted
thought, you can begin to restructure the algorithm. In this case, you
could identify the distortion known as catastrophizing leading you to
believe you will never get a good job, or that this would mean that you
are fundamentally inadequate. You restructure the core belief that x
means y, and once you have done this, your brain will learn that similar
lines of reasoning are invalid the next time a similar situation arises.
By learning to quickly recognize and refute this bias, you can build the
habit of short-circuiting this tendency automatically, programming it
out for good. After identifying and reappraising your distorted
cognition, you will have eliminated the negative emotion and can now
focus your efforts on setting new goals and taking action.

As you practice the art of restructuring, you begin to call your brain
out on the nonsense it throws at you. Discipline with this practice will
gradually train your brain not to think these thoughts in the first
place. I want to assure you that the art of cognitive restructuring can
be mastered. Whether you have a relentless inner monologue or merely an
occasionally annoying one, you can develop a firm grip on the ongoing
narrative of your life, proactively designing your own experience rather
than simply being along for the ride. You may wonder why the brain
thinks such ridiculous thoughts in the first place. You would likely
never think someone else was incompetent for forgetting a single
appointment. Why do we commit these absurd errors with ourselves?
Whether or not we are fully conscious of it, we choose irrational
interpretations. And counterintuitively, we do it because it feels
good.35 We are not just victim to our painful emotions. We indulge them.
We choose to catastrophize because, perverse as it may seem, self-pity
gives us a kind of shortterm high, even if it habitually locks us into
deeper lows. When we allow the mind to get away with thinking distorted
and self-critical thoughts, our reward system trains it to do it more.36
In order to choose long-term well-being, we have to resist the urge to
indulge in our own pain. It is in our power to have no opinion about a
thing, and not to be disturbed in our soul. For things

themselves have no natural power to form our judgments. - Marcus
Aurelius, Meditations Imagine how much fun it would be to be physically
invincible. To enter a sword-fight unarmed and to exit without a
scratch, leaving your opponent frustrated and exhausted. When you become
emotionally invincible, your opponent may be another person shelling out
insults, your own inner critic, or simply the unexpected blows life
deals to us all. These petty attempts to break you will begin to amuse
you more than they dishearten you once you learn their game. When a
drunk man hits the wall of a castle with a stick, you don't call it an
attack, you call it entertainment! When a person insults you, they embed
a narrative in your mind. Whether you are forced to accept this
suggestion or are able to resist it is a matter of how developed your
cognitive toolkit is. With enough practice, you can learn to instantly
identify the irrational thoughts that will cause you to suffer. You can
develop the knowledge and discipline to take control of the ongoing
story your brain is spinning. But in order to do it, you have to build
the habits of noticing every distortion that enters your awareness,
resisting the urge to indulge it, and shooting down each one before it
takes your emotional trajectory down with it.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6: Desires and the Keys to Modulating Them Always Get What You
Want If thou wilt make a man happy, add not unto his riches but take
away from his desires. - Epicurus, Principal Doctrines As we have seen,
living to serve and gratify our desires is far from the key to enduring
well-being. But our desires do more than serve as the red herrings of
happiness: they actively cause us to suffer. Because desires cause us
pain and frustration when they are not satisfied, every desire we harbor
is a potential threat to our contentment and stability.1 Forming defined
goals does not get rid of our desires. Even after we refuse the
seductive offer of our desires to set our goals for us, they are still
present, either serving to pull us toward our goals or away from them.
The desires that pull us away from our goals are called temptations. The
desires that push us toward our goals are fuel, and we will

deal with all of these in later chapters. Some desires can be highly
beneficial, and we will strive to keep them in place even amplify and
stack them. But this tendency of our desires to propel us toward our
goals becomes problematic when we fail to achieve our goals and the
desires for nonexistent realities continue to writhe and cause us to
suffer.2 In these cases, previously advantageous desires become
disadvantageous, as suffering is rarely conducive to our goals. Popular
wisdom offers a solution: don't fail. Try your best to succeed at
achieving your goals, and maybe you won't suffer so much. However, an
alternate approach has been suggested by a few wise thinkers throughout
history. These thinkers indicate that it might be possible to control
our desires directly rather than simply trying to control our
circumstances. They argued that the negative emotions our desires cause
can be hijacked. By learning to modulate our desires, we can not only
reduce the temptations and increase the fuel propelling us toward our
goals, we can eliminate a major source of suffering. In the previous
chapter, we looked at how we can modify our perceptions to change our
emotions. But if our unwanted emotions are not caused by cognitive
distortion, we need to pursue a different path to controlling our
emotions. The algorithm which outputs emotions takes in the inputs of
cognitions and desires. And if our perceptions are not the problem, we
will have to change our desires.

Although there seems to be a scarcity of research on the act of changing
one's emotions through desire modulation, this practice has been
initiated and used successfully for millennia. It has been a major focal
point of almost every practical philosophy to date. Most people are
familiar with Buddhism's solution to the problem of craving. According
to the prevalent interpretation of SiddhÄrtha Gautama's teachings,
liberation from the vicious cycle of craving could be achieved through a
combination of mindfulness, ethical living, and wisdom.3 If followed
properly, this path could result in a psychological state potent enough
to popularize grunge music for nearly half a decade. Nirvana was a
transcendent state characterized by the extinguishment of the fire of
craving and desire. A total detachment from preference and outcome.4
Another wise thinker who weighed in on desire was Epicurus, who argued
that we need very little to be happy

and should strive to reduce our desires as much as possible. He thought
we should satisfy our natural and necessary desires like food and water.
But we should not strive to satisfy those which are unnatural or
unnecessary, like extravagant foods, sex, power, or Instagram followers
(his words, not mine).5 It is less extreme than the Buddha's suggestion,
and may strike us as more realistic, and we see this minimalistic
approach to desire in countless other thinkers. The sage desires to have
few desires. - Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching \[I\] try always to master myself
rather than fortune, and to change my desires rather than the order of
the world. - RenÃ© Descartes, Discourse on Method Freedom is not achieved
by satisfying desire, but by eliminating it.

- Epictetus, Discourses The Stoic notion that we should not desire what
  we cannot control is also relevant here. Situations we have no control
  over are obvious examples of times you shouldn't want things to be
  different because these desires cause

unnecessary suffering. We often long for other things which are out of
our reach even though they are not, at least at the present moment,
within our control. These misplaced longings often result from confusion
over how much control we have.6 No adult suffers over the fact that he
cannot simply spread his arms and fly, as this is unambiguously out of
reach. There is a condition known as locked-in syndrome in which a
patient is fully aware but completely paralyzed, unable to speak, and
forced to communicate simple yes or no answers using a computer. Most
people will claim they would rather die than have to live this way. The
curious finding is that not only is the average quality of life found in
these patients very high, but their brains learn to stop struggling with
their condition very quickly, often within hours. They cease all desire
and strain because the impossibility of controlling the external world
quickly becomes unambiguously apparent.7 The faculty of desire purports
to aim at securing what you want...If you fail in your desire, you are
unfortunate, if you experience what you would rather avoid you are
unhappy...For desire, suspend it completely for now. Because if you
desire something outside your control, you are bound to be disappointed;
and even things we do control, which under other circumstances would be
deserving of our desire, are not yet within our power to attain.
Restrict yourself to choice and refusal; and exercise them carefully,
within discipline and detachment.

- Epictetus, Enchiridion So Buddhism's solution is to eliminate all
desire, Epicureanism's solution is to reduce one's desires to the
absolute essentials, and Stoicism's solution is not to desire what we
can't control. We will see that each of these perspectives holds keys to
the mastery of desire. It is possible for us to regulate our desires
such that we cut off our suffering when the situation calls for it. But
furthermore, it is entirely possible to do this and still use them to
powerfully motivate us toward rational goals. We don't need to renounce
desire altogether; we just need to become proficient desire
manipulators.8 If we can tame our desires and develop agility at
modulating them so we want the right things at any given time, we can
leverage them to fuel us toward our goals as effectively as possible.
Later chapters will focus on using our desires to fuel us. But before
this can be done, we need to learn and practice the methods these
thinkers devised for using desire to promote our own emotional peace.

OceanofPDF.com

The Modulation of Desire Though they may have viewed the goal
differently, a number of great psychitectural thinkers have conceived
exercises for strengthening the desire modulation muscle so our wants
can be bent to suit our circumstances. Many of these exercises have
since been validated by modern research. Each one of these exercises is
a counter algorithm which can be internalized to quash desire-based
emotional friction.

The first and most basic skill we must practice is the ability to
up-regulate, or increase, and down-regulate, or decrease the strength of
a particular desire. As the previous

chapter described, our cognitions are deeply involved in emotion, and
they are intertwined with our desires as well. Strong feelings of desire
are typically accompanied or preceded by cognitive simulations and
fantasies.9 ...desire-related processing can be subject to a vicious
circle of reprocessing and rumination that, in turn, increases the
feeling of wanting and the motivational power of desire. - Wilhelm
Hofmann et al., The Psychology of Desire Participants of experiments who
are given cognitively demanding tasks to complete are less likely to
respond to stimulus with desire.10 In other words, if our minds are
preoccupied or focused on something else, they are unable to initiate
the thought cycles that heighten desire. So the key to basic desire
regulation has to do with our mental closeness or distance from the
stimulus. This understanding provides us with the opportunity to raise
or lower the dials of desire as it serves us. To upregulate a desire,
focus purely on the desired stimulus and all of its most positive
aspects and delicious details. This can be done to increase the
intensity of a desire for a school lecture, a long drive, or a veggie
burger.

We can also down-regulate a desire. To do this, distract yourself from
the desired stimulus, focus on it in a purely objective, even alienating
way, and cultivate a non-attached awareness of the feelings associated
with the desire.

Marcus Aurelius offers some examples of downregulation: When we have
meat before us and other food, we must say to ourselves: 'This is the
dead body of a fish, and this is the dead body of a bird or of a pig,
and again, this Falernian \[wine\] is only a little grape juice, and
this purple robe some sheep's wool died with the blood of a
shellfish'...This is how we should act throughout life: where there are
things that seem worthy of great estimation, we ought to lay them bare
and look at their worthlessness and strip them of all the words by which
they are exalted. For the outward show \[of things\] is a wonderful
perverter of reason, and when we are certain the things we are dealing
with are worth the trouble, that is when it cheats us most.

- Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 6.13 Buddhism offers a similar exercise
for those under the spell of unwanted sexual desire, in which one
meditates on the more repulsive aspects of the human body such as
organs, tissues, and fluids in order to "...extinguish the fire of lust
by removing its fuel."11 The Buddhist practice of mindfulness meditation
in general can be a useful method for taking the subjectivity and
passion out of our perceptions and viewing the objects of our desire
with dispassionate acceptance. Do not indulge in dreams of having what
you have not, but reckon up the chief of the blessings you do possess,
and then thankfully remember how you would crave for them if they were
not yours. - Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book 7 There are many methods
for regulating desires in bulk. Take the incredibly simple practice of
gratitude. Our minds are wired to acclimate to our circumstances and
magnify the negative to completely fill our field of view. This tendency
may be biologically useful by driving us to continually push for more,
but it can destroy our contentment and make life seem like one big
series of hindrances and hardships.

Gratitude can be used as a method for up-regulating all desires for what
you already have while down-regulating desires for what you lack. It is
an excellent strategy for countering the disappointment of failure by
shifting emotional investment away from new gains and toward things that
you already have, such as loved ones, achievements, or fortunate living
conditions. Often the greatest barrier to serenity is too many desires
for what we don't possess and too few for what we do. Numerous studies
have found that people who consistently experience gratitude are more
satisfied with their lives and experience more frequent positive
emotions. They are also less depressed, anxious, lonely, and neurotic.12
Gratitude is likely so effective because it causes people to savor their
positive life experiences, reinterpret negative ones, build stronger
interpersonal bonds, and avoid constant envy and craving.13

The Stoics had a related practice which has been called negative
visualization, or premortem. It is closely related to the Buddhist
reflection on impermanence, and the Dalai Lama has termed it "pain
insurance." When you initiate this practice, you reflect on the
possibility of losing the things you have. You consider the possibility
that all of your plans may fail, all of your possessions may be lost,
and all those you care about, including yourself, can, and eventually
will die.

It may seem depressing, but this practice actually goes hand-in-hand
with gratitude. When we down-regulate our desire to possess and keep
something permanently, we upregulate our desire and appreciation for
what we have in the present moment. This visualization technique can
inoculate us against loss and reduce or eliminate the blow to our
emotions we have to bear if things don't go according to plan. This act
of anticipating unpleasant events has actually been proven to minimize
their emotional impact. In one study, participants were delivered a
series of electric shocks of varying intensity. Those who knew the
intensity of the shocks in advance experienced less pain and fear than
those who received less intense shocks of unpredictable intensity.14 We
can apply this insight by calibrating our

expectations so we are never caught off guard by unanticipated shocks.
The Buddhist belief called anatta, or nonself, states that the concept
of the self is entirely an illusion, and that the person you think you
are today is a different entity from what you were ten years ago, or
even ten seconds ago. You are an ongoing and constantly evolving
process - an aggregation of uncontrolled perceptions and cognitions.
Nonself serves as a reminder that we are not unified egos, but parts of
an ongoing and constantly evolving process -- an aggregation of
uncontrolled perceptions and cognitions. We are not discrete beings
detached from all others, but inextricably tied to the collective of all
sentient beings. Much of the pain we experience is caused not by events
we wish to avoid, but by the identity we wish to have. The desires which
cause us to suffer when we are hit with a painful insult are the desires
to be a competent, lovable, and valued individual. But by contemplating
nonself, we can down-regulate all identity-based desires by reminding
ourselves of the flaws with the entire self-construct when circumstances
clash with these desires to be liked or respected. There is evidence
that reflecting less on our personal life narratives and more on the
expanded self improves wellbeing. A decrease in narrative-self thoughts
has been found to result in greater well-being by decreasing negative
and mixed negative--positive emotions.15 This decrease in attention on
the self is often achieved and studied through a

practice of mindfulness meditation.16 Mindfulness is thought by some to
have this effect by decreasing activity in the brain structures
collectively known as the default mode network, which are associated
with rumination about the narrative-self.17

The Stoics also made use of a method known as the view from above, which
consists of contemplating the vastness of the cosmos, and the
contrasting smallness of all of one's petty concerns. This method can be
used to downregulate all of your desires in bulk when you are overly
invested in general, particularly when life becomes volatile. To see
them from above: the thousands of animal herds, the rituals, the voyages
on calm or stormy

seas, the different ways we come into the world, share it with one
another, and leave it. Consider the lives led once by others, long ago,
the lives to be led by others after you, the lives led even now, in
foreign lands. How many people don't even know your name. How many will
soon have forgotten it. How many offer you praise now-and tomorrow,
perhaps contempt. - Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, Book 9 It is hard to
even read this quotation without feeling a humble relief over the
ultimate triviality of our concerns.The Stoics thought the primary
reason we suffered was because we are unable to comprehend and love
nature in its entirety. When we understand that everything that happens
is causally determined, we free ourselves from the blame and resentment
of ourselves and others and from the anxiety of trying to control fate.
When we come to see that what we naturally view as bad is derived from
our limited perspective, we can put a limit to our sadness. And when we
understand that the permanence of our possessions, relationships, and
souls for which we long is unattainable, we can learn to love what is
permanent.

Victor Frankl, a 20th-century psychiatrist famous for his analysis of
his own experiences as a prisoner in Nazi death camps during the
holocaust, notes the utility of the distancing tactic: All that
oppressed me at that moment became objective, seen and described from
the remote viewpoint of science. By this method I succeeded somehow in
rising above the situation, above the sufferings of the moment and I
observed them as if they were already of the past. Both I and my
troubles became the interesting object of psychoscientific study taken
on by myself.18 In his book, The Philosophy of Cognitive Behavioural

Therapy, Donald Robertson points out that this thought experiment has
its place in modern therapy as well.19

Aaron Beck refers to the tendency of depressed patients to magnify their
issues and take the "worm's eye view" of their situations. To counter
this, patients are encouraged to take an "enlarged perspective," in
which they distance themselves from their current circumstances, view
them with greater objectivity, and contemplate them from a greater scale
and timespan.20 Let's return to our video rental rejection example from
the previous chapter. Let's say you have mastered the art of cognitive
restructuring, and have no distortions in reasoning around this
rejection. But somehow, the rejection still causes you to suffer.

The conflict between this reality and your desire for the job results in
sadness. You know this job is already out of the question for you. But a
rogue desire within you is causing you to experience emotions that
aren't serving you. It would be much better if your desires were fully
adapted to this

reality so they could start fueling you toward a better outcome instead
of causing needless pain. So let's get rid of that useless desire. You
can use desire modulation to adjust the dials of desire and calibrate
them to reality. You could engage in gratitude to up-regulate your
desire for all the great things you have, even if this particular job
isn't one of them. You also might downregulate the specific desire
causing your suffering by reminding yourself of the hour-and-a-half-long
commute, or that movie rental is probably not a great industry to build
a career in right now, or that you have a master's in data science.
Honestly, I have no idea what you saw in that job in the first place,
Sarah.

Once you learn and strengthen your ability to use these tactics, you
will be able to adjust your desires at will, largely eliminating the
tendency to suffer over ungratified longings.

OceanofPDF.com

The Counteraction of Desire Greed and aversion surface in the form of
thoughts, and thus can be eroded by a process of 'thought substitution,'
by replacing them with the thoughts opposed to them. - Bhikkhu Bodhi,
The Noble Eightfold Path A powerful tactic which uses and builds upon
the basic skills of up and down-regulation is a method I call
counteraction. Counteraction, which was briefly touched on in chapter 2,
entails balancing out a desire by up or down-regulating an equal and
opposing desire so they "cancel" one another out.

Have you ever sat at a red light full of anger that it is taking too
long to change? Of course you have. Have you

ever been frustrated that a red light changed to green too quickly -
perhaps because it interrupted your attempt to eat a sandwich or shave
your legs on your commute? In this conflict, there is an opportunity.
Next time you are sitting at a red light impatiently, try cultivating
the desire for the light to stay red as long as possible. Use the
up-regulation techniques listed above to desire the opposite of whatever
is nagging at you.

By generating conflicting desires, you hedge your bets against unwanted
outcomes and turn every outcome into a wanted one. The moment one
outcome actualizes, you can drop the counteracting desire. If you can
develop the ability to neutralize all of your desires, you can then
up-regulate and down-regulate them precisely in order to achieve the

goals which align with your ideals. You can carefully increase a desire
and decrease the conflicting desire like increasing the gas in a car.
Eventually, you will start to enact counteraction techniques
automatically and internally. You start to immediately notice friction
in your mind and generate the counteracting desire automatically. As we
will explore in the behavioral section, desires operate algorithmically
too, meaning they are based on habits and can be programmed or
deprogrammed.21 Eating ice cream after every meal will cause you to
strongly desire dessert after every meal. Watching television every day
after work will cause you to need to watch television every day after
work. And struggling with every setback in your life, desiring reality
to be otherwise, will cause you to continue to struggle. Some of our
desires are not for isolated objects, but represent ongoing dependencies
from which we may aspire to free ourselves. Because we are creatures of
habit, our behaviors have a strong influence on what we become. This is
why, even though there is no biological reason for pieces of green paper
and numbers in our bank account to capture our desires, we can be
trained to crave money. Weird as it may seem, we often learn about
ourselves by observing our own behaviors, so if all of our behaviors
suggest to us that money, for example, is the highest good, we very well
may start to believe it.22 One of the lesser known and more fascinating
of the ancient Greek philosophers was a man known as Diogenes

of Sinope. He is thought to have lived partially naked in a wine barrel
in Athens, and to have frequently relieved and pleasured himself in
public. According to one revealing story, Alexander the Great became
dismayed that Diogenes had not come to visit him, as many others had
come to lavish him in praise. So Alexander decided to pay Diogenes a
visit accompanied by a large crowd and trumpets announcing his arrival.
Alexander greeted and praised Diogenes, and said "Ask any favor you
choose of me." After leaning up a bit and seeing the crowd of people,
Diogenes told the leader of the civilized world only to "Stand a little
out of my sun."23 Diogenes may sound like a senile homeless man, but he
was actually a highly respected philosopher and founder of the school of
Cynicism. He was admired for his wit and radical non-conformity. And
though eccentric, he had surprisingly coherent reasons for his
behaviors. He engaged in inappropriate acts in public because he
believed anything natural and acceptable to do in private should be
regarded as acceptable in public. He chose to live in poverty and
rejected praise and favors because he held wealth, social status, and
all cultural values in contempt.24 He was a precursor to the modern-day
minimalist, rejecting anything unnecessary. His shamelessness was meant
to serve as a demonstration that nature and reason were superior to
convention, and that in many ways, the simple lives of animals were
better than the overcomplicated lives civilized society demands. He

preached the virtues of self-control and self-sufficiency and claimed
that virtue of character was all anyone needed to live a good life. He
once threw away his only possession, a wooden bowl, after seeing a boy
cupping his hands to drink from the river, announcing, "A child has
beaten me in plainness of living."25 Diogenes is probably not someone
you will want to model your life after, and the fact that he was a great
philosopher does not make the case for disregarding hygiene or social
courtesy. But his life is a reminder that many of the things you may
consider essential for a happy life can be discarded without losing your
sense of peace or purpose. By banishing all unnecessary forms of
gratification from his life, he reduced the number of things he needed
to have in order to be content, and the number of things he could lose
that would ruin his day. If we find that certain desire-based
dependencies are maladaptive or cause us to act against our values, we
can use the practice of asceticism, or voluntary discomfort, to
intentionally deprive ourselves of some desired and attainable object.
The practice has been used by some to serve as self-punishment, which
has led some to quickly write it off. But the useful purpose of
asceticism is to down-regulate a perpetual desire for anything
extrinsic. By utilizing this practice, you can break dependencies and
make yourself more emotionally robust. Simply choose something on which
you feel you are overly reliant, and intentionally limit

or sacrifice the gratification of the associated desire. Though it may
feel like self-punishment, minor and temporary acts of self-denial can
be fully grounded in self-compassion.26 I am so firmly determined,
however, to test the constancy of your mind that, drawing from the
teachings of great men, I shall give you also a lesson: Set aside a
certain number of days, during which you shall be content with the
scantiest and cheapest fare, with coarse and rough dress, saying to
yourself the while: 'Is this the condition that I feared?' - Seneca,
Letters from a Stoic If you find yourself unable to endure basic economy
flights, enjoy camping trips, or are unhappy whenever the thermostat is
not set to the perfect temperature, you have become overly-reliant on
comfort. This dependency will limit your ability to be content in all
but the rare perfect scenario. In this case, you can periodically force
yourself to endure pain or discomfort to down-regulate the desire for
comfort. Counter your dependency by sleeping on the floor for a night or
walking barefoot on a gravel road.27 Taking this to it's extreme and
hiking the Appalachian Trail will completely rewire your relationship
with comfort. If it is pleasure you crave, you can temporarily deprive
yourself of food (fasting), sex, or a drug to down-regulate the desire.
Minor acts of social sacrifice, such as neglecting

an opportunity to signal something positive about yourself, can decrease
your desire for status, approval, and validation. And giving away all
but the most necessary possessions in the spirit of minimalism can
down-regulate the innate desire to accumulate and horde. You can even
take this ascetic spirit to an extreme by completely renouncing some
forms of desire. You can refuse to accumulate new toys. Reject all
social media platforms. Commit to give away all excess money beyond what
is needed for a sustainable lifestyle. For every type of perpetual
desire you are able to renounce, you remove complication from your
life.28 Frequent practice of moderate asceticism is a way of embedding
into your mind the fact that your desires are not good indicators of
worthwhile choices. When you act against those desires, your mind will
learn from your behaviors and conclude that these things are not so
desirable after all. Would anyone who thought pleasure was the ultimate
good deliberately put herself in an uncomfortable position? Would anyone
who thought social status were the highest good neglect his social media
accounts? Would anyone who thought money were the highest good turn
down, or even give away, a large sum of money. You teach yourself what
is important to you through your behaviors, so behave wisely. Learning
the ways of your desires and strengthening the skill of modulating them
will require patience, but once you have done this, you will be able to
use this craft in real time. When an obstacle stands in your way, you
will instantly

arrange your desires to avoid the emotional friction and focus your
attention on responding to the obstacle.

OceanofPDF.com

Principles of Modulation On a broader level, there are principles we can
follow for relating to our desires and working with them more
effectively to avoid unnecessary pain. You need to detect when you want
something very strongly - when there are few alternates to a particular
object or outcome. Ask yourself - "What would cause me to suffer if I
failed to achieve it or lost it?" Maybe failing out of college would
crush you, or perhaps the loss of a favorite pet. Though we may not be
eager to plan for these misfortunes, doing so can prevent us from being
blindsided if and when they occur. Let's look back at the goal hierarchy
from before. We saw that defined goals are the keys to actualizing your
values, but they are also the key to reducing suffering. When we aim for
the intrinsic, we will be much less likely to suffer because nothing can
take out our final goals.29 Modern Stoic William Irvine illustrates this
by looking at the goals of a tennis player: Thus, his goal in playing
tennis will not be to win a match (something external, over which he has
only partial control) but to play to the best of his ability in the
match (something internal, over which he has complete control). By
choosing this goal, he will

spare himself frustration or disappointment should he lose the match:
Since it was not his goal to win the match, he will not have failed to
attain his goal, as long as he played his best. His tranquility will not
be disrupted.30 Intrinsic goals do not result in negative emotion
because it is impossible to fail at them, and building a life full of
intrinsic goals is a great way to prevent constant emotional pain. But
even when our highest goals and ultimate aims are intrinsic, we will
inevitably have certain extrinsic subgoals that will result in pain when
they are unmet. And in order to prevent this pain, we need to structure
these goals properly. Which of these structures would you rather be
inside of in a tornado?

The structure on the left is incredibly vulnerable. A small breeze would
be enough to destroy it. In our case, the small breeze would be the
everyday occurrence of a situation not going according to plan. As soon
as one link in the chain

fails, the entire structure topples, which results in emotional
self-destruction. The structure on the right, however, is highly robust,
and a person with a goal structure like this will be far more
emotionally robust. As soon as one goal fails, he can pivot over to
another, and the more quickly this can be done, the less time has to be
spent suffering, and the sooner he can get back to pursuing his ends.
This is why you need to develop alternates for your goals. Carve out as
many alternate paths to your higher goals as you can.

If you desperately want a particular job at a particular time, you will
be crushed if you fail to land it. Try to discover other companies and
timelines as paths toward a fulfilling job. On a higher level, add the
alternate goal of starting a business as a path toward income. Why not
take it to the

extreme? Develop the alternate goal of living in a monastery as a path
toward a sustainable existence. Reflect on the possibility of building a
new life with new opportunities for growth after a major loss.

Our desires are essentially emotional investments, and many of the
principles of good financial investing apply to good desire allocation.
Diversification is the act of increasing the variety of investments to
avoid being overly reliant on any particular one.31 Just as being fully
invested in one stock makes you incredibly vulnerable to its
fluctuations, being fully invested in any specific goal or outcome makes
you emotionally vulnerable. Whether you find yourself attached to a
belief, an idea at work, a way to spend your Saturday, or a person to
spend the rest of your life with, failing to cultivate positive
alternatives will leave you crushed when things don't go according to
plan. You

should set up your desires such that you benefit from every possible
outcome.32 Design a dense minefield of success for yourself such that it
is impossible to take a step without winning. Use the tactics discussed
earlier to up-regulate or downregulate desires until all outcomes are
appropriately balanced. "Invest" desire toward the goals with the
highest and most probable emotional return. When it seems likely that a
certain goal will not pan out and its outcome is out of your control,
down-regulate your desire for that outcome or counteract it with an
opposing desire. When you suspect that a person in your life has an
overall negative effect on you, decrease your investment and increase it
in other, more constructive relationships. Furthermore, if you feel you
are overly invested in relationships altogether, or have a condition
like autism that makes relationships more difficult, it may be a good
idea to shift significant emotional investment toward other things, such
as creative pursuits. The investment principle of liquidity is also
highly relevant to desire design. You need to be able to quickly move
funds from one form of investment to another so you can respond to new
circumstances with agility.33 And you need to be able to modulate your
desires quickly so you aren't stuck wanting something which has already
left the realm of possibility. By exercising the muscle of desire
regulation, even when it seems unnecessary, you increase your emotional
agility. Try to take a relatively weak desire

and ramp it up to a strong craving. Try to take a desperate longing and
reduce it to indifference. Lastly, extinguish desire for anything out of
the realm of possibility as quickly as possible. It wouldn't make sense
to invest in the stock of a company we knew was going out of business,
and it doesn't make sense to invest emotionally in a dead end. The Stoic
contrast between circumstances we can control and those we cannot
becomes highly relevant here, and the most common of such outcomes, one
we can absolutely never control, is one that has happened in the past.
As you get quicker and quicker at desire regulation, you increase what
we might call your refresh rate, or the speed at which you can accept
and adapt to circumstances. You gain the ability to adjust the dials of
desire as it aids you in your goals, whether those goals are behavioral
or emotional. Much like the reappraisal methods of the last chapter,
this can become an instantaneous process. You can adapt to new
circumstances as soon as they arise and skip the negative emotions
altogether. You will know you have mastered desire when you are capable
of desiring whatever comes your way. Your car's battery dying becomes an
unexpected adventure in an otherwise boring day. A difficult transition
in life becomes an opportunity to learn and grow. Some people like to
point out that without desire, we would all be apathetic and passive
observers of reality, never finding motivation to achieve our goals.
This is true, and that is why rather than eliminating

desire, we need to design our desire structures carefully. With
practice, you can learn to desire for the present to be exactly as it is
while desiring for the future to be different. It is no accident that we
are covering how to use desire modulation for tranquility before we
learn to use it for effective motivation. If you lack the ability to
stabilize your emotions and feel at peace in the face of difficult
circumstances, those emotions will hijack your plans to achieve bigger
things. The founders of other practical philosophies have lifted
emotional control and stability to the level of the highest human goal.
For us, the ability to remain tranquil and content in spite of our
circumstances is not the highest goal in life, but an essential
instrument for aligning with our values and living a great life.36

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7: Emotional SelfMastery and Equanimity On the Pathologies of
Philosophers Anybody can become angry - that is easy, but to be angry
with the right person and to the right degree and at the right time and
for the right purpose, and in the right way - that is not within
everybody's power and is not easy. - Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics We
have now learned to restructure our perceptions and to modulate our
desires. Now, just as rationality and introspection came together as the
building blocks for cognitive self-mastery, these tools come together to
form the building blocks for emotional self-mastery. This type of
mastery represents the peak of emotion regulation skills, and tends to
be characterized by a state of deep tranquility. It has been lauded
throughout the ages by many different

philosophies, some claiming it to be the highest good in life.1 One
might think that this type of tranquility would be universally praised,
but there are always those who seem to idealize suffering. Though 19th
century philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche offers crucial guidance for
emotional self-mastery, he also provides examples of some of the most
self-limiting perspectives on emotion. Here the ways of men divide. If
you wish to strive for peace of soul and happiness, then believe; if you
wish to be a disciple of truth, then inquire. - Friedrich Nietzsche,
letter to his sister, Elizabeth Though this quote is an inspiring call
to intellectual courage, it makes the unfortunate mistake of conflating
psychological well-being with dogmatism. The implication is that the
truth must be painful, and those who accurately perceive it must be
unhappy. It fits with our stereotypes of the pessimistic truth-seeker,
and the happy-go-lucky dogmatist living an unexamined life. But here is
what these stereotypes actually represent: people with one type of
selfmastery but deficient in another, in this case, people with
cognitive self-mastery and a lack of emotional self-mastery, and vice
versa. There is no reason we cannot have our cake and understand it too.
An individual with well-rounded selfmastery would be capable of
accepting seemingly harsh

truths and being happy in spite of them, or better yet, because of
them.2 I have personally known people (though admittedly few) who prove
that incisive beliefs need not entail cynical attitudes. If you force
yourself to confront the bitter truths of this world and then go through
life full of pain and pessimism, have the courage to call it what it
really is: strength in one area and weakness in another. We must strive
to cultivate intellectual maturity and emotional maturity
simultaneously. Though we only have one word for them, there are two
very different meanings of "optimism." Cognitive optimism is a
distortion of the truth. The willingness to believe a desired outcome or
belief is more likely than the evidence suggests. But emotional optimism
has nothing to do with specific truths or outcomes in our lives. It is
the highly adaptive attitude that all will be well regardless of the
outcome. We must all aim to be cognitive realists and emotional
optimists. Another eloquent Nietzsche excerpt demonstrates a similar
error: The discipline of suffering, of great suffering- do you not know
that only this discipline has created all enhancements of man so far? -
Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil Here we see the incredibly
popular assumption that behavioral self-mastery (the focus of the next
few chapters)

must come at the expense of emotional self-mastery. It is the age-old
argument that people who are content have no reason to get off their
couch, or out of their Zen monastery. But the idea that only suffering
can motivate us to greatness commits the same type of error as the
first. The myth of the neurotic but brilliant artist is just another
stereotype which is not grounded in reality.3 There is no reason we
cannot simultaneously pursue both emotional and behavioral self-mastery.
If we actually study the people who cannot motivate themselves out of
bed in the morning, the mental state we observe is not tranquility; it
is depression.4 Nothing about having positive emotions or life
satisfaction preclude the ability to see opportunity for improvement in
the world. To the contrary, the happiest people, though not necessarily
the most comfortable, are shown to be the most productive and
motivated,5 making them far more likely to positively impact the world
than their melancholy counterparts.6 Just as in the optimism example, by
conflating the two very different meanings of the word "happy," critics
of contentedness argue that a happy person (emotional) must be "happy"
with the way things are (behavioral), having no reason to act to change
them. Desire for the present to be different from the present incites
pain, but desire for the future to be different from the present incites
action.7

Though Nietzsche often praised the optimistic outlook, he also claimed
that great individuals are more emotionally fragile, and must suffer
more than "common men." Nietzsche's philosophy claims that certain
ethical systems, which he called "slave morality," originate through
oppressed groups idealizing weakness to increase their power.8 But could
it be that Nietzsche created his own slave morality of suffering,
idealizing it because it was the only option available to him?9 Could it
be that even Nietzsche couldn't face the truth that his own involuntary
suffering was in fact a form of weakness he learned to praise as a
defense mechanism? Many thinkers throughout the ages have defended
suffering in similar ways, but my reaction is always to say, "spoken
like a true sufferer." As you learn to exercise a high degree of control
over your emotions, the arguments for unhappiness, pessimism, and
emotional helplessness will become increasingly baffling to you. Strong
people alone know how to organize their suffering so as to bear only the
most necessary pain. - Emil Dorian, The Quality of Witness There is no
doubt that our emotions play a central role in a life well-lived, and
have a great impact on our pursuit of

value alignment. Positive emotions often represent goals in and of
themselves, though few people place suffering on their to-do list. But
negative and positive emotions alike often stand in the way of our
goals, even sabotaging them at times. Aristotle had a lot to say about
our emotions, but his approach is different from those found in later
Greek thinkers. According to him, well-being is about experiencing the
right emotions, whether positive or negative, not simply the most
positive or peaceful ones.10 Emotions can be powerful motivators, and
they play a powerful role in how we see ourselves. Aristotle proposed
the notion that we should strive not to extirpate all negative emotion,
but to experience appropriate emotions in appropriate proportions. The
virtuous had to learn to master their emotions and experience them
appropriately in the right balance. This balance was defined as a mean
between two extremes, and this mean varied by circumstance. Courage was
the ideal mean between cowardice and rashness, and pride between
humility and vanity. In this sense, ethics could be compared to
aesthetics, striving toward beauty, proportion, and harmony.11 Unlike
Aristotle, I view the arbiter of appropriate emotion, not as a universal
golden mean, but as the subjective value intuitions of the individual.
So the question of which emotions we should experience becomes a
question of "what would my ideal self feel?" Would my ideal self get

angry over being disrespected, or simply laugh it off and deal with it
as necessary? Would my ideal self be perfectly tranquil at his parent's
funeral, or would she grieve for a period of time? Which reaction is
most conducive to my defined goals? Each of these questions must be
answered by the individual. There is actually evidence that connects
this Aristotelian approach to emotion with overall well-being. One
crosscultural study measured experienced emotions, desired emotions, and
indicators of well-being and depressive symptoms.12 Across cultures,
happier people were those who more often experienced emotions they
wanted to experience, whether these were pleasant (e.g., love) or
unpleasant (e.g., hatred). This pattern applied even to people who
wanted to feel less pleasant or more unpleasant emotions than they
actually felt. Controlling for differences in experienced and desired
emotions left the pattern unchanged. These findings suggest that
happiness involves experiencing emotions that feel right, whether they
feel good or not. These findings do not support the aim of tranquility
above all that we associate with Stoicism, Epicureanism, and Buddhism,
but they do make a strong case for emotional self-control. Greater
emotional self-mastery can allow us to ensure we experience the emotions
which align with our goals and ideals more and more of the time.

I will not claim that negative emotions never align with our ideals. But
I will argue throughout this chapter that the occasion in which they
will is less common than you might think. The idealization of suffering
by both philosophers and popular culture has done a great disservice to
people by normalizing and perpetuating experiences that would be better
left behind.13 And the process of gradually leaving these problematic
emotions behind is possible for anyone with the right toolkit and
commitment.

OceanofPDF.com

Emotional Algorithms Man's lack of power to moderate and restrain the
affects I call bondage. For the man who is subject to affects is under
the control, not of himself, but of fortune, in whose power he so
greatly is that often, though he sees the better for himself, he is
still forced to follow the worst. - Baruch Spinoza, Ethics Emotions
exist for the purpose of triggering adaptive behaviors. They helped our
ancestors navigate conflicts, connect with potential mates, and
cooperate with allies. And they continue to compel us to run from
potential threats to our lives, bond with and care for our children, and
refrain from acting in ways that would alienate members of our
community. All emotions exist for a reason, whether as direct
adaptations, incidental byproducts of other adaptations, or occasionally
useful safeguards. But the crucial contrast between genetic interests
and human interests is just as relevant here as it has been in previous
chapters.14 Human emotions exist to guide people toward gene propagation
in a bygone world. They may overlap with modern, personal ends, but this
is in no way guaranteed.

Our emotions should only be considered useful to us insofar as they
serve our personal goals. They are not inherently useful to us or even
necessarily informative. They can guide us in positive directions and
teach us valuable things, but to suggest that they always will is to
misunderstand the reasons they exist. They may be counter-productive to
our goals and values, which should lead us to view them as errors in
these cases, just like the cognitive biases we have examined.15 Emotions
are not always 'correct,' based as they are on probabilistic systems
that have evolved to ensure our survival across a wide range of
circumstances. - Handbook of Emotion Regulation Several philosophies
have urged followers to numb or relinquish their passions wholesale. But
the psychitectural perspective looks at individual emotional responses Ã 
la carte. We must decide on a case-by-case basis which emotions serve us
in which situations. Few people struggle with uncontrollable joy, though
even joy can be maladaptive, as in cases of mania.16 But there are a
number of emotional responses which most people share that seem to only
cause problems. For every negative emotional algorithm, there are
strategies to be uncovered for deprogramming it. Certain cognitions can
serve as counter algorithms for anxiety,

jealousy, and anger, and the best of these have been preserved. We can
codify the wise, therapeutic words of the great psychitectural thinkers.
If you can embed these precepts into your software, they will be
triggered automatically by the thoughts which cause anger, envy, and
sorrow, neutralizing the painful reactions on contact. We will take a
brief look at some of the algorithms that have been proposed for dealing
with particular emotions. This list of emotions is not exhaustive, and
the algorithms listed for dealing with each one is one of hundreds of
possibilities. All are merely suggestions, and you will have to decide
for yourself which emotions are beneficial to you and when. Anger and
Hatred Anger arises when one perceives that his strategic goals have
been impeded through the fault of another. It is a social emotion which
likely evolved as a mechanism to deter people from violating various
boundaries, such as harming, shaming, or stealing from others.17
Initially, this deterrence would seem to be a useful function even
today. But most of the time, our anger is directed toward situations or
inanimate objects. It is only after we remind ourselves that there is no
conscious target of blame that our anger subsides, and it becomes clear
that our rage and hatred has caused no one pain but ourselves.

Even in circumstances in which anger is directed toward other people, it
is rarely the most effective strategy for dealing with them. The Tao Te
Ching reminds us that "the best fighter is never angry," and if even
fighters are more effective without anger, it is hard to conceive of
cases in which it benefits us. As one understands the true causes and
motives of his enemy's actions, assigning blame for anything becomes
less and less reasonable. Great people develop superior strategies for
dealing with obstacles, threats, and aggression.18 A person who can
stand her ground while responding to aggressors with compassion, humor,
and reasonable consideration will win more battles than one who goes
into a rage.19 Stoic philosopher Seneca provides great insight into the
nature of anger and how to deal with it in his writings On

Anger. One counter-algorithm he suggests: The greatest remedy for anger
is delay: beg anger to grant you this at the first, not in order that it
may

pardon the offense, but that it may form a right judgment about it - if
it delays, it will come to an end. Do not attempt to quell it all at
once, for its first impulses are fierce; by plucking away its parts we
shall remove the whole. - Seneca, On Anger Here he proposes a counter to
anger that involves simply delaying our reactions, gradually chipping
away at our impulses of rage until we can think clearly. In the lowest
recess of the heart let it be hidden away, and let it not drive, but be
driven. Moreover, let us change all its symptoms into the opposite: let
the expression on our faces be relaxed, our voices gentler, our steps
more measured; little by little outer features mold inner ones. -
Seneca, On Anger He suggests that by controlling our expressions of
anger, we can keep it contained, prevent it from doing any damage, and
train our inner feelings of anger to mirror our outer expressions of
calmness.20 If we can program algorithms like these to be triggered
automatically by feelings of anger, we can gradually master the emotion.
Learn to view every frustration you encounter as a test of mental
strength, and you will get better and better at maintaining your
patience, levity, and control.

Embarrassment and Shame Shame is a social emotion which has to do with
our social status and and observance of norms. We feel shame when we
embarrass ourselves, offend other people, or feel that someone else
disapproves of us. It serves the purpose of discouraging us from risking
our social status or mate prospects, but it generally does more harm
than good.21 No matter how prepared we are, we cannot help being afraid
of embarrassment when public speaking. No matter how inaccurate or
irrelevant to our values, an insult from another person stings for days
after we receive it. We have talked about the value of allocating less
emotional investment in our social status, of living for our own
approval rather than that of others, and of rejecting popular and wrong
ideas about how life should be lived. These can be positive ways of
dealing with social shame and the need for validation. One powerful
counter-algorithm which can weaken or eliminate the pain of insult is
often attributed to yogi and teacher Yogi Bhajan: If you are willing to
look at another person's behavior toward you as a reflection of the
state of their relationship with themselves rather than a statement
about your value as a person, then you will, over a period of time cease
to react at all.

The opinions and comments of others often have more to do with their own
insecurities than any meaningful statement about us.22 In the rare case
that we learn from the affronts of others, we simply need to work on
changing our own behaviors, and these changes need not be accompanied by
pain. Envy and Schadenfreude Envy is the feeling which results from
comparing oneself to another and finding that they have something we
want or feel we deserve. We experience envy to drive us to fight for
more wealth, higher status, and more sexual partners.23 But when we envy
someone, we deprive ourself of the satisfaction of appreciating what we
have and keep ourselves on the vicious treadmill of gain which will
never deliver satisfaction.24 Do not spoil what you have by desiring
what you have not; remember that what you now have was

once among the things you only hoped for. - Epicurus, Principal
Doctrines Envy and comparison can prevent satisfaction from ever
increasing, regardless of how high a person's or community's living
standard rises.24 In order to fight it, we have to embed what is
important to us into our software, and what is important should never be
relative to those around us.25 Don't be the best. Be the only. - Kevin
Kelly26 The best counter for envy is to shift your perspective,
reminding yourself that you are competing only with yourself.27 If you
measure yourself by your unique combination of qualities and strengths
instead of a onedimensional metric, you will rarely come across people
worth envying.

Schadenfreude is the German word for delight in the misfortune of
others. Many people relish the losses of other people and feel averse to
their gains - sometimes even those they care about.28 A good friend, and
an adaptive individual, should genuinely delight in the successes of his
friends. When your own values are the benchmark of your well-being, the
only person you should be envious of is one which is more you than you
are. And in this event, you will know what needs to be done. Fear,
Worry, and Anxiety Fear can serve as a helpful reaction to acute
threats, but because we live in a world in which many of our decisions
are made for future goals, many of us experience anxiety, a prolonged
and future-oriented version of fear. Anxiety often involves rumination
over the far future, but can range from worry about meeting deadlines to
the intense fear of hair (Chaetophobia). Anxiety exists as a kind of
alarm to let us know to avoid threats to our genes, but more often than
not, it ends up resulting in useless false positives.29 In a
conversation with Robert Wright, evolutionary psychiatrist Randolph
Nesse describes a reason for this. He says that our threat detection
system, like many other bodily responses, is shaped by natural selection
to be hypersensitive. It errs on the side of overreaction to ensure that
it goes off when it needs to. He adds,

This is why we put up with smoke detectors. They don't warn us about a
fire but once in a lifetime, but they warn us about burnt toast every
week. - Randolph Nesse30 I think Dr.Â Nesse should probably adjust the
settings on his toaster, but his smoke detector principle is nonetheless
a valid explanation for much of our suffering, especially when it
results from anxiety. The false positives become increasingly likely as
our world resembles that of our ancestors less and less. Most of us
don't need constant alarm bells in our minds in order to do what is
necessary to avoid dangers and meet deadlines, making it a largely
maladaptive response. Unwanted fears can be gradually overcome through
the process called extinction, which often makes use of incremental
exposure methods to gradually train the brain not to associate a
stimulus with danger.31 But long-term anxiety can be more challenging.
Buddhism's focus on presence makes it particularly useful for dealing
with anxiety.32 The Buddha acknowledged that our anxieties themselves
cause us far more pain than the threats they attempt to warn us about.
Nothing can harm you as much as your own thoughts unguarded.

- SiddhÄrtha Gautama, Anguttara Nikaya Many have found it helpful to
internalize a simple algorithm, articulated by the Buddhist monk
Shantideva: If the problem can be solved why worry? If the problem
cannot be solved worrying will do you no good. - Shantideva, Guide to
the Bodhisattva's Way of Life

If you can program your software to remember the futility of worry as
soon as it arises, you can gradually eliminate it from your emotional
vocabulary. This change will free up your mental bandwidth to focus on
the best course of action instead of being paralyzed by panic.

OceanofPDF.com

More Emotional Algorithms Grief and Sadness Sadness and grief are
experienced when we perceive we have lost something important to us,
whether that is our chances at achieving a goal, a cherished possession,
or a close relationship. Though some types of sadness can help us learn
to avoid bad outcomes or connect with others, much of the grief of loss
we experience remains unexplained. We don't fully understand why we
suffer so deeply when a loved one passes away, and some believe it to be
an unfortunate byproduct of other emotional mechanisms.33 Whatever the
cause, grief is one of the most acute and common forms of suffering.
Dr.Â Nesse says that though he expected people who experience little
grief after loss to be deeply impaired in other ways, he was surprised
to find that these people seem to be just as healthy in their lives and
social relationships as those who grieve deeply.34 The Buddha's
algorithm for dealing with grief: The world is afflicted by death and
decay. But the wise do not grieve, having realized the nature of the

world. - SiddhÄrtha Gautama, Sutta Nipata Buddhism encourages people to
develop a different kind of relationship with their gains, possessions,
and even their loved ones.35 When we fully understand that all things
must end, we can learn to appreciate the finite amount of time we have
with others and celebrate the end rather than repeatedly mourning the
tragedy of impermanence.

Grief is so powerful that most people should not expect to be able to
eliminate it completely, and we may not want to. While some people would
like to move on immediately after a loss, others find that this response
does not fit their values. I have grieved over lost loved ones and
almost certainly will again. But by comprehending the inevitability of
death and loss, we can learn to experience grief to the right degree and
duration instead of resigning to it.

Guilt and Remorse We often experience guilt or remorse when we act in a
way that violates our own values.36 I would advise you not to eliminate
this impulse completely, as it can serve a useful function by promoting
your values. But we need to calibrate our conscience to activate at the
right times and not the wrong ones. Say you find yourself in a difficult
situation and have to make a decision. In retrospect, you realize you
made the wrong one. You experience a wave of guilt and regret that
lingers for months, or even years. Though you may believe this feeling
is justified, I would argue that your remorse impulse has not been
properly trained. What good do painful feelings do if they are activated
when you make the best decision you can given all the information
available to you? Remorse--Never give way to remorse but immediately say
to yourself: that would merely mean adding a second stupidity to the
first--If you have done harm, see how you can do good. - Friedrich
Nietzsche, The Wanderer and His Shadow One of the counter-algorithms
offered by Nate Soares in his book, Replacing Guilt, has to do with the
way we talk to ourselves about our obligations:

Just stop doing things because you 'should.' As in, never let a 'should'
feel like a reason to do something... When you're deliberating, your
only responsibility is to figure out which action seems best given the
available time and information. - Nate Soares, Replacing Guilt If you
can't identify what you could do better, there is no use in punishing
yourself for it. And as long as you make the best decisions you can at
any given time, you cannot reasonably blame yourself for the outcome.37
Your conscience is a tool. You want to train your remorse to activate
when you knowingly act against your own values or interests. You want to
incentivize yourself to align with your ideals, and carefully programmed
emotional algorithms can help with this. Make the commitment never to do
anything you believe is a bad decision, but never beat yourself up for
doing what you believe is the best one.

Jealousy and Possessiveness

Jealousy is contrasted with envy through its focus on something one
already has but fears losing, particularly a romantic partner. It exists
as a clear mechanism for preventing the loss of one's mate.38 But like
so many other negative emotions, it is a crude instrument for bringing
about this outcome. Your protectiveness may keep your partner around
long enough to pass on your genes, but if it is a healthy, long-term
relationship you long for, you will only do damage by trying to shelter
your partner from other people.39 Your possessiveness and neediness will
turn your significant other away and make your relationship fragile and
weak. There are numerous ways to weaken jealousy's hold on you. You can
lower its sensitivity by restructuring your beliefs about human
psychology, reminding yourself that a conversation with another person
does not indicate plans to leave one's current partner for them.40 You
can remind yourself that your significant other is human, will be
attracted to other people besides you, and that this is perfectly
fine.41 And you can internalize the idea that if your partner decides to
part with you, it likely was not the right relationship to be in.42 The
most helpful algorithm I have come across for eliminating jealousy is a
refusal to identify as another person's possessor, found in this quote
attributed to Osho:

If you love a flower, don't pick it up. Because if you pick it up it
dies and it ceases to be what you love. So if you love a flower, let it
be. Love is not about possession. Love is about appreciation.

Take a radical approach of appreciating every moment you get to spend
with other people, but never considering them yours. If you love
someone, you will want to promote their flourishing as an individual,
not as a possession. And this kind of selfless appreciation will only
make you a more appealing partner. A relationship in which both partners
can appreciate one another without compulsive attachment would encourage
the growth and flourishing of both individuals.43 Love, Compassion, and
Empathy In addition to our competitive and aggressive tendencies, we
were endowed with a number of pro-social and altruistic tendencies and
emotions. We are made to care deeply

about our loved ones, to feel the pain of others, and to try to help
those who belong to our tribe.44 Most people consider compassion and
emotional empathy to be universally positive traits. But these emotions
have a dark side too. The value of emotional empathy has been called
into question by Paul Bloom in his book, Against Empathy: The Case for
Rational Compassion. Bloom argues that empathy is quite often
counterproductive for our individualistic good, causing us unnecessary
pain that does not sustainably compel us to solve problems. Some people
are so compassionate that they regularly suffer pointlessly on behalf of
others. But it also may hinder the good of the person with whom we are
empathizing. Although many people who vent their problems to us only
want someone with whom to commiserate, a caring friend would be more
likely to help them solve their problems than to validate and encourage
their maladaptive responses. Bloom argues that the people we typically
think of as lacking empathy - psychopaths - are generally more lacking
in impulse control, and that exceptional altruists are more likely to be
high in self-control than in empathy.45 Those who praise empathy need to
keep in mind that however noble it may seem, it is still an emotion. It
does not consider facts or consequences, and if you do not maintain
conscious control over your compassion, it will not serve a useful
purpose.46 The effective altruism movement encourages people to look at
how much good their actions

will do, rather than simply donating money or time to whichever
advertisement or cause more effectively stirs up their empathy.47
Following these principles may cause you to seem cold at times, but
remember that emotions must be tamed to be used intelligently and
effectively.

Our best hope for the future is not to get people to think of all
humanity as family---that's impossible. It lies, instead, in an
appreciation of the fact that, even if we don't empathize with distant
strangers, their lives have the same value as the lives of those we
love. - Paul Bloom48 On the other hand, we can also hack our compassion
impulses in the other direction when we determine it to be beneficial.
The Buddha, Jesus, and other great teachers have encouraged people to
cultivate love, compassion, and

forgiveness for everyone, even our enemies,49 and this type of universal
compassion can be highly conducive to well-being and social good.50 It
can foster social connection, rid us of negative feelings of hate, and
encourage us to actually act in favor of pro-social values to improve
society.51 Though most people in the Western world are not phased by the
notion of universal love, the original teachers who extolled it were
considered radical at the time, and universal compassion is actually a
counterintuitive and powerful tool. Love your enemies! Do good to them.
Lend to them without expecting to be repaid. - Jesus Christ, Luke 6:35
NLT Empathy was biologically intended to be felt toward family and
fellow members of small tribes, but we can "misuse" it to serve our own
values by extending it to members of other groups, or even those we are
predisposed to dislike. We can down-regulate a number of negative
emotions like anger and hate by programming the habit of experiencing
love toward everyone by default. Metta, or loving-kindness meditation,
is one method for cultivating this universal compassion. This practice
typically consists of repeating words and thoughts wishing happiness and
freedom from suffering to other people, beginning with

oneself and one's loved ones, and ending with difficult people, enemies,
and eventually all sentient beings.52

OceanofPDF.com

Unlocking Equanimity There is no more reliable proof of greatness than
to be in a state where nothing can happen to make you disturbed. -
Seneca, On Anger Resilience has become a pop-psychological buzzword, and
for good reason. Learning to quickly recover from inevitable setbacks is
far more practical than attempting to avoid them all. Highly resilient
people are better at coping with stress, have fewer depressive symptoms,
live longer, and have greater physical health.53 54 But why don't we aim
higher? If emotional resilience is getting back up after getting knocked
down, emotional robustness is not getting knocked down in the first
place. A robust mind is one with a powerful immune system one which can
bear more without bending. And we fortify our minds, not by
circumventing threats, but by preparing for them. We improve ourselves
by exposing ourselves to difficulties so our minds learn to deal with
them effectively. We optimize our software by identifying and
reprogramming the emotional algorithms likely to be triggered by the
events in our lives.

Emotions are precision instruments. They can be used to achieve great
things, but your conflicting passions will only undermine your efforts
if you have only little or moderate control over them. Though negative
emotions can occasionally serve our purposes and align with our values,
people with generally stable and controlled emotions have been proven to
have greater psychological health than those whose moods are constantly
up and down.55 And if your emotions are all the reactive default
reflexes they were originally built to be, only luck can help you in
achieving your goals. Believing an emotion to be useful is one thing.
But if you are unable to control the emotion, you are not using it. It
is using you. If you are unable to keep from getting angry, you have a
major weakness, no matter how hard you punched that wall. If you are
unable to keep from getting jealous constantly, your partner's mind is
not necessarily a problem, but yours is. And as counterintuitive as it
may seem, if you are unable to control your empathy for others, you too
have a weakness, and it isn't doing anyone any favors. You have to learn
to stabilize your emotions before you can use them proficiently. The
central idea we've covered in the last three chapters, that you can
simply reprogram a negative emotional response with which you may
struggle, may seem overly simplistic. But over the years, I have
repeatedly proven to myself that by viewing emotional algorithms as the
root of my problems, these reactions can be eliminated entirely.

Each unwanted emotional response poses a unique challenge for creative
problem solving. Some are more challenging than others. But I cannot
emphasize enough that resignation to negative emotions is the greatest
obstacle to a tranquil mind. Undesirable emotions are bugs in your
software. Each emotional category which causes you to feel or act
against your values reveals a vulnerability in your psychological code.
Culture is keen to remind people that it is okay to feel hurt and upset.
This may be important for people to understand, but it's a bit like
telling a programmer it is okay to have errors in his code. Sure, it's
okay. Taking it personally will only create more problems. But now it's
time to debug it. Your thoughts and emotions can be trained, whether or
not you have committed to the endeavor of training them. Every problem
you have is a part of your software that hasn't been optimized. As we
aim to optimize our emotions, we must attempt to cultivate the ancient
ideal of equanimity. Equanimity is a state of undisturbed tranquility
and psychological stability, with equivalent concepts in nearly every
practical philosophy and religion - apatheia in Greek Stoicism, ataraxia
in Epicureanism, and upekkha in Buddhism.56 Someone with this state of
mind was someone whose balance of mind could not be shaken, even in the
face of great adversity. Equanimity is the pinnacle of psychological
robustness and control.57

It is evenness of mind, unshakeable freedom of mind, a state of inner
equipoise that cannot be upset by gain and loss, honor and dishonor,
praise and blame, pleasure and pain. - Bhikkhu Bodhi, Toward a Threshold
of Understanding It is easy to view this state as a spiritual aspiration
achieved only by ancient sages, but you likely underestimate how
attainable a state like this is for you. Think back to the problems you
were dealing with five years ago. Chances are these problems are largely
irrelevant to you now. Whatever circumstances were causing you anger,
fear, anxiety, or sadness then have likely shifted, and they no longer
cause you the suffering they once did. From where you stand now, it is
easy to look at these problems and see that most of them were trivial;
it may even seem laughable that the majority of them ever caused you
distress. The problems likely worked themselves out, or better yet,
weren't really problems in the first place. You may even be thankful for
the struggles you went through. Equanimity is about feeling the way you
feel about your five-years-ago-problems right now, about your current
problems. Meaning they either aren't problems, are problems that will
sort themselves out, or are problems that are good to have. And this
state is attained through the gradual process of identifying the
emotional reactions that hold you back, using the restructuring and
modulation tactics to correct them, and reprogramming each one until

you are left with nearly total stability, regardless of your
circumstances. Be like a headland of rock on which the waves break
incessantly; but it stands fast and around it the seething of the waters
sink to rest. - Marcus Aurelius, Meditations Once you have learned to
cultivate tranquility and keep your mind still, you will be ready to
learn to masterfully maneuver it in the right direction. We will now
turn to the control and mastery of our behaviors, actions, and habits.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8: Self-Direction and Its Impediments The Threat of Craving A
person who wants to be happy must evidently pursue and practice
self-control. - Plato, Gorgias We all face countless internal conflicts
every day. To read or play video games? To exercise or stay home and eat
waffles? To go out to the bar or spend time with your kids? Each of
these questions represents a battle between two or more drives within
the mind. And the drives which perpetually win these battles determine
who we will become. The behavioral realm of the self-mastery triad has
been saved for last because in many ways, the other two realms are the
instruments which enable us to take the best actions. Our ultimate goal
of value alignment depends on our ability to reach congruence between
our ideals and our behavior.

Self-control, or self-regulation, is the peak of the behavioral realm,
and represents the final piece of the puzzle of self-mastery. After you
have acquired the wisdom to strategically align your goals with your
values and the ability to stabilize the emotional forces within you,
there is only one thing left to do: Direct your behavior toward your
goals. And to do this, you will need the ability to resist the urges to
act against your defined goals, and the ability to motivate yourself
toward them. We generally talk about self-control in reference to those
who lack it. The concept comes up when discussing alcoholics, violent
criminals, and hyperactive kids. Books on self-control are typically
about dieting and addiction. We will discuss these types of issues and
temptations, but we will also look at the temptations of the easy life.
We will examine the addictions which lock us into normalcy and
mediocrity. We will learn to program out the behaviors which limit our
character and prevent us from becoming the type of person we wish to be.
When we recognize that selfcontrol determines so much more than the
ability to resist that delicious slice of pie, it becomes clear that
behavioral self-regulation deserves to be regarded among the highest of
human strengths. The answer to the perennial question of what
facilitates individual and cultural success might be found in the
concept of self-regulation. The benefits of successful self- regulation
are great and its costs can be dire. Failures of self-regulation are at
the root of many personal and societal ills, such as

interpersonal violence, self-defeating behaviors, substance abuse, poor
health, under-achievement, and obesity. - Roy Baumeister, Handbook of
Self-Regulation People high in self-control tend to have the qualities
we all aspire to. They eat more healthily,1 exercise more,2 sleep
better,3 spend less compulsively,4 drink and smoke less,5 and are
generally healthier both physically and mentally.6 Poor self-control is
correlated with many mental disorders, like chronic anxiety, explosive
anger, depression, paranoia, psychoticism, eating disorders, and OCD,7
as well as problematic behaviors like violence and crime.8 Self-control
is the best predictor of college grades, beating even IQ or SAT scores.9
Those high in it have more secure and fulfilling relationships,10
achieve greater financial security,11 and have greater life
satisfaction.12 They even have more fun, as people who often indulge
temptations experience more negative affect and guilt.13 If you can name
a positive outcome in life, chances are it's highly correlated with
self-control.14 Needless to say, the development of self-control is a
worthy goal. And an understanding of the mechanisms behind self-control
will be crucial to cultivating it and building good habits. But before
we can start pulling the

levers of behavior and self-control, we must become cognizant of the
potential threats which are most likely to take hold of us and take away
our capacity for self-direction. A behavioral algorithm is known as a
habit. But this term includes the single actions which appear to be
isolated. Ultimately, all actions are habitual in the sense that they
are the products of biologically ingrained and algorithmic responses. A
bad habit is one which leads us away from our goals; a good habit is one
which leads us toward them. The behavioral algorithm causes a specific
behavioral output in response to an environmental input.15

Ultimately, desire is the driver of behavior, so in order for a behavior
to be activated, the trigger must generate a desire, a term we are using
interchangeably with drive or craving.16 So bad habits arise because a
trigger generates a desire which conflicts with our ideal behavior.

And good habits arise because the trigger generates a desire which is
aligned with our ideal behavior. As in previous chapters, a straight
gold line indicates that the driving desires are aligned with the
behavior.

We need to understand the nature of our drives and cravings and why they
can be so problematic in the modern world. It should be understood at
this point that our ancestral, genetic programming can be a great
hindrance to well-being, and these problems are often amplified in
modern society. The most obvious examples are the chemicals that
undeniably result in addiction. Synthetic drugs like cocaine tap
directly into our brain's reward circuits, providing us with pleasures
our ancestors did not have access to. These drug-induced feelings,
originally built

to reinforce adaptive behaviors, fail to reinforce anything besides
continued use of the drug.17 But the things we are used to calling
addictions are not the only type of modern pleasures that continually
hold people back. Corporate entities craft many aspects of our world
today. They are incentivized to meet every one of our desires as
effectively as they can. Though there are far worse ways of organizing
society, the incentives our economic systems provide can result in new
addictions that harm people in the name of improving the world.18
Ultimately, an addiction is any maladaptive behavior which controls an
individual rather than being controlled by him. Addictions often
preclude adaptive behaviors, limiting people from building healthy lives
and relationships and obstructing the alignment that would result in
genuine satisfaction.19 And there are many times when good feelings can
serve as bad addictions. We are built to crave foods high in sugar,
salt, and fat because they provided our ancestors with energy, vital
nutrients, and stored fat to help them get through times of food
shortage. It was beneficial for them to eat as much of these as they
could find because they were often scarce.20 But the modern world has
hacked the reward systems that were so beneficial in the ancient world,
boosting the content of these craved compounds in the foods we eat to
maximize addictiveness. Combined with the sedentary lifestyle the

modern world affords, these chemicals no longer serve their original
purpose, instead resulting in disease and obesity.21 In similar fashion,
our innate desire for validation is exploited by social media companies
who tailor the algorithms of their platforms to get people as hooked as
possible. Randolph Nesse calls the result "social obesity."22 We are
provided with more opportunities for social approval and entertainment
than our ancestors ever would have had. Digital votes of approval
provide the same type of rewards that real social interaction is meant
to provide.23 Though they are ostensibly built to foster connection,
these addictions can impede social connection in real life.24 We see the
same addictive brain hacks in video games, streaming platforms, digital
pornography, and online shopping. They provide us with new temptations
that make it harder for us to make deliberate decisions about how we
spend our time.25 The problem with the modern world is that it optimizes
for our drives, not for our values. If Youtube's algorithms were built
to show you the videos that your ideal self would view instead of the
ones you click on, it would be an entirely positive tool. But when the
world around us is built to amplify our desires, it is easy to allow our
lifestyle to be designed by others with ulterior motives. We become the
products (literally) of the companies seeking to squeeze profits out of
us. Though you may detect a critical tone, there is not an inherent
problem with any of these modern innovations. It

is no more necessary for you to delete your Facebook account than to
burn the bag of sugar in your pantry for fear that you'll be tempted to
shovel it into your mouth at any moment. Technology, by definition,
serves useful functions, and there is no problem with using tools for
their utility as long as they aren't able to hijack your judgment.
Though the world is getting more addictive, our best tool to counter it
is still found in the cultivation of self-mastery.26 We must design our
lifestyles intentionally, applying the process of reflecting on our
values and setting goals to the way we spend our time and energy. We
have to learn to develop increasing control over ourselves, and the key
is not so much moderation as it is intentionality. The next chapter will
cover the fine details of self-control, but the process begins with
broad strategy and awareness. And the first step to designing our
behavior is to become aware of how we live currently. The quantified
self movement is centered around collecting and analyzing data about our
behavior and lifestyle, and this type of careful monitoring is essential
to change behavior and habits.27 Make a list of desirable and
undesirable habits, which may include how many hours you sleep, how many
miles you run, or how many calories you consume, depending on the
behaviors you are concerned with. It may also include behaviors like
using filler words, complaining, or failing to assert yourself at
restaurants. There are even ways to track

your own carbon footprint.28 For any negative behavior, keep a log of
the number of times you engage in it per week. This simple act of
logging is sometimes enough to break a habit. You should also conduct a
study of how you spend your weekly time. You may be surprised by how
many hours per week you spend playing video games or watching Criss
Angel videos. You will need to use a tool to do this monitoring, as your
intuitions on the matter are likely flawed. Create a pie chart to
display this weekly time allocation, followed by an ideal time
allocation derived from your ideal lifestyle. Always be looking for
opportunities to move closer to this ideal. When you decide on a
specific optimization, be sure to make use of implementation intentions,
stating exactly what you intend to do ahead of time.29 It may seem too
simple to think that stating "If X then Y" would train our internal
algorithms, but it seems this method can actually be highly effective.
When people are trying to adopt a certain behavior, they will often say
they want to smoke fewer cigarettes or start going to bed earlier, but
they fail to build a specific plan, and this requires them to use more
willpower in the moment. An implementation intention consists of stating
exactly what we want to do, exactly when, and exactly where. Instead of
saying "I will write more this year," say "Every time I walk into my
house after work, I will sit down at my computer and write 500 words."
You wouldn't

program a computer telling it to do something more often. You would tell
it exactly when it needs to do what with a specific trigger and specific
instructions. Your psychological software must be treated in the same
way. We all know that attempting to transform your lifestyle overnight
will not result in sustained changes. Instead, focus on gradual,
one-percent shifts in behavior, always nearing your ideal lifestyle more
and more. This process of incremental optimization will be rewarding at
many points along the way, but you may eventually wake up to find that
your bad habits have been broken, positive behaviors are automatic, and
one-hundred percent of your weekly time is spent constructively serving
your ideals.

OceanofPDF.com

The Perils of Compliance He who cannot obey himself will be commanded. -
Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra Other people naturally have
great influence over us. Without cognitive self-mastery, the opinions of
others deeply influence and manipulate ours. They lull us into dogmatic
beliefs which may or may not be accurate. And they cause us to believe
certain paths in life will lead to well-being when all they lead to is
monotony. Without emotional selfmastery, the words and thoughts of
others cause us to suffer. We put ourselves fully into the hands of
other people, unable to be content on our own. And without behavioral
self-mastery, the actions and attitudes of others compel us to conform,
even when we know better.30 When we are young, we hear about the dangers
of peer pressure, often rolling our eyes and moving on with our lives.
But though it takes on new forms, social pressure does not go away in
adulthood.31 In an incredible psychological experiment documented in the
Netflix special, The Push, mentalist Derren Brown led subjects to
believe they were helping out in a real charity event which goes awry
(spoilers ahead). In reality, they

were surrounded by actors instructed to pressure the subjects to commit
increasingly questionable and absurd acts. The primary subject we follow
in the film is gradually led to mislabel the allergy content of foods,
help hide a body, impersonate a philanthropist, and more. It all leads
up to a moment in which the subject is led to believe that the only way
to avoid his own imprisonment is to push an innocent man off the roof of
a building to his death. The actors are trained to use high pressure
tactics to prompt the subject to commit the act. But the reasoning they
give for why the push was necessary is deeply flawed, and a few moments
of clear thinking would have made this obvious. This particular subject
refuses to push the man off of the roof, though he was previously
convinced to push an ostensibly dead body down a flight of stairs to
make it appear that he had died from the fall. But amazingly, all three
of the other unfortunate subjects were successfully convinced to push
the man off the building (which luckily had a net secretly positioned
below it). They were then informed that the whole thing had been staged
and would be turned into a hit Netflix special. At the end, Brown says:
The point is we are all profoundly susceptible to this kind of
influence. But by understanding this, understanding how we can be
manipulated, we can be stronger. We can say no. We can push back.32

We often have strong and positive ideas about our own character, and
view ourselves as simply good people independent of our circumstances.
But our behavior varies widely depending on the social forces at play
around us. Had the experiment above been real, the people who pushed the
man off the building would have been guilty of murder. But even when the
consequences are less obvious, they are not unimportant. As we all know,
we are deeply motivated by the desire to belong and be accepted. This is
not problematic in itself, but it can be one of the easiest methods for
others to abuse us and cause us to act against our own will. Social
compliance refers to the effect of the words and actions of others on
our own decisions. Though it is not always conscious, our friends and
family members often attempt to subtly influence us to make certain
decisions.33 We are most easily influenced to comply with the pressures
of groups who are close to us, similar to us, powerful, and great in
number.34 35 If you are asked by a coworker, a salesman, or an
organization to complete a small task, followed by a series of
successively larger commitments, they may be using the foot-in-the-door
technique, which is often highly effective at convincing people to do
things they would never agree to normally.36 On the other hand, the
door-in-the-face technique involves asking for a large request which
will be rejected, followed by a much smaller request.37

Ingratiation refers to the use of flattery to compel someone to accept
or complete a certain behavior.38 A common form of ingratiation is to
try to convince someone that an idea was originally theirs so as to make
them more likely to favor it.

The norm of reciprocity is applied by doing a favor for someone before
asking something in return. This method preys on an innate sense of
reciprocity which helped our ancestors remain in good social standing.39

You can also be convinced to make certain decisions through
identification, or the suggestion that a decision is characteristic of
"people like you" or like you would like to be.40 Advertisers take
advantage of our desire to conform with respected and admired people by
using social proof to give credibility to products. Celebrity
endorsements and claims about the popularity of certain products have a
strong impact on our perceptions of value. Good marketers understand
that many purchases are driven by the desire to fit in with certain
groups, and this can be used to compel us to make bad decisions.41
Advertisers frequently manufacture urgency or scarcity by creating
limited time or quantity offers which causes customers to make impulsive
decisions. Discounts and deals tap into our tendency of anchoring prices
to known values, believing we are getting a good deal when an Amazon
Prime day offer is ninety percent less than the original price, even
when it is still not a good product. And due to the contrast effect, the
presence of a ridiculously overpriced dish on the menu at a restaurant
makes us more likely to buy the second most expensive dish.42 Can you
think of a time when one of these tactics was used to convince you to
take a certain action? What about in the decision to purchase this very
book? Before you demand a refund, note that choosing not to make a
purchase or decision out of objection to persuasion tactics still
represents a kind of manipulation. The phenomenon of reactance is the
tendency to do the opposite of what

someone who is attempting to influence you wants.43 It still consists in
making a decision for reasons other than your own judgment of its merit,
and hence is still a bias. Not every decision that others want us to
make is a bad one. What is important is that we make our decisions on
our own. By developing resistance to manipulation tactics, we free
ourselves to make decisions based on their benefit to us independent of
the wishes of others. Much like the case of cognitive biases, you can
program immunity to persuasion and manipulation into your operating
system. As always, this process begins with familiarization. Study
manipulation tactics, not to use them against others, but to defend
yourself against them, and so you can apply the methods we will cover in
the next chapter to reprogram our vulnerabilities.44 When we allow
ourselves to be compelled to act against our own wishes, goals, and
ideals, we place our well-being in the hands of others who have far less
vested interest in it. When we let the fear of standing out prevent us
from defending our values, we step away from our ideals. When we let our
jealous friends talk us out of our ambitions, we step away from our
ideals. And when we let the desire to be liked by others cause us to be
less liked by ourselves, we step away from our ideals. The individual
has always had to struggle to keep from being overwhelmed by the tribe.
If you try it, you will be lonely often, and sometimes frightened.

But no price is too high to pay for the privilege of owning yourself. -
Rudyard Kipling, interview with Arthur Gordon

OceanofPDF.com

The Dangers of Comfort The three most harmful addictions are heroin,
carbohydrates, and a monthly salary. - Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Bed of
Procrustes We are all tempted by comfort the moment we are able to
achieve it, and while comfort is not problematic in itself, a
comfortable life is by no means synonymous with a good life. Comfort can
be a powerful sedative which breeds complacency and makes it difficult
to do the things we know we should. From the literal moment we are born,
we are jerked out of a warm asylum and into a confusing, chaotic
struggle. This struggle pervades early life; childhood can be seen as a
series of abrupt removals from one's comfort zone. Going to school for
the first time, spending a night away from parents, joining a sports
team, first dates, first jobs... Every year, young people are uprooted
from their routines. From the people they have grown accustomed to. From
the identities they thought were theirs. Change is inherently painful.
We do not tend to choose it if we are given a choice.45 We gravitate
toward homeostasis, and when we break out of it, it often feels like
some terrible mistake has been made. But so often in this

phase of life, we are given no apparent choice but to dive straight in.
The pressures to grow and adapt are too strong to resist, and the few
who are unwilling or unable to adapt are regarded as immature or
impaired.46 After making one of these shifts, we go through a
distressing transitional period, often lasting months. Our old sources
of reinforcement are gone, and new ones haven't had time to come in and
take their place. But with the conclusion of this transition comes a
golden period. We start to acclimate to this new life. There is an air
of novelty and opportunity without the alien feeling we had at first.
The new people who seemed so distant at first are exciting now.
Spontaneity takes the place of routine, and we start to see ourselves in
a new light too. The interactions between our personalities and new
stimuli let us see sides of ourselves we forgot, or didn't know, were
there. We discover our own ideals and new paths to aligning with them.
And this is what we call growth.47 The cycle is reliable for quite a
while, and while some attempt to fight it every time, some learn to love
it. Whether leaving for college, moving to a new city, or starting a new
job, we plunge into the unknown with a kind of confidence that it will
all work out. And maybe sometimes it doesn't. But it seems that
overwhelmingly, the decision to let go of comfort and embrace the
unknown is met with generous reward.

Nature loves courage. You make the commitment and nature will respond to
that commitment by removing impossible obstacles... This is how magic is
done. By hurling yourself into the abyss and discovering it's a feather
bed. - Terence McKenna, Unfolding the Stone But something strange often
happens once one has reached adulthood. Life stops pushing. The rapids
that once left you with no choice now leave you in a pool of all the
choice you ever wanted. Sure, occasionally your life gets shaken up
unexpectedly. But for the most part, your precious balance remains
undisturbed. Even stranger, it starts to feel like you are being pushed
in the opposite direction. The pressures, social and biological, that
once forced you to change and adapt have abruptly decided it's time to
settle down.48 It's time to meet someone - the last someone. It's time
to settle into a good city, job, and home. Now the people insisting on
change and growth are the stunted ones. It's time to commit. Eventually,
it becomes clear that your comfort zone isn't really supposed to be
expanding anymore. So you cave in, and it's not so bad. You meet someone
you enjoy being around and start planning your life together. You get a
nice house and a job that you don't hate. And you've made it. You have
achieved the life everyone wants. The life adolescence wouldn't let you
have. A life that never forces

you to change. That keeps you in that warm asylum of your comfort zone
and never throws you into chaos. We love comfort. We love
state-of-the-art practice facilities, oak-paneled corner offices,
spotless locker rooms, and fluffy towels. Which is a shame, because
luxury is a motivational narcotic: It signals our unconscious minds to
give less effort. It whispers, Relax, you've made it. - Daniel Coyle,
The Little Book of Talent The evolution that you will undergo when
you've achieved this kind of stability is a much more subtle kind. It's
so gradual as to be nearly imperceptible. The fun and challenge and
excitement slowly die down a little bit. And again in a few more years.
Everything becomes a watereddown version of itself - especially you. You
forget much of your personality. You forget your potential. And you
forget that you've forgotten. And this is what we call decay.

Nietzsche may be biased in his view that suffering is the key to
greatness, but if we substitute "suffering" for "discomfort," things
start to make far more sense. In his book, Hiking with Nietzsche, John
Kaag points out that Nietzsche's philosophy is sometimes critiqued as
immature and best suited for adolescence. But Kaag claims that many of
Nietzsche's ideas are not only appropriate for those in the midst of
adulthood, but may even be "lost on the young."49 I had no idea how dull
the world could sometimes be. How easy it would be to remain in the
valleys, to be satisfied with mediocrity. Or how difficult it would be
to stay alert to life... Being a responsible adult is, among other
things, often to resign oneself to a life that falls radically short of
the expectations and potentialities that one had or, indeed, still
has. - John Kaag, Hiking with Nietzsche Though it is true that many of
Nietzsche's ideas are grandiose and dramatic, they can also be powerful
reminders that one has a choice to bear the discomfort needed to do
great things. He argued that the great life was the life of the
individual who overcomes resistance - who overcomes one's own desire for
pleasure and comfort. By developing self-control and integration of the
parts of the psyche, she could develop autonomy over her own actions and
direct them toward her highest goals. She could be a

creative force and live in a way that affirmed her own nature and
promoted her growth.50 It is time for man to fix his goal. It is time
for man to plant the seed of his highest hope. His soil is still rich
enough for it. But this soil will one day be poor and weak; no longer
will a high tree be able to grow from it... I tell you: one must have
chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star. - Friedrich Nietzsche,
Thus Spoke Zarathustra There is a popular belief that most of the
personal evolution and growth you undergo in life will be wrapping up by
the time you're thirty. But this is a self-fulfilling prophecy. By the
time most people reach thirty, they've carved themselves into a life
that leaves them no room for growth and accepted that this is simply the
norm. This kind of stagnation is not inevitable, but you must build the
habit of continually breaking out and expanding your comfort zone to
prevent it.51 A life limited to your comfort zone will almost certainly
hold you back from your potential. You cannot build a robust mind by
sheltering yourself from reality. We have seen in previous chapters that
avoiding uncomfortable surroundings will make you vulnerable when things
don't go according to plan.52 Avoiding uncomfortable feedback will keep
you from developing your ideas and developing into the person you are
capable of being. Avoiding uncomfortable beliefs will

shield you from the truth. And avoiding uncomfortable situations will
create barriers which may keep you from ever knowing who you were
capable of being.53 You must learn to do what scares you. That which
does not kill us, makes us stronger. - Kelly Clarkson - Just kidding,
that one's Nietzsche too.54 Another strong supporter of choosing growth
over fear was Abraham Maslow. But he is also responsible for
popularizing one of the greatest obstacles to this choice: needs.
Maslow's hierarchy of needs taught people that they have certain
psychological needs, and if these needs are not met, they are incomplete
or deficient as people. Securing these needs is challenging, but losing
them is easy. Many choose not to take risks in their lives for fear of
losing the people and circumstances that meet their needs. But the truth
is that you don't have mandatory needs. You are not deficient if all of
your longings are not met - in fact, it would be impossible to have all
of your longings met. Maslow said: One can choose to go back toward
safety or forward toward growth. Growth must be chosen again and again;
fear must be overcome again and again. - Abraham Maslow, The Psychology
of Science

You must understand that your mind is not a delicate machine to be
protected from variability and stress. The mind can be made better
through stress and discomfort.55 When you force yourself out of your
comfort zone, you gain reference experiences that teach you the things
you feared aren't so bad. You defend yourself against the threats to
your comfort, expanding your comfort zone until everything is
comfortable, and all barriers to value alignment have been demolished.
The older you get, the more resolve it requires to choose change and
growth, and the harder it becomes to sacrifice security and comfort and
order. Choosing anything other than growth is a sure path to regret. And
allowing your craving for comfort to stand in the way of your unique
potential is one of the most common barriers to living the greatest life
possible and aligning with your ideals. Do not confuse a life of comfort
and ease for the good life. The good life is one of pushing your
boundaries, incrementally overcoming yourself, striving for greatness
whatever that means for you. The happiness that results from the absence
of discomfort is the happiness of mediocrity. Live your life, not as if
you were trying to hoard a precious treasure, but as if you were
crafting your own autobiography with every decision - because you are.

OceanofPDF.com

The Risk of Corruption Do not act as if you were going to live ten
thousand years. Death hangs over you. While you live, while it is in
your power, be good. - Marcus Aurelius, Meditations Marcus Aurelius is
known as the last of the Five Good Emperors of Rome, he and was a great
Stoic philosopher as well. Every quote of his that we have referenced
comes from his book, Meditations, which is one of the most powerful
sources of philosophical wisdom available, but not because of its
innovative ideas or clever arguments. What makes this book so incredible
is found in the fact that it was the Roman emperor's personal journal.
It was never intended to be published. It was written by the most
powerful man in the world at the time for the sole purpose of helping
himself to live a better life through daily reminders of Stoic wisdom
and principles.56 The reason we find this type of work so incredible is
that most of us realize how easy it would be for someone with immense
power to quit trying to live with integrity. We expect the powerful to
be corrupt. We expect politicians to betray their promises when they get
the chance. We assume companies will sell out after they have grown
large

enough. We have all seen friends compromise their principles after an
increase in social status. And many of us have personally had the
experience of slowly slipping away from our values as soon as we were no
longer held externally accountable for them. Negative habits of
character can slowly creep in if we are not vigilant. We may develop the
habit of putting down the people in our lives if they allow it. We may
be drawn in to talk negatively about others behind their backs. We find
ways to justify our own behavior even when we know we would find it
repulsive in someone else.

Corruption of character is a very real phenomenon, and although Marcus
Aurelius is testament to the fact that absolute power does not always
"corrupt absolutely," it is all too easy to allow one's behavior to
degrade.57 Nothing discloses real character like the use of power. It is
easy for the weak to be gentle. Most people can bear adversity. But if
you wish to know

what a man really is, give him power. This is the supreme test. - Robert
Ingersoll, The Works of Robert G. Ingersoll You, like everyone else,
have had impulses to do terrible things before, things which may have
violated not only the law, but more importantly, your own personal
values. The reason you merely thought about these acts instead of
committing them ultimately must be explained by your behavioral
self-regulation skills - The ability to direct your own drives instead
of having them directed beneath your awareness.58 Who hasn't been
tempted to violate a significant other's trust or drive while
intoxicated, risking multiple potential lives? Most people have not only
been tempted, but have caved into such temptations. It isn't my place to
tell you which actions you should engage in or avoid; that is the role
of your values. But as soon as the drive is present and the risks of
getting caught or punished disappear, our default behavior will be to do
whatever it is we crave without regard for our values.

One of the least discussed keys to overcoming one's default behaviors
comes down to identity. Humans are built to try to preserve a positive
view of themselves.59 Though this tendency can result in distorted
self-perceptions and narcissism, it is also the key to some of the
greatest human capacities. In many ways, our sense of identity shapes
the actions we take and the habits we build. There is a major difference
between someone who believes she is trying to learn to play the guitar
and someone who believes she is a musician, or someone who believes he
is trying to stop drinking and someone who believes he is not a drinker.
In his excellent book, Atomic Habits, author James Clear illustrates the
link between our identity and our behavior, claiming that "every action
you take is a vote for the type of person you wish to become."

Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit
your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity. - James Clear,
Atomic Habits But the relationship between identity and behavior is a
two way street. Not only does your identity shape your behavior, your
behavior shapes your identity as well.60 Despite the perception many of
us share that we know ourselves deeply, we largely learn about ourselves
the same way others do: by observing our behavior.61 Selfsignaling
refers to our tendency to signal certain traits to ourselves to shape
our own self-perceptions. We signal our character to ourselves through
the actions we perform repeatedly. And the implications for our pursuit
to align with our ideals are tremendous. Though we can deceive ourselves
on some level, we are always monitoring our own behavior and evaluating
ourselves based on it, even when we are not conscious of this process.62
We can see how this effect relates to well-being in psychotherapy as
well. The reason for the "behavioral" part of cognitive behavioral
therapy is that it is often not enough to simply tell ourselves that
something is true or untrue of us. We have to prove it. People who are
depressed often have incredibly low self-regard, along with a difficult
time completing even the simplest tasks like getting out of bed. One of
the most common exercises for these patients is a

daily activity schedule, in which the patient commits to a list of
activities like taking a shower or going for a walk. Over time, the
difficulty level of the tasks is increased until it is possible to live
a normal life and maintain a healthy selfimage. The fact that this
behavioral method is often highly effective in treating depression
demonstrates that our wellbeing is deeply tied to our behavior.63 Our
habits serve as evidence of the type of person we are to ourselves,
which in turn adds fuel to the habits themselves. If we do nothing, we
have no evidence of the type of person we are. And if we consistently do
all the things our ideal self would, we have all the evidence we need.
This perspective brings us back to Aristotle's view of character as the
sum of one's habits. Our behaviors are the constant neuroplastic
reinforcement that program our software, and this software is the source
of our habits. So unless we take an active role in this programming, who
we are and how closely we align with our ideals will be purely a
consequence of chance. We have to be careful when crafting our identity,
as there is risk in centering your identity around certain traits, even
positive traits. For example, when you are naturally gifted in a certain
skill, you will quickly recognize it as a strength, and it will almost
inevitably become a part of your identity. Your self-worth will become
dependent on this trait, whether it is attractiveness, intelligence, or
humor. You will invest more in it and less in other qualities,
potentially leading to underdevelopment in those areas. If the traits
you identify

with are unearned or uncontrollable, they will not be able to shape your
character in positive directions. And as soon as these strengths fail
you or fade, your entire self-image will be broken.64 The effect of
one-off experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets
reinforced with time, which means your habits contribute most of the
evidence that shapes your identity. In this way, the process of building
habits is actually the process of becoming yourself. - James Clear,
Atomic Habits An increasingly common concern voiced today is that humans
have no reason to be accountable for their actions without the commands
of objective morality. If you don't believe you are always being watched
by an omniscient judge or audited by a karmic cycle of rebirth, why do
the right thing? Why not simply follow your every desire? What is
integrity besides the dogmatic acceptance of rules with no consequences?
But from the perspective of value alignment, it becomes clear that the
consequences are entirely real and acute. The reason to act in
accordance with your values, even when no one is watching, is that you
are always being watched by the most important person: yourself. You are
constantly measuring yourself by your

behaviors, and even though you may consciously deceive yourself into
believing you measure up to your standards, you cannot trick yourself on
every level.65 To achieve this alignment, the correspondence between
your actions and your ideals must be genuine. Whenever you do a thing,
though it can be known but to yourself, ask yourself how you would act
were all the world looking at you, and act accordingly. Encourage all
your virtuous dispositions, and exercise them whenever an opportunity
arises; being assured that they will gain strength by exercise, as a
limb of the body does, and that exercise will make them habitual. -
Thomas Jefferson, Letter to Peter Carr Concepts like virtue, integrity,
and character, seem dry and dated to the modern ear because they have
come to be associated with antiquated and overbearing doctrines. But
these ideas have more to offer than categorical demands. The state of
being a person you yourself don't approve of is the worst form of prison
in this life. Being a person you truly love and respect, not merely
someone with an inflated selfesteem, is the highest hallmark of the good
life. If you value your own values - which by definition, you do - you
have the most powerful reason to live according to them that could
possibly be given. You are both the protagonist and the audience of your
own life, and how greatly you

appeal to this audience of one is the measure of wellbeing you will
realize.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 9: Behavioral Algorithms and SelfControl Behavior, Self-Control,
and Willpower Men's natures are alike; it is their habits that separate
them. - Confucius, Analects Now that we have covered the greatest
obstacles to living a self-directed life, we can dive into the nuts and
bolts of behavioral psychitecture. Some people have the capacity to
overcome their impulses a remarkable amount of the time. They seem to
exert superhuman control over their impulses, consistently following
through on their goals throughout their lives. But these people are not
merely endowed with abnormal levels of willpower. They make use of
strategies

that can be learned by anyone, and their secrets may surprise you.1 We
all know that it is possible to overcome negative behaviors, break bad
habits, and act according to our goals. But you also may believe that
for many of your highest goals, you simply don't have the willpower to
make them happen. You want to break the habits which clash with your
ideals, find the motivation to work toward them, and do the things you
know you should. But sometimes, you just can't. You can't muster the
strength. Since the Medieval era, the key to self-control has been
thought to lie in the special strength of willpower.2 This mysterious
energy of effortful restraint inside us allows us to resist our
strongest urges and work toward what really matters. Willpower, we are
often told, is like a muscle. It depletes in the moment as we use it.
The more we demand of it, the stronger it gets in the long run. But this
notion of willpower has fallen in light of modern thought and research.3
As it turns out, the willpower muscle may amount to the percentage of
glucose in one's blood. Yes, like a muscle, glucose can be depleted, and
one's ability to resist urges along with it. It can also be temporarily
replenished by sipping a sugary drink, though this will come at the
expense of longer-term self-control. But unlike a muscle, it seems that
increased exertion of willpower does not necessarily increase capacity
for it, though a healthy diet and proper

sleep do seem to increase its capacity.4 But the greatest problem with
the notion of willpower as the key to selfcontrol is this: the people
with the highest self-control aren't even using willpower.5 We have all
heard the inspiring sentiment that we must overcome our desires and do
what is rational. What we don't realize when we say these things is that
the idea of overcoming desire is a bit delusional. We don't actually
resist our drives. No matter what we do, we always succumb to our
strongest desires. This does not mean we are helpless to control
ourselves. But it does mean that if we want to harness the power of
self-control, we will have to change the way we think about it.
Nietzsche believed that all beings could be viewed as the sum of a
multitude of drives - competing, conflicting, and struggling for power.
He denied that an individual possessed a unified will which could
overcome these drives, arguing instead that the most powerful drives
always win out and determine our actions. The key to self-mastery, he
suggested, was not found in using reason or willpower to conquer our
drives, but in the coordination of those drives toward organizing
ideals. The ideal state was one in which the individual had organized
his passions and directed them toward his highest goals.6 Nietzsche's
view on drives has aged well. It seems that taking the right actions and
avoiding the wrong ones is once again a creative design process, not a
white-knuckled battle of will. Some of our drives long to align with our
ideals and

achieve our goals. They are just not the most powerful drives by
default. If we want these drives to win out, we have to domesticate the
stronger desires, canceling out the noise so the whispers of our values
can be heard. The secrets to self-control and good habits lie in the
management and training of these desires. The initial trigger is one
major leverage point for reprogramming behaviors.7 In order for a
trigger to generate a drive, one must not only encounter the trigger,
but must pay attention to it, and must interpret it to be desirable. Our
behaviors are mediated by our cognitions and emotions. So we can use our
environmental inputs, our thoughts, or our emotions to reprogram
habits.8 The immediate result of a certain behavior also plays a major
role in habit formation and can be designed to alter habits. The
strength of a drive is conditioned by the strength of the immediate
reward resulting from our response to the trigger. We see the bag of
candy in our pantry, and the craving we feel compels us to grab a piece.
The strength of the immediate reward reinforces the link between input
and output. This reward, or lack thereof, is called the consequence.9
And in many cases, the reassessment and restructuring of goals can make
it so that desires which would be working against us can work for us
instead.10 This leaves us with several promising opportunities for
reprogramming our

behaviors - all found in modulating, activating, and using our desires.

The ability to use these levers to manipulate our drives is the key to
self-control. By using smarter strategies and modulating the strength of
existing desires and emotions, we can ensure that our goals are
completed not only effectively, but effortlessly.11 We can gradually
become proficient at using our drives to fuel us in the right directions
and at keeping them from leading us astray. We have seen that our drives
are not to be trusted as guides to the good life. We have seen that
emotional tranquility depends on the ability to modulate these drives to
keep them from causing us needless pain. Now it is time to learn to
harness them.

OceanofPDF.com

Design Your Inputs We design our world, while our world acts back on us
and designs us. - Anne-Marie Willis, "Ontological Designing" Soon
enough, virtual reality environments may overtake our physical world as
the primary locus of our experience, which means every aspect of our
environment will have been designed by someone.12 Even today, it is hard
to go anywhere that has not been deliberately shaped by human design.
The concept of ontological design posits that in the act of designing
our environments, we actually design ourselves, as the human mind is
shaped greatly by its experiences. Hence there is a continual cycle of
shaping between the individual and his environment.13

The earliest opportunity we have to shape our own behavioral algorithms
is through the active structuring of our environments. This process
allows us to avoid the inputs which trigger unwanted behaviors or ensure
that we encounter those that trigger desired behavior. However, the
purpose of environmental design does not just lie in avoiding negative
cues, but in using cues to condition habits, making us invulnerable to
threats when they inevitably come along. It may seem obvious that we can
influence our own behavior by choosing the situations we enter. An
alcoholic can choose not to enter a bar in the first place. An unhealthy
eater can choose not to purchase the jumbo jar of Nutella, or at least
not to put it on his bedside table.14 The Stoics may have considered
environmental conditions to be irrelevant and worthy only of our
indifference.15 But when you neglect the role of your

environment, you do so at your own detriment. Though the internal world
may be our focus, the external world is certainly not irrelevant. The
world around us shapes us in powerful ways. We can make ourselves
resistant to the manipulation of others, but we can't eliminate all
influence our environment has on us. For us, the environment is a
powerful tool for shaping our software.

If you want to change your software, it is important to ask if there is
an environmental change which would do the work for you. If your goal is
to get more focused work done, design your workspace to be free from
distractions. If you want to start meditating, going to a meditation
retreat will lock you into an environment that will build stronger
habits than you will alone in your room. In many ways, the process of
designing your environment is the process of designing yourself.

You shape the garden of your mind by planting specific things from your
environment, such as the

books you read, experiences you have, and people you surround yourself
with. - Benjamin Hardy, Willpower Doesn't Work One crucial way to design
yourself through your environment is by surrounding yourself with people
who have priorities, traits, or practices you would like to cultivate in
yourself. Statistically, the more overweight people in your social
circles, the more likely you are to become overweight.16 So if you want
to become more fit, you'll be swimming against the current if you
haven't embedded yourself in active environments or built connections
with people who prioritize fitness. The character traits of the people
around you will rub off on you as well, so people who are honest,
narcissistic, altruistic, or manipulative will gradually shape you in
the direction of those traits.17 Look around at how your living space is
arranged. What behaviors does it promote and what does it neglect or
discourage? Would you say the physical space you spend your time in is
representative of the person you would like to be? Your digital
environments shape you as well. The websites you visit regularly, the
podcasts you subscribe to, and the apps you keep on your phone will
shape you. If you want to be less distracted, disable the notifications
and unsubscribe from the email newsletters that you don't feel push you
in the direction of your ideals, and consider subscribing to those that
do.

The second opportunity for changing behaviors is through our attention
and thoughts. Just as we established in the emotional section, our
external experiences are generally filtered through our thoughts before
they trigger behaviors. This means our thoughts and focus play a
powerful role in the actions we take. Most people are familiar with the
marshmallow test Stanford psychologist Walter Mischel's classic
experiment which linked self-control and delayed gratification to nearly
every important metric of the good life. It asked children to resist the
urge to eat a marshmallow for as long as they could. They did not have
the option of changing their environment because they were asked to sit
right in front of the marshmallow.

But the kids who did this successfully were not gritting their teeth and
fighting back their urges, suppressing their cravings, or trying to
power through them. The kids who

used those methods didn't make it long. The successful kids were making
use of cognitive strategies which decreased their desire for the
marshmallow, bypassing the need to exert the willpower "muscle."18 And
there are a number of ways you can design your habitual behavior by
designing its inputs.

One of these strategies is attentional deployment - in this case, simple
self-distraction. Numerous studies have shown that the ability, and the
automatic habit of distracting oneself from tempting stimuli can be a
highly effective method for keeping from caving in.19 Children who chose
to play with toys or pretend to do so could resist the marshmallow
longer. If you can realize you are being tempted by something, remind
yourself of your defined goals, look away if the temptation is physical,
and engage your mind in another activity. It is important to note that
distraction can also be a great hindrance to self-control if it

is done while engaging in a tempting activity. People who are distracted
while they eat don't remember how much they've eaten and consume far
more than those who eat consciously.20 Another use of our attention is
to practice mindfulness. People who were trained in mindfulness
strategies were able to develop an awareness of the physical feelings of
craving and observe them from a non-attached and non-identified
perspective until they subsided.21 Once again, mindfulness operates
within the gaps of algorithms to weaken the connection between our
cravings and our behaviors, giving us a greater degree of choice in the
decisions we make. Another powerful method is cognitive reappraisal,
which we have discussed in regard to emotion. Just as we can reinterpret
the meaning of an emotionally salient stimulus, we can reinterpret a
tempting stimulus to weaken its hold on us. Kids who thought of the
marshmallows as mouth-watering treats were more likely to lose control
and eat them quickly. Kids who pretended the marshmallows weren't real
or compared them to fluffy clouds were able to cool their desire more
effectively.22 Similarly, we can reframe tempting foods as artery
clogging fat, addictive media platforms as psychologically toxic noise,
and drugs or alcohol as poison.

We can also reappraise beneficial activities to make them more
desirable. Instead of thinking of exercise as painful and exhausting, we
can imagine each lap or rep making us stronger. We can envision the
nutrients from healthy foods permeating our bodies and minds and
energizing us. And we can think of every dollar we don't spend as a unit
of freedom. The third input we can change to alter our behaviors is
emotion. Sometimes people adopt certain behaviors as coping mechanisms
to deal with difficult emotions.23 Binge drinking, compulsive sex, and
online shopping can all be used as temporary numbing agents for
emotional pain without solving any problems systemically. Sometimes
these coping behaviors are as trivial as occasionally skipping an
appointment or ordering a Cheesy Gordita Crunch from Taco Bell. But they
can also be far more severe - even lifethreatening. Dialectical behavior
therapy (DBT), a therapeutic practice which originally emerged from CBT,
often focuses on treating harmful behaviors such as addiction,
self-harm, and even suicidal ideation and attempts. One of the core
exercises is known as behavioral chain analysis, in which a

patient investigates what led to the target behavior and which leverage
points exist for preventing it in the future.24 Here is a heavy and
complex example adapted from a patient's experience documented in
Shireen Rizvi's Chain

Analysis in Dialectical Behavior Therapy.

All previously covered methods for modifying emotions can be used
instrumentally for changing behaviors. This patient's cognitive
evaluations are highly distorted, and one promising path to changing the
problematic behavior would be the cognitive restructuring methods
covered in chapter 5. But it is also worth noting that not everyone
dealing with

feelings of loneliness and anxiety resorts to extreme behaviors like
self-harm. Because a habit is essentially a behavior that has become
linked to an input, one of the best methods for changing a habit is to
replace the problem behavior with another response to the same input.25
Imagine how much less tragic the example above would be if cutting were
replaced with exercise. If you are able to notice that your Nutella
problem is triggered by the feeling of boredom, your problem is halfway
solved. You can then explore opportunities for changing the behavior,
such as replacing Nutella with a similar but healthier snack like
yogurt. You can reroute the paths leading from your emotions to your
behaviors and direct them to a healthier place - ideally one that
doesn't reinforce the negative emotion that triggered it.

OceanofPDF.com

Design Your Consequences We can also shape our behavior by altering the
consequences of our actions. The strength of the desire connecting an
environmental input with a behavioral output is determined by the
resulting reward.26 If we win money after gambling at a slot machine,
this reward will condition and strengthen the connection between the cue
of casino bells and the act of sitting down and trying the slots. This
will increase our craving next time and make the behavior more habitual.
Unfortunately, going home feeling terrible after having lost lots of
money will have less conditioning power than a small win because more
immediate rewards have more power. The feeling of satisfaction we get
from running a marathon has less power than the immediate pleasure of a
Baby Bottle PopÂ®.

Fortunately, there are ways we can take advantage of this programming
power by designing the consequences of our behaviors. Through the method
known as precommitment, you can set up certain rewards and sanctions for
your behaviors prior to facing the temptation to cave in or slack off.27
You can leverage your drive for financial accumulation by making the
commitment to give money to a friend every for day that you fail to
practice an instrument you want to learn. Simply make a deposit to a
trusted friend that you can only get back if you meet your specific
behavioral goal. You can also construct an allowance system in which you
"pay yourself" spendable money for every time you complete a desired
action. Just make sure it isn't set up so that good behavior will
deplete your savings. By making these commitments, you set up meaningful
consequences for behaviors that wouldn't normally result in them.28

There are many ways to leverage your social drives to make your defined
goals more rewarding or failing them more punishing. By publicly
announcing the behavioral changes you intend to make, you can raise the
stakes of failure. This will effectively stack your aversion to social
disapproval onto the desired action.29 By getting a personal trainer or
workout partner, you can add accountability to your habits and make it
so failing to go to the gym will cause you to disappoint others. We can
also ask people close to us to deliver praise when we successfully
perform a predefined action.30 It has even been shown that creating a
physical contract stating exactly what we intend to do and signing it
will make us more likely to go through with it. We have a natural
aversion to breaking our commitments, and the more formal the
commitment, the more strongly we will feel the violation.31 As I write
this, I'm using an online tool called Focusmate which calls itself a
virtual coworking tool.32 It sets up roughly hour-long video sessions
between strangers trying to accomplish their own goals and asks each
person to work silently, only sharing their goal at the beginning and
how well they did at the end. It's a surprisingly powerful productivity
tool, and it works because it reroutes our desires to follow through on
our goals and to gain social approval toward the end of efficiently
achieving our personal goals.

There are other technologies which can help us create immediate rewards
or punishments for our behaviors. Though rewards tend to work better
than punishments, wearables such as Pavlok will deliver electric shocks
for failing to get up when your alarm goes off, smoking a cigarette, or
going to a fast food restaurant you have sworn off, which may train you
not to crave these things.33 Some evidence has shown that the simple act
of smiling can serve as a reward, so you may be able to condition
positive behaviors by smiling immediately after completing them.34 A
method known as temptation bundling allows us to stack enjoyable
activities onto our defined goals. Whether you love fantasy football,
bubble baths, or dressing up like a pirate, you can structure your plans
such that you only allow yourself to do these things after completing a
particular disciplined activity. This will slowly cause you to associate
the positive behavior with the indulgence until you begin to crave the
positive activity itself.35

One of the most interesting ways to take advantage of your reward system
is through the construction of a token economy. Create some kind of
token, be it a poker chip, a paper clip, or a check mark in your
notebook. Assign a

particular value to the token, and give yourself one immediately every
time you perform a predetermined action. You can say that a token equals
a coffee, a concert, or one episode of your favorite streaming show.
Over time, the token will become so closely associated with the reward
that it will serve as a powerful reward itself.36 A forcing function is
a self-imposed circumstance which "forces" you to execute behaviors
which would otherwise be difficult or impossible. When you pre-commit to
a certain situation, you lock yourself into a positive spiral which is
very difficult to escape. Although there are plenty of free, online
resources for learning the skill of programming, using these to develop
the level of proficiency that you would get in a university education
would be incredibly difficult, simply because free courses don't serve
as a significant forcing function. In school courses, you have a
financial investment, the respect of your peers and professors, grades,
and degrees on the line, and these motives will pull you up far more
effectively and efficiently than your own brute willpower. If you can
name a craving or a guilty pleasure, chances are there is a way to stack
it onto a beneficial behavior or habit to reinforce it. Can you find a
way to make use of your drive for sugar to fuel you toward your goals?
What about your desire for relaxation? Your sex drive? Don't limit
yourself - every drive you have is a tool for effortlessly propelling
yourself toward your ideals. Find a way to rotate

your existing drives so that they stack onto the weaker drives for good
behavior. If you can strengthen your motivations to complete defined
goals, the behavior will become automatic, and the need to use willpower
will be eliminated. There are times when the best way to build a habit
is to leverage existing drives so that the behavior seems to happen
automatically. We can directly regulate our drives, strengthening or
weakening the connection between cues and cravings, and many of the
modulation tactics we used to dial up or down our emotions in chapter 6
can be used for the purpose of directing behavior as well. Asceticism
can be used to weaken a desire's hold on us and break the soft
addictions that lock us into bad habits. Seneca speaks of fasting as a
method for making one less addicted to regular meals: I am so firmly
determined, however, to test the constancy of your mind that, drawing
from the teachings of great men, I shall give you also a lesson: Set
aside a certain number of days, during which you shall be content with
the scantiest and cheapest fare, with coarse and rough dress, saying to
yourself the while: 'Is this the condition that I feared?' - Seneca,
Letters from a Stoic Nietzsche named specific methods for gaining
greater self-control as well. One was the same method of fasting

and asceticism that Seneca referenced. But another was to schedule
specific times to indulge in certain cravings, strictly refraining from
doing so outside of the schedule. This could help ensure that acceptable
moderation does not get out of hand. An interesting suggestion he offers
is that we may associate a painful or unpleasant idea (or conversely, a
very enjoyable idea) with a particular action such that over time, the
behavior and the idea become intertwined and our desires push us
accordingly. If certain emotions become associated with a behavior, they
can help to promote or discourage that behavior.37 Which emotions fuel
you the most? You can use the frustration you feel when other people
doubt your potential to fuel you. Just make sure you can keep this anger
contained and prevent it from leading you to make impulsive mistakes.
You can use pride to lock yourself into positive habits. When you
practice playing an instrument, imagine performing for the people you
would most like to impress. The sense of pride you get from a
nonexistent audience is still real, and it still results in motivation.
When you finish reading a book, add it to either a physical bookshelf or
a profile on a platform like Goodreads. Seeing your accomplishments add
up will boost your motivation, and sharing them with others will lock
you into positive habits.38 Your primary reason for giving to charity
may be to impress friends with your generosity. But if you are aware of

this fact, there is no reason you can't use this social drive to
motivate the actions which align with your values. Use social drives to
help lock you into your own personal goals which you have determined are
consistent with your values. Build an imaginary council of people who
collectively embody your values, and consult this group in your head
when you need to make a decision.

OceanofPDF.com

Design Your Goals Our subjects no longer strive in the ordinary sense,
but rather develop. They attempt to grow to perfection and to develop
more and more fully in their own style. The motivation of ordinary men
is a striving for the basic need gratifications that they lack. -
Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality A major source of motivation
comes from choosing goals we truly find rewarding and authentic. Though
we have talked about the importance of setting up rewards for positive
behaviors, rewards can have a dark side when it comes to motivation for
thoughtful and creative activities. According to Maslow's observations,
one of the most prominent qualities of more highly developed and
fulfilled individuals was a tendency to be motivated by intrinsically
rewarding processes, such as growth, inquiry, and creativity, rather
than by "flattery, applause, popularity, status, prestige, money,
honors..."39 Today, we have even more evidence for this fact. Numerous
studies have shown that intrinsic motivation, which consists of doing
things we find enjoyable and engaging, can be more powerful than
extrinsic rewards.40 It

can be far more effective to choose goals we already have strong desires
pushing us toward than to reward ourselves for going against our
desires. But counterintuitively, the overwhelming evidence suggests that
extrinsic rewards can not only be weakly motivating, but can actually
hurt our motivation and yield inferior work than intrinsic drive.41 One
study found that the less evidence of extrinsic motivation in school,
the more likely students were to be successful twenty years later.
Amazingly, a lack of interest in external rewards appears to be
positively correlated with attaining those external rewards. These art
students who were more intrinsically motivated were more likely to have
created work which received positive recognition and superior
evaluation.42 Daniel Pink, author of Drive: The Surprising Truth About
What Motivates Us, lists seven problems with extrinsic, carrot-and-stick
motivations: 1. They can extinguish intrinsic motivation. 2. They can
diminish performance. 3. They can crush creativity. 4. They can crowd
out good behavior. 5. They can encourage cheating, shortcuts, and
unethical behavior. 6. They can become addictive. 7. They can foster
short-term thinking.43

More and more of the world is adapting to this counterintuitive truth.
As automation takes over more mundane work, carrot-and-stick incentives
are being used less to ensure that work is done. More platforms like
Wikipedia, which work only because of the intrinsic motivation of their
contributors, are being built. Although many aspire to retire and stop
working, the truth is that humans are not wired to be without work. They
are simply wired to crave creative, challenging, and meaningful work. As
the promise of artificial intelligence looms, so does the possibility
that all work will be done for intrinsically rewarding purposes. Pink
points out three properties of intrinsically motivating activities:
autonomy, mastery, and purpose. If an activity provides us with a
creative challenge that contributes to a meaningful cause, it can fuel
us more than activities for which we are extrinsically rewarded. It
should be noted that repetitive tasks lacking in creativity are still
enhanced by extrinsic rewards.44 And because many of the behaviors and
habits we wish to cultivate are important but mundane

tasks, it is crucial to make use of rewards for these activities. But
for the important work which provides us with a sense of autonomy,
mastery, and purpose, we should be wary of extrinsic rewards and strive
to cultivate innate motivation to fuel us. An individual with a high
degree of self-mastery will strategically design rewards in key places,
and let intrinsic drive push them forward in others. These mastery
motives can remove the effortful strain we typically associate with hard
work and major accomplishments. Struggling to motivate ourselves toward
our goals is often a product of choosing goals that do not align with
our personal passions and values. We also may struggle with motivation
if the goals we have set do not fit into our "Goldilocks zone" of
challenge. They must not be too lofty or unrealistic, but they also must
not be too easy to be challenging.45 Whether you are exercising, playing
an instrument, or starting a business, you must be able to see and
measure progress in order to stay motivated.46 The minute you plateau in
your exercise goals and are no longer progressing, exercise will become
a chore. The moment you stop challenging yourself musically, the more
effort it will take to maintain your skills. And as soon as your
business ceases to improve in whatever metrics constitute success for
you, it will become an obligation. The will to build is fundamental to
intrinsic motivation, so if you are wondering why you can't get into a
job, a hobby, or a project, ask

yourself if you feel like you are building something. If you aren't
overcoming resistance, facing new challenges, and noticeably
progressing, don't be surprised when your motivation fails you. If you
want to be highly driven, you have to find a way to connect your goals
with your innate fascinations.

If all of the goals you set for yourself run counter to your own
passions, it is probably time to return to chapter 5 and question the
goals you have set in the first place. Satisfaction is not found in the
achievement of goals, but in their pursuit, so many of the steps along
the way to your goals should be enjoyable.47 The most proficient and
prolific artists, authors, and architects all achieved what they did
because they found a way to capitalize on what they already loved. Set
goals that fit who you are, what you enjoy, and what you value.

If you want to get in shape but hate jogging, start playing tennis,
which will demand just as much from you physically but will provide the
fun and engaging challenges of the sport. If your goal is to start a
business, connect it to a cause you genuinely care about instead of
using it to chase extrinsic rewards. The feeling of working hard when
your drives have been aligned with your goals is no different from the
feeling of play or deeply engaged flow. What you aim for is not an
absence of desire, but a frictionless experience with desire. You want
your desires to carry you to where you want to be in a way that is
seemingly effortless. When your life compass points in a consistent
direction that you can align your drives toward, everything else falls
into place.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 10: Self-Mastery The Self-Mastery Triad To compose our character
is our duty, not to compose books, and to win, not battles and
provinces, but order and tranquility in our conduct. Our great and
glorious masterpiece is to live appropriately. All other things, ruling,
hoarding, building, are only little appendages and props, at most. -
Michel de Montaigne, The Complete Essays Now we have reached the final
fragment of the self-mastery triad. When we combine the behavioral realm
with the cognitive and emotional realms, the full picture of selfmastery
comes into view. These domains represent the ability to become the self
of your highest vision. To resist the many forces which would lead you
away from it. Self-mastery represents the degree to which you are
capable of aligning with your own ideals. In other words, it is your
ability to become a great individual and live a great life - by your own
standards. The capacities found in the various forms of self-mastery
like wisdom, equanimity, and self-

control are not merely important virtues. They are the prerequisite,
second-order virtues that enable all other strengths to emerge.1 Despite
many differences, all of our psychitectural guides come together to sing
the praises of self-mastery: Though one may conquer a thousand times a
thousand men in battle, yet he indeed is the noblest victor who conquers
himself. - SiddhÄrtha Gautama, Dhammapada You have power over your mind
--- not outside events. Realize this, and you will find strength. -
Marcus Aurelius, Meditations What the superior man seeks, is in himself;
what the ordinary man seeks, is in others. - Confucius, Analects The
chief use of wisdom lies in its teaching us to be masters of our
passions and to control them with such skill that the evils which they
cause are quite bearable, and even become a source of joy. - RenÃ©
Descartes, The Passions of the Soul Stop honoring externals, quit
turning yourself into the tool of mere matter, or of people who can
supply

you or deny you those material things... It is enough if I hold the
right idea about poverty, illness and removal from office: all such
challenges will only serve my turn. No more, then, should I look for
bad, and good, in external conditions. - Epictetus, Discourses
Conquering others takes force. Conquering yourself is true strength. -
Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching The most intelligent men, like the strongest, find
their happiness where others would find only disaster: in the
labyrinth... their delight is in selfmastery... They regard a difficult
task as a privilege; it is to them a recreation to play with burdens
that would crush all others. - Friedrich Nietzsche, Antichrist What
makes the philosophies behind these words unique is that they reject the
fundamental assumption we form early in our lives - that the best
measure of success in life, and the best means for attaining, it is
through our life circumstances and achievements. These ancient thinkers
may have had slightly different ideas about how to get there, but they
agreed that the best state of being is achieved, not through external
measures, but through the individual mind. They aimed to overcome
themselves rather

than overcome the world. In psychitectural language, they were software
optimizers. People who subscribe to these philosophies don't strive
primarily to meet their deficiencies through the world, but live to
fortify and master the vehicle through which they traverse it. We have
all heard the ancient cliche that "true happiness comes from within,"
but this truism is ambiguous and sends too many people down spiritual
rabbit-holes that often amount to nothing. To become useful, it needs to
be combined with the rational methods for reprogramming our
psychological software "from within." I have attempted to provide a
start to this process, but the fundamental mindset must be understood,
internalized, and committed to first. Psychological well-being is a
systemic property of the mind; it cannot be gifted to anyone, nor can it
be taken away. There are too many people with great lives on paper who
are still miserable at the end of the day. Many who face immense
adversity who are genuinely fulfilled. You can only be as happy as your
mind is programmed to be. This means that although you may feel content
at any given time, that satisfaction is illusory insofar as it can be
taken away. If losing all of your possessions, circumstances, social
standing, and relationships would deprive you of all your happiness,
what you have cannot be called happiness in the first place. Your body
will be declining for most of your life. Your relationships will come
and go. Material success can be lost. These things must all be icing on
the cake of your well-

being. Nothing you gain in life is yours. Your psychological software is
your sole possession. It is the best investment you can make - one of
the few things you can start developing now and get to keep for the rest
of your life. When your external world is in chaos, you can place your
focus on your internal world. Let your mind become your sanctuary. Build
a palace of clarity and peace within you that you can visit any time. I
have had too many conversations with people who have not even questioned
the assumption that their external life was all that mattered - who are
convinced that they are failures because their life circumstances have
not met their expectations. Others are self-satisfied and complacent
because they have built an impressive resume and bought a nice house. To
those who have not achieved the external life of your dreams, do not
allow the popular narrative to convince you that you are a failure. The
world will tell you that you are deficient if you haven't had success in
all of your endeavors. It will tell you that if your financial or
professional or social life is lacking, you are somehow worth less. It
will try to convince you that internal self-mastery is irrelevant. And
don't you dare believe it. Never envy the people with the most
impressive credentials or social media accounts unless you have reason
to believe their internal accomplishments match their external ones.
Only those who have achieved greatness of the mind are worthy of our
deep admiration.

If your career isn't where you had hoped it would be, your financial
means are modest, or your relationships are few, you are not a failure
unless you are also lacking in wisdom, integrity, and self-mastery. But
be careful not to idealize external failures. Our external lives may be
secondary, but they are not inconsequential. Your environment,
lifestyle, and relationships will inevitably shape your mind and change
you. If you romanticize or justify your life as it is, it will keep you
locked in a place that may not have a positive effect on you. To those
who have achieved success in your external life, congratulations. You
are winning the great mini-game of life for the time being. But be
vigilant. The stories of your culture will tell you that you've made it,
and complacency and corruption will creep in the minute you think your
work is done. Say to yourself, "now the real work begins" as you step
away from the external game, unplug, and start to optimize your mind. I
have personally been very fortunate in my circumstances - so far. It is
not my goal to trivialize the struggles of those who have been dealt
more difficult hands. If you have endured painful circumstances, you
have my deepest condolences. But before you justify the current state of
your mind, ask yourself if everyone with similar conditions has resigned
to them, or if there are some who have endured equal or greater
difficulties and managed to thrive.

The teachers who inspired this work have included orphans,2 crippled
slaves,3 and concentration camp prisoners.4 Some were plagued by illness
their entire lives,5 and some lost their own children.6 Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn, prisoner of the Gulag Soviet labor camps and author of The

Gulag Archipelago reminds us that "the meaning of earthly existence lies
not, as we have grown used to thinking, in prospering, but... in the
development of the soul."7 OceanofPDF.com

The Self-Slavery Hypothesis But self-mastery does not merely concern
your happiness. The opposite of self-mastery is not merely
selfincompetence. It is self-slavery. When you lack selfmastery, you are
captive to your own mind. Your biological pre-programming tells you what
to think, how to feel, how to act, and how to direct your life. You are
in the hands of your default software, and this may affect far more
people than just you. There is an ancient and still prevalent notion
that destructive, anti-social behaviors are the product of evil, some
enigmatic psychological inclination that causes a person to commit
terrible acts. But it is no coincidence that these people also seem to
be the least psychologically fulfilled, or that the happiest people
exhibit the most altruistic behavior.8 The truth is that many, if not
all, of the so-called evil people in the world are simply lacking in
self-mastery. With enough information, understanding, and the right
motives, we could understand and cure murderous psychopaths, brutal
dictators, school shooters, and belligerent bigots purely in reference
to weaknesses in their psychological software.

We have already seen that those lacking in behavioral self-mastery are
more likely to experience explosive anger and commit violent crimes. In
fact, among those with the lowest self-control, forty percent have
criminal convictions by age thirty-two.9 These people experience the
same violent urges that everyone has from time to time, but fail to
constrain them, and often regret their actions soon after taking them.
They are short-sighted, cave in to their immediate desires, and act in
ways that violate both the law and their own values.10 We see a lack of
emotional self-mastery in those who plot murderous tantrums in revolt
against a world in which they couldn't find peace. These people often
lash out and take their pain out on innocent others because they
couldn't deal with their problems and desires in healthy ways. Mass
murderers typically feel wounded and victimized by the world, and their
plots to kill are often their attempts to play out revenge fantasies
against the people they perceive hurt them.11 Though these people have
often dealt with abuse or chronic rejection, their lack of emotional
resilience and equanimity makes them unable to cope with their
difficulties in healthy ways.12 Their unregulated emotions punish them
because they lack effective strategies for managing them.13 When some
men fail to accomplish what they desire to do they exclaim angrily, 'May
the whole world perish!' This repulsive emotion is the pinnacle of

envy, whose implication is 'If I cannot have something, no one can have
anything, no one is to be anything!' - Friedrich Nietzsche14 And many of
the greatest catastrophes and future risks result from a lack of
cognitive self-mastery. In his book, Evil, Roy Baumeister points out
that "...many especially evil acts are performed by people who believe
they are doing something supremely good." Everyone from terrorists to
assassins to dictators have all committed their terrible acts in the
name of higher ideals and a better future.15 Most acts of war, genocide,
and terrorism occur because the perpetrators lack critical thinking
skills and wisdom. Hitler, Stalin, and Thanos all believed they were
doing what was necessary to create a better world. The reason we call
them evil is that they were very, very wrong. And this ultimately stems
from mistaken, deeply biased beliefs and tremendous overconfidence in
those beliefs. These people often accept unfounded ideologies without
question. They often have dogmatic and distorted value systems. They are
unable to think or introspect clearly, and these limitations result in
myopia, foolishness, and corruption.15 And what about the sadists and
psychopaths? We all have some antisocial or even sadistic urges, whether
or not we are able to admit this to ourselves. But this need not be the
defining characteristic of evil. As we have discussed,

many of our drives will not align with our values. But values, not
drives, are the true indicators of good choices. Most serial killers
report that though they expected their murderous acts to be deeply
satisfying, they found the actual act to be disappointing.16 They
continue to commit these acts despite continually finding
disappointment, which is the hallmark of a lack of wisdom. It is the
decision to cave in to our misaligned desires, not the mere presence of
those desires, which represents a lack of wisdom or self-control. The
core trait of psychopaths has always been thought to be a lack of
empathy. But psychopaths who are prompted to feel another person's pain
show they are capable of "turning on" their empathy at will, much as
many people are able to turn down their empathy when needed.17 Research
has found that self-control is a much better indicator of antisocial
behavior than empathy.18 And despite the stereotypes of psychopaths
being brilliant and calculating, antisocial personality disorder, the
formal diagnosis associated with psychopathy, has been found to be
associated with impulsive behavior, short-term thinking, and emotion
dysregulation.19 20 21 In other words, psychopaths are often lacking in
all three forms of self-mastery. I am open to the possibility that there
exist human beings who can think incisively, introspect clearly, set
goals wisely, control their emotions and behavior effectively, and who
still choose to commit destructive and antisocial acts. But I have yet
to find compelling evidence of such a

person. All of the cases of so called evil I have studied demonstrate
extreme weakness and self-slavery in at least one realm of their
software. And most importantly, for each of these cases, that software
could theoretically be restructured. We need to shift our attention and
conversations from surface-level events and actions to their
psychitectural underpinnings. We need to drill down to the algorithmic
patterns behind the best and worst of human nature. Aristotle argued
that a person's upbringing, wealth, and personal strengths play an
important role in living a good life.22 This has been misinterpreted as
a claim that there are hard barriers preventing poor, unlucky, or
unattractive people from living a happy, moral life. But there is a much
better interpretation of his claim. Our genes, upbringing, natural
strengths, and early life experiences exclusively shape our
psychological software until we develop the autonomy to examine and
shape it ourselves. These factors represent our default settings. Our
psychitectural starting point. The software of an individual who is
naturally neurotic or violent, had a difficult childhood, or has dealt
with serious trauma will have further to go than others to build a mind
which aligns with his ideals. Trauma, loss, and abuse can embed and
habitualize whole networks of algorithms which may pose great challenges
for the psychitect. And these challenges may be too great for some. But
the only truly

insurmountable barrier to psychitecture is the failure to take on the
project at all.

OceanofPDF.com

Software Optimization Your entire life runs on the software in your
head--- why wouldn't you obsess over optimizing it? ...And yet, not only
do most of us not obsess over our own software---most of us don't even
understand our own software, how it works, or why it works that way. -
Tim Urban23 This book has offered a new model for psychological
algorithms which can illuminate many of the relationships between mental
phenomena of which few people are cognizant. But this model is better
viewed as a kind of functional interface than a theory. Though this
structure is based on lots of psychological research, it is not the
final word on the structure of psychological software. In truth,
psychological algorithms are far too complex to be represented by a
functional model. The value of this model is to give form to the
software framework, and to convert you to thinking about psychological
problems algorithmically. Think about how your cognitions, desires,
emotions, and behaviors interconnect and how they relate to their
external inputs. Understand that these different variables influence
each

other and chain together to form worldviews, behavioral patterns, and
mood disorders. But also understand that it is possible to form networks
made up of adaptive traits, character strengths, and wisdom. Understand
that there are indisputable leverage points for reprogramming these
negative patterns and turning them into positive ones. Every design
process, from construction architecture to software architecture,
attempts to develop a blueprint for a system or artifact which bridges
the gap between what is and a vision of what could be, guided by our
shared values and principles. And anyone who has engaged in this
creative process knows the immense satisfaction of looking at your own
creation as it nears this more ideal state. Psychitecture is no
exception. As you near your ideals, you can look down on your software
with both the satisfaction of seeing how far it has come and excitement
at how far it still has to go. Who is your ideal self? What are the
highest values and principles that this person embodies? What does this
person's psychological software look like? And most importantly, what is
the difference between it and your current software? When you have
answered this question, you can begin taking steps toward this ideal. A
psychitect lives in a state of perpetual becoming experimenting with his
mind, reinventing himself, and gradually elevating his state of being.
He makes a game out of unlocking and implementing beneficial mindsets.

The life of a true psychitect is a kind of meta-existence. She continues
to live in the world as a human but comes to live above her mind in a
sense as she starts to identify as the designer of her software rather
than synonymous with it. She starts to see through the illusions
presented to her by her default dispositions and the social reality
presented by other people. The automatic stories constructed by her
cognition begin to appear as just that: stories - rather than as reality
itself. Her painful emotions become the programmed, and not yet
deprogrammed reactions to these stories. A psychitect is a collector of
adaptive mental mechanisms - a craftsman of strategic psychological
structures. He comes to see unwanted negative emotions as inefficiencies
in his programming. Wise ideas and principles come to be viewed as
snippets of open-source cognitive code. He takes responsibility for his
innate human flaws and biases and for programming them out.
Psychitecture is a mindset which can allow you to increasingly embrace
and enjoy life. It is about getting out of your own way and removing the
obstacles to the full appreciation for this incredible world. Have you
ever met a person who was invincible? Someone who seemed never to lose
her balance regardless of what happened to her. Someone who laughed when
others would break down - who seemed to have a way of turning every
setback into a victory without ever compromising what matters to her. A
seasoned psychitect

may act as if she had somehow never had normal human suffering
programmed into her - a naturally calm and easygoing person. But
realistically, this type of person is most likely the product of her own
rigorous endeavor to program out the uncongenial aspects of herself. The
first time you successfully reprogram a pain-point, a self-limiting
belief, or a problematic behavior to which you were previously subject,
it doesn't just feel like you got a little better at coping with life.
It feels like you've opened the door to a new way of being. Each time
you unlock one of these tools, you climb to a higher cliff of
perspective, able to look down on the issue and laugh at the fact that
it ever troubled you.

OceanofPDF.com

Beyond the Human Condition This painting---that which we humans call
life and experience---has gradually become, is indeed still fully in the
process of becoming, and should thus not be regarded as a fixed
object... - Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human What if we could
provide each individual with an array of powerful psychotechnologies for
understanding and optimizing the functions of their own minds? What
would be the cumulative effects on society if every person's highest
goal was to overcome themselves and build the best possible mind? The
purpose of psychitecture is not just to decrease suffering, but to
pursue greatness and active flourishing. I am interested in
psychological development beyond the norm - in human potential. And I
believe that for reasons entirely within their control, most people
today fall radically short of their own values. There is a massive and
growing gap in our culture between skill and wisdom - a gap that is
becoming increasingly dangerous.24 Modern culture is obsessed with the
external. We appoint leaders who present thin

veneers of strength and superficial accomplishment. We pay so much
attention to these facades that we fail to inquire into their
foundations. As a result, we live in a world whose fate increasingly
falls in the hands of the least wise and most power-obsessed
individuals. When people set out to improve their lives, they look
outward. They ask how they might elevate their lifestyle, their status,
or their possessions. When we talk about life skills, most think of the
skills needed to get jobs, attract partners, and manage finances. These
are all perfectly admirable skills. But they are secondary. Every
external end is a means to an internal end. And many of our deepest
internal goals can be achieved directly. The primary sense in which
people today need to get better at living their lives has to do with
wisdom, character, and well-being. These are not skills which are taught
in school. Companies promise to make the world a better place25 by
creating devices and services which often only serve as new obstacles to
well-being. I strongly believe in the promise of technology, when
directed toward the right ends, to lead to a genuinely better world for
all. But I would estimate that ninety-nine percent of technologies
created today only create new addictions. They "improve" our lives only
in the sense that they become our new baseline of expectation,
ultimately creating new barriers to contentment. There are technologies,
like medicine, which truly improve life for people. But most of the
technologies which

can actually serve this end effectively are psychotechnologies. We need
tools and methods for cultivating robust well-being and self-mastery. We
need to find and provide the keys to the kind of flourishing which is
less dependent on external things, not more dependent on them. If we
want to truly improve the world, we need to train people to build
systematically better minds - our emphasis on "making people happy"
needs to shift to "making happy people." I want to work toward a world
of individuals who see through the illusion. Who are no longer fooled by
the vanity metrics and tourist traps of life. Who can slow their
judgments, call the bluff of facades and personas, and ask the questions
which matter most. Who put the cultivation of a better mind at the top
of their priorities, not only because it is the most important in and of
itself, but because it is at the root of every other endeavor. I have
attempted to build a starting toolkit to inspire and enable people to
make modifications to their own minds, but this toolkit is nowhere near
complete, and this book is only the beginning. That is why it is my
primary goal to ignite the flame of psychitecture in as many people as
possible. That way, each individual can construct his own tools and
contribute to the great collective toolkit. Fundamentally, there is no
reason why pleasure, excitement, profound well-being and simple joy at
being alive could not become the natural, default state of mind for all
who desire it.

- Nick Bostrom26 Though it is so often accompanied by descriptions of
futuristic gadgets, body augmentation, and distant concerns, the
Transhumanist vision provides a reminder that humanity can be far
greater than it is today. The human condition is a work in progress. An
early and very rough draft of what could be a masterpiece. And the
evolution of society begins with the evolution of the individual mind.
This evolution cannot be left to chance. It must be the result of
deliberate design conducted by each person and directed toward the
highest values within them. The software framework and the principles of
psychitecture are basic psychotechnologies which, if provided and
instilled in each individual, could radically advance our evolution. The
ambition of this book is not just to offer a manual. It may be based on
timeless wisdom, but the manual provided here is still only an
ever-evolving draft. This book exists, first and foremost, to
reinvigorate the directive issued by the many psychitectural
visionaries: You must be a software optimizer first and a circumstance
optimizer second. Place the development of your mind above all else.
Make the psychitectural pursuit your highest priority, and watch your
experience, your life, and your being transform. No matter who you are
or where you are starting from, know that you have the power to
transform your software and attain selfmastery. You can design your
mind.

OceanofPDF.com

Free Toolkit and Self Mastery FREE PSYCHITECT'S TOOLKIT AND BOOK OF SELF
MASTERY If this book has been valuable to you and you would like a way
to contribute, please write an quick and honest review.

In addition to this book, readers can download a free, 50-page guide on
psychitecture, which includes: 64 incredible book recommendations
related to self mastery and psychitecture â A list of 16 websites,
blogs, and podcasts that can aid in self-optimization An cheat sheet for
the basic concepts of psychitecture and psychological algorithms

A breakdown of 8 psychotechnologies you can start using to reprogram
your mind Inspiring quotes by ancient and modern psychitectural
visionaries

I will also give you a free, edition of The Book of SelfMastery, which
contains 150 quotes by some of the greatest self-mastery thinkers who
every lived. Just go to designingthemind.org/psychitecture to get your
Psychitect's Toolkit and The Book of Self-Mastery for free.

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments I have never liked acknowledgments. Like footnotes and
appendices, no one is quite sure if they are supposed to read them.
Acknowledgments seem irrelevant to the reader, who doesn't know any of
the people being thanked and probably doesn't care. I wanted to give
readers a crisp, clean message that was designed just for them. But at
the end of the day, life, and the process of writing, are not crisp and
clean - they're messy. And when it comes time to publish your book, it
seems wrong not to recognize the people who helped along the way. There
are more people who have helped me in some way than I will endeavor to
thank here, but some played direct roles in helping make this book
happen. Katlyn, it is only because of your ongoing encouragement that I
was able to finish this book, and because of our many jokes and
adventures forcing me to pause that I wasn't completely consumed by it.
Thank you for being a part of this journey. To my parents, Ron and Dena,
thank you for your lifelong support for my passions, for your brutally
honest feedback

on my first draft, and for your kind praise of my final draft. To my
friends, mentors, and beta readers, this book is orders of magnitude
better because of your thoughtful guidance, feedback, and ideas. Thank
you to Aaron Perkins, Alan K, Ben Rogers, Cavell H-B, Christopher Clay,
Felipe Olchenski, Hamish S, Jakub SmrÄek, Jeff Shreve, Jo Ann Miller,
Jorge Rodighiero, Justin Qubrosi, Kate Theobald, Kelsey Butts,
Konstantin V, Mark Mulvey, Matt Karamazov, Nate Shenkute, Nishit
Chauhan, Philip L, Thibaut Meurisse, and several incredible anonymous
readers. And special thanks to Hootie. You are my light and my muse.

OceanofPDF.com

Notes Chapter 1 Joseph LeDoux, The Deep History of Ourselves: The
Four-Billion-Year Story of How We Got Conscious Brains , Illustrated
edition (New York City: Viking, 2019). 2. Colleen A. McClung and Eric J.
Nestler, "Neuroplasticity Mediated by Altered Gene Expression,"
Neuropsychopharmacology 33, no. 1 (January 2008): 3-- 17,
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1301544. 3. Sibylle Delaloye and Paul E.
Holtzheimer, "Deep Brain Stimulation in the Treatment of Depression,"
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 16, no. 1 (March 2014): 83--91. 4.
Akhlaq Farooqui, "The Effects of Diet, Exercise, and Sleep on Brain
Metabolism and Function," 2014, 1-- 42,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-04111-7_1. 5. Jon KabatâZinn,
"Mindfulness-Based Interventions in Context: Past, Present, and Future,"
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 10, no. 2 (2003): 144-- 56,
https://doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.bpg016. 6. "13 Effects of Transcranial
Direct Current Stimulation (TDCS)," SelfHacked (blog), December 17,
2019, https://selfhacked.com/blog/tdcs-benefits/. 7. LâS Camilla
d'Angelo, George Savulich, and Barbara J Sahakian, "Lifestyle Use of
Drugs by Healthy People for Enhancing Cognition, Creativity, Motivation
and Pleasure," British Journal of Pharmacology 174, no. 19 (October
2017): 3257-- 67, https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13813. 1.

Michael Pollan, How to Change Your Mind: What the New Science of
Psychedelics Teaches Us About Consciousness, Dying, Addiction,
Depression, and Transcendence, Softcover large print edition (New York:
Penguin Press, 2018). 9. "What Is Transhumanism?," What is
Transhumanism?, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://whatistranshumanism.org/. 10. "Six Paths to the Nonsurgical
Future of Brain-Machine Interfaces," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2019-05-20. 11. "Home," Neuralink,
accessed November 25, 2020, https://neuralink.com/. 12. Eberhard Fuchs
and Gabriele FlÃ¼gge, "Adult Neuroplasticity: More Than 40 Years of
Research," Neural Plasticity 2014 (2014),
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/541870. 13. Norman Doidge, The Brain That
Changes Itself: Stories of Personal Triumph from the Frontiers of Brain
Science, n.d. 14. Melanie J. Zimmer-Gembeck and Ellen A. Skinner,
"Review: The Development of Coping across Childhood and Adolescence: An
Integrative Review and Critique of Research," International Journal of
Behavioral Development 35, no. 1 (January 1, 2011): 1-- 17,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0165025410384923. 15. David Whitebread and
Marisol Basilio, "The Emergence and Early Development of Self-Regulation
in Young Children," Profesorado: Journal of Curriculum and Teacher
Education 16 (January 1, 2012): 15--34. 16. Malcolm Gladwell, Outliers:
The Story of Success, n.d. 17. Carol S. Dweck, Mindset: The New
Psychology of Success, n.d. 18. David Buss and Martie Haselton, "The
Evolution of Jealousy," Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9 (December 1, 8.

2005): 506--7; author reply 508,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.09.006. 19. Cory J. Clark et al.,
"Tribalism Is Human Nature," Current Directions in Psychological Science
28, no. 6 (December 1, 2019): 587-- 92,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721419862289. 20. Tammy Saah, "The
Evolutionary Origins and Significance of Drug Addiction," Harm Reduction
Journal 2 (June 29, 2005): 8, https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7517-2-8. 21.
"Definition of ALGORITHM," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/algorithm. 22. "The Thing We
Fear More Than Death," Psychology Today, accessed November 25, 2020,
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-realstory-risk/201211/the-thing-we-fear-more-death.
23. David L. Watson and Roland G. Tharp, Self-Directed Behavior:
Self-Modification for Personal Adjustment. Chapter 1: The Skills of
Self-Direction, 10th edition (Australia: Cengage Learning, 2013). 24.
Warren Tryon, Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychotherapy: Network
Principles for a Unified Theory. Chapter 3 - Core Network Principles:
The Explanatory Nucleus, 1st edition (London, UK ; Waltham, MA, USA:
Academic Press, 2014). 25. Aaron T. Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the
Emotional Disorders. Chapter 2: Tapping the Internal Communications,
n.d. 26. "Emotional Competency - Human Nature," accessed November 25,
2020, http://www.emotionalcompetency.com/human%20 nature.htm. 27. David
D. Burns, Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy. Chapter 1, n.d.

28.

Carey K. Morewedge et al., "Debiasing Decisions: Improved Decision
Making With a Single Training Intervention," Policy Insights from the
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, August 13, 2015,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2372732215600886. 29. Benjamin Gardner and
Amanda L. Rebar, "Habit Formation and Behavior Change," Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Psychology, April 26, 2019,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190236557. 013.129. 30. Aristotle,
Nicomachean Ethics, trans. C. D. C. Reeve, n.d. 31. "A Philosophical
Approach to Routines Can Illuminate Who We Really Are -- Elias Anttila
\| Aeon Ideas," Aeon, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://aeon.co/ideas/aphilosophical-approach-to-routines-can-illuminate-whowe-really-are.
32. John H. Flavell, "Metacognition and Cognitive Monitoring: A New Area
of Cognitive--Developmental Inquiry," American Psychologist 34, no. 10
(1979): 906-- 11, https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.34.10.906. 33. Jon
KabatâZinn, "Mindfulness-Based Interventions in Context: Past, Present,
and Future," Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 10, no. 2 (2003):
144-- 56, https://doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.bpg016. 34. Shian-Ling Keng,
Moria J. Smoski, and Clive J. Robins, "Effects of Mindfulness on
Psychological Health: A Review of Empirical Studies," Clinical
Psychology Review 31, no. 6 (August 2011): 1041-- 56,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.04.006. 35. Sam Harris, Waking Up: A
Guide to Spirituality Without Religion. Chapter 1, n.d. 36. "Meditation
Trains Metacognition - LessWrong," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JMgffu9AzhYpTp
HFJ/meditation-trains-metacognition.

37.

Peter Sedlmeier et al., "The Psychological Effects of Meditation: A
Meta-Analysis," Psychological Bulletin 138, no. 6 (November 2012):
1139-- 71, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028168. 38. "A Map of Bay Area
Memespace - LessWrong," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WzPJRNYWhMX
QTEj69/a-map-of-bay-area-memespace. 39. Tim Buschmann et al., "The
Relationship Between Automatic Thoughts and Irrational Beliefs
Predicting Anxiety and Depression," Journal of Rational-Emotive &
Cognitive-Behavior Therapy 36 (July 1, 2017): 1-- 26,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10942-017-0278-y. 40. Paradigm, "Mindfulness &
Bias: Literature Review," Medium, May 8, 2017,
https://medium.com/inclusioninsights/mindfulness-bias-literature-review3e4a9993cb41.
41. Diana J. Burgess, Mary Catherine Beach, and Somnath Saha,
"Mindfulness Practice: A Promising Approach to Reducing the Effects of
Clinician Implicit Bias on Patients," Patient Education and Counseling
100, no. 2 (February 1, 2017): 372-- 76,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2016.09.005. 42. Richard F. Gombrich,
Theravada Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern
Colombo, 2nd edition (Routledge, 2006). 43. Yair Dor-Ziderman et al.,
"Mindfulness-Induced Selflessness: A MEG Neurophenomenological Study,"
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7 (2013),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00582. Chapter 2 1.

Atsuo Murata, Tomoko Nakamura, and Waldemar Karwowski, "Influence of
Cognitive Biases in Distorting Decision Making and Leading to Critical
Unfavorable

Incidents," Safety 1, no. 1 (December 2015): 44-- 58,
https://doi.org/10.3390/safety1010044. 2. Kevin N. Ochsner and James J.
Gross, "The Cognitive Control of Emotion," Trends in Cognitive Sciences
9, no. 5 (May 2005): 242-- 49,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.03.010. 3. Hedy Kober et al.,
"Regulation of Craving by Cognitive Strategies in Cigarette Smokers,"
Drug and Alcohol Dependence 106, no. 1 (January 1, 2010): 52-- 55,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.07.017. 4. Robert Alan Burton,
On Being Certain: Believing You Are Right Even When You're Not, Reprint
edition (St. Martin's Press, 2008). 5. "Map--Territory Relation," in
Wikipedia, October 30, 2020, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Map%E2%80%93territory_relation&oldid=9862437 21. 6. Henry
Markovits and Guilaine Nantel, "The Belief-Bias Effect in the Production
and Evaluation of Logical Conclusions," Memory & Cognition 17, no. 1
(January 1, 1989): 11--17, https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03199552. 7. Steven
Novella and Yale School of Medicine, Your Deceptive Mind:A Scientific
Guide to Critical Thinking Skills (the great courses, 2012). 8. Mark P.
Mattson, "Superior Pattern Processing Is the Essence of the Evolved
Human Brain," Frontiers in Neuroscience 8 (August 22, 2014),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00265. 9. Scott D. Blain et al.,
"Apophenia as the Disposition to False Positives: A Unifying Framework
for Openness and Psychoticism," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 129, no.
3 (2020): 279--92, https://doi.org/10.1037/abn0000504. 10. Alexander
Alvarez, "Destructive Beliefs: Genocide and the Role of Ideology," 2008.
11. "Cognitive Bias," in Wikipedia, November 24, 2020,
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?

title=Cognitive_bias&oldid=990416478. 12. Buster Benson, "Cognitive Bias
Cheat Sheet, Simplified," Medium, April 2, 2019,
https://medium.com/thinking-is-hard/4conundrums-of-intelligence-2ab78d90740f.
13. "The Illusion of Transparency: Biased Assessments of Others' Ability
to Read One's Emotional States. PsycNET," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding? doi=10.1037%2F0022-3514.75.2.332. 14.
"Reducing Implicit Racial Preferences: II. Intervention Effectiveness
across Time. - PsycNET," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding? doi=10.1037%2Fxge0000179. 15.
Paradigm, "Mindfulness & Bias: Literature Review," Medium, May 8, 2017,
https://medium.com/inclusioninsights/mindfulness-bias-literature-review3e4a9993cb41.
16. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow. Chapter 23, 1st edition
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013). 17. Anne-Laure Sellier,
Irene Scopelliti, and Carey K. Morewedge, "Debiasing Training Improves
Decision Making in the Field:," Psychological Science, July 26, 2019,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797619861429. 18. Carey K. Morewedge et al.,
"Debiasing Decisions: Improved Decision Making With a Single Training
Intervention," Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
August 13, 2015, https://doi.org/10.1177/2372732215600886. 19. Vasco
Correia, "Contextual Debiasing and Critical Thinking: Reasons for
Optimism," Topoi 37, no. 1 (March 1, 2018): 103--11,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-0169388-x.

Wayne Weiten, Psychology: Themes and Variations, Briefer Version, n.d.
21. Thomas Mussweiler, Fritz Strack, and Tim Pfeiffer, "Overcoming the
Inevitable Anchoring Effect: Considering the Opposite Compensates for
Selective Accessibility," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26,
no. 9 (November 1, 2000): 1142-- 50,
https://doi.org/10.1177/01461672002611010. 22. Martie G. Haselton,
Daniel Nettle, and Paul W. Andrews, "The Evolution of Cognitive Bias,"
in The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
2015), 724-- 46, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470939376.ch25. 23.
MaÅgorzata Kossowska, Aneta Czernatowicz-Kukuczka, and Maciek Sekerdej,
"Many Faces of Dogmatism: Prejudice as a Way of Protecting Certainty
against Value Violators among Dogmatic Believers and Atheists," British
Journal of Psychology (London, England : 1953) 108 (February 19, 2016),
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12186. 24. Melvin J. Lerner, "The Belief in
a Just World," in The Belief in a Just World: A Fundamental Delusion,
ed. Melvin J. Lerner, Perspectives in Social Psychology (Boston, MA:
Springer US, 1980), 9-- 30, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-0448-5_2.
25. Zick Rubin and Anne Peplau, "Belief in a Just World and Reactions to
Another's Lot: A Study of Participants in the National Draft Lottery1,"
Journal of Social Issues 29, no. 4 (1973): 73-- 93,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4560.1973.tb00104.x. 26. Susan T. Fiske,
"Intent and Ordinary Bias: Unintended Thought and Social Motivation
Create Casual Prejudice," Social Justice Research 17, no. 2 (June 1,
2004): 117-- 27, https://doi.org/10.1023/B:SORE.0000027405.94966. 23.
20.

27.

Shelley E. Taylor and Jonathon D. Brown, "Positive Illusions and
Well-Being Revisited: Separating Fact from Fiction," Psychological
Bulletin 116, no. 1 (1994): 21-- 27,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.116.1.21. 28. Aaron M. Scherer, Paul
D. Windschitl, and Andrew R. Smith, "Hope to Be Right: Biased
Information Seeking Following Arbitrary and Informed Predictions,"
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49, no. 1 (January 1, 2013):
106-- 12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2012.07.012. 29. Giovanni Luca
Ciampaglia US Filippo Menczer,The Conversation, "Biases Make People
Vulnerable to Misinformation Spread by Social Media," Scientific
American, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/biasesmake-people-vulnerable-to-misinformation-spread-bysocial-media/.
30. Agnes Makhene, "The Use of the Socratic Inquiry to Facilitate
Critical Thinking in Nursing Education," Health SA = SA Gesondheid 24
(April 23, 2019), https://doi.org/10.4102/hsag.v24i0.1224. 31. Carl
Sagan and Ann Druyan, The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in
the Dark. Chapter 2: Science and Hope, n.d. 32. "Alternative Medicine
Kills Cancer Patients -- ScienceBased Medicine," accessed November 25,
2020,
https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/alternativemedicine-kills-cancer-patients/.
33. Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful
of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Climate
Change. Chapter 6: The Denial of Global Warming, n.d. 34. Roy F.
Baumeister Ph.D and Aaron Beck, Evil: Inside Human Violence and Cruelty.
Chapter 6: True Believers and Idealists (New York: Holt Paperbacks,
1999).

35.

SeÃ¡n Ã hÃigeartaigh, "Technological Wild Cards: Existential Risk and a
Changing Humanity," SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social Science
Research Network, October 5, 2016),
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3446697. 36. "The Cook and the Chef:
Musk's Secret Sauce," Wait But Why, November 6, 2015,
https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/11/the-cook-andthe-chef-musks-secret-sauce.html.
37. J. Lambie, How to Be Critically Open-Minded: A Psychological and
Historical Analysis. Chapter 6: Effects of Open-Mindedness on Decision
Making, Morality, and Well-Being , 2014th edition (Palgrave Macmillan,
2014). 38. Maryam MALMIR, Mohammad KHANAHMADI, and Dariush FARHUD,
"Dogmatism and Happiness," Iranian Journal of Public Health 46, no. 3
(March 2017): 326--32. Chapter 3 1.

Lauren B. Alloy and Lyn Y. Abramson, "Learned Helplessness, Depression,
and the Illusion of Control," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 42, no. 6 (1982): 1114-- 26,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.42.6.1114. 2. "Predictability: Does
the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado in Texas? \|
Weather Forecasting \| Weather," Scribd, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.scribd.com/document/130949814/Pre
dictability-Does-the-Flap-of-a-Butterfly-s-Wings-in-BrazilSet-Off-a-Tornado-in-Texas
. 3. "2.4.1 Swimming Headless Part 1 \| AlanWatts.Org," accessed
November 25, 2020,
https://www.alanwatts.org/2-4-1-swimmingheadless-part-1/. 4. Timothy
Wilson and Daniel Gilbert, "The Impact Bias Is Alive and Well," Journal
of Personality and Social

Psychology 105 (November 1, 2013): 740-- 48,
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032662. 5. Daniel Gilbert, Stumbling on
Happiness. Part III: Realism (New York: Vintage, 2007). 6. Daniel
Gilbert, Stumbling on Happiness. Part IV: Presentism (New York: Vintage,
2007). 7. Daniel Gilbert, Stumbling on Happiness. Part V:
Rationalization (New York: Vintage, 2007). 8. Tasha Eurich, Insight: The
Surprising Truth About How Others See Us, How We See Ourselves, and Why
the Answers Matter More Than We Think, Reprint edition (New York:
Currency, 2018). 9. Kieran C. R. Fox et al., "Meditation Experience
Predicts Introspective Accuracy," PLOS ONE 7, no. 9 (September 25,
2012): e45370, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0045370. 10. Marcus
Johansson, Terry Hartig, and Henk Staats, "Psychological Benefits of
Walking: Moderation by Company and Outdoor Environment," Applied
Psychology: Health and Well-Being 3, no. 3 (2011): 261-- 80,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-0854.2011.01051.x. 11. Eugene T. Gendlin,
Focusing, n.d. 12. Christopher R. Long and James R. Averill, "Solitude:
An Exploration of Benefits of Being Alone," Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour 33, no. 1 (2003): 21-- 44,
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5914.00204. 13. Inge Huijsmans et al., "A
Scarcity Mindset Alters Neural Processing Underlying Consumer Decision
Making," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 24
(June 11, 2019): 11699-- 704, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1818572116.
14. Pamela Tierney and Steven M. Farmer, "Creative SelfEfficacy
Development and Creative Performance over Time.," Journal of Applied
Psychology 96, no. 2 (2011): 277--93, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020952.

15.

Edward P. Lemay and Noah R. Wolf, "Projection of Romantic and Sexual
Desire in Opposite-Sex Friendships: How Wishful Thinking Creates a
SelfFulfilling Prophecy," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 42,
no. 7 (July 1, 2016): 864-- 78,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167216646077. 16. Abraham H. Maslow, Toward
a Psychology of Being. Chapter 1: Introduction: Toward a Psychology of
Health 3rd Edition, n.d. 17. David Moshman, "Cognitive Development
beyond Childhood," in Handbook of Child Psychology: Volume 2: Cognition,
Perception, and Language (Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1998),
947--78. 18. Christopher Peterson and Martin Seligman, Character
Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and Classification, 1st edition
(Washington, DC : New York: American Psychological Association / Oxford
University Press, 2004). 19. Bertrand Russell, The Problems of
Philosophy, n.d. 20. Albert Speer, Inside the Third Reich, n.d. 21.
Stephen J. Whitfield, "Hannah Arendt and the Banality of Evil," The
History Teacher 14, no. 4 (1981): 469-- 77,
https://doi.org/10.2307/493684. 22. Daniela Barni et al., "Value
Transmission in the Family: Do Adolescents Accept the Values Their
Parents Want to Transmit?," Journal of Moral Education 40, no. 1 (March
1, 2011): 105-- 21, https://doi.org/10.1080/03057240.2011.553797. 23.
Christopher Peterson and Martin Seligman, Character Strengths and
Virtues: A Handbook and Classification, n.d. 24. Donald Robertson, The
Philosophy of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: Stoic Philosophy as
Rational and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 1st edition (London: Routledge,
2010).

25.

"5 Steps to Define Your Core Values: A Compass for Navigating Life's
Decisions," Mindful Ambition (blog), June 8, 2017,
https://mindfulambition.net/values/. 26. Carl Rogers and Peter D. Kramer
M.D, On Becoming a Person: A Therapist's View of Psychotherapy, 2nd ed.
edition (New York: Mariner Books, 1995). Chapter 4 1.

George Benson et al., "Cultural Values and Definitions of Career
Success," Human Resource Management Journal 30 (March 1, 2020),
https://doi.org/10.1111/1748-8583.12266. 2. "HAMER PEOPLE: THE ETHIOPIAN
TRIBE WITH THE FAMOUS BULL JUMPING CEREMONY," HAMER PEOPLE (blog),
accessed November 25, 2020,
https://kwekudeetripdownmemorylane.blogspot.com/2012/10/hamerpeople-ethiopian-tribe-with.html.
3. Marsha L. Richins, "Social Comparison and the Idealized Images of
Advertising," Journal of Consumer Research 18, no. 1 (June 1, 1991):
71-- 83, https://doi.org/10.1086/209242. 4. Monique Boekaerts, Paul R.
Pintrich, and Moshe Zeidner, eds., Handbook of Self-Regulation. Chapter
1: Self-Regulation of Action and Affect - Charles S. Carver, Michael F.
Scheier, n.d. 5. Jonathan Gutman, "Means--end chains as goal
hierarchies," Psychology & Marketing 14, no. 6 (1997): 545--60,
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)15206793(199709)14:6\<545::AID-MAR2\>3.0.CO;2-7.
6. "Are Animals Stuck in Time? - PsycNET," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding? doi=10.1037%2F0033-2909.128.3.473. 7.
Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene: 30th Anniversary Edition--with a New
Introduction by the Author. Chapter

1: Why Are People?, n.d. 8. Ted Chu, Human Purpose and Transhuman
Potential: A Cosmic Vision of Our Future Evolution (San Rafael, CA:
Origin Press, 2014). 9. Ran R. Hassin, John A. Bargh, and Shira
Zimerman, "Automatic and Flexible," Social Cognition 27, no. 1 (2009):
20--36. 10. Plato, Phaedrus, trans. Alexander Nehamas and Paul Woodruff,
UK ed.Â edition (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc., 1995).
11. W. Mischel, Y. Shoda, and M. I. Rodriguez, "Delay of Gratification
in Children," Science 244, no. 4907 (May 26, 1989): 933-- 38,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2658056. 12. David Hume, A Treatise of
Human Nature, n.d. 13. Antonio Damasio, Descartes' Error: Emotion,
Reason, and the Human Brain, n.d. 14. Antonio R. Damasio, "A Second
Chance for Emotion," in Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotion, ed.Â Richard
D. R. Lane et al.Â (Oxford University Press, 2000), 12--23. 15. Kevin
Simler and Robin Hanson, The Elephant in the Brain: Hidden Motives in
Everyday Life. Chapter 5: SelfDeception, n.d. 16. Claire Matson Cannon
and Richard D. Palmiter, "Reward without Dopamine," Journal of
Neuroscience 23, no. 34 (November 26, 2003): 10827-- 31,
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-3410827.2003. 17. Zachary B. Bulwa
et al., "Increased Consumption of Ethanol and Sugar Water in Mice
Lacking the Dopamine D2 Long Receptor," Alcohol (Fayetteville, N.Y.) 45,
no. 7 (November 2011): 631-- 39,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2011.06.004. 18. Wilhelm Hofmann and
Loran F. Nordgren, eds., The Psychology of Desire. Chapter 6: Motivation
and

Pleasure in the Brain - Morten L. Kringelbach, Kent C. Berridge, n.d.
19. Daniel Gilbert and Timothy Wilson, "Miswanting: Some Problems in the
Forecasting of Future Affective States.," October 11, 2012. 20. Raymond
G. Miltenberger, Behavior Modification: Principles and Procedures.
Chapter 4: Reinforcement, 6th edition (Boston, MA: Cengage Learning,
2015). 21. Rupert Gethin, The Foundations of Buddhism. Chapter 1: The
Buddha: The Story of the Awakened One, 1st edition (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1998). 22. Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught:
Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada, n.d.
23. Steven M. Emmanuel, ed., A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy, n.d.
24. Robert Wright, Why Buddhism Is True: The Science and Philosophy of
Meditation and Enlightenment. Chapter 1: Taking the Red Pill, n.d. 25.
Daniel Kahneman, Edward Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, eds., Well-Being:
Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. Chapter 16: Hedonic Adaptation, First
Paperback Edition (New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation, 2003). 26.
Abraham H. Maslow, Toward a Psychology of Being, 3rd Edition. Chapter 1:
Introduction: Toward a Psychology of Health, 3rd edition (cNew York:
Wiley, 1998). 27. Joachim C. Brunstein, "Personal Goals and Subjective
Well-Being: A Longitudinal Study," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 65, no. 5 (1993): 1061-- 70,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.65.5.1061. 28. Michael Siegrist and
Bernadette SÃ¼tterlin, "Human and Nature-Caused Hazards: The Affect
Heuristic Causes Biased Decisions," Risk Analysis 34, no. 8 (2014):
1482-- 94, https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12179.

29.

Antonio R. Damasio, "A Second Chance for Emotion," in Cognitive
Neuroscience of Emotion, ed.Â Richard D. R. Lane et al.Â (Oxford
University Press, 2000), 12--23. 30. Richard Garner, Beyond Morality,
n.d. 31. Sam Harris, Lying, ed.Â Annaka Harris, n.d. 32. Igor Grossmann
et al., "A Route to Well-Being: Intelligence vs.Â Wise Reasoning,"
Journal of Experimental Psychology. General 142, no. 3 (August 2013):
944--53, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029560. Chapter 5 1.

Psychology, "5 Skills to Help You Develop Emotional Intelligence," Mark
Manson, April 11, 2019, https://markmanson.net/emotional-intelligence.
2. James J. Gross, ed., Handbook of Emotion Regulation, Second Edition,
Second edition (New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 2015). 3. Ellen
Leibenluft, "Severe Mood Dysregulation, Irritability, and the Diagnostic
Boundaries of Bipolar Disorder in Youths," The American Journal of
Psychiatry 168, no. 2 (February 2011): 129-- 42,
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10050766. 4. Jaak Panksepp,
Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions.
Chapter 13: Love and the Social Bond: The Sources of Nurturance and
Maternal Behavior, Illustrated edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2004). 5. Randolph M. Nesse MD, Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights
from the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry. Chapter 4: Good Reasons
for Bad Feelings, n.d. 6. "Emotional Suppression: Physiology,
Self-Report, and Expressive Behavior. - PsycNET," accessed November 25,
2020, https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?
doi=10.1037%2F0022-3514.64.6.970.

James J. Gross, ed., Handbook of Emotion Regulation, Second Edition.
Chapter 1: Emotion Regulation: Conceptual and Empirical Foundations,
n.d. 8. "Total Control vs.Â No Control Theory of Emotions: Can You
Control Your Emotions or Not?," Psychology Today, accessed November 25,
2020, http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/ambigamy/
201006/total-control-vs-no-control-theory-emotions-canyou-control-your-emotions-or.
9. Ravi Thiruchselvam, Greg Hajcak, and James J. Gross, "Looking Inward:
Shifting Attention Within Working Memory Representations Alters
Emotional Responses," Psychological Science 23, no. 12 (December 1,
2012): 1461-- 66, https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612449838. 10. James J.
Gross, ed., Handbook of Emotion Regulation, Second Edition. Chapter 32:
Mindfulness Interventions and Emotion Regulation, Second edition (New
York, NY: The Guilford Press, 2015). 11. Pritha Das et al., "Pathways
for Fear Perception: Modulation of Amygdala Activity by Thalamo-Cortical
Systems," NeuroImage 26, no. 1 (May 15, 2005): 141-- 48,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.01.049. 12. Matthew Dixon et
al., "Emotion and the Prefrontal Cortex: An Integrative Review,"
Psychological Bulletin 143 (June 15, 2017),
https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000096. 13. Richard S. Lazarus and Susan
Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping. Chapter 2: Cognitive Appraisal
Processes, 1st edition (New York: Springer Publishing Company, 1984).
14. E. Diener and F. Fujita, "Resources, Personal Strivings, and
Subjective Well-Being: A Nomothetic and Idiographic Approach," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 68, no. 5 (May 1995): 926-- 35,
https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.68.5.926. 7.

Keimpe Algra et al., eds., The Cambridge History of Hellenistic
Philosophy, n.d. 16. William J. Prior, Virtue and Knowledge: An
Introduction to Ancient Greek Ethics, n.d. 17. William B. Irvine, A
Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy, 1st edition
(Oxford University Press, 2008). 18. Donald Robertson, The Philosophy of
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: Stoic Philosophy as Rational and
Cognitive Psychotherapy, 1st edition (London: Routledge, 2010). 19.
Aaron T. Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders (New York,
N.Y.: Plume, 1979). 20. Judith S. Beck, Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 3rd
edition (The Guilford Press, 2021) 21. David D. Burns, Feeling Good: The
New Mood Therapy, Reprint edition (New York: Harper, 2008). 22.
Elizabeth V. Naylor et al., "Bibliotherapy as a Treatment for Depression
in Primary Care," Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings 17,
no. 3 (September 1, 2010): 258-- 71,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10880-010-9207-2. 23. James J. Gross and Oliver
P. John, "Individual Differences in Two Emotion Regulation Processes:
Implications for Affect, Relationships, and WellBeing," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 85, no. 2 (August 2003): 348-- 62,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.348. 24. Tianqiang Hu et al.,
"Relation between Emotion Regulation and Mental Health: A Meta-Analysis
Review," Psychological Reports 114 (April 1, 2014): 341-- 62,
https://doi.org/10.2466/03.20.PR0.114k22w4. 25. James J. Gross, Handbook
of Emotion Regulation, Second Edition. Chapter 1: Emotion, 2nd edition
(The Guilford Press, 2013). 15.

26.

Shengdong Chen et al., "Automatic Reappraisal-Based Implementation
Intention Produces Early and Sustainable Emotion Regulation Effects:
Event-Related Potential Evidence," Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience
14 (July 1, 2020): 89, https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2020.00089. 27.
Justin K. Mogilski et al., "Jealousy, Consent, and Compersion Within
Monogamous and Consensually NonMonogamous Romantic Relationships,"
Archives of Sexual Behavior 48, no. 6 (August 1, 2019): 1811-- 28,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-018-1286-4. 28. Jessica L. Jenness et
al., "Catastrophizing, Rumination, and Reappraisal Prospectively Predict
Adolescent PTSD Symptom Onset Following a Terrorist Attack," Depression
and Anxiety 33, no. 11 (2016): 1039--47,
https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22548. 29. "Sonja Lyubomirsky," accessed
November 25, 2020, http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/. 30. Debra A. Hope et
al., "Automatic Thoughts and Cognitive Restructuring in Cognitive
Behavioral Group Therapy for Social Anxiety Disorder," Cognitive Therapy
and Research 34, no. 1 (February 1, 2010): 1-- 12,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-007-9147-9. 31. "Cognitive Restructuring
(Guide)," Therapist Aid, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.therapistaid.com/therapyguide/cognitive-restructuring. 32.
David D. Burns, Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy. Chapter 3:
Understanding Your Moods: You Feel the Way You Think, Reprint edition
(New York: Harper, 2008). 33. "CBT's Cognitive Restructuring (CR) For
Tackling Cognitive Distortions," PositivePsychology.com, February 12,
2018,
https://positivepsychology.com/cbt-cognitiverestructuring-cognitive-distortions/.
34. Aaron T. Beck, Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders.
Chapter 2: Tapping the Internal

Communications, n.d. 35. Patrick B. Wood, "Role of Central Dopamine in
Pain and Analgesia," Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics 8, no. 5 (May
2008): 781-- 97, https://doi.org/10.1586/14737175.8.5.781. 36. R. C.
Lane, J. W. Hull, and L. M. Foehrenbach, "The Addiction to Negativity,"
Psychoanalytic Review 78, no. 3 (1991): 391--410. Chapter 6 William B.
Irvine, On Desire: Why We Want What We Want. Chapter 7: The Biological
Incentive System (Oxford University Press, 2005). 2. Epictetus, The
Discourses of Epictetus: The Handbook, Fragments, ed.Â Christopher Gill
and Richard Stoneman, trans. Robin Hard, 2nd Original ed.Â edition
(London : Rutland, Vt: Everyman Paperbacks, 1995). 3. Bhikkhu Bodhi, The
Noble Eightfold Path: Way to the End of Suffering. Chapter 1: The Way to
the End of Suffering, n.d. 4. Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught:
Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada.
Chapter 4: The Third Noble Truth, n.d. 5. Epicurus, Principal Doctrines,
n.d. 6. Epictetus, Enchiridion, trans. George Long, unknown edition
(Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2004). 7. Marie-AurÃ©lie Bruno et al.,
"A Survey on Self-Assessed Well-Being in a Cohort of Chronic Locked-in
Syndrome Patients: Happy Majority, Miserable Minority," BMJ Open 1, no.
1 (January 1, 2011): e000039,
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2010000039. 8. "Personal Strivings: An
Approach to Personality and Subjective Well-Being. - PsycNET," accessed
November 1.

25, 2020, https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?
doi=10.1037%2F0022-3514.51.5.1058. 9. Wilhelm Hofmann and Loran F.
Nordgren, eds., The Psychology of Desire. Chapter 3 - Desire and Desire
Regulation, Reprint edition (New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 2016).
10. Lotte Dillen, Esther Papies, and Wilhelm Hofmann, "Turning a Blind
Eye to Temptation: How Cognitive Load Can Facilitate Self-Regulation,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 104 (December 31, 2012),
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0031262. 11. "The Grateful Disposition: A
Conceptual and Empirical Topography. - PsycNET," accessed November 25,
2020, /doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F00223514.82.1.112. 12. "Counting
Blessings versus Burdens: An Experimental Investigation of Gratitude and
Subjective Well-Being in Daily Life. - PsycNET," accessed November 25,
2020, /doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F00223514.84.2.377. 13. "Beyond
Reciprocity: Gratitude and Relationships in Everyday Life. - PsycNET,"
accessed November 25, 2020, /doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2F1528-3542.8.3.425.
14. Arnoud Arntz and Miranda Hopmans, "Underpredicted Pain Disrupts More
than Correctly Predicted Pain, but Does Not Hurt More," Behaviour
Research and Therapy 36, no. 12 (December 1, 1998): 1121-- 29,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(98)00085-0. 15. Yair Dor-Ziderman et
al., "Mindfulness-Induced Selflessness: A MEG Neurophenomenological
Study," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7 (2013),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00582. 16. Paul Verhaeghen, "The
Self-Effacing Buddhist: No(t)Self in Early Buddhism and Contemplative
Neuroscience," Contemporary Buddhism 18, no. 1

(January 2, 2017): 21-- 36,
https://doi.org/10.1080/14639947.2017.1297344. 17. M. E. Raichle et al.,
"A Default Mode of Brain Function," Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 98, no. 2 (January 16, 2001): 676-- 82,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.98.2.676. 18. Viktor E. Frankl, William J.
Winslade, and Harold S. Kushner, Man's Search for Meaning, 1st edition
(Boston: Beacon Press, 2006). 19. Donald Robertson, The Philosophy of
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy: Stoic Philosophy as Rational and
Cognitive Psychotherapy. Chapter 13: The View from Above and Stoic
Metaphysics, n.d. 20. Aaron Beck, Gary Emery, and Ruth L. Greenberg,
Anxiety Disorders and Phobias: A Cognitive Perspective. Chapter 11:
Strategies and Techniques for Cognitive Restructuring, n.d. 21. Anna
Rose Childress, A. Thomas McLELLAN, and Charles P. O'brien, "Abstinent
Opiate Abusers Exhibit Conditioned Craving, Conditioned Withdrawal and
Reductions in Both through Extinction," British Journal of Addiction 81,
no. 5 (1986): 655-- 60,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1986.tb00385.x. 22. Daryl J. Bem,
"Self-Perception Theory, in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
ed.Â Leonard Berkowitz, vol.Â 6 (Academic Press, 1972), 1-- 62,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60024-6. 23. Diogenes Laertius,
Lives of the Eminent Philosophers: By Diogenes Laertius. Book 6 -
Diogenes Laertius, ed. James Miller, trans. Pamela Mensch (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2018). 24. "Diogenes of Sinope \| Internet
Encyclopedia of Philosophy," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://iep.utm.edu/diogsino/. 25. "Diogenes," accessed November 25,
2020, https://penelope.uchicago.edu/\~grout/encyclopae

dia_romana/greece/hetairai/diogenes.html. 26. William B. Irvine, A Guide
to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy. Chapter 7: Self-Denial,
1st edition (Oxford University Press, 2008). 27. Cynthia King and
William B. Irvine, Musonius Rufus: Lectures and Sayings, n.d. 28.
Wilhelm Hofmann et al., "Yes, But Are They Happy? Effects of Trait
Self-Control on Affective Well-Being and Life Satisfaction," Journal of
Personality 82, no. 4 (2014): 265--77,
https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12050. 29. Kennon M. Sheldon and Sonja
Lyubomirsky, "The Challenge of Staying Happier: Testing the Hedonic
Adaptation Prevention Model," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
38, no. 5 (May 1, 2012): 670-- 80,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167212436400. 30. William B. Irvine, A Guide
to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy. Chapter 5 - The
Dichotomy of Control: On Becoming Invincible, 1st edition (Oxford
University Press, 2008). 31. Nick K. Lioudis, "The Importance Of
Diversification," Investopedia, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.investopedia.com/investing/importan ce-diversification/. 32.
Andrew K. MacLeod, Emma Coates, and Jacquie Hetherton, "Increasing
Well-Being through Teaching Goal-Setting and Planning Skills: Results of
a Brief Intervention," Journal of Happiness Studies: An
Interdisciplinary Forum on Subjective Well-Being 9, no. 2 (2008):
185--96, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-0079057-2. 33. James Chen,
"Liquidity," Investopedia, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/liquidity.asp . 34. Markku
Jokisaari, "Regret Appraisals, Age, and Subjective Well-Being," Journal
of Research in

Personality 37, no. 6 (December 1, 2003): 487-- 503,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-6566(03)00033-3. 35. Kai Epstude and Kai
J. Jonas, "Regret and Counterfactual Thinking in the Face of
Inevitability: The Case of HIV-Positive Men," Social Psychological and
Personality Science 6, no. 2 (March 1, 2015): 157-- 63,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550614546048. 36. June Gruber et al.,
"Happiness Is Best Kept Stable: Positive Emotion Variability Is
Associated With Poorer Psychological Health," Emotion (Washington, D.C.)
13 (November 19, 2012), https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030262. Chapter 7 Tim
O'Keefe, Epicureanism. Chapter 12 - Varieties of Pleasure, Varieties of
Desire, n.d. 2. Maryam MALMIR, Mohammad KHANAHMADI, and Dariush FARHUD,
"Dogmatism and Happiness," Iranian Journal of Public Health 46, no. 3
(March 2017): 326--32. 3. Marc Kreidler, "Stardust, Smoke, and Mirrors:
The Myth of the Mad Genius \| Skeptical Inquirer," September 1, 2013,
https://skepticalinquirer.org/2013/09/stardustsmoke-and-mirrors-the-myth-of-the-mad-genius/.
4. Aaron T. Beck and Brad A. Alford, Depression: Causes and Treatment,
2nd Edition. Chapter 17: Cognition and Psychopathology, n.d. 5. Andrew
J. Oswald, Eugenio Proto, and Daniel Sgroi, "Happiness and
Productivity," Journal of Labor Economics 33, no. 4 (September 26,
2015): 789-- 822, https://doi.org/10.1086/681096. 6. Stephen G. Post,
"Altruism, Happiness, and Health: It's Good to Be Good," International
Journal of Behavioral Medicine 12, no. 2 (June 1, 2005): 66-- 77,
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327558ijbm1202_4. 1.

7.

Kai Epstude and Kai J. Jonas, "Regret and Counterfactual Thinking in the
Face of Inevitability: The Case of HIV-Positive Men," Social
Psychological and Personality Science 6, no. 2 (March 1, 2015): 157--
63, https://doi.org/10.1177/1948550614546048. 8. Friedrich Nietzsche, On
the Genealogy of Morals and Ecce Homo. Essay 1: 'Good and Evil', 'Good
and Bad,' ed.Â Walter Kaufmann, Reissue edition (New York: Vintage,
1989). 9. D. Hemelsoet, K. Hemelsoet, and D. Devreese, "The Neurological
Illness of Friedrich Nietzsche," Acta Neurologica Belgica 108, no. 1
(March 2008): 9--16. 10. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics. Book II Chapter
6, trans. C. D. C. Reeve (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company,
Inc., 2014). 11. Richard Kraut, "Aristotle's Ethics," in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed.Â Edward N. Zalta, Summer 2018
(Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2018),
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entr ies/aristotle-ethics/.
12. Maya Tamir et al., "The Secret to Happiness: Feeling Good or Feeling
Right?," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 146 (August 14,
2017), https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000303. 13. Emily Rose Dunn, "Blue Is
the New Black: How Popular Culture Is Romanticizing Mental Illness,"
December 2017, https://digital.library.txstate.edu/handle/10877/69 85.
14. Randolph M. Nesse MD, Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from
the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry. Chapter 4: Good Reasons for Bad
Feelings, n.d. 15. James J. Gross, ed., Handbook of Emotion Regulation,
Second Edition. Chapter 4: The Neural Basis of Emotion

Dysregulation, Second edition (New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 2015).
16. June Gruber, "Can Feeling Too Good Be Bad?: Positive Emotion
Persistence (PEP) in Bipolar Disorder," Current Directions in
Psychological Science 20, no. 4 (August 1, 2011): 217-- 21,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721411414632. 17. Heather C. Lench, ed., The
Function of Emotions: When and Why Emotions Help Us. Chapter 8:
Functions of Anger in the Emotion System, 1st ed.Â 2018 edition (Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2018). 18. Siew-Maan Diong and George D. Bishop,
"Anger Expression, Coping Styles, and Well-Being," Journal of Health
Psychology 4, no. 1 (January 1, 1999): 81-- 96,
https://doi.org/10.1177/135910539900400106. 19. Craig Winston LeCroy,
"Anger Management or Anger Expression," Residential Treatment for
Children & Youth 5, no. 3 (August 9, 1988): 29-- 39,
https://doi.org/10.1300/J007v05n03_04. 20. Seneca, On Anger: De Ira,
trans. Aubrey Stewart (Independently published, 2017). 21. "The True
Trigger of Shame: Social Devaluation Is Sufficient, Wrongdoing Is
Unnecessary - ScienceDirect," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs
/pii/S1090513817303872. 22. Courtland S. Hyatt et al., "The Anatomy of
an Insult: Popular Derogatory Terms Connote Important Individual
Differences in Agreeableness/Antagonism," Journal of Research in
Personality 78 (February 1, 2019): 61-- 75,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2018.11.005. 23. Vilayanur S. Ramachandran
and Baland Jalal, "The Evolutionary Psychology of Envy and Jealousy,"
Frontiers in Psychology 8 (September 19, 2017),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01619.

24.

Christopher J. Boyce, Gordon D. A. Brown, and Simon C. Moore, "Money and
Happiness: Rank of Income, Not Income, Affects Life Satisfaction,"
Psychological Science, February 18, 2010,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610362671. 25. "Emotional Competency -
Envy," accessed November 25, 2020,
http://www.emotionalcompetency.com/envy.htm. 26. Kevin Kelly, "68 Bits
of Unsolicited Advice," The Technium (blog), accessed November 25, 2020,
https://kk.org/thetechnium/68-bits-of-unsolicitedadvice/. 27. "How to
Deal with Extreme Envy," Time, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://time.com/4358803/jealousyenvy-advice/. 28. Wilco W. van Dijk et
al., "The Role of Self-Evaluation and Envy in Schadenfreude," European
Review of Social Psychology 26, no. 1 (January 1, 2015): 247-- 82,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2015.1111600. 29. Randolph M. Nesse MD,
Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from the Frontier of
Evolutionary Psychiatry. Chapter 5: Anxiety and Smoke Detectors,
Illustrated edition (New York, New York: Dutton, 2019). 30.
MeaningofLife.tv, Good Reasons for Bad Feelings \| Robert Wright &
Randolph Nesse \[The Wright Show\], 2019,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17-ypeL88kQ. 31. Raymond G.
Miltenberger, Behavior Modification: Principles and Procedures. Chapter
5: Extinction, 6th edition (Boston, MA: Cengage Learning, 2015). 32. B.
Alan Wallace and Shauna L. Shapiro, "Mental Balance and Well-Being:
Building Bridges between Buddhism and Western Psychology," American
Psychologist 61, no. 7 (2006): 690-- 701,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.61.7.690. 33. Randolph M. Nesse MD,
Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from the Frontier of
Evolutionary

Psychiatry. Chapter 9: Guilt and Grief: The Price of Goodness and Love,
n.d. 34. Michael Caserta, Rebecca Utz, and Dale Lund, "Spousal
Bereavement Following Cancer Death," Illness, Crises, and Loss 21
(January 1, 2013): 185-- 202, https://doi.org/10.2190/IL.21.3.b. 35.
Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition
with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada, n.d. 36. R. M. A. Nelissen, A. J.
M. Dijker, and N. K. de Vries, "Emotions and Goals: Assessing Relations
between Values and Emotions," Cognition and Emotion 21, no. 4 (June 1,
2007): 902-- 11, https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930600861330. 37. Nate
Soares, Replacing Guilt: Minding Our Way (Independently published,
2020). 38. Heather C. Lench, ed., The Function of Emotions: When and Why
Emotions Help Us. Chapter 7: The Adaptive Functions of Jealousy, n.d.
39. Rachel Elphinston et al., "Romantic Jealousy and Relationship
Satisfaction: The Costs of Rumination," Western Journal of Communication
77 (April 4, 2013): 293-- 304,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10570314.2013.770161. 40. Stephen Kellett and
Peter Totterdell, "Taming the Green-Eyed Monster: Temporal Responsivity
to Cognitive Behavioural and Cognitive Analytic Therapy for Morbid
Jealousy," Psychology and Psychotherapy 86, no. 1 (March 2013): 52--69,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.20448341.2011.02045.x. 41. Valerie Rubinsky,
"Identity Gaps and Jealousy as Predictors of Satisfaction in Polyamorous
Relationships," Southern Communication Journal 84, no. 1 (January 1,
2019): 17-- 29, https://doi.org/10.1080/1041794X.2018.1531916.

42.

Robert L. Leahy and Dennis D. Tirch, "Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for
Jealousy," International Journal of Cognitive Therapy 1, no. 1 (February
1, 2008): 18-- 32, https://doi.org/10.1521/ijct.2008.1.1.18. 43.
"Attachment Styles of Predictors of Relationship Satisfaction Within
Adulthood -- Nevada State Undergraduate Research Journal," accessed
November 25, 2020, http://nsurj.com/v4-i1-2/. 44. Richard Dawkins, The
Selfish Gene: 40th Anniversary Edition. Chapter 1: Why Are People?, 4th
edition (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2016). 45. Paul Bloom,
Against Empathy: The Case for Rational Compassion, n.d. 46. Barbara
Oakley et al., eds., Pathological Altruism. Chapter 2: Empathy-Based
Pathogenic Guilt, Pathological Altruism, and Psychopathology, n.d. 47.
"Introduction to Effective Altruism," Effective Altruism, accessed
November 25, 2020, https://www.effectivealtruism.org/articles/introduc
tion-to-effective-altruism/. 48. Paul Bloom, "The Baby in the Well," The
New Yorker, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/05/20 /the-baby-in-the-well. 49.
Shoyu Hanayama, "Christian 'Love' and Buddhist 'Compassion,'" Journal of
Indian and Buddhist Studies (Indogaku Bukkyogaku Kenkyu) 20, no. 1
(1971): 464-- 455, https://doi.org/10.4259/ibk.20.464. 50. "Open Hearts
Build Lives: Positive Emotions, Induced through Loving-Kindness
Meditation, Build Consequential Personal Resources. - PsycNET," accessed
November 25, 2020, https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?
doi=10.1037%2Fa0013262. 51. "Loving-Kindness Meditation Increases Social
Connectedness. - PsycNET," accessed November 25,

2020, https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding? doi=10.1037%2Fa0013237. 52.
Peter Harvey, An Introduction to Buddhism, Second Edition: Teachings,
History and Practices, n.d. 53. Michael A. Cohn et al., "Happiness
Unpacked: Positive Emotions Increase Life Satisfaction by Building
Resilience," Emotion (Washington, D.C.) 9, no. 3 (June 2009): 361--68,
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015952. 54. Arantzazu RodrÃ­guez-FernÃ¡ndez,
Estibaliz Ramos-DÃ­az, and Inge Axpe-Saez, "The Role of Resilience and
Psychological Well-Being in School Engagement and Perceived Academic
Performance: An Exploratory Model to Improve Academic Achievement,"
Health and Academic Achievement, September 19, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.73580. 55. June Gruber et al.,
"Happiness Is Best Kept Stable: Positive Emotion Variability Is
Associated With Poorer Psychological Health," Emotion (Washington, D.C.)
13 (November 19, 2012), https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030262. 56.
"Similitudes: Stoicism and Buddhism," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://stoicandzen.com/stoicismand-buddhism-similarities/. 57. Marcin
FabjaÅski and Eric Brymer, "Enhancing Health and Wellbeing through
Immersion in Nature: A Conceptual Perspective Combining the Stoic and
Buddhist Traditions," Frontiers in Psychology 8 (September 12, 2017),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01573. Chapter 8 1.

Wilhelm Hofmann et al., "Dieting and the Self-Control of Eating in
Everyday Environments: An Experience Sampling Study," British Journal of
Health

Psychology 19, no. 3 (September 2014): 523-- 39,
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjhp.12053. 2. Marja Kinnunen et al.,
"Self-Control Is Associated with Physical Activity and Fitness among
Young Males," Behavioral Medicine (Washington, D.C.) 38 (July 1, 2012):
83-- 89, https://doi.org/10.1080/08964289.2012.693975. 3. Larissa
Barber, Matthew Grawitch, and David Munz, "Are Better Sleepers More
Engaged Workers? A SelfRegulatory Approach to Sleep Hygiene and Work
Engagement.," Stress and Health : Journal of the International Society
for the Investigation of Stress, October 1, 2012,
https://doi.org/10.1002/smi.2468. 4. Anja Achtziger et al., "Debt out of
Control: The Links between Self-Control, Compulsive Buying, and Real
Debts," Journal of Economic Psychology 49 (August 1, 2015): 141-- 49,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2015.04.003. 5. Thomas A. Wills et al.,
"Behavioral and Emotional SelfControl: Relations to Substance Use in
Samples of Middle and High School Students," Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors: Journal of the Society of Psychologists in Addictive
Behaviors 20, no. 3 (September 2006): 265-- 78,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0893-164X.20.3.265. 6. Adriel Boals, Michelle R.
Vandellen, and Jonathan B. Banks, "The Relationship between Self-Control
and Health: The Mediating Effect of Avoidant Coping," Psychology &
Health 26, no. 8 (August 2011): 1049-- 62,
https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2010.529139. 7. June P. Tangney, Roy F.
Baumeister, and Angie Luzio Boone, "High Self-Control Predicts Good
Adjustment, Less Pathology, Better Grades, and Interpersonal Success,"
Journal of Personality 72, no. 2 (2004): 271-- 324,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00263.x.

8.

June Price Tangney et al., "Reliability, Validity, and Predictive
Utility of the 25-Item Criminogenic Cognitions Scale (CCS)," Criminal
Justice and Behavior 39, no. 10 (October 1, 2012): 1340-- 60,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854812451092. 9. Angela L. Duckworth and
Martin E.P. Seligman, "SelfDiscipline Outdoes IQ in Predicting Academic
Performance of Adolescents," Psychological Science 16, no. 12 (December
1, 2005): 939-- 44, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01641.x.
10. Eli Finkel and W. Keith Campbell, "Self-Control and Accommodation in
Close Relationships: An Interdependence Analysis," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 81 (September 1, 2001): 263-- 77,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.81.2.263. 11. Camilla StrÃ¶mbÃ¤ck et
al., "Does Self-Control Predict Financial Behavior and Financial
Well-Being?," Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 14 (June 1,
2017): 30--38, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.04.002. 12. Wilhelm
Hofmann et al., "Yes, But Are They Happy? Effects of Trait Self-Control
on Affective Well-Being and Life Satisfaction," Journal of Personality
82, no. 4 (2014): 265--77, https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12050. 13.
Wilhelm Hofmann, Hiroki Kotabe, and Maike Luhmann, "The Spoiled Pleasure
of Giving in to Temptation," Motivation and Emotion 37, no. 4 (December
1, 2013): 733-- 42, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-013-9355-4. 14. T. E.
Moffitt et al., "A Gradient of Childhood SelfControl Predicts Health,
Wealth, and Public Safety," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108, no. 7 (February 15, 2011): 2693-- 98,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010076108. 15. David L. Watson and Roland
G. Tharp, Self-Directed Behavior: Self-Modification for Personal
Adjustment. Chapter 5: Antecedents, n.d.

James Clear, Atomic Habits: An Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits &
Break Bad Ones. Chapter 8: How to Make a Habit Irresistible, Illustrated
edition (New York: Avery, 2018). 17. George F. Koob and Eric J. Simon,
"The Neurobiology of Addiction: Where We Have Been and Where We Are
Going," Journal of Drug Issues 39, no. 1 (January 2009): 115--32. 18.
David T. Courtwright, The Age of Addiction: How Bad Habits Became Big
Business, n.d. 19. Daniel H. Angres and Kathy Bettinardi--Angres, "The
Disease of Addiction: Origins, Treatment, and Recovery,"
Disease-a-Month, The Disease of Addiction: Origins, Treatment, and
Recovery, 54, no. 10 (October 1, 2008): 696-- 721,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.disamonth.2008.07.002. 20. Daniel Lieberman,
The Story of the Human Body: Evolution, Health, and Disease, n.d. 21.
Angela Jacques et al., "The Impact of Sugar Consumption on Stress
Driven, Emotional and Addictive Behaviors," Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews 103 (August 1, 2019): 178-- 99,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.021. 22. MeaningofLife.tv,
Good Reasons for Bad Feelings \| Robert Wright & Randolph Nesse \[The
Wright Show\], 2019, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17-ypeL88kQ. 23.
Lauren E. Sherman et al., "What the Brain 'Likes': Neural Correlates of
Providing Feedback on Social Media," Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience 13, no. 7 (September 4, 2018): 699-- 707,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsy051. 24. Russell Clayton, Alexander
Nagurney, and Jessica Smith, "Cheating, Breakup, and Divorce: Is
Facebook Use to Blame?," Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking 16 (October 22, 2013): 717-- 20,
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2012.0424. 16.

25.

Mark Griffiths, Halley Pontes, and Daria Kuss, "The Clinical Psychology
of Internet Addiction: A Review of Its Conceptualization, Prevalence,
Neuronal Processes, and Implications for Treatment.," Neurosciences and
Neureconomics 4 (January 1, 2015). 26. Ahmet AKIN et al.,
"Self-Control/Management And Internet Addiction," International Online
Journal of Educational Sciences 7 (August 11, 2015): 95-- 100,
https://doi.org/10.15345/iojes.2015.03.016. 27. Kashmir Hill,
"Adventures in Self-Surveillance, Aka The Quantified Self, Aka Extreme
Navel-Gazing," Forbes, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2011/04/
07/adventures-in-self-surveillance-aka-the-quantifiedself-aka-extreme-navel-gazing/.
28. "Carbonfootprint.Com - Carbon Footprint Calculator," accessed
November 25, 2020, https://www.carbonfootprint.com/calculator.aspx. 29.
Peter M. Gollwitzer and Veronika BrandstÃ¤tter, "Implementation
Intentions and Effective Goal Pursuit," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 73, no. 1 (1997): 186--99,
https://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.73.1.186. 30. Elliot Aronson and Joshua
Aronson, The Social Animal. Chapter 4: Conformity, n.d. 31. S. E. Asch,
"Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification and Distortion of
Judgments," in Groups, Leadership and Men; Research in Human Relations
(Oxford, England: Carnegie Press, 1951), 177-- 90. 32. Netflix, Derren
Brown: The Push I Official Trailer \[HD\] I Netflix, 2018,
https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=doFpACkiZ2Q&feature=emb_title. 33.
Herbert C. Kelman, "Compliance, Identification, and Internalization
Three Processes of Attitude

Change:," Journal of Conflict Resolution, July 1, 2016,
https://doi.org/10.1177/002200275800200106. 34. Patricia Pliner et al.,
"Compliance without Pressure: Some Further Data on the Foot-in-the-Door
Technique," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 10, no. 1 (January
1, 1974): 17-- 22, https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(74)90053-5. 35.
Robert Cialdini et al., "Reciprocal Concessions Procedure for Inducing
Compliance: The Door-in-theFace Technique," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 31 (February 1, 1975): 206-- 15,
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076284. 36. Edward E. Jones, Ingratiation: A
Social Psychological Analysis, First Edition (Appleton-Century-Crofts,
Inc, 1964). 37. Mark Whatley et al., "The Effect of a Favor on Public
and Private Compliance: How Internalized Is the Norm of Reciprocity?,"
Basic and Applied Social Psychology BASIC APPL SOC PSYCHOL 21 (September
1, 1999): 251-- 59, https://doi.org/10.1207/S15324834BASP2103_8. 38.
Herbert C. Kelman, "Compliance, Identification, and Internalization
Three Processes of Attitude Change:," Journal of Conflict Resolution,
July 1, 2016, https://doi.org/10.1177/002200275800200106. 39. Jerry M.
Burger et al., "What a Coincidence! The Effects of Incidental Similarity
on Compliance:," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, July 2,
2016, https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167203258838. 40. Dan Ariely,
Predictably Irrational, Revised and Expanded Edition: The Hidden Forces
That Shape Our Decisions. Chapter 2: The Fallacy of Supply and Demand,
Revised and Expanded ed.Â edition (New York, NY: Harper Perennial, 2010).
41. Christina Steindl et al., "Understanding Psychological Reactance,"
Zeitschrift Fur Psychologie 223, no. 4

(2015): 205--14, https://doi.org/10.1027/21512604/a000222. 42. Brad J.
Sagarin et al., "Dispelling the Illusion of Invulnerability: The
Motivations and Mechanisms of Resistance to Persuasion," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 83, no. 3 (2002): 526-- 41,
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.83.3.526. 43. Arend Hintze et al.,
"Risk Aversion as an Evolutionary Adaptation," October 23, 2013. 44.
"Adaptability: How Students' Responses to Uncertainty and Novelty
Predict Their Academic and Non-Academic Outcomes. - PsycNET," APA
PsycNET, accessed November 25, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032794.
45. Abraham H. Maslow, Bertha G. Maslow, and Henry Geiger, The Farther
Reaches of Human Nature. Chapter 2: Neurosis as a Failure of Personal
Growth, n.d. 46. Steven M. Albert and John Duffy, "Differences in Risk
Aversion between Young and Older Adults," Neuroscience and
Neuroeconomics 2012, no. 1 (January 15, 2012),
https://doi.org/10.2147/NAN.S27184. 47. John Kaag, Hiking with
Nietzsche: On Becoming Who You Are, 1st edition (New York: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 2018). 48. Bernard Reginster, The Affirmation of
Life: Nietzsche on Overcoming Nihilism, 0 edition (Harvard University
Press, 2009). 49. Rodica Ioana Damian et al., "Sixteen Going on
SixtySix: A Longitudinal Study of Personality Stability and Change
across 50 Years," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 117, no.
3 (September 2019): 674-- 95, https://doi.org/10.1037/pspp0000210. 50.
L. -G Ãst et al., "One vs Five Sessions of Exposure and Five Sessions of
Cognitive Therapy in the Treatment of Claustrophobia," Behaviour
Research and Therapy 39, no. 2 (February 1, 2001): 167-- 83,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00176-X.

Lissa Rankin M.D, The Fear Cure: Cultivating Courage as Medicine for the
Body, Mind, and Soul. Chapter 4: Uncertainty Is the Gateway to
Possibility, n.d. 52. Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols: Or How
to Philosophize with a Hammer, trans. Duncan Large, n.d. 53. Geraldine
O'Sullivan, "The Relationship Between Hope, Eustress, Self-Efficacy, and
Life Satisfaction Among Undergraduates," Social Indicators Research 101,
no. 1 (March 1, 2011): 155-- 72,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-010-9662-z. 54. Marcus Aurelius,
Meditations, 1st edition (CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform,
2018). 55. R. Blaug, How Power Corrupts: Cognition and Democracy in
Organisations. Chapter 2: Psychologies of Power, n.d. 56. Olena
Antonaccio and Charles R. Tittle, "Morality, SelfControl, and Crime\*,"
Criminology 46, no. 2 (2008): 479-- 510,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2008.00116.x. 57. David Myers,
Exploring Social Psychology, n.d. 58. James Clear, Atomic Habits: An
Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits & Break Bad Ones. Chapter 2: How
Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa), Illustrated edition
(New York: Avery, 2018). 59. Daryl J. Bem, "Self-Perception Theory,
Development of Self-Perception Theory Was Supported Primarily by a Grant
from the National Science Foundation (GS 1452) Awarded to the Author
during His Tenure at CarnegieMellon University.," in Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, ed.Â Leonard Berkowitz, vol.Â 6 (Academic
Press, 1972), 1--62, https://doi.org/10.1016/S00652601(08)60024-6. 60.
Danica MijoviÄ-Prelec and Drazen Prelec, "SelfDeception as
Self-Signalling: A Model and Experimental Evidence," Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences 365, no. 51.

1538 (January 27, 2010): 227-- 40,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0218. 61. David D. Burns, Feeling
Good: The New Mood Therapy. Chapter 5: Do-Nothingism: How to Beat It,
n.d. 62. "Praise for Intelligence Can Undermine Children's Motivation
and Performance. - PsycNET," accessed November 25, 2020,
https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding? doi=10.1037%2F0022-3514.75.1.33. 63.
"Implicit Social Cognition: Attitudes, Self-Esteem, and Stereotypes. -
PsycNET," accessed November 25, 2020, https://doi.apa.org/doiLanding?
doi=10.1037%2F0033-295X.102.1.4. Chapter 9 1.

Kentaro Fujita, Ariana Orvell, and Ethan Kross, "Smarter, Not Harder: A
Toolbox Approach to Enhancing Self-Control," Policy Insights from the
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7, no. 2 (October 1, 2020): 149-- 56,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2372732220941242. 2. Christian Tornau, "Saint
Augustine," in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed.Â Edward N.
Zalta, Summer 2020 (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
2020), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entr ies/augustine/.
3. David Dubner, "Willpower and Ego Depletion: Useful Constructs?,"
Counseling & Wellness: A Professional Counseling Journal 5 (February
2016), https://openknowledge.nau.edu/2338/. 4. Matthew T. Gailliot and
Roy F. Baumeister, "The Physiology of Willpower: Linking Blood Glucose
to SelfControl," Personality and Social Psychology Review 11, no. 4
(November 1, 2007): 303-- 27, https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868307303030.

Mischel Walter, The Marshmallow Test: Understanding Self-Control and How
To Master It. Chapter 2: How They Do It, n.d. 6. "Nietzsche and
Psychology: How to Become Who You Are," Academy of Ideas (blog),
February 21, 2017,
https://academyofideas.com/2017/02/nietzschepsychology-become-who-you-are/.
7. David L. Watson and Roland G. Tharp, Self-Directed Behavior:
Self-Modification for Personal Adjustment. Chapter 5: Antecedents, n.d.
8. "The Complete Guide to Self-Control," Scott H Young, September 30,
2019, https://www.scotthyoung.com/blog/2019/09/30/sel f-control/. 9.
David L. Watson and Roland G. Tharp, Self-Directed Behavior:
Self-Modification for Personal Adjustment. Chapter 7: Consequences, n.d.
10. Daniel H. Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us.
Chapter 2: Seven Reasons Carrots and Sticks (Often) Don't Work (New
York: Riverhead Books, 2011). 11. T. E. Moffitt et al., "A Gradient of
Childhood SelfControl Predicts Health, Wealth, and Public Safety,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 7 (February 15,
2011): 2693-- 98, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010076108. 12.
"Neuroreality: The New Reality Is Coming. And It's a Brain Computer
Interface.," Futurism, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://futurism.com/neurorealitythe-new-reality-is-coming-and-its-a-brain-computerinterface.
13. Anne-Marie Willis, "Ontological Designing," Design Philosophy Papers
4 (June 1, 2006): 69-- 92,
https://doi.org/10.2752/144871306X1396626813151 4. 5.

Benjamin Hardy, Willpower Doesn't Work: Discover the Hidden Keys to
Success. Chapter 2: How Your Environment Shapes You, n.d. 15. Epictetus,
Enchiridion, XXXII, trans. George Long, n.d. 16. Nicholas A. Christakis
and James H. Fowler, "The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network
over 32 Years," New England Journal of Medicine 357, no. 4 (July 26,
2007): 370-- 79, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa066082. 17. M. J. Howes,
J. E. Hokanson, and D. A. Loewenstein, "Induction of Depressive Affect
after Prolonged Exposure to a Mildly Depressed Individual," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 49, no. 4 (October 1985): 1110-- 13,
https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.49.4.1110. 18. Walter Mischel and
Nancy Baker, "Cognitive Appraisals and Transformations in Delay
Behavior," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 31, no. 2
(1975): 254-- 61, https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076272. 19. Monique
Boekaerts, Paul R. Pintrich, and Moshe Zeidner, eds., Handbook of
Self-Regulation. Chapter 15: Attentional Control and Self-Regulation,
n.d. 20. Stacey Long et al., "Effects of Distraction and Focused
Attention on Actual and Perceived Food Intake in Females with
Non-Clinical Eating Psychopathology," Appetite 56, no. 2 (April 1,
2011): 350--56, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2010.12.018. 21. Ashley
E. Mason et al., "Reduced Reward-Driven Eating Accounts for the Impact
of a Mindfulness-Based Diet and Exercise Intervention on Weight Loss:
Data from the SHINE Randomized Controlled Trial," Appetite 100 (May 1,
2016): 86-- 93, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2016.02.009. 22. W.
Mischel, E. B. Ebbesen, and A. R. Zeiss, "Cognitive and Attentional
Mechanisms in Delay of Gratification," Journal of Personality and Social
14.

Psychology 21, no. 2 (February 1972): 204-- 18,
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0032198. 23. Fjolvar Darri Rafnsson, Fridrik H.
Jonsson, and Michael Windle, "Coping Strategies, Stressful Life Events,
Problem Behaviors, and Depressed Affect," Anxiety, Stress, & Coping 19,
no. 3 (September 1, 2006): 241-- 57,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10615800600679111. 24. Shireen L. Rizvi, Chain
Analysis in Dialectical Behavior Therapy. Chapter 3: Getting to Know the
Target Behavior, 1st edition (The Guilford Press, 2019). 25. David L.
Watson and Roland G. Tharp, Self-Directed Behavior: Self-Modification
for Personal Adjustment. Chapter 2: Forethought: Planning for Success,
10th edition (Australia: Cengage Learning, 2013). 26. Raymond G.
Miltenberger, Behavior Modification: Principles and Procedures. Chapter
4: Reinforcement, 6th edition (Boston, MA: Cengage Learning, 2015). 27.
Dan Ariely and Klaus Wertenbroch, "Procrastination, Deadlines, and
Performance: Self-Control by Precommitment," Psychological Science 13,
no. 3 (May 1, 2002): 219--24, https://doi.org/10.1111/14679280.00441.
28. Xavier GinÃ©, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, "Put Your Money Where
Your Butt Is: A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation," American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 4 (October 2010): 213-- 35,
https://doi.org/10.1257/app.2.4.213. 29. Jinfeng Jiao and Catherine A.
Cole, "The Effects of Goal Publicity and Self-Monitoring on Escalation
of Goal Commitment," Journal of Consumer Behaviour 19, no. 3 (2020):
219--28, https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.1806. 30. John Raglin, "Factors in
Exercise Adherence: Influence of Spouse Participation," Quest 53 (August
1, 2001), https://doi.org/10.1080/00336297.2001.1049175 2.

James Clear, Atomic Habits: An Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits &
Break Bad Ones. Chapter 17: How an Accountability Partner Can Change
Everything, Illustrated edition (New York: Avery, 2018). 32.
"Focusmate - Distraction-Free Productivity," Focusmate, accessed
November 25, 2020, https://www.focusmate.com. 33. "Change Your Habits
and Life with Pavlok," Pavlok, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://pavlok.com/. 34. Robert Soussignan, "Duchenne Smile, Emotional
Experience, and Autonomic Reactivity: A Test of the Facial Feedback
Hypothesis," Emotion (Washington, D.C.) 2, no. 1 (March 2002): 52-- 74,
https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.2.1.52. 35. Katherine L. Milkman,
Julia A. Minson, and Kevin G. M. Volpp, "Holding the Hunger Games
Hostage at the Gym: An Evaluation of Temptation Bundling," Management
Science 60, no. 2 (February 2014): 283-- 99,
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1784. 36. Timothy D Hackenberg, "TOKEN
REINFORCEMENT: A REVIEW AND ANALYSIS," Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior 91, no. 2 (March 2009): 257-- 86,
https://doi.org/10.1901/jeab.2009.91-257. 37. Friedrich Nietzsche,
Nietzsche: Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality,
ed.Â Maudemarie Clark and Brian Leiter, trans. R. J. Hollingdale, 2nd
edition (Cambridge University Press, 1997). 38. Lisa Williams and David
desteno, "Pride and Perseverance: The Motivational Role of Pride,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94 (June 1, 2008):
1007--17, https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.94.6.1007. 39. Abraham H.
Maslow, Bertha G. Maslow, and Henry Geiger, The Farther Reaches of Human
Nature. Chapter 23: A Theory of Metamotivation: The Biological Rooting
of the Value-Life, n.d. 31.

40.

Edward Deci, Richard Koestner, and Richard Ryan, "A Meta-Analytic Review
of Experiments Examining the Effect of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic
Motivation," Psychological Bulletin 125 (December 1, 1999): 627--68;
discussion 692, https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.125.6.627. 41. Mark
Lepper and And Others, "Undermining Children's Intrinsic Interest with
Extrinsic Reward: A Test of the 'Overjustification' Hypothesis," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 28 (October 1, 1973),
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0035519. 42. Teresa M. Amabile, Creativity In
Context: Update To The Social Psychology Of Creativity. Chapter 3: A
Consensual Technique for Creativity Assessment, New edition (Boulder,
Colo: Routledge, 1996). 43. Daniel H. Pink, Drive: The Surprising Truth
About What Motivates Us. Chapter 2: Seven Reasons Carrots and Sticks
(Often) Don't Work, n.d. 44. Edward L. Deci, Richard Koestner, and
Richard M. Ryan, "Extrinsic Rewards and Intrinsic Motivation in
Education: Reconsidered Once Again," Review of Educational Research 71,
no. 1 (2001): 1--27. 45. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Beyond Boredom and
Anxiety: Experiencing Flow in Work and Play, 25th Anniversary edition
(San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000). 46. Teresa Amabile and Steven J.
Kramer, "The Power of Small Wins," Harvard Business Review, May 1, 2011,
https://hbr.org/2011/05/the-power-of-small-wins. 47. KjÃ¦rsti
Thorsteinsen and Joar VittersÃ¸, "Striving for Wellbeing: The Different
Roles of Hedonia and Eudaimonia in Goal Pursuit and Goal Achievement,"
International Journal of Wellbeing 8, no. 2 (December 8, 2018),
https://doi.org/10.5502/ijw.v8i2.733. Chapter 10

Lorraine L. Besser, Eudaimonic Ethics: The Philosophy and Psychology of
Living Well. Chapter 6: An Instrumental Theory of Virtue, 1st edition
(Routledge, 2014). 2. History com Editors, "Aristotle," HISTORY,
accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.history.com/topics/ancienthistory/aristotle. 3. "Who Was
Epictetus? The Slave Who Became The Stoic Philosopher," Orion
Philosophy, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://www.orionphilosophy.com/stoicblog/epictetus. 4. Viktor E.
Frankl, William J. Winslade, and Harold S. Kushner, Man's Search for
Meaning, n.d. 5. Charles Huenemann, "Nietzsche's Illness," The Oxford
Handbook of Nietzsche, September 1, 2013,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199534647. 013.0004. 6. "Marcus
Aurelius: The Main Philosopher of Ancient Roman Empire," Rome.us,
November 18, 2019, https://rome.us/roman-emperors/marcusaurelius.html.
7. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago (Place of publication
not identified: Random House, 2003). 8. Stephen G. Post, "Altruism,
Happiness, and Health: It's Good to Be Good," International Journal of
Behavioral Medicine 12, no. 2 (June 1, 2005): 66-- 77,
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327558ijbm1202_4. 9. June Price Tangney et
al., "Reliability, Validity, and Predictive Utility of the 25-Item
Criminogenic Cognitions Scale (CCS)," Criminal Justice and Behavior 39,
no. 10 (October 1, 2012): 1340-- 60,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854812451092. 1.

Roy F. Baumeister Ph.D and Aaron Beck, Evil: Inside Human Violence and
Cruelty. Chapter 8: Crossing the Line: How Evil Starts, n.d. 11. James
L. Knoll, "The 'Pseudocommando' Mass Murderer: Part I, The Psychology of
Revenge and Obliteration," Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry
and the Law Online 38, no. 1 (March 1, 2010): 87--94. 12. Fabienne
Glowacz and Michel Born, "Away from Delinquency and Crime: Resilience
and Protective Factors," 2015, 283--94,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-08720-7_18. 13. Neelu Sharma et al.,
"The Relation between Emotional Intelligence and Criminal Behavior: A
Study among Convicted Criminals," Industrial Psychiatry Journal 24, no.
1 (2015): 54--58, https://doi.org/10.4103/09726748.160934. 14. Friedrich
Nietzsche, Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality, n.d. 15.
Roy F. Baumeister Ph.D and Aaron Beck, Evil: Inside Human Violence and
Cruelty. Chapter 1: The Question of Evil, and the Answers (New York:
Holt Paperbacks, 1999). 16. Robert Ressler, "Lecture at the University
of Virginia, 1993." 17. Harma Meffert et al., "Reduced Spontaneous but
Relatively Normal Deliberate Vicarious Representations in Psychopathy,"
Brain 136, no. 8 (August 1, 2013): 2550--62,
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt190. 18. Paul Bloom, Against Empathy:
The Case for Rational Compassion (New York, NY: Ecco, 2016). 19. Carlo
Garofalo et al., "Emotion Dysregulation, Impulsivity and Personality
Disorder Traits: A Community Sample Study," Psychiatry Research 266
(August 1, 2018): 186-- 92,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2018.05.067. 10.

20.

Tamas Bereczkei, "The Manipulative Skill: Cognitive Devices and Their
Neural Correlates Underlying Machiavellian's Decision Making," Brain and
Cognition 99 (October 1, 2015): 24-- 31,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2015.06.007. 21. C. Zlotnick,
"Antisocial Personality Disorder, Affect Dysregulation and Childhood
Abuse Among Incarcerated Women," Journal of Personality Disorders 13,
no. 1 (March 1, 1999): 90-- 95,
https://doi.org/10.1521/pedi.1999.13.1.90. 22. Iakovos Vasiliou, "The
Role of Good Upbringing in Aristotle's Ethics," Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 56, no. 4 (1996): 771-- 97,
https://doi.org/10.2307/2108280. 23. "The Cook and the Chef: Musk's
Secret Sauce," Wait But Why, November 6, 2015,
https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/11/the-cook-andthe-chef-musks-secret-sauce.html.
24. James Martin, The Meaning of the 21st Century: A Vital Blueprint for
Ensuring Our Future, (Penguin Group, 2006) 25. Brian Hall, Silicon
Valley - Making the World a Better Place, 2019,
https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=B8C5sjjhsso. 26. "What Is
Transhumanism?," What is Transhumanism?, accessed November 25, 2020,
https://whatistranshumanism.org/.

OceanofPDF.com


