Copyright © 2014 by Marie Kondo All rights reserved. Published in the
United States by Ten Speed Press, an imprint of the Crown Publishing

Group, a division of Random House LLC, a Penguin Random House Company,
New York. www.crownpublishing.com www.tenspeed.com

Ten Speed Press and the Ten Speed Press colophon are registered
trademarks of Random House LLC.

Originally published in Japan as Jinsei Ga Tokimeku Katazuke No Maho by
Sunmark

Publishing, Inc., Tokyo, in 2011. Copyright © 2011 by Marie Kondo.
English translation rights arranged with Sunmark Publishing, Inc.,
through InterRights, Inc., Tokyo, Japan,

and Waterside Productions Inc., California, USA. This English
translation by Cathy Hirano rst published in Great Britain by Ebury
Publishing, an imprint of Random House UK,

London.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Kondo, Marie, author.

\[Jinsei ga tokimeku katazuke no maho. English\]

Life-changing magic: a journal: spark joy every day / Marie Kondo. --
First edition. pages cm

"The text in this work was originally published in The life-changing
magic of tidying up

translation by Marie Kondo and translated from the Japanese by Cathy
Hirano. Published in Great Britain by Ebury Publishing, an imprint of
Penguin Random House, London." ISBN 978-0-8041-8909-5 (diary/journal) 1.
Housekeeping. 2. Home economics. 3.

Storage in the home. 4. Orderliness. I. Title. TX321. K6613 2016
648---dc23

2015031411

Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-60774-730-7 eBook ISBN: 978-1-60774-731-4 Design
by Betsy Stromberg

Front cover image copyright © Vadim Georgiev/Shutterstock.com v3.1_r3

Contents

Cover Title Page Copyright

Introduction

1

Why can't I keep my house in order? You can't tidy if you've never
learned how A tidying marathon doesn't cause rebound Tidy a little a day
and you'll be tidying forever Why you should aim for perfection The
moment you start you reset your life Storage experts are hoarders Sort
by category, not by location Don't change the method to suit your
personality Make tidying a special event, not a daily chore

2

Finish discarding rst Start by discarding, all at once, intensely and
completely Before you start, visualize your destination Selection
criterion: does it spark joy? One category at a time Starting with
mementos spells certain failure Don't let your family see If you're mad
at your family, your room may be the cause What you don't need, your
family doesn't either Tidying is a dialogue with one's self What to do
when you can't throw something away

3

Tidying by category works like magic Tidying order: follow the correct
order of categories Clothing: place every item of clothing in the house
on the oor Loungewear: downgrading to "loungewear" is taboo Clothing
storage: fold it right and solve your storage problems How to fold: the
best way to fold for perfect appearance Arranging clothes: the secret to
energizing your closet Storing socks: treat your socks and stockings
with respect Seasonal clothes: eliminate the need to store o -season
clothes Storing books: put all your books on the oor Unread books:
"sometime" means "never"

Books to keep: those that belong in the hall of fame Sorting papers:
rule of thumb---discard everything All about papers: how to organize
troublesome papers Komono (miscellaneous items): keep things because you
love them ---not "just because" Common types of komono: disposables
Small change: make "into my wallet" your motto Sentimental items: your
parents' home is not a haven for mementos Photos: cherish who you are
now Astounding stockpiles I have seen Reduce until you reach the point
where something clicks Follow your intuition and all will be well

4

Storing your things to make your life shine Designate a place for each
thing Discard rst, store later Storage: pursue ultimate simplicity Don't
scatter storage spaces Forget about " ow planning" and "frequency of
use" Never pile things: vertical storage is the key No need for
commercial storage items The best way to store bags is in another bag
Empty your bag every day

Items that usurp oor space belong in the closet Keep things out of the
bath and the kitchen sink Make the top shelf of the bookcase your
personal shrine Decorate your closet with your secret delights Unpack
and de-tag new clothes immediately Don't underestimate the "noise" of
written information Appreciate your possessions and gain strong allies

5

The magic of tidying transforms your life

dramatically

Put your house in order and discover what you really want to do The
magic e ect of tidying Gaining con dence in life through the magic of
tidying An attachment to the past or anxiety about the future Learning
that you can do without Do you greet your house? Your possessions want
to help you Your living space a ects your body Is it true that tidying
increases good fortune? How to identify what is truly precious Being
surrounded by things that spark joy makes you happy Your real life
begins after putting your house in order

Afterword

About the author

Introduction

In this book, I have summed up how to put your space in order in a way
that will change your life forever. Impossible? A common response and
not surprising, considering that almost everyone has experienced a
rebound e ect at least once, if not multiple times, after tidying. Have
you ever tidied madly, only to nd that all too soon your home or
workspace is cluttered again? If so, let me share with you the secret of
success. Start by discarding. Then organize your space, thoroughly,
completely, in one go. If you adopt this approach---the KonMari
Method---you'll never revert to clutter again. Although this approach
contradicts conventional wisdom, everyone who completes my private
course has successfully kept their house in order---with unexpected
results. Putting their house in order positively a ects all other
aspects of their lives, including work and family. Having devoted more
than 80 percent of my life to this subject, I know that tidying can
transform your life. Does it still sound too good to be true? If your
idea of tidying is getting rid of one unnecessary item a day or cleaning
up your room a little at a time, then you are right. It won't have much
e ect on your life. If you change your approach, however, tidying can
have an immeasurable impact. In fact, that is what it means to put your
house in order. I started reading home and lifestyle magazines when I
was ve, and it was this that inspired me, from the age of fteen, to

undertake a serious study of tidying that led to my development of the
KonMari Method (based on a combination of my rst and last names). I am
now a consultant and spend most of my days visiting homes and o ces,
giving hands-on advice to people who nd it di cult to tidy, who tidy but
su er rebounds, or who want to tidy but don't know where to start. The
number of things my clients have discarded, from clothes and
undergarments to photos, pens, magazine clippings, and makeup samples,
easily exceeds a million items. This is no exaggeration. I have assisted
individual clients who have thrown out two hundred 45-liter garbage bags
in one go. From my exploration of the art of organizing and my
experience helping messy people become tidy, there is one thing I can
say with con dence: A dramatic reorganization of the home causes
correspondingly dramatic changes in lifestyle and perspective. It is
life transforming. I mean it. Here are just a few of the testimonies I
receive on a daily basis from former clients. After your course, I quit
my job and launched my own business doing something I had dreamed of
doing ever since I was a child. Your course taught me to see what I
really need and what I don't. So I got a divorce. Now I feel much
happier. Someone I have been wanting to get in touch with recently
contacted me. I'm delighted to report that since cleaning up my
apartment, I've been able to really increase my sales. My husband and I
are getting along much better.

I'm amazed to nd that just throwing things away has changed me so much.
I nally succeeded in losing ten pounds. My clients always sound so
happy, and the results show that tidying has changed their way of
thinking and their approach to life. In fact, it has changed their
future. Why? This question is addressed in more detail throughout the
book, but basically, when you put your house in order, you put your a
airs and your past in order, too. As a result, you can see quite clearly
what you need in life and what you don't, and what you should and
shouldn't do. I currently o er a course for clients in their homes and
for company owners in their o ces. These are all private, one-on-one
consultations, but I have yet to run out of clients. There is currently
a three-month waiting list, and I receive inquiries daily from people
who have been introduced by a former client or who have heard about the
course from someone else. I travel from one end of Japan to the other
and sometimes even overseas. Tickets for one of my public talks for
stay-at-home parents sold out overnight. There was a waiting list not
only for cancellations but also for the waiting list. Yet my repeater
rate is zero. From a business perspective, this would appear to be a
fatal aw. But what if my lack of repeaters was actually the secret to
the popularity of my approach? As I said at the beginning, people who
use the KonMari Method never revert to clutter again. Because they can
keep their space in order, they don't need to come back for more
lessons. I occasionally check in with graduates of my courses to see how
they are doing. In almost every case, not only is their home or o ce
still in order but they are continuing to improve their space. It is
evident from the photographs they send that they have even fewer
belongings than when they nished the course, and have acquired new
curtains and furnishings. They are surrounded only by the things they
love. Why does my course transform people? Because my approach is not
simply a technique. The act of tidying is a series of simple

actions in which objects are moved from one place to another. It
involves putting things away where they belong. This seems so simple
that even a six-year-old should be able to do it. Yet most people can't.
A short time after tidying, their space is a disorganized mess. The
cause is not lack of skills but rather lack of awareness and the
inability to make tidying a regular habit. In other words, the root of
the problem lies in the mind. Success is 90 percent dependent on our
mind-set. Excluding the fortunate few to whom organizing comes
naturally, if we do not address this aspect, rebound is inevitable no
matter how much is discarded or how cleverly things are organized. So
how can you acquire the right kind of mind-set? There is just one way,
and, paradoxically, it is by acquiring the right technique. Remember:
the KonMari Method I describe in this book is not a mere set of rules on
how to sort, organize, and put things away. It is a guide to acquiring
the right mind-set for creating order and becoming a tidy person. Of
course, I can't claim that all my students have perfected the art of
tidying. Unfortunately, some had to stop for one reason or another
before completing the course. And some quit because they expected me to
do the work for them. As an organizing fanatic and professional, I can
tell you right now that no matter how hard I try to organize another's
space, no matter how perfect a storage system I devise, I can never put
someone else's house in order in the true sense of the term. Why?
Because a person's awareness and perspective on his or her own lifestyle
are far more important than any skill at sorting, storing, or whatever.
Order is dependent on the extremely personal values of what a person
wants to live with. Most people would prefer to live in a clean and tidy
space. Anyone who has managed to tidy even once will have wished to keep
it that way. But many don't believe it's possible. They try out various
approaches to tidying only to nd that things soon return to "normal." I
am absolutely convinced, however, that everyone can keep his or her
space in order. To do that, it is essential to thoroughly reassess your
habits and assumptions about tidying. That may sound like far too much
work,

but don't worry. By the time you nish reading this book, you will be
ready and willing. People often tell me, "I'm disorganized by nature,"
"I can't do it," or "I don't have time"; but being messy is not
hereditary nor is it related to lack of time. It has far more to do with
the accumulation of mistaken notions about tidying, such as "it's best
to tackle one room at a time" or "it's better to do a little each day"
or "storage should follow the ow plan of the house." In Japan, people
believe that things like cleaning your room and keeping your bathroom
spick-and-span bring good luck, but if your house is cluttered, the e
ect of polishing the toilet bowl is going to be limited. The same is
true for the practice of feng shui. It is only when you put your house
in order that your furniture and decorations come to life. When you've
nished putting your house in order, your life will change dramatically.
Once you have experienced what it's like to have a truly ordered house,
you'll feel your whole world brighten. Never again will you revert to
clutter. This is what I call the magic of tidying. And the e ects are
stupendous. Not only will you never be messy again, but you'll also get
a new start on life. This is the magic I want to share with as many
people as possible.

1

Why can't I keep my house in order?

You can't tidy if you've never learned how When I tell people that my
profession is teaching others how to tidy, I am usually met with looks
of astonishment. "Can you actually make money doing that?" is their rst
question. This is almost always followed by, "Do people need lessons in
tidying?" It's true that while instructors and schools o er courses in
everything from cooking and how to wear a kimono to yoga and Zen
meditation, you'll be hard-pressed to nd classes on how to tidy. The
general assumption, in Japan at least, is that tidying doesn't need to
be taught but rather is picked up naturally. Cooking skills and recipes
are passed down as family traditions from grandmother to mother to
daughter, yet one never hears of anyone passing on the family secrets of
tidying, even within the same household. Think back to your own
childhood. I'm sure most of us have been scolded for not tidying up our
rooms, but how many of our parents consciously taught us how to tidy as
part of our upbringing? Our parents demanded that we clean up our rooms,
but they, too, had never been trained in how to do that. When it comes
to tidying, we are all self-taught. Instruction in tidying is neglected
not only in the home but also at school. When we think back to our home
economics classes, most of us remember making hamburgers or learning how
to use a sewing machine to make an apron, but compared to cooking and
sewing, surprisingly little time is devoted to the subject of tidying.
Even if it is included in a textbook, that section is either just read
in class, or worse, assigned for reading at home so that students can
skip ahead to more popular topics, such as food and health.
Consequently, even

the extremely rare home economics graduates who have formally studied
"tidying" can't do it. Food, clothing, and shelter are the most basic
human needs, so you would think that where we live would be considered
just as important as what we eat and what we wear. Yet in most societies
tidying, the job that keeps a home livable, is completely disregarded
because of the misconception that the ability to tidy is acquired
through experience and therefore doesn't require training. Do people who
have been tidying for more years than others tidy better? The answer is
no. Twenty- ve percent of my students are women in their fties, and the
majority of them have been homemakers for close to thirty years, which
makes them veterans at this job. But do they tidy better than women in
their twenties? The opposite is true. Many of them have spent so many
years applying erroneous conventional approaches that their homes over
ow with unnecessary items and they struggle to keep clutter under
control with ine ective storage methods. How can they be expected to
know how to tidy when they have never studied it properly? If you, too,
don't know how to tidy, don't be discouraged. Now is the time to learn.
By studying and applying the KonMari Method presented in this book, you
can escape the vicious cycle of clutter.

A tidying marathon doesn't cause rebound "I clean up when I realize how
untidy my place is, but once I'm done, it's not long before it's a mess
again." This is a common complaint, and the standard response touted by
magazine advice columns is, "Don't try tidying your entire house all at
once. You'll just rebound. Make a habit of doing a little at a time." I
rst stumbled across this refrain when I was ve. As the middle child of
three children, I was raised with a great deal of freedom. My mother was
busy taking care of my newborn younger sister, and my brother, who was
two years older than me, was always glued to the TV playing video games.
Consequently, I spent most of my time at home on my own. My favorite
pastime was reading home and lifestyle magazines. My mother subscribed
to ESSE---a magazine with features on interior decorating, cleaning
tips, and product reviews. As soon as it was delivered, I would snatch
it from the mailbox before my mother even knew it had arrived, rip open
the envelope, and immerse myself in the contents. On my way home from
school, I liked to stop at the bookstore and browse through Orange Page,
a popular Japanese food magazine. I wasn't actually able to read all the
words, but these magazines, with their photos of scrumptious dishes,
amazing tips for removing stains and grease, and pennysaving ideas, were
as fascinating for me as game guides were for my brother. I would fold
the corner of a page that caught my interest and dream of trying out the
tip described. I also made up a variety of my own solitary "games." For
example, after reading a feature on saving money, I immediately launched
into a "power-saving game" that involved roaming about the house and
unplugging things that weren't in use, even though I knew nothing about
electric meters. In response to another feature, I lled plastic bottles
with water and put them in the toilet tank in a solo "water-saving
contest." Articles on storage inspired me to

convert milk cartons into dividers for my drawers and make a letter rack
by stacking empty video cases between two pieces of furniture. At
school, while other kids were playing dodge ball or skipping, I'd slip
away to rearrange the bookshelves in our classroom, or check the
contents of the mop cupboard, all the while muttering about the poor
storage methods. "If only there were an S-hook, it would be so much
easier to use." But there was one problem that seemed unsolvable. No
matter how much I tidied, it wasn't long before every space was a mess
again. The milk carton dividers in my desk drawer soon over owed with
pens. The rack made from video cases was soon so crammed with letters
and papers that it crumpled to the oor. With cooking or sewing, practice
makes perfect, but even though tidying is also housework, I never seemed
to improve no matter how often I did it ---nowhere stayed tidy for long.
"It can't be helped," I consoled myself. "Rebound comes with the
territory. If I tackle the job all at once, I'll just get discouraged."
I had read this in many articles about tidying and assumed it was true.
If I had a time machine now, I'd go back and tell myself, "That's wrong.
If you use the right approach, you'll never rebound." Most people
associate the word "rebound" with dieting, but when they hear it used in
the context of tidying, it still makes sense. It seems logical that a
sudden, drastic reduction in clutter could have the same e ect as a
drastic cut in calories. But don't be deceived. The moment you begin
moving furniture around and getting rid of garbage, your room changes.
It's very simple. If you put your house in order in one fell swoop, you
will have tidied up in one fell swoop. (In Japanese, the term is ikki
ni, or "in one go.") Rebound occurs because people mistakenly believe
they have tidied thoroughly, when in fact they have only sorted and
stored things halfway. If you put your house in order properly, you'll
be able to keep your room tidy, even if you are lazy or sloppy by
nature.

Tidy a little a day and you'll be tidying forever "If you tidy your
house all at once, you'll rebound. It's better to make it a habit to do
a little at a time." Although this advice sounds very tempting, we've
already seen that the rst part is wrong. How about the suggestion that
we should do only a little a day? Although it sounds convincing, don't
be fooled. The reason you never seem to nish is precisely because you
tidy a little at a time. Changing lifestyle habits acquired over a span
of many years is generally extremely di cult. If you have never
succeeded in staying tidy to date, you will nd it next to impossible to
develop the habit of tidying a little at a time. People cannot change
their habits without rst changing their way of thinking. And that's not
easy! After all, it's quite hard to control what we think. There is,
however, one way to drastically transform the way we think about
tidying. The subject of tidying rst caught my attention when I was in
junior high school. The catalyst was a book called The Art of Discarding
by Nagisa Tatsumi (Takarajimasha, Inc.), which explained the importance
of getting rid of unnecessary things. I picked the book up on my way
home from school, intrigued to see a topic I had never encountered
before, and I can still remember the shock of surprise I felt as I read
it on the train. I became so absorbed that I almost missed my stop. Once
home, I went straight to my room with a handful of garbage bags and
stayed closeted for several hours. Although my room was small, by the
time I nished I had eight bags full of stu ---clothes I never wore,
textbooks from elementary school, toys I had not played with in years,
my eraser and seal collection. I had forgotten that most of these things
even existed. I sat motionless on the oor for about an hour afterward
staring at the pile of bags and wondering, "Why on earth did I bother
keeping all this stu ?"

What shocked me most, however, was how di erent my room looked. After
only a few hours, I could see parts of the oor that had never been
revealed before. My room seemed to have been transformed, and the air
inside seemed so much fresher and brighter that even my mind felt
clearer. Tidying, I realized, could have far more impact than I had ever
imagined. Thunderstruck by the extent of the change, from that day on I
turned my attention from cooking and sewing, which I had thought were
the essentials of a well-kept home, to the art of tidying. Tidying
brings visible results. Tidying never lies. The ultimate secret of
success is this: If you tidy up in one shot, rather than little by
little, you can dramatically change your mind-set. A change so profound
that it touches your emotions will irresistibly a ect your way of
thinking and your lifestyle habits. My clients do not develop the habit
of tidying gradually. Every one of them has been clutter-free since they
undertook their tidying marathon. This approach is the key to preventing
rebound. When people revert to clutter no matter how much they tidy, it
is not their room or their belongings but their way of thinking that is
at fault. Even if they are initially inspired, they can't stay motivated
and their e orts peter out. The root cause lies in the fact that they
can't see the results or feel the e ects. This is precisely why success
depends on experiencing tangible results immediately. If you use the
right method and concentrate your e orts on eliminating clutter
thoroughly and completely within a short span of time, you'll see
instant results that will empower you to keep your space in order ever
after. Anyone who experiences this process, no matter who they are, will
vow never to revert to clutter again.

Why you should aim for perfection "Don't aim for perfection. Start o
slowly and discard just one item a day." What lovely words to ease the
hearts of those who lack con dence in their ability to tidy. I came
across this advice when I was devouring every book about tidying that
had ever been published in Japan, and I fell for it, hook, line, and
sinker. The momentum sparked by my epiphany concerning the power of
tidying was beginning to wear o , and I was starting to feel jaded by
the lack of solid results. These words seemed to make sense. It seems
daunting to aim for perfection from the beginning. Besides, perfection
is supposedly unattainable. By discarding one thing a day, I could get
rid of 365 things by the end of the year. Convinced that I had
discovered a very practical method, I immediately followed the book's
instructions. I opened my closet in the morning wondering what to
dispose of that day. Seeing a T-shirt that I no longer wore, I put it in
the garbage bag. Before going to bed the next night, I opened my desk
drawer and discovered a notebook that seemed too childish for me. I put
it in the bag. Noticing a memo pad in the same drawer, I thought to
myself, "Oh, I don't need that anymore," but as I reached out to pick it
up, I paused at a new thought. "I can save that to discard tomorrow."
And I waited until the next morning to throw it away. The day after
that, I forgot completely, so I got rid of two items on the following
day. To be honest, I did not last two weeks. I am not the type of person
who likes to plug away at something, one step at a time. For people like
me, who do their assignments on the very last day right before the
deadline, this approach just doesn't work. Besides, casting o one object
a day did not compensate for the fact that when I shop, I buy several
items at one time. In the end, the pace at which I reduced could not
keep up with the pace at which I acquired new things, and I was
confronted with the discouraging fact that my

space was still cluttered. It wasn't long before I had completely
forgotten to follow the rule of discarding one item per day. So I can
tell you from experience that you will never get your house in order if
you only clean up half-heartedly. If, like me, you are not the diligent,
persevering type, then I recommend aiming for perfection just once. Many
people may protest when I use the word "perfection," insisting that it's
an impossible goal. But don't worry. Tidying in the end is just a
physical act. The work involved can be broadly divided into two kinds:
deciding whether or not to dispose of something and deciding where to
put it. If you can do these two things, you can achieve perfection.
Objects can be counted. All you need to do is look at each item, one at
a time, and decide whether or not to keep it and where to put it. That's
all you need to do to complete this job. It is not hard to tidy up
perfectly and completely in one fell swoop. In fact, anyone can do it.
And if you want to avoid rebound, this is the only way to do it.

The moment you start you reset your life Have you ever found yourself
unable to study the night before an exam and begun frantically tidying?
I confess, I have. In fact, for me it was a regular event. I would take
the piles of handouts covering my desk and throw them in the garbage.
Then, unable to stop, I'd tackle the textbooks and papers littering the
oor and begin arranging them in my bookcase. Finally, I'd open my desk
drawer and start organizing my pens and pencils. Before I knew it, it
would be two-thirty in the morning. Overcome by sleep, I'd jolt awake
again at ve and only then, in a complete panic, would I open my textbook
and buckle down to study. I thought that this urge to tidy before an
exam was a peculiar quirk of my own, but after meeting many others who
do the same, I realized that it was a common phenomenon. Many people get
the urge to clean up when under pressure, such as just before an exam.
But this urge doesn't occur because they want to clean their room. It
occurs because they need to put "something else" in order. Their brain
is actually clamoring to study, but when it notices the cluttered space,
the focus switches to "I need to clean up my room." The fact that the
tidying urge rarely continues once the crisis is over proves my theory.
Once the exam has ended, the passion poured into cleaning the previous
night dissipates and life returns to normal. All thought of tidying is
wiped from the person's mind. Why? Because the problem faced---that is,
the need to study for the exam---has been "tidied away." This doesn't
mean that tidying your room will actually calm your troubled mind. While
it may help you feel refreshed temporarily, the relief won't last
because you haven't addressed the true cause of your anxiety. If you let
the temporary relief achieved by tidying up your physical space deceive
you, you will never recognize the need to clean up your psychological
space. This was true for me.

Distracted by the "need" to tidy my room, it took me so long to get down
to studying that my grades were always terrible. Let's imagine a
cluttered room. It does not get messy all by itself. You, the person who
lives in it, makes the mess. There is a saying that "a messy room equals
a messy mind." I look at it this way. When a room becomes cluttered, the
cause is more than just physical. Visible mess helps distract us from
the true source of the disorder. The act of cluttering is really an
instinctive re ex that draws our attention away from the heart of an
issue. If you can't feel relaxed in a clean and tidy room, try
confronting your feeling of anxiety. It may shed light on what is really
bothering you. When your room is clean and uncluttered, you have no
choice but to examine your inner state. You can see any issues you have
been avoiding and are forced to deal with them. From the moment you
start tidying, you will be compelled to reset your life. As a result,
your life will start to change. That's why the task of putting your
house in order should be done quickly. It allows you to confront the
issues that are really important. Tidying is just a tool, not the nal
destination. The true goal should be to establish the lifestyle you want
most once your house has been put in order.

Storage experts are hoarders What is the rst problem that comes to mind
when you think of tidying? For many, the answer is storage. My clients
often want me to teach them what to put where. Believe me, I can relate,
but unfortunately, this is not the real issue. A booby trap lies within
the term "storage." Features on how to organize and store your
belongings and convenient storage products are always accompanied by
stock phrases that make it sound simple, such as "organize your space in
no time" or "make tidying fast and easy." It's human nature to take the
easy route, and most people leap at storage methods that promise quick
and convenient ways to remove visible clutter. I confess that I, too,
was once captivated by the storage myth. An avid fan of home and
lifestyle magazines since kindergarten, I would read a feature on how to
put things away and have to try out each suggestion immediately. I made
drawers out of tissue boxes and broke my piggybank to purchase nifty
storage items. In junior high on my way home from school, I would drop
in at a DIY store or browse at a magazine stand to check out the latest
products. In high school, I even called up the manufacturer of
particularly intriguing items and pestered the receptionist to tell me
the story of how they were invented. I dutifully used these storage
items to organize my things. Then I would stand and admire my handiwork,
content with how convenient the world had become. From this experience,
I can honestly declare that storage methods do not solve the problem of
how to get rid of clutter. In the end, they are only a super cial
answer. When I nally came to my senses, I saw that my room still wasn't
tidy even though it was full of magazine racks, bookshelves, drawer
dividers, and other storage units of every kind. "Why does my room still
feel cluttered when I've worked so hard to organize and store things
away?" I wondered. Filled with despair, I looked at the

contents of each storage unit and had a ash of revelation. I didn't need
most of the things that were in them! Although I thought that I had been
tidying, in fact I had merely been wasting my time shoving stu out of
sight, concealing the things I didn't need under a lid. Putting things
away creates the illusion that the clutter problem has been solved. But
sooner or later, all the storage units are full, the room once again
over ows with things, and some new and "easy" storage method becomes
necessary, creating a negative spiral. This is why tidying must start
with discarding. We need to exercise self-control and resist storing our
belongings until we have nished identifying what we really want and need
to keep.

Sort by category, not by location My study of tidying began in earnest
when I was in junior high and basically consisted of repeated practice.
Every day I cleaned one place at a time---my own room, my brother's
room, my sister's room, the bathroom. Each day I planned where to tidy
and launched solo campaigns that resembled bargain sales. "The fth of
every month is 'living room day'!" "Today is 'clean the pantry day.' "
"Tomorrow I conquer the bathroom cupboards!" I maintained this custom
even after entering high school. When I came home, I headed straight for
the place I had decided to clean that day without even changing out of
my school uniform. If my target was a set of plastic drawers in the
washroom cupboard, I would open the doors and dump everything out of one
of the drawers, including makeup samples, soaps, toothbrushes, and
razors. Then I would sort them by category, organize them into box
dividers, and return them to the drawer. Finally, I would gaze in quiet
admiration at the neatly organized contents before going on to the next
drawer. I would sit on the oor for hours sorting things in the cupboard
until my mother called me for supper. One day, I was sorting the
contents of a drawer in the hall cupboard when I stopped in surprise.
"This must be the same drawer that I cleaned yesterday," I thought. It
wasn't, but the items inside were the same---makeup samples, soaps,
toothbrushes, and razors. I was sorting them by category, putting them
in boxes, and returning them to the drawer just like I had the day
before. It was at this moment that it hit me: Tidying up by location is
a fatal mistake. I'm ashamed to admit that it took me three years to see
this. Many people are surprised to hear that such a seemingly viable
approach is actually a common pitfall. The root of the problem lies in
the fact that people often store the same type of item in more than one
place. When we tidy each place separately, we fail to see

that we're repeating the same work in many locations and become locked
into a vicious circle of tidying. To avoid this, I recommend tidying by
category. For example, instead of deciding that today you'll tidy a
particular room, set goals like "clothes today, books tomorrow." One
reason so many of us never succeed at tidying is because we have too
much stu . This excess is caused by our ignorance of how much we
actually own. When we disperse storage of a particular item throughout
the house and tidy one place at a time, we can never grasp the overall
volume and therefore can never nish. To escape this negative spiral,
tidy by category, not by place.

Don't change the method to suit your personality Handbooks for tidying
often claim that the cause of clutter di ers depending on the person,
and that therefore we should select the method that best suits our
personality type. At rst glance, this argument seems convincing. "So
that's why I can't seem to keep my space tidy," we might think. "The
method I've been using doesn't suit my character." We can check the
handy chart on what method works for lazy people, busy people, picky
people, or nonpicky people, and choose the one that ts. At one point, I
explored this idea of categorizing methods of tidying by character type.
I read books on psychology, interviewed my clients about their blood
types, their parents' characters, and so on, and even tried a popular
type of astrology called Dobutsu uranai, or zoological fortune-telling.
I spent over ve years analyzing my ndings in my search for a general
principle governing the best method for each personality type. Instead,
I discovered that there is no point whatsoever in changing your approach
to suit your personality. When it comes to tidying, the majority of
people are lazy. They are also busy. As for being picky, everyone is
particular about certain things but not about others. When I examined
the personality categories suggested, I realized that I t all of them.
So by what standard was I to categorize people's reasons for being
untidy? I have a habit of trying to categorize everything, probably
because I have spent so much time pondering how to organize. When I rst
started out as a consultant, I worked very hard to categorize my clients
and tailor the content of my services to suit each type. In retrospect,
however, I can see that I had an ulterior motive. Somehow I imagined
that a complex approach consisting of di erent methods for di erent
character types would make me look

more professional. After careful consideration, however, I came to the
conclusion that it makes far more sense to categorize people by their
actions rather than by some generalized personality trait. Using this
approach, people who can't stay tidy can be categorized into just three
types: the "can't-throw-it-away" type, the "can't-put-it-back" type, and
the " rst-two-combined" type. Looking at my clients, I further realized
that 90 percent fall into the third category---the "can't-throw-it-away,
can't-put-it-back" type---while the remaining 10 percent fall into the
"can't-put-it-back" type. I have yet to nd someone who is purely the
"can't throw it away" type, probably because anyone who can't throw
things away will soon end up with so much stu that their storage space
over ows. As for the 10 percent who can discard but can't put things
away, when we start tidying seriously, it is soon obvious that they
could discard much more because they produce at least thirty bags of
garbage. My point is that tidying must begin with discarding regardless
of personality type. As long as my clients grasp this principle, there
is no need for me to change the content of what I teach to suit the
person. I teach the same approach to everyone. How I convey it and the
way each client puts it into practice will naturally di er because each
individual is just as unique as the way he or she furnishes the house.
But I don't need to worry about identifying these di erences or creating
complex categories. E ective tidying involves only two essential
actions: discarding and deciding where to store things. Of the two,
discarding must come rst. This principle does not change. The rest
depends on the level of tidiness you personally want to achieve.

Make tidying a special event, not a daily chore I begin my course with
these words: Tidying is a special event. Don't do it every day. This
usually elicits a moment of stunned silence. Of course, there are
countless perspectives on tidying, and even though I have undertaken an
exhaustive study of the subject, I don't claim to know every method that
exists. Therefore, what I say here applies only to my own method. Still,
let me repeat: tidying should be done just once. Or, to put it more
accurately, the work of tidying should be completed once and for all
within a single period of time. If you think tidying is an endless chore
that must be done every day, you are gravely mistaken. There are two
types of tidying ---"daily tidying" and "special event tidying." Daily
tidying, which consists of using something and putting it back in its
place, will always be part of our lives as long as we need to use
clothes, books, writing materials, and so on. But the purpose of this
book is to inspire you to tackle the "special event" of putting your
house in order as soon as possible. By successfully concluding this
once-in-a-lifetime task, you will gain the lifestyle you aspire to and
enjoy a clean and orderly space of your choosing. Can you place your
hand on your heart and swear that you are happy when surrounded by so
much stu that you don't even remember what's there? Most people
desperately need to put their house in order. Unfortunately, the
majority of them fail to embrace this as a "special event" and instead
make do with rooms that are more like storage sheds. Decades drag by as
they struggle unsuccessfully to maintain order by tidying every day.
Believe me. Until you have completed the once-in-a-lifetime event of
putting your house in order, any attempt to tidy on a daily basis is
doomed to failure. Conversely, once you have put your house in

order, tidying will be reduced to the very simple task of putting things
back where they belong. In fact, this becomes an unconscious habit. I
use the term "special event" because it is crucial to tackle this job
within a short space of time while your spirits are uplifted. After all,
it isn't desirable to stay in a state of excitement forever. You may
worry that even when this event is over your space will sink back into
disorder. Perhaps you shop a lot and imagine that your possessions will
just pile up again. I realize that it's hard to believe if you have
never tried it, but once you have completed this dramatic cleanup, you
will have no di culty whatsoever in putting things back where they
belong or in deciding where to keep new things. Unbelievable as it may
sound, you only have to experience a state of perfect order once to be
able to maintain it. All you need to do is take the time to sit down and
examine each item you own, decide whether you want to keep or discard
it, and then choose where to put what you keep. Have you ever told
yourself, "I'm just no good at tidying," or "It's not worth trying; I
was born untidy"? Many people carry this type of negative self-image for
years, but it is swept away the instant they experience their own
perfectly clean space. This drastic change in self-perception, the
belief that you can do anything if you set your mind to it, transforms
behavior and lifestyles. This is precisely why my students never
experience rebound. Once you have experienced the powerful impact of a
perfectly ordered space, you, too, will never return to clutter. Yes, I
mean you! It may sound too di cult, but I can honestly say that it's
quite simple. When you tidy, you are dealing with objects. Objects are
easy to discard and move around. Anyone can do it. Your goal is clearly
in sight. The moment you have put everything in its place, you have
crossed the nish line. Unlike work, studies, or sports, there is no need
to compare your performance to that of anyone else. You are the
standard. Better yet, the one thing that everyone nds hardest to
do---continuing---is totally unnecessary. You only have to decide where
to put things once. I never tidy my room. Why? Because it is already
tidy. The only tidying I do is once or sometimes twice a year, and for a
total of

about one hour each time. The many days I spent tidying without seeing
permanent results now seem hard to believe. In contrast, I feel happy
and content. I have time to experience bliss in my quiet space, where
even the air feels fresh and clean; time to sit and sip herbal tea while
I re ect on my day. As I look around, my glance falls on a painting that
I particularly love, purchased overseas, and a vase of fresh owers in
one corner. Although not large, the space I live in is graced only with
those things that speak to my heart. My lifestyle brings me joy.
Wouldn't you like to live this way, too? It's easy, once you know how to
truly put your home in order.

2

Finish discarding rst

Start by discarding, all at once, intensely and completely You think you
have tidied everything perfectly, but within a few days you notice that
your room is becoming cluttered again. As time goes by, you collect more
things, and before you know it, your space has reverted to its previous
state. This rebound e ect is caused by ine ective methods that tackle
tidying only halfway. As I've already mentioned, there is just one way
to escape this negative spiral---by tidying e ciently all at once, as
quickly as possible, to make the perfect clutter-free environment. But
how does this create the right mind-set? When you tidy your space
completely, you transform the scenery. The change is so profound that
you feel as if you are living in a totally di erent world. This deeply a
ects your mind and inspires a strong aversion to reverting to your
previously cluttered state. The key is to make the change so sudden that
you experience a complete change of heart. The same impact can never be
achieved if the process is gradual. To achieve a sudden change like
this, you need to use the most e cient method of tidying. Otherwise,
before you know it, the day will be gone and you will have made no
headway. The more time it takes, the more tired you feel, and the more
likely you are to give up when you're only halfway through. When things
pile up again, you will be caught in a downward spiral. From my
experience with private individual lessons, "quickly" means about half a
year. That may seem like a long time, but it is only six months out of
your entire life. Once the process is complete and you've experienced
what it's like to be perfectly tidy, you will have been freed forever
from the mistaken assumption that you're no good at tidying.

For the best results, I ask that you adhere faithfully to the following
rule: Tidy in the right order. As we've seen, there are only two tasks
involved---discarding and deciding where to keep things. Just two, but
discarding must come rst. Be sure to completely nish the rst task before
starting the next. Do not even think of putting your things away until
you have nished the process of discarding. Failure to follow this order
is one reason many people never make permanent progress. In the middle
of discarding, they start thinking about where to put things. As soon as
they think, "I wonder if it will t in this drawer," the work of
discarding comes to a halt. You can think about where to put things when
you've nished getting rid of everything you don't need. To summarize,
the secret of success is to tidy in one shot, as quickly and completely
as possible, and to start by discarding.

Before you start, visualize your destination By now you understand why
it is crucial to discard before thinking about where to keep things. But
to start discarding without thinking ahead at all would be like casting
yourself into the negative spiral of clutter. Instead, begin by
identifying your goal. There must have been some reason you picked up
this book. What was it that motivated you to tidy in the rst place? What
do you hope to gain through tidying? Before you start getting rid of
things, take the time to think this through carefully. This means
visualizing the ideal lifestyle you dream of. If you skip this step, not
only will it delay the whole process, but it will also put you at higher
risk for rebound. Goals like "I want to live clutter-free" or "I want to
be able to put things away" are too broad. You need to think much more
deeply than that. Think in concrete terms so that you can vividly
picture what it would be like to live in a clutter-free space. One
client in her twenties de ned her dream as "a more feminine lifestyle."
She lived in a messy seven-mat room (seven tatami mats take up about ten
by thirteen feet of oor space) with a built-in closet and three sets of
shelves of di erent sizes. This should have been su cient storage space,
but no matter which way I turned, all I could see was clutter. The
closet was so stu ed the doors wouldn't shut, and clothes oozed from the
set of drawers inside like the stu ng in a hamburger. The curtain rail
over the bay window was hung with so many clothes that there was no need
for a curtain. The oor and bed were covered in baskets and bags lled
with magazines and papers. When my client came home from work, she moved
the things on her bed to the oor and when she woke up, she put them back
on the bed to make a path to the door so she could go to work. Her
lifestyle could not have been called "feminine" by any stretch of the
imagination. "What do you mean by a 'feminine lifestyle'?" I asked. She
thought for a long moment before nally responding.

"Well, when I come home from work, the oor would be clear of clutter ...
and my room, as tidy as a hotel suite with nothing obstructing the line
of sight. I'd have a pink bedspread and a white antique-style lamp.
Before going to bed, I would have a bath, burn aromatherapy oils, and
listen to classical piano or violin while doing yoga and drinking herbal
tea. I would fall asleep with a feeling of unhurried spaciousness." Her
description was as vivid as if she actually lived that way. It's
important to achieve this degree of concreteness when visualizing your
ideal lifestyle. If you nd that hard, if you can't picture the kind of
life you would like to have, try looking in interior decorating
magazines for photos that grab you. Visiting model homes can also be
useful. Seeing a variety of homes will help you get a feel for what you
like. By the way, the client I described above does indeed enjoy
post-bath aromatherapy, classical music, and yoga. Redeemed from the
depths of disorder, she emerged to grasp the "feminine lifestyle" to
which she aspired. Now that you can picture the lifestyle you dream of,
is it time to move on to discarding? No, not yet. I can understand your
impatience, but to prevent rebound you need to move ahead properly, step
by step, as you launch into this once-in-a-lifetime event. Your next
step is to identify why you want to live like that. Look back over your
notes about the kind of lifestyle you want, and think again. Why do you
want to do aromatherapy before bed? Why do you want to listen to
classical music while doing yoga? If the answers are "because I want to
relax before bed," and "I want to do yoga to lose weight," ask yourself
why you want to relax and why you want to lose weight. Maybe your
answers will be "I don't want to be tired when I go to work the next
day," and "I want to lose weight so that I can be more svelte." Ask
yourself "Why?" again, for each answer. Repeat this process three to ve
times for every item. As you continue to explore the reasons behind your
ideal lifestyle, you will come to a simple realization. The whole point
in both discarding and keeping things is to be happy. It may seem
obvious, but it is important to experience this realization for yourself
and let it sink into your heart. Before you start tidying, look at the
lifestyle

you aspire to and ask yourself, "Why do I want to tidy?" When you nd the
answer, you are ready to move on to the next step: examining what you
own.

Selection criterion: does it spark joy? What standard do you use to
decide what to get rid of? There are several common patterns when it
comes to discarding. One is to discard things when they cease being
functional---for example, when something breaks down beyond repair or
when part of a set is broken. Another is to discard things that are out
of date, such as clothes that are no longer in fashion or things related
to an event that has passed. It's easy to get rid of things when there
is an obvious reason for doing so. It's much more di cult when there is
no compelling reason. Various experts have proposed yardsticks for
discarding things people nd hard to part with. These include such rules
as "discard anything you haven't used for a year," and "if you can't
decide, pack those items away in a box and look at them again six months
later." However, the moment you start focusing on how to choose what to
throw away, you have actually veered signi cantly o course. In this
state, it is extremely risky to continue tidying. At one point in my
life, I was virtually a "disposal unit." After discovering The Art of
Discarding when I was fteen, I focused on how to get rid of things, and
my research e orts escalated. I was always looking for new places to
practice, be it my siblings' rooms or the communal storage lockers at
school. My head was full of tidying tips, and I had complete, albeit
misguided, con dence that I could tidy any place. My particular goal at
that time was to get rid of as much as possible. I applied every
criteria suggested by the various books I read on reducing. I tried
getting rid of clothes that I hadn't worn for two years, discarding
another item every time I bought something new, and throwing away
anything I wasn't sure of. I threw out thirty bags of garbage in one
month. But no matter how much I discarded, not a single room in my house
felt any tidier.

In fact, I found myself going shopping just to relieve the stress and so
failed miserably to reduce the total volume of my possessions. At home,
I was always uptight, constantly on the lookout for super uous things
that could be discarded. When I found something not in use, I would
pounce on it vengefully and throw it in the garbage. Not surprisingly, I
became increasingly irritable and tense and found it impossible to relax
even in my own home. One day after school, I opened the door to my room
to begin cleaning as usual. At the sight of that untidy space, I nally
lost it. "I don't want to tidy anymore!" I cried. Plopping myself down
in the middle of my room, I began to think. I had spent three years
tidying and discarding things, yet my room still felt cluttered. Would
someone please tell me why my room isn't tidy when I work so hard at it?
Although I did not say this out loud, in my heart I was practically
shouting. At that moment, I heard a voice. "Look more closely at what is
there." What do you mean? I look at what's here so closely every day I
could drill a hole through it all. With that thought still in my head, I
fell fast asleep right there on the oor. If I had been a little smarter,
I would have realized before I became so neurotic that focusing solely
on throwing things away can only bring unhappiness. Why? Because we
should be choosing what we want to keep, not what we want to get rid of.
When I woke up, I knew immediately what that voice in my head had meant.
Look more closely at what is there. I had been so focused on what to
discard, on attacking the unwanted obstacles around me, that I had
forgotten to cherish the things that I loved, the things I wanted to
keep. Through this experience, I came to the conclusion that the best
way to choose what to keep and what to throw away is to take each item
in one's hand and ask: "Does this spark joy?" If it does, keep it. If
not, dispose of it. This is not only the simplest but also the most
accurate yardstick by which to judge. You may wonder about the e
ectiveness of such a vague criteria, but the trick is to handle each
item. Don't just open up your closet and decide after a cursory glance
that everything in it gives you a

thrill. You must take each out t in your hand. When you touch a piece of
clothing, your body reacts. Its response to each item is di erent. Trust
me and try it. I chose this standard for a reason. After all, what is
the point in tidying? If it's not so that our space and the things in it
can bring us happiness, then I think there is no point at all.
Therefore, the best criterion for choosing what to keep and what to
discard is whether keeping it will make you happy, whether it will bring
you joy. Are you happy wearing clothes that don't give you pleasure? Do
you feel joy when surrounded by piles of unread books that don't touch
your heart? Do you think that owning accessories you know you'll never
use will ever bring you happiness? The answer to these questions should
be no. Now imagine yourself living in a space that contains only things
that spark joy. Isn't this the lifestyle you dream of? Keep only those
things that speak to your heart. Then take the plunge and discard all
the rest. By doing this, you can reset your life and embark on a new
lifestyle.

One category at a time Deciding what to keep on the basis of what sparks
joy in your heart is the most important step in tidying. But what
concrete steps are needed to e ciently eliminate excess? Let me begin by
telling you what not to do. Don't start selecting and discarding by
location. Don't think "I'll tidy the bedroom rst and then move on to the
living room" or "I'll go through my drawers one by one starting from the
top down." This approach is fatal. Why? Because most people don't bother
to store similar items in the same place. In the majority of households,
items that fall into the same category are stored in two or more places
scattered around the house. Say, for example, you start with the bedroom
closet. After you have nished sorting and discarding everything in it,
you are bound to come across clothes you kept in a di erent closet or a
coat draped over a living room chair. You will then have to repeat the
whole process of choosing and storing, wasting time and e ort, and you
cannot make an accurate assessment of what you want to keep and discard
under such conditions. Repetition and wasted e ort can kill motivation,
and therefore it must be avoided. For this reason, I recommend that you
always think in terms of category, not place. Before choosing what to
keep, collect everything that falls within the same category at one
time. Take every last item out and lay everything in one spot. To
demonstrate the steps involved, let's go back to the example of clothing
above. You start by deciding that you are going to organize and put away
your clothes. The next step is to search every room of the house. Bring
every piece of clothing you nd to the same place, and spread them out on
the oor. Then pick up each out t and see if it sparks joy. Those and
only those are the ones to keep. Follow this procedure for every
category. If you have too many clothes, you can

make subcategories such as tops, bottoms, socks, and so on, and examine
your clothes, one subcategory at a time. Gathering every item in one
place is essential to this process because it gives you an accurate
grasp of how much you have. Most people are shocked at the sheer volume,
which is often at least twice what they imagined. By collecting things
in one spot, you can also compare items that are similar in design,
making it easier to decide whether you want to keep them. I have another
good reason for removing all items in the same category from drawers,
closets, and cupboards and spreading them out on the oor. Things stored
out of sight are dormant. This makes it much harder to decide whether
they inspire joy or not. By exposing them to the light of day and
jolting them alive, so to speak, you'll nd it's surprisingly easy to
judge whether they touch your heart. Dealing with just one category
within a single time frame speeds up the tidying process. So be sure to
gather every item in the category you are working on. Don't let any slip
by unnoticed.

Starting with mementos spells certain failure You launch into your day
all red up to tidy, but before you know it the sun is setting and you've
barely made a dent in your belongings. Noticing the time with a start,
you feel yourself sinking into selfreproach and despair. And what are
you holding in your hands? More often than not, it's one of your
favorite comic books, an album, or some other item that brings back fond
memories. My advice to begin tidying not by room but by category does
not mean that you should start with any category you like. The degree of
di culty involved in selecting what to keep and what to discard di ers
greatly depending on the category. People who get stuck halfway usually
do so because they start with the things that are hardest to make
decisions about. Things that bring back memories, such as photos, are
not the place for beginners to start. Not only is the sheer volume of
items in this category usually greater than that of any other, but it is
also far harder to make a decision about whether or not to keep them. In
addition to the physical value of things, there are three other factors
that add value to our belongings: function, information, and emotional
attachment. When the element of rarity is added, the di culty in
choosing what to discard multiplies. People have trouble discarding
things that they could still use (functional value), that contain
helpful information (informational value), and that have sentimental
ties (emotional value). When these things are hard to obtain or replace
(rarity), they become even harder to part with. The process of deciding
what to keep and what to discard will go much more smoothly if you begin
with items that are easier to make decisions about. As you gradually
work toward the harder categories, you will be honing your
decision-making skills. Clothes are the easiest because their rarity
value is extremely low. Photographs and letters, on the other hand, not
only have a high

sentimental value but also are one of a kind; therefore, they should be
left until last. This is true for photographs, in particular, because
they tend to turn up at random while sorting through other categories
and in the most unexpected places, such as between books and papers. The
best sequence is this: clothes rst, then books, papers, komono
(miscellany), and lastly, mementos. This order has also proven to be the
most e cient in terms of the level of di culty for the subsequent task
of storing. Finally, sticking to this sequence sharpens our intuitive
sense of what items spark joy inside us. If you can dramatically
accelerate the speed of the decisionmaking process just by changing the
order in which you discard, don't you think it's worth a try?

Don't let your family see Marathon tidying produces a heap of garbage.
At this stage, the one disaster that can wreak more havoc than an
earthquake is the entrance of that recycling expert who goes by the
alias of "mother." One of my clients, whom I'll call "M," lived with her
parents and one sibling. They had moved to the house fteen years earlier
when M was still in grade school. Not only did she love buying clothes,
but she also saved those that had sentimental value, such as school
uniforms and T-shirts made for various events. She stored these in boxes
and stacked them on the oor until the oorboards were completely obscured
from view. It took ve hours to sort and clean. By the end of that day,
she had fteen bags to get rid of, including eight bags of clothes, two
hundred books, various stu ed toys, and crafts she had made at school.
We had stacked everything neatly beside the door on the oor, which was
now nally visible, and I was just about to explain a very important
point. "There's one secret you should know about getting rid of this
garbage," I began, when the door opened and in came her mother bearing a
tray of iced tea. Oh dear, I thought. Her mother set down the tray on a
table. "Thank you so much for helping my daughter," she said and turned
to leave. At that moment, her eyes fell on the pile of garbage by the
door. "Oh my, are you going to throw that away?" she said, pointing to a
pink yoga mat on top of the pile. "I haven't used it in two years."
"Really? Well, maybe I'll use it then." She began rummaging through the
bags. "Oh, and maybe this, too." When she left, she took not only the
yoga mat but also three skirts, two blouses, two jackets, and some
stationery. When the room was quiet again, I sipped my iced tea and
asked M, "So how often does your mother do yoga?" "I've never seen her
do any."

What I had been about to say before her mother came in was this. "Don't
let your family see what's here. If at all possible, take the bags out
yourself. There's no need to let your family know the details of what
you throw out or donate." I especially recommend that my clients avoid
showing their parents. It's not that there is anything to be ashamed of.
There's nothing wrong with tidying. However, it's extremely stressful
for parents to see what their children discard. The sheer volume of the
pile can make parents anxious about whether their children can survive
on what's left. In addition, despite knowing that they should rejoice at
their child's independence and maturity, parents can nd it very painful
to see clothes, toys, and mementos from the past on the rubbish heap,
especially if they are things they gave to their child. Keeping your
garbage out of sight is considerate. It also protects your family from
acquiring more than they need or can enjoy. Up to this point, your
family was perfectly content with what they had. When they see what you
have chosen to discard, they may feel guilty at such blatant waste, but
the items they retrieve from your pile just increase the burden of
unnecessary items in their home. And we should be ashamed of forcing
them to carry this burden. In an overwhelming percentage of cases, it is
the mother who retrieves things from her daughter, yet mothers rarely
wear the clothes they take. The women I work with who are in their fties
and sixties invariably end up discarding or donating their daughters'
hand-me-downs without ever wearing them. I think we should avoid
creating situations like this where a mother's a ection for her daughter
becomes a burden. Of course, there's nothing wrong with other family
members actually using the things you don't need. If you live with your
family, you could ask them, "Is there something you need that you were
planning to buy?" before you start tidying, and then if you happen to
come across exactly what they need, give it to them as a gift.

If you're mad at your family, your room may be the cause "Even if I
tidy, the rest of my family just messes things up again." "My husband's
a packrat. How can I get him to throw things away?" It can be very
annoying when your family doesn't cooperate with your attempts to
achieve the "ideal" home. This is something I experienced many times in
the past. At one time, I was so absorbed in tidying that cleaning my own
room was not enough. I just had to tackle my siblings' rooms and every
other space in the house. And I was constantly frustrated by my untidy
family. A major cause of distress was the communal storage closet in the
middle of the house. To me more than half of it seemed to be devoted to
unused and unnecessary junk. The clothing rods were jammed with out ts I
had never seen my mother wear and suits belonging to my father that were
clearly obsolete. Boxes of manga belonging to my brother covered the
oor. I would wait until the timing was right and confront the owner with
this question: "You don't use this anymore, right?" But the response was
either, "Yes, I do," or, "I'll get rid of it myself," which they never
did. Every time I looked in that closet I would sigh and complain, "Why
does everyone keep accumulating things? Can't they see how hard I'm
working to keep the house tidy?" Fully aware that I was an anomaly when
it came to tidying, I was not going to let them defeat me. When my
frustration reached the limit, I decided to adopt stealth tactics. I
identi ed items that had not been used for many years, judging by their
design, the amount of dust they had gathered, and the way they smelled.
I would move those items to the very back of the closet and observe what
happened. If no one noticed that they were missing, I disposed of them,
one item at a time, just as if I were thinning plants. After

three months of this strategy, I had managed to dispose of ten bags'
worth. In most cases, no one noticed, and life went on as usual. But
when the volume reached a certain point, people began to miss a thing or
two. When they pointed the nger at me, I responded quite shamelessly. My
basic strategy was to play ignorant. "Hey, do you know where my jacket
went?" "Nope." If they pressed me further, my next step was denial.
"Mari, are you sure you didn't throw it out?" "Yes, I'm sure." "Oh.
Well, I wonder where it could be, then." If they gave up at this point,
my conclusion was that whatever the item had been, it hadn't been worth
saving. But if they were no longer fooled, I still wasn't fazed. "I know
it was here, Mari. I saw it with my own eyes just two months ago." Far
from apologizing for discarding their things without permission, I would
retort, "I threw it out for you because you weren't capable of doing it
yourself." In retrospect, I must admit that I was pretty arrogant. Once
exposed, I was met with a ood of reproach and protest, and, in the end,
I was forbidden to tidy anywhere but my own room. If I could, I'd go
back and give myself a good smack and make sure that I didn't even
consider such a ridiculous campaign. Getting rid of other people's
things without permission demonstrates a sad lack of common sense.
Although such stealth tactics generally succeed and the items discarded
are never missed, the risk of losing your family's trust when you are
caught is far too great. Besides, it just isn't right. If you really
want your family to tidy up, there is a much easier way to go about it.
After I was banned from tidying other people's spaces and had nowhere to
turn but my own room, I took a good look around it and was struck by a
surprising fact. There were far more items that needed discarding than I
had noticed before---a shirt in my closet that I had never worn along
with an outdated skirt that I wouldn't

wear again, books on my shelves that I knew I didn't need. I realized
with a shock that I was guilty of exactly the same thing I had been so
bitterly accusing my family of doing. Not being in a position to
criticize others, I sat down with my garbage bags and focused on tidying
my own space. After about two weeks, a change began to occur in my
family. My brother, who had refused, no matter how much I had
complained, to get rid of anything, began a thorough sorting of his
belongings. In a single day, he disposed of more than two hundred books.
Then my parents and my sister gradually began to sort and discard their
clothes and accessories. In the end, my whole family was able to keep
the house much tidier than before. To quietly work away at disposing of
your own excess is actually the best way of dealing with a family that
doesn't tidy. As if drawn into your wake, they will begin weeding out
unnecessary belongings and tidying without your having to utter a single
complaint. It may sound incredible, but when someone starts tidying it
sets o a chain reaction. Cleaning quietly on one's own generates another
interesting change---the ability to tolerate a certain level of
untidiness among your family members. Once I was satis ed with my own
room, I no longer felt the urge to dispose of things belonging to my
siblings or parents. When I noticed that communal spaces such as the
living room or bathroom were messy, I cleaned them up without a second
thought and never bothered to mention it. I have noticed this same
change occur in many of my clients as well. If you feel annoyed with
your family for being untidy, I urge you to check your own space,
especially your storage. You are bound to nd things that need to be
thrown away. The urge to point out someone else's failure to tidy is
usually a sign that you are neglecting to take care of your own space.
This is why you should begin by discarding only your own things. You can
leave the communal spaces to the end. The rst step is to confront your
own stu .

What you don't need, your family doesn't either My sister is three years
younger than me. Quiet and a bit on the shy side, she prefers to stay
inside and draw or read quietly rather than to go out and socialize.
Without a doubt, she su ered the most from my research on tidying,
serving as my unsuspecting victim. By the time I was a university
student, my focus was on "discarding," but there were always things that
I found hard to dispose of, such as a T-shirt that I really liked but
that somehow didn't look right. Unable to bring myself to part with it,
I would try the item on repeatedly, standing in front of the mirror, but
in the end, would be forced to conclude that it just didn't suit me. If
it was brand new, or a gift from my parents, the thought of getting rid
of it made me feel very guilty. At times like this, my sister came in
very handy. The "gift for my sister" method seemed the perfect way to
cast o such items. When I say "gift," I don't mean that I wrapped it up
like a present---far from it. With the unwanted out t in my hand, I
would barge into my sister's room where she lay on her bed reading
contentedly. Extracting the book from her hand, I would say, "You want
this Tshirt? I'll give it to you if you like." Seeing the puzzled look
on her face, I would deal the nal blow. "It's brand new and really cute.
But if you don't need it, I'll have to throw it away. Are you OK with
that?" My poor, mild-mannered sister would have no choice but to say, "I
guess I'll take it then." This happened so frequently that my sister,
who hardly ever shopped, had a closet jammed to over owing. Although she
did wear some of the clothes I gave her, there were many more that she
wore only once if ever. Yet I continued to give her "presents." After
all, they were good clothes and I thought she should be happy to

have more. I only realized how wrong I was after I began my consulting
business and met a client whom I will call "K." K was in her twenties,
worked for a cosmetics company, and lived at home. As we were sorting
through her clothes, I began to notice something odd about the choices
she was making. Despite the fact that she owned enough clothes to ll one
large closet, which is an average-size wardrobe, the number of clothes
she chose to keep seemed unnaturally small. Her answer to the question,
"Does this spark joy?" was almost always "No." After thanking each item
for a job well done, I would pass them to her to discard. I couldn't
help noticing the look of relief on her face every time she put an out t
in the bag. Examining the collection more closely, I saw that the
clothes she chose to keep were mostly casual things like T-shirts, while
the ones she discarded were a completely di erent style--- tight skirts
and revealing tops. When I asked her about this, she said, "My older
sister gave me those." When all the clothes were sorted and she had made
her nal choice, she murmured, "Look at that. I was surrounded by all
this stu that I didn't even like." Her sister's hand-me-downs had
comprised over a third of her wardrobe, but hardly any of these had
given her that important thrill of pleasure. Although she had worn them
because her sister had given them to her, she had never liked them. To
me, this seems tragic. And this is not an isolated case. In my work, the
volume discarded by younger sisters is always greater than the volume
discarded by older sisters, a phenomenon surely related to the fact that
younger children are often accustomed to wearing hand-me-downs. There
are two reasons why younger sisters tend to collect clothes they don't
really like. One is that it's hard to get rid of something received from
family. The other is that they don't really know what they like, which
makes it hard to decide whether they should part with it. Because they
receive so much clothing from others, they don't really need to shop and
therefore they have less opportunity to develop the instinct for what
really inspires joy. Don't misunderstand me. Giving things you can't use
to others who can is an excellent idea. Not only is it economical, but
it can

also be a source of great joy to see these things being enjoyed and
treasured by someone close to you. But that is not the same as forcing
things onto your family members because you can't bring yourself to
discard or donate them. Whether the victim is a sibling, a parent, or a
child, this particular custom should be banned. Although my sister never
complained, I am sure that she must have had mixed feelings when she
accepted my hand-me-downs. Basically, I was simply transferring my guilt
at not being able to discard them onto her. In retrospect, that was
pretty despicable. If you want to give something away, don't push people
to take it unconditionally or pressure them by making them feel guilty.
Find out in advance what they like, and if you nd something that ts
those criteria, then and only then should you show it to them. You can
also o er to give it to them on the condition that it is something they
would have been willing to pay for. We need to show consideration for
others by helping them avoid the burden of owning more than they need or
can enjoy.

Tidying is a dialogue with one's self "KonMari, would you like to come
stand under a waterfall?" I got this invitation from a client, a
charming woman who was still an active business manager and an avid
skier and hiker at the age of seventy-four. She had been practicing
meditation under running water for more than a decade and seemed to
really enjoy it. She would casually remark, "I'm o to a waterfall," as
if she were going to the spa. Consequently, the place she took me was
not a spot for beginners on an introductory tour. Leaving our lodgings
at six in the morning, we hiked along a mountain path, climbed over
fences, and forded a river where the rushing water came up to our knees,
until we nally reached a deserted waterfall. But I didn't bring up this
subject because I wanted to introduce this peculiar form of recreation.
Rather, I found through this experience that there is signi cant
similarity between meditating under a waterfall and tidying. When you
stand under a waterfall, the only audible sound is the roar of water. As
the cascade pummels your body, the sensation of pain soon disappears and
numbness spreads. Then a sensation of heat warms you from the inside
out, and you enter a meditative trance. Although I had never tried this
form of meditation before, the sensation it generated seemed extremely
familiar. It closely resembled what I experience when I am tidying.
While not exactly a meditative state, there are times when I am cleaning
that I can quietly commune with myself. The work of carefully
considering each object I own to see whether it sparks joy inside me is
like conversing with myself through the medium of my possessions. For
this reason, it is essential to create a quiet space in which to
evaluate the things in your life. Ideally, you should not even be
listening to music. Sometimes I hear of methods that recommend tidying
in time to a catchy song, but personally, I don't encourage this. I feel
that noise makes it harder to hear the internal dialogue

between the owner and his or her belongings. Listening to the TV is, of
course, out of the question. If you need some background noise to relax,
choose environmental or ambient music with no lyrics or well-de ned
melodies. If you want to add momentum to your tidying work, tap the
power of the atmosphere in your room rather than relying on music. The
best time to start is early morning. The fresh morning air keeps your
mind clear and your power of discernment sharp. For this reason, most of
my lessons commence in the morning. The earliest lesson I ever conducted
began at six thirty, and we were able to clean at twice the usual speed.
The clear, refreshed feeling gained after standing under a waterfall can
be addictive. Similarly, when you nish putting your space in order, you
will be overcome with the urge to do it again. And, unlike waterfall
meditation, you don't have to travel long distances over hard terrain to
get there. You can enjoy the same e ect in your own home. That's pretty
special, don't you think?

What to do when you can't throw something away My criterion for deciding
to keep an item is that we should feel a thrill of joy when we touch it.
But it is human nature to resist throwing something away even when we
know that we should. Items that we can't bring ourselves to discard even
when they don't inspire joy are a real problem. Human judgment can be
divided into two broad types: intuitive and rational. When it comes to
selecting what to discard, it is actually our rational judgment that
causes trouble. Although intuitively we know that an object has no
attraction for us, our reason raises all kinds of arguments for not
discarding it, such as "I might need it later" or "It's a waste to get
rid of it." These thoughts spin round and round in our mind, making it
impossible to let go. I am not claiming that it is wrong to hesitate.
The inability to decide demonstrates a certain degree of attachment to a
particular object. Nor can all decisions be made on intuition alone. But
this is precisely why we need to consider each object with care and not
be distracted by thoughts of being wasteful. When you come across
something that's hard to discard, consider carefully why you have that
speci c item in the rst place. When did you get it and what meaning did
it have for you then? Reassess the role it plays in your life. If, for
example, you have some clothes that you bought but never wear, examine
them one at a time. Where did you buy that particular out t and why? If
you bought it because you thought it looked cool in the shop, it has ful
lled the function of giving you a thrill when you bought it. Then why
did you never wear it? Was it because you realized that it didn't suit
you when you tried it on at home? If so, and if you no longer buy
clothes of the same style or color, it has ful lled another important
function---it has taught you what doesn't suit you. In fact, that
particular article

of clothing has already completed its role in your life, and you are
free to say, "Thank you for giving me joy when I bought you," or "Thank
you for teaching me what doesn't suit me," and let it go. Every object
has a di erent role to play. Not all clothes have come to you to be worn
threadbare. It is the same with people. Not every person you meet in
life will become a close friend or lover. Some you will nd hard to get
along with or impossible to like. But these people, too, teach you the
precious lesson of who you do like, so that you will appreciate those
special people even more. When you come across something that you cannot
part with, think carefully about its true purpose in your life. You'll
be surprised at how many of the things you possess have already ful lled
their role. By acknowledging their contribution and letting them go with
gratitude, you will be able to truly put the things you own, and your
life, in order. In the end, all that will remain are the things that you
really treasure. To truly cherish the things that are important to you,
you must rst discard those that have outlived their purpose. To get rid
of what you no longer need is neither wasteful nor shameful. Can you
truthfully say that you treasure something buried so deeply in a closet
or drawer that you have forgotten its existence? If things had feelings,
they would certainly not be happy. Free them from the prison to which
you have relegated them. Help them leave that deserted isle to which you
have exiled them. Let them go, with gratitude. Not only you, but your
things as well, will feel clear and refreshed when you are done tidying.

3

Tidying by category works like magic

Tidying order Follow the correct order of categories The door opens with
a click, and a woman looks out at me somewhat anxiously. "H-hello." My
clients almost always seem a bit tense the rst time I visit their home.
As they have already met me several times, this tenseness stems not from
shyness but more from the need to brace themselves for a major
challenge. "Do you think it's really possible to clean up my house?
There's no place to even put your feet in here." "I don't see how I can
really tidy completely in such a short time." "You said that none of
your clients have ever su ered rebound. But what if I'm the rst?" Their
nervous excitement is almost palpable, but I know without a doubt that
every one of them will do ne. Even those who are lazy or messy by
nature, even people who have descended from generations of slobs or who
are excessively busy, can learn to clean properly if they use the
KonMari Method. Let me share a secret. Putting your house in order is
fun! The process of assessing how you feel about the things you own,
identifying those that have ful lled their purpose, expressing your
gratitude, and bidding them farewell, is really about examining your
inner self, a rite of passage to a new life. The yardstick by which you
judge is your intuitive sense of attraction, and therefore there's no
need for complex theories or numerical data. All you need to do is
follow the right order. So arm yourself with plenty of garbage bags and
prepare to have fun. Start with clothes, then move on to books, papers,
komono (miscellany), and nally things with sentimental value. If you

reduce what you own in this order, your work will proceed with
surprising ease. By starting with the easy things rst and leaving the
hardest for last, you can gradually hone your decision-making skills, so
that by the end, it seems simple. For the rst category, clothing, I
recommend dividing further into the following subcategories to increase
e ciency: Tops (shirts, sweaters, etc.) Bottoms (pants, skirts, etc.)
Clothes that should be hung (jackets, coats, suits, etc.) Socks
Underwear Bags (handbags, messenger bags, etc.) Accessories (scarves,
belts, hats, etc.) Clothes for speci c events (swimsuits, kimonos,
uniforms, etc.) Shoes And, yes, I include handbags and shoes as
clothing. Why is this the optimal order? I am actually not sure why, but
based on the experience I've gained devoting half my life to tidying, I
can tell you for certain that it works! Believe me. If you follow this
order, you'll speed through the work and achieve visible results
surprisingly quickly. Moreover, because you will keep only the things
you truly love, your energy and joy will increase. You may be physically
tired, but it feels so good to get rid of unnecessary items that you
will nd it hard to stop. The important point, however, is deciding what
to keep. What things will bring you joy if you keep them as part of your
life? Pick them as if you were identifying items you loved from a
showcase in your favorite store. Once you've grasped the basics, put

all your clothes in one heap, take them in your hand one by one, and ask
yourself quietly, "Does this spark joy?" Your tidying festival has
begun.

Clothing Place every item of clothing in the house on the oor The rst
step is to check every closet and dresser in the house and gather all
your clothes in one spot. Don't leave a single wardrobe or dresser
drawer unopened. Make sure you have gathered every last piece of
clothing. When my clients think they have nished, I always ask them this
question. "Are you sure there's not a single piece of clothing left in
the house?" Then I add, "You can forget about any clothes you nd after
this. They'll automatically go in the discard pile." I let them know I'm
quite serious. I have no intention of letting them keep anything found
after the sorting is done. The response is usually, "Oh, wait. I think
there might be something in my husband's closet," or "Ah! I might have
hung something in the hallway," followed by one last dash around the
house and a few extra items added to the pile. This ultimatum sounds a
bit like the automatic withdrawal system for paying bills at the bank,
but when my clients know there's a rm deadline, they search their
memories one more time because they don't want to lose clothes without
being given a chance to decide. Although I rarely have to follow through
on my threat, if someone doesn't remember an item at this point, it
obviously doesn't inspire a thrill of joy, and therefore I am quite
ruthless. The only exception is clothes that happen to be in the
laundry. When all the clothes have been gathered together, the pile of
tops alone is usually knee-deep. The term "tops" includes clothes for
every season, from T-shirts and camisoles to knitted sweaters. The
average number of items in this initial pile is around 160. Confronted
by their rst obstacle in the tidying process, most people are
overwhelmed by the sheer volume of what they actually own. At this
point, I usually say, "Let's start with o -season clothes." I have

a good reason for choosing o -season clothing for their rst foray into
this tidying gala. It's the easiest category for tuning in to one's
intuition concerning what feels good. If they start with clothes they
are currently using, clients are more likely to think, "It doesn't spark
joy, but I just wore it yesterday," or "If I don't have any clothes left
to wear, what am I going to do?" This makes it harder for them to make
an objective decision. Because o -season clothes are not imminently
necessary, it is much easier to apply the simple criterion of whether or
not they bring you joy. There's one question I recommend asking when you
select o season clothes. "Do I want to see this out t again next time
it's in season?" Or, to rephrase it, "Would I want to wear this right
away if the temperature suddenly changed?" "Do I want to see it again?
Well, not necessarily...." If that's how you feel, throw it in the
discard or donate pile. And if you got a lot of wear out of it last
season, don't forget to express your appreciation. You might fear that
you'll have no clothes left if you use this standard. But don't worry.
It may seem as if you have discarded an awful lot, but as long as you
are choosing clothes that give you pleasure, you'll be left with the
amount you need. Once you have gotten the knack of choosing what you
love, you can move on to each subcategory of in-season clothing. The
most important points to remember are these: Make sure you gather every
piece of clothing in the house and be sure to handle each one.

Loungewear Downgrading to "loungewear" is taboo It seems a waste to get
rid of something that is still perfectly usable, especially if you
bought it yourself. In cases like this, my clients often ask me if they
can keep clothes they know they'll never wear outside and use them as
loungewear. If I said "yes," the pile of loungewear would grow ever
larger without any decrease in the overall volume of clothes. Having
said that, I admit that I myself once did the same thing with clothes I
knew I'd never wear to go out. Pilled cardigans, outdated blouses,
dresses that didn't suit me or that I just never wore---it wasn't long
before I had developed the habit of demoting clothes like these to
"loungewear" rather than discarding them. Yet nine out of ten times I
never wore them. I soon discovered that many of my clients also had
collections of dormant "loungewear." When asked why they don't wear
them, their answers are very revealing: "I can't relax in them," "It
seems a waste to wear this inside when it was really for going out," "I
don't like it," and so on. In other words, these casto s are not really
loungewear at all. Calling them that merely delays parting with clothes
that don't spark any joy. There are stores dedicated solely to
loungewear products, and the design, material, and cut are all aimed at
relaxation. Obviously, it is a completely di erent genre from what we
wear outside. Cotton T-shirts are probably the only type of regular
clothing that could be reused in this category. To me, it doesn't seem
right to keep clothes we don't enjoy for relaxing around the house. This
time at home is still a precious part of living. Its value should not
change just because nobody sees us. So, starting today, break the habit
of downgrading clothes that don't thrill you to loungewear. The real
waste is not discarding clothes

you don't like but wearing them even though you are striving to create
the ideal space for your ideal lifestyle. Precisely because no one is
there to see you, it makes far more sense to reinforce a positive
self-image by wearing clothes you love. The same goes for pajamas. If
you are a woman, try wearing something elegant as nightwear. The worst
thing you can do is to wear a sloppy sweat suit. I occasionally meet
people who dress like this all the time, whether waking or sleeping. If
sweatpants are your everyday attire, you'll end up looking like you
belong in them, which is not very attractive. What you wear in the house
does impact your self-image.

Clothing storage Fold it right and solve your storage problems After the
selection process, my clients are usually left with only a third to a
quarter of the clothes they started out with. As the clothes they want
to keep are still piled in the middle of the oor, it is time to start
putting them away. Before I go on to that step, however, let me tell you
a story. I once had a client with a problem that I just could not
understand. A woman in her fties, she told me during our initial
interview that she didn't have enough closet space in her house for all
her clothes. From the oor plan, however, it was clear not only that she
had two full closets to herself but that those closets were one and a
half times larger than average. Although this should have been plenty of
space, she also had a clothing stand with three rods full of clothes.
Amazed, I roughly estimated that she must have more than two thousand
out ts in her wardrobe. It was only when I visited her home that I nally
understood. Upon opening her wall-length closet, my jaw dropped. It was
like looking at the crowded racks at the dry cleaners. Hanging neatly on
hangers were not just coats and skirts but also T-shirts, sweaters,
purses, and even underwear. My client immediately launched into a
detailed explanation of her hanger collection. "This type is made
especially for knits so that they don't slip o . And these are handmade.
I bought them in Germany." After a ve-minute lecture, she beamed at me
and said, "Clothes don't get wrinkled if you hang them up. And they last
longer, too, right?" Upon further questioning, I discovered that she did
not fold any of her clothes at all. There are two storage methods for
clothes: one is to put them on hangers and hang from a rod and the other
is to fold them and put

them away in drawers. I can understand why people might be attracted to
hanging their clothes. It seems like far less work. However, I strongly
recommend folding as the main storage method. But it's a pain to fold
clothes and put them away in the drawer. It's much easier to pop them on
a hanger and stick them in the closet. If that's what you're thinking,
then you haven't discovered the true impact of folding. Hanging just
can't compete with folding for saving space. Although it depends
somewhat on the thickness of the clothes in question, you can t from
twenty to forty pieces of folded clothing in the same amount of space
required to hang ten. The client described above had only slightly more
clothes than average. If she had folded them, she would have had no
problem tting them into her storage space. By neatly folding your
clothes, you can solve almost every problem related to storage. But that
is not the only e ect of folding. The real bene t is that you must
handle each piece of clothing. As you run your hands over the cloth, you
pour your energy into it. The Japanese word for healing is te-ate, which
literally means "to apply hands." The term originated prior to the
development of modern medicine when people believed that placing one's
hand on an injury promoted healing. We know that gentle physical contact
from a parent, such as holding hands, patting a child on the head, and
hugging, has a calming e ect on children. Likewise, a rm but gentle
massage by human hands does much more to loosen knotted muscles than
being pummeled by a massage machine. The energy that ows from the
person's hands into our skin seems to heal both body and soul. The same
is true for clothing. When we take our clothes in our hands and fold
them neatly, we are, I believe, transmitting energy, which has a
positive e ect on our clothes. Folding properly pulls the cloth taut and
erases wrinkles, and makes the material stronger and more vibrant.
Clothes that have been neatly folded have a resilience and sheen that
can be discerned immediately, clearly distinguishing them from those
that have been haphazardly stu ed in a drawer. The act of folding is far
more than making clothes compact for storage. It is an act of caring, an
expression of love and appreciation

for the way these clothes support your lifestyle. Therefore, when we
fold, we should put our heart into it, thanking our clothes for
protecting our bodies. In addition, folding clothes after they have been
washed and dried is an opportunity to really notice them in all their
detail. For example, we might spot places where the cloth has frayed or
see that a certain piece of clothing is becoming worn out. Folding is
really a form of dialogue with our wardrobe. Japanese traditional
clothing, kimono and yukata, were always folded into rectangles to t
perfectly into drawers designed to their uniform dimensions. I don't
think there is any other culture in the world where storage units and
clothing were matched so precisely. Japanese people quickly grasp the
pleasure that comes from folding clothes, almost as if they are
genetically programmed for this task.

How to fold The best way to fold for perfect appearance The laundry is
done and ready to be put away, but this is where many people get stuck.
Folding seems like extra work, especially as the clothes will be worn
again soon anyway. Many people can't be bothered and soon they have a
heap of clothes on the oor. They fall into the daily routine of picking
something out of the pile to wear while the mound continues to grow,
eventually spreading from one corner to take over the rest of the room.
If this describes you, don't worry. None of my clients have ever known
how to fold clothes properly when they began taking my lessons. In fact,
quite a few of them declared that it was their policy never to fold
their clothes. I have opened closets so full that the clothes look like
they have been hardened in a jelly mold, and I have witnessed drawers
lled with clothes rolled and twisted like noodles. You would think my
clients had never seen the rst letter of the word "fold." But once they
nish my course, all of them, without exception, have told me, "Folding
is fun!" One of my clients, a young woman in her twenties, hated folding
so much that her mother used to come and do it for her. Through the
course, however, she came to love it and even taught her mother how to
fold properly. Once you have mastered this technique, you will actually
enjoy doing it every day and will nd it a handy skill for the rest of
your life. In fact, to go through life without knowing how to fold is a
huge loss. The rst step is to visualize what the inside of your drawer
will look like when you nish. The goal should be to organize the
contents so that you can see where every item is at a glance, just as
you can see the spines of the books on your bookshelves. The key is to
store things standing up rather than laid at. Some people

mimic store displays, folding each piece of clothing into a large square
and then arranging them one on top of the other in layers. This is great
for temporary sales displays in stores, but not what we should be aiming
for at home, where our relationship with these clothes is long term. To
store clothes standing, they must be made compact, which means more
folds. Some people believe that more folds means more wrinkles, but this
is not the case. It is not the number of folds but rather the amount of
pressure applied that causes wrinkling. Even lightly folded clothes will
wrinkle if they are stored in a pile because the weight of the clothes
acts like a press. Think of the di erence between folding one sheet of
paper as opposed to a hundred sheets in one go. It is much harder to get
a sharp crease when folding a whole stack of paper at one time. Once you
have an image of what the inside of your drawers will look like, you can
begin folding. The goal is to fold each piece of clothing into a simple,
smooth rectangle. First, fold each lengthwise side of the garment toward
the center (such as the lefthand, then right-hand, sides of a shirt) and
tuck the sleeves in to make a long rectangular shape. It doesn't matter
how you fold the sleeves. Next, pick up one short end of the rectangle
and fold it toward the other short end. Then fold again, in the same
manner, in halves or in thirds. The number of folds should be adjusted
so that the folded clothing when standing on edge ts the height of the
drawer. This is the basic principle that will ultimately allow your
clothes to be stacked on edge, side by side, so that when you pull open
your drawer you can see the edge of every item inside. If you nd that
the end result is the right shape but too loose and oppy to stand up,
it's a sign that your way of folding doesn't match the type of clothing.
Every piece of clothing has its own "sweet spot" where it feels just
right---a folded state that best suits that item. This will di er
depending on the type of material and size of the clothing, and
therefore you will need to adjust your method until you nd what works.
This isn't di cult. By adjusting the height when folded so that it
stands properly, you'll reach the sweet spot surprisingly easily.

Folding goes even more smoothly if you fold thin, soft material more
tightly, reducing it to a small width and height, and thick, u y
materials less. In cases where one end of the piece of clothing is
thicker than the other, it also helps to keep the thinner end in your
hand while folding. There is nothing more satisfying than nding that
"sweet spot." The piece of clothing keeps its shape when stood on edge
and feels just right when held in your hand. It's like a sudden
revelation---So this is how you always wanted to be folded!---a
historical moment in which your mind and the piece of clothing connect.
I love the way my clients' faces light up at that moment.

Arranging clothes The secret to energizing your closet It feels great to
open up your closet and see the clothes you love arranged neatly on
hangers. But my clients' closets are often such a mess that it takes
courage just to open them and, once open, it's impossible to nd anything
in them. There are two possible causes. The rst is that the closet is
simply too full. One of my clients had jammed so many clothes inside
that it took her three full minutes to extract a single out t. The
hangers were so closely packed that when, after much grunting and
pulling, she nally managed to extract an out t, the clothes on either
side popped out with it like bread from a toaster. I could see why she
had not used that closet for several years. This is an extreme example,
but it is true that most people store far more than necessary in their
closets. This is one reason I recommend folding whatever clothes you
can. Of course, there are some types of clothing that are better stored
on hangers. These include coats, suits, jackets, skirts, and dresses. My
standard is this: hang any clothes that look like they would be happier
hung up, such as those made with soft materials that utter in the breeze
or highly tailored cuts, which protest at being folded. These we should
hang willingly. The other cause of a messy closet is lack of knowledge.
Many people simply don't know how to organize clothes on hangers. The
most basic rule is to hang clothes in the same category side by side,
dividing your closet into a jacket section, a suit section, and so on.
Clothes, like people, can relax more freely when in the company of
others who are very similar in type, and therefore organizing them by
category helps them feel more comfortable and secure. You can literally
transform your closet just by applying this principle.

Of course, many people insist that even when they organize their clothes
by category, it isn't long before their closets are messy again. So let
me introduce a secret for maintaining the neatness of closets that you
work hard to organize. Arrange your clothes so that they rise to the
right. Take a moment to draw an arrow rising toward the right and then
another descending to the right. You can do this on paper or just trace
them in the air. Did you notice that when you draw an arrow rising to
the right it makes you feel lighter? Lines that slope up to the right
make people feel comfortable. By using this principle when you organize
your closet, you can make the contents look far more exciting. To do so,
hang heavy items on the left side of the closet and light items on the
right. Heavy items include those with length, those made from heavier
material, and those that are dark in color. As you move toward the right
side of the closet, the length of the clothing grows shorter, the
material thinner, and the color lighter. By category, coats would be on
the far left, followed by dresses, jackets, pants, skirts, and blouses.
This is the basic order, but depending on the trends in your wardrobe,
what classi es as "heavy" in each category will di er. Use your
intuition to create a balance that makes it appear as if the clothes are
sloping up to the right. In addition, organize the clothes within each
category from heavy to light. When you stand in front of a closet that
has been reorganized so that the clothes rise to the right, you will
feel your heart beat faster and the cells in your body buzz with energy.
This energy will also be transmitted to your clothes. Even when you
close the closet door, your room will feel fresher. Once you have
experienced this, you'll never lose the habit of organizing by category.
Some may question whether paying attention to such details can possibly
cause such a change, but why waste your time doubting if incorporating
this exciting magic into all your storage spaces could keep your room
tidy? It will only take you ten minutes to rearrange your closet by
category, so trust me and give it a try. But don't forget that you rst
need to reduce your wardrobe to only those clothes that you really love.

Storing socks Treat your socks and stockings with respect Have you ever
had the experience where you thought what you were doing was a good
thing but later learned that it had hurt someone? At the time, you were
totally unconcerned, oblivious to the other person's feelings. This is
somewhat similar to the way many of us treat our socks. I visited the
home of a client in her fties. As always, we started with her clothes.
We moved through her wardrobe at a smooth pace, nished the underwear,
and were ready to start organizing her socks. But when she pulled open
her sock drawer, I could not suppress a gasp. It was full of potato-like
lumps that rolled about. She had folded back the tops to form balls and
tied her stockings tightly in the middle. I was speechless. Dressed in a
crisp white apron, my client smiled at me and said, "It's easy to pick
out what I need this way, and it's quite simple to put them away as
well, don't you think?" Although I frequently run into this attitude
during my lessons, it never fails to astonish me. Let me state here and
now: Never, ever tie up your stockings. Never, ever ball up your socks.
I pointed to the balled-up socks. "Look at them carefully. This should
be a time for them to rest. Do you really think they can get any rest
like that?" That's right. The socks and stockings stored in your drawer
are essentially on holiday. They take a brutal beating in their daily
work, trapped between your foot and your shoe, enduring pressure and
friction to protect your precious feet. The time they spend in your
drawer is their only chance to rest. But if they are folded over, balled
up, or tied, they are always in a state of tension, their fabric
stretched and their elastic pulled. They roll about and bump into

each other every time the drawer is opened and closed. Any socks and
stockings unfortunate enough to get pushed to the back of the drawer are
often forgotten for so long that their elastic stretches beyond
recovery. When the owner nally discovers them and puts them on, it will
be too late and they will be relegated to the garbage. What treatment
could be worse than this? Let's begin with how to fold your stockings.
If you've tied them up, start by undoing the knot! Lay the toes one on
top of the other and fold the stocking in half lengthwise. Then fold it
into thirds, making sure that the toes are inside, not outside, and that
the waistband protrudes slightly at the top. Finally, roll the stocking
up toward the waistband. If the waistband is on the outside when you
nish, you've done it right. Fold knee-high stockings the same way. With
thicker material, such as tights, it is easier to roll if you fold them
in half rather than in thirds. The point is that the stocking should be
rm and stable when you've nished, much like a sushi roll. When you store
the stockings in your drawer, arrange them on end so that the swirl is
visible. If you are storing them in plastic drawers, I recommend putting
them into a cardboard box rst, so that they don't slip and unroll, and
putting the box into the drawer. A shoebox is the perfect size for a
stocking divider. This method is a win-win solution. It allows you to
see how many stockings you have at a single glance, protects your
stockings from damage, and keeps them smooth and unwrinkled so that they
are easier to put on. And it makes your stockings much happier, too.
Folding socks is even easier. If you've folded back the tops, start by
unfolding them. Place one sock on top of the other and follow the same
principles as those for folding clothing. For low-cut socks that just
cover the feet, folding twice is enough; for ankle socks, three times;
for knee socks and over-knee socks, four to six times. You can adjust
the number of folds to achieve the height that best suits the drawer.
It's easy. Just aim to make a simple rectangle, the key to folding.
Store the socks on edge, just as you did for clothing. You'll be amazed
at how little space you need compared to your

"potato ball days," and you'll notice your socks breathing a sigh of
relief at being untied. When I see high school students wearing high
socks that are loose at the top, I long to tell them how to fold their
socks properly.

Seasonal clothes Eliminate the need to store o -season clothes June in
Japan is the rainy season. It is also traditionally the month for
koromogae, when people change to summer clothes. This is preceded by
several weeks of cleaning and packing away winter clothes and bringing
out summer clothes. Whenever this time of year approaches, it reminds me
that I used to do this, too. For years, however, I have not bothered to
put away o -season clothes. The custom of koromogae originated in China
and was introduced to Japan as a court custom during the Heian period
(794--1185 AD). It was only in the late nineteenth century, when workers
and students began to wear uniforms, that the custom was introduced in
businesses and schools. Companies and schools o cially switched to the
summer uniform at the beginning of June and to the winter uniform at the
beginning of October. In other words, this rule was only applied within
organizations, and its extension to the ordinary home was not really
necessary. But like every other Japanese, I, too, was convinced that I
had to store and unpack seasonal clothing twice a year in June and
October. I spent these two months busily emptying and re lling the
contents of closets and drawers. To be honest, I found this custom a
nuisance. If a dress I wanted to wear was stored away in a box on the
top shelf of the closet, it seemed like far too much trouble to get it
down and dig it out. Instead, I would compromise and wear something
else. There were some years when I didn't manage to unpack my summer
clothes until July, and I would realize that in the meantime I had
bought clothes similar to those I already owned. Often as soon as I got
out my summer clothes, the weather would suddenly turn cold again.

The custom of storing seasonal clothes is behind the times. With the
introduction of air-conditioning and heating, our homes are less subject
to the weather outside. It's not uncommon now to see people wearing
T-shirts indoors even in winter. So it's time to abandon this custom and
keep all our clothes ready to be used year-round, regardless of the
season. My clients love this approach, especially because they can grasp
at all times exactly what clothes they have. No di cult techniques are
required. All you need to do is organize your clothes on the premise
that you aren't going to put o -season clothes in storage. The trick is
not to overcategorize. Divide your clothes roughly into "cotton-like"
and "wool-like" materials when you put them in the drawer. Categorizing
by season---summer, winter, falland-spring---or by activity, such as
work and leisure, should be avoided because it is too vague. If my
client's space is limited, I have them store only small, speci c o
-season items, such as bathing suits and sun hats for the summer season,
and mu ers, mittens, and earmu s for the winter season. Although not a
small item, winter coats can also be put away in the back of the closet
during the o -season. For those of you who still don't have enough
space, let me share a few tips for storing your o -season clothes. Many
people store their o -season clothes in plastic cases with lids. These,
however, are the hardest type of storage units to use e ectively. Once
in the closet, something is bound to be placed on top of it, and pulling
the case out and opening it up seems like too much extra work. In the
end, it is all too easy to forget the case is even there until the
season is almost over. If you are planning to buy storage units in the
near future, I recommend that you get a set of drawers instead. Be
careful not to bury clothes in the cupboard even if they are o season.
Clothes that have been shut up for half a year look wilted, as if they
have been sti ed. Instead, let in some light and air occasionally. Open
the drawer and run your hands over the contents. Let them know you care
and look forward to wearing them when they are next in season. This kind
of "communication" helps

your clothes stay vibrant and keeps your relationship with them alive
longer.

Storing books Put all your books on the oor Once you have nished
organizing and storing your clothes, it's time to move on to books.
Books are one of three things that people nd hardest to let go. Many
people say that books are one thing they just can't part with regardless
of whether they are avid readers or not, but the real problem is
actually the way in which they part with them. One of my clients, a
woman in her thirties who worked for a foreign consulting rm, loved
books. She had read not only every business book but also a broad range
of novels and manga. Naturally, her room was lled with books. She had
three large ceiling-height bookshelves full of books, plus about twenty
waisthigh towers of books piled precariously on the oor. When walking
through the room, I had to sidestep and twist to avoid bumping into
them. I said to her what I say to all my clients. "Please start by
removing every book from your shelves and putting them all on the oor."
Her eyes grew round. "All of them? There's an awful lot." "Yes, I know.
All of them, please." "But ..." She hesitated for a moment as though
searching for words before continuing. "Wouldn't it be easier to choose
them while they're still on the shelf and I can see the titles?" Books
are usually arranged in rows in bookcases so that their titles are
clearly visible, so it does seem to make more sense to weed out those
you don't want when you can see them. Not only that, but books are
heavy. Taking them all o the shelf only to put them back on again seems
like a waste of e ort. Even so, do not skip this step. Remove all the
books from your bookcases. You cannot judge whether or not a book really
grabs you when it's still on the shelf.

Like clothes or any other belongings, books that have been left
untouched on the shelf for a long time are dormant. Or perhaps I should
say they're "invisible." Although in plain sight, they remain unseen,
just like a praying mantis still in the grass, merging with its
surroundings. (Have you ever experienced that jolt of surprise when you
suddenly notice it there?) If you ask yourself, "Does this spark joy?"
when you are just looking at the things on your shelves or in your
drawers, the question won't mean much to you. To truly decide whether
you want to keep something or to dispose of it, you must take your
things out of hibernation. Even the piles of books already on the oor
will be easier to assess if you move them to a di erent part of the oor
or restack them. Just like the gentle shake we use to wake someone up,
we can stimulate our belongings by physically moving them, exposing them
to fresh air and making them "conscious." While helping my clients tidy
their homes or o ces, I stand in front of the mound of books they have
piled on the oor and clap my hands, or I gently stroke the book covers.
Although my clients look at me strangely at rst, they are inevitably
surprised at how quickly and precisely they are able to choose after
this. They can see exactly what they need and don't need. It is much
harder to choose books when they are still on the shelf, which means you
will have to repeat the process later. If there are too many books to
arrange on the oor all at one time, I ask my clients to divide them into
four broad categories: General (books you read for pleasure) Practical
(references, cookbooks, etc.) Visual (photograph collections, etc.)
Magazines Once you have piled your books, take them in your hand one by
one and decide whether you want to keep or discard each one. The

criterion is, of course, whether or not it gives you a thrill of
pleasure when you touch it. Remember, I said when you touch it. Make
sure you don't start reading it. Reading clouds your judgment. Instead
of asking yourself what you feel, you'll start asking whether you need
that book or not. Imagine what it would be like to have a bookshelf lled
only with books that you really love. Isn't that image spellbinding? For
someone who loves books, what greater happiness could there be?

Unread books "Sometime" means "never" The most common reason for not
discarding a book is "I might read it again." Take a moment to count the
number of favorite books that you have actually read more than once. How
many are there? For some it may be as few as ve while for some
exceptional readers it may be as many as one hundred. People who reread
that many, however, are usually people in speci c professions, such as
scholars and authors. Very rarely will you nd ordinary people like me
who read so many books. Let's face it. In the end, you are going to read
very few of your books again. As with clothing, we need to stop and
think about what purpose these books serve. Books are essentially
paper---sheets of paper printed with letters and bound together. Their
true purpose is to be read, to convey the information to their readers.
It's the information they contain that has meaning. There is no meaning
in their just being on your shelves. You read books for the experience
of reading. Books you have read have already been experienced and their
content is inside you, even if you don't remember. So when deciding
which books to keep, forget about whether you think you'll read it again
or whether you've mastered what's inside. Instead, take each book in
your hand and decide whether it moves you or not. Keep only those books
that will make you happy just to see them on your shelves, the ones that
you really love. That includes this book, too. If you don't feel any joy
when you hold it in your hand, I would rather you discard it. What about
books that you have started but not yet nished reading? Or books you
bought but have not yet started? What should be done with books like
these that you intend to read sometime? The Internet has made it easy to
purchase books, but as a consequence, it seems to me that people have
far more unread

books than they once did, ranging from three to more than forty. It is
not uncommon for people to purchase a book and then buy another one not
long after, before they have read the rst one. Unread books accumulate.
The problem with books that we intend to read sometime is that they are
far harder to part with than ones we have already read. I remember one
incident where I was giving a lesson to a CEO on how to clean his o ce.
His bookshelves were lled with di cultsounding titles that you might
expect a company president to read, such as classics by authors like
Drucker and Carnegie, as well as the latest best sellers. It was like
walking into a bookstore. When I saw his collection, I had a sinking
feeling. Sure enough, when he began sorting them, he put one book after
another on his "to keep" pile, announcing that they were still unread.
By the time he nished, he still had fty volumes and had barely made a
dent in the original collection. When I asked why he kept them, he gave
the classic answer from my list of most probable answers: "Because I
might want to read it sometime." I'm afraid that from personal
experience I can tell you right now, "sometime" never comes. If you
missed your chance to read a particular book, even if it was recommended
to you or is one you have been intending to read for ages, this is your
chance to let it go. You may have wanted to read it when you bought it,
but if you haven't read it by now, the book's purpose was to teach you
that you didn't need it. There's no need to nish reading books that you
only got halfway through. Their purpose was to be read halfway. So get
rid of all those unread books. It will be far better for you to read the
book that really grabs you right now than one that you left to gather
dust for years. People with large book collections are almost always
diligent learners. This is why it's not unusual to see many references
and study guides in my clients' bookcases. Those most commonly left
unread in Japan are English textbooks, practical English conversation
handbooks for travelers, and useful business English phrase books.
Handbooks and guides for acquiring quali cations are often incredibly
diverse, ranging from bookkeeping, real estate, and computer quali
cations to aromatherapy and color coordinating.

Sometimes I am amazed at the type of quali cations my clients are
interested in. Many of my clients also keep their old textbooks all the
way back to junior high and notebooks for practicing writing skills. So
if, like many of my clients, you have any books that fall into this
category, I urge you to stop insisting that you will use them someday.
Get rid of them today. Why? Because the odds are very low that you'll
ever read them. Of all my clients, less than 15 percent put such books
to use. When they explain why they hang on to them, their answers are
all about what they intend to do "someday." "I'd like to study this
someday," "I'll study it when I have a little more time," "I thought it
would be useful to master English," "I wanted to study bookkeeping
because I'm in management." If you haven't done what you intended to do
yet, donate or recycle that book. Only by discarding it will you be able
to test how passionate you are about that subject. If your feelings
don't change after discarding it, then you're ne as is. If you want the
book so badly after getting rid of it that you're willing to buy another
copy, then buy one---and this time read and study it.

Books to keep Those that belong in the hall of fame I now keep my
collection of books to about thirty volumes at any one time, but in the
past, I found it very hard to discard books because I love them. The rst
time I sorted through my library using the yardstick of whether or not
they gave me joy, I had about a hundred volumes left in my bookcase.
Although this is not excessive compared to the average, I felt that I
could still reduce. One day I decided to take a closer look at what I
had. I started with books that I considered taboo to discard. In my
case, rst on the list was Alice in Wonderland, which I have read
repeatedly since grade one. Books like this, which fall into one's
personal Book Hall of Fame, are simple to identify. Next, I looked at
books that inspired pleasure but didn't quite make it into the Hall of
Fame. As time passes the content of this category naturally changes, but
these books are the ones I de nitely want to keep right now. At that
time, one of these was The Art of Discarding, which rst opened my eyes
to tidying, although I no longer have it. Books that provide this degree
of pleasure are also ne to keep. The most di cult ones are those that
give you moderate pleasure ---those with words and phrases that moved
your heart and that you might want to read again. These are the hardest
to discard. Although I felt no pressure to get rid of them, I could not
overlook the fact that they only gave me moderate pleasure, particularly
not when I was pursuing perfection in the eld of tidying. I began to
search for a way to let them go without regret and eventually hit upon
what I called the "bulk reduction method." Realizing that what I really
wanted to keep was not the book but certain information or speci c words
it contained, I decided that if I kept only what was necessary, I should
be able to part with the rest.

My idea was to copy the sentences that inspired me into a notebook. Over
time, I thought, this would become a personal collection of my favorite
words of wisdom. It might be fun to read it over in the future and trace
the path my interests had led me. With great excitement, I pulled out a
notebook I liked and launched my project. I began by underlining the
places I wanted to copy. Then I wrote the title in my notebook and began
transcribing. Once I started, however, I realized that this process was
far too much work. It takes time to transcribe and if I was going to be
able to read those words in the future, my handwriting had to be neat.
To copy ten quotations from a single book would take at least half an
hour, and that was a low estimate. The thought of doing this for forty
books made me dizzy. My next plan was to use a copy machine. I would
copy the sections I wanted to keep and cut and paste them into the
notebook. This, I thought, should be much quicker and easier. But when I
tried it, it was even more work. I nally decided to rip the relevant
page out of the book. Pasting pages into a notebook was also a pain, so
I simpli ed the process by slipping them into a le instead. This only
took ve minutes per book and I managed to get rid of forty books and
keep the words that I liked. I was extremely pleased with the results.
Two years after launching this "bulk reduction method," I had a sudden
ash of realization. I had never once looked at the le I created. All
that e ort had just been to ease my own conscience. Recently, I have
noticed that having fewer books actually increases the impact of the
information I read. I recognize necessary information much more easily.
Many of my clients, particularly those who have disposed of a
substantial number of books and papers, have also mentioned this. For
books, timing is everything. The moment you rst encounter a particular
book is the right time to read it. To avoid missing that moment, I
recommend that you keep your collection small.

Sorting papers Rule of thumb---discard everything Once you've nished
organizing your books, it's time to move on to your papers. For example,
the letter holder bursting with envelopes that hangs on your wall; the
school announcements stuck to your fridge; the unanswered invitation to
your school reunion lying by the phone; the newspapers that have
accumulated on your table over the last few days. There are several
spots within the house where papers tend to pile up like snowdrifts.
Although the general assumption is that there are far fewer papers in
the home than in an o ce, this is actually not true. The minimum amount
of paper my clients discard or recycle is two 45-liter bags. The maximum
(so far) is fteen bags. I don't know how many times I hear my clients'
paper shredders jam. It is extremely di cult to manage such a large
volume of paper, yet I occasionally meet some amazing clients whose ling
skills take my breath away. When I ask, "How are you managing your
papers?" their explanations are extremely thorough. "Papers related to
the children go in this le. That le there is my recipe le. Magazine
clippings go in here, and manuals for my electric appliances go in this
box...." They have categorized their papers in such ne detail that my
mind sometimes wanders o in the middle of their discourse. I confess. I
hate ling papers! I never use multiple les or write labels. This system
perhaps works better in an o ce setting, where many people use the same
documents, but there is absolutely no need to use such a detailed ling
system in the home. My basic principle for sorting papers is to throw
them all away. My clients are stunned when I say this, but there is
nothing more annoying than papers. After all, they will never inspire
joy, no

matter how carefully you keep them. For this reason, I recommend you
dispose of anything that does not fall into one of three categories:
currently in use, needed for a limited period of time, or must be kept
inde nitely. The term "papers," by the way, does not include papers with
sentimental value like old love letters or diaries. Attempting to sort
these will slow down your pace drastically. Limit yourself at rst to
sorting papers that give you no thrill at all and nish the job in one
go. Letters from friends and lovers can be left for when you tackle
sentimental items. Once you've gone through those papers that don't
evoke any pleasure, what should you do with the ones that you've decided
to keep? My ling method is extremely simple. I divide them into two
categories: papers to be saved and papers that need to be dealt with.
Although my policy is to get rid of all papers, these are the only
categories I make for those that can't be discarded. Letters requiring a
reply, forms that need to be submitted, a newspaper that I intend to
read---make a special corner for papers like these that need to be dealt
with. Make sure that you keep all such papers in one spot only. Never
let them spread to other parts of the house. I recommend using a
vertical organizer in which papers can be stored standing up and
designating a speci c place for it. All papers requiring attention can
be placed in here without separating them. As for papers that must be
saved, these I subdivide according to the frequency of use. Again, the
way I divide them is not complicated. I organize them into infrequently
used papers and more frequently used papers. Infrequently used papers
include insurance policies, guarantees, and leases. Unfortunately, these
must be kept automatically regardless of the fact that they spark no
particular joy in your heart. As you will almost never need to access
papers in this category, you don't have to put a lot of e ort into
storing them. I recommend putting them all into a single ordinary clear
plastic folder without worrying about further categorization. The other
subcategory consists of papers that you will take out and look at more
frequently, such as outlines of seminars or newspaper clippings. These
are meaningless unless they are stored

in a way that's easy to access and read, which is why I recommend
inserting them into the book-like pages of a clear plastic le folder.
This category is the trickiest of them all. Although papers like this
are not really necessary, they tend to multiply. Reducing the volume of
this category is key to organizing your papers. Papers are organized
into only three categories: needs attention, should be saved
(contractual documents), and should be saved (others). The point is to
keep all papers in one category in the same container or folder and to
purposely refrain from subdividing them any further by content. In other
words, you only need three containers or folders. Don't forget that the
"needs attention" box ought to be empty. If there are papers in it, be
aware that this means you have left things undone in your life that
require your attention. Although I have never managed to completely
empty my "needs attention" box, this is the goal to which we should
aspire.

All about papers How to organize troublesome papers My basic policy is
to discard all papers, but there are always going to be some that are
hard to get rid of. Let's consider here how to tackle these.

LECTURE MATERIALS Those who enjoy studying are quite likely to attend
seminars or courses in various subjects, such as aromatherapy, logical
thinking, or marketing. The recent trend in Japan is to utilize time in
the early morning to take seminars. The content and time frame are
broadening, giving people a wide choice. For the participants, the
materials diligently produced by the lecturer are akin to a badge of
honor, and as such they are hard to part with. But when I visit the
homes of these ardent learners, I nd that these materials usurp much of
the room, making their space oppressive. One of my clients was a woman
in her thirties who worked for an advertising company. The moment I
entered her room, I felt like I was in an o ce. My eyes were assaulted
by rows of les with carefully printed titles. "These are all materials
from the seminars I took," she told me. A self-confessed seminar
fanatic, she had saved and led the materials from every seminar she had
ever attended. People often insist, "I want to restudy these materials
sometime," but most never do so. Moreover, the majority of them usually
have materials for multiple seminars on the same or similar subjects.
Why? Because what they learned at the seminars did not stick. I am not
saying this as a criticism, but merely to point out why it isn't worth
keeping materials from past seminars. If the content is not put

into practice, such courses are meaningless. A seminar's value begins
the moment we start attending, and the key to extracting the full value
is putting what we learn there into practice the moment the course ends.
Why do people pay expensive fees for such courses when they can read the
same content in a book or elsewhere? Because they want to feel the
passion of the teacher and experience that learning environment. Thus
the real material is the seminar itself, and it must be experienced
live. When you attend a seminar, do so with the resolve to part with
every handout distributed. If you regret recycling it, take the same
seminar again, and this time apply the learning. It's paradoxical, but I
believe that precisely because we hang on to such materials, we fail to
put what we learn into practice. The biggest collection of seminar
materials I have come across so far was 199 les. Needless to say, I had
her discard every single one.

CREDIT CARD STATEMENTS Another thing to discard are all your credit card
statements. What is their purpose? For most people, they are simply the
means of checking how much money was spent on what during a particular
month. So, once you've checked the content to con rm that it's correct
and have recorded the gure in your household account book, the statement
has ful lled its purpose and you should discard it. Trust me. You need
feel no guilt at all. Can you think of any other time that you would
really need your credit card statements? Do you imagine that you might
need them for a court case to prove how much was withdrawn? That's not
going to happen, so there is no need to treasure these statements for
the rest of your life. The same is true for notices of withdrawals from
your account to pay utility fees. Be resolute and take this opportunity
to get rid of them. Of all my clients, the ones who had the hardest time
disposing of papers were a couple, both of whom were lawyers. They kept
asking, "What if this document is needed in court?" At rst, they

made very little progress, but in the end, even they were able to
discard almost all their papers without experiencing any problems. If
they can do it, so can you.

WARRANTIES FOR ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES Whether a TV or a digital camera,
all electrical appliances come with a warranty. This is the most
standard document category in any home, and the one that almost everyone
les and saves properly. The method of organizing, however, is usually
almost but not quite right. In general, people save their warranties in
clear folder les or accordion-style les. The attraction of these les is
that the documents can be stored in separate compartments. However,
therein lies their pitfall. Because they are so well divided, it is easy
to overlook things. Most people save not only the warranty but also the
operation manual in the same le. First, let's start by parting with
these manuals. Take a look at them. Have you ever used them? In general,
there are only a few manuals that we actually need to read, such as our
computer or digital camera manual, and these are so thick that they
won't t in a le anyway. So basically, any manuals contained in your
warranty folder can be discarded without causing any di culty. To date,
all my clients have discarded most of their manuals, including those for
their PCs and cameras, and none of them has experienced any problems
from doing so. If they have a problem, they can usually x it themselves
by ddling with the machine, and they can nd solutions for anything they
can't gure out on their own from the Internet or the place of purchase.
So I assure you, you can dispose of them without any qualms. Getting
back to warranties: the ling method I recommend is to put them all in a
single clear le, without separating them into categories. Warranties are
only used once a year if at all. What point is there in carefully
sorting and separating them when the odds that they will be needed are
so low? Moreover, if you've led them in a

le folder, you'll have to ip through the pages to nd the right warranty.
In that case, it's just as easy to keep them all in one le, pull out the
entire stack, and search through it. If you sort in too much detail, it
means you will have fewer opportunities to look at each warranty. Before
you realize it, the warranty will be out of date. If you have to sift
through them all when you need one anyway, this becomes an excellent
opportunity to check the expiration dates of your other warranties. This
way, you don't have to go to the trouble of deliberately checking the
contents just for the expiration dates, and often, you don't even have
to buy the clear le in which you store the warranties because there is
usually at least one already in the house. Finally, this method takes up
a tenth of the space of conventional methods.

GREETING CARDS In Japan, it is the custom to send New Year's cards to
convey New Year's greetings (many have lottery numbers at the bottom).
This means that each card has ful lled its purpose the moment the
receiver nishes reading it. Once you've checked to see whether the
numbers on your cards have won anything in the lottery, you can part
with the cards with gratitude for conveying to you the consideration of
the sender. If you save the cards to con rm the sending address for the
following year, then only save one year's worth. Dispense with those
that are two or more years old, except those that spark joy in your
heart.

USED CHECKBOOKS Used checkbooks are just that---used. You're not going
to look at them again, and even if you do, it won't increase the amount
of money in the bank, so, really, get rid of them.

PAY SLIPS The purpose of your pay slip is to inform you how much you
have been paid for this month. Once you've checked the content, its
usefulness is over.

Komono (miscellaneous items) Keep things because you love them---not
"just because" I pull out a drawer in a client's home and discover a
strange little box, just waiting to be opened---like a tantalizing book
that promises some fascinating tale. But for me there is no excitement
whatsoever. I know exactly what I'll nd inside. Loose change, hairpins,
erasers, spare buttons, wristwatch parts, batteries that may or may not
be dead, leftover medicine, lucky charms, key rings. And the list goes
on. I already know what the client's answer will be if I ask why these
things are in that box: "Just because." Many items within the home are
treated in the same way. They are placed, stored, and accumulate "just
because," without our giving them much thought. I call this category
komono, a Japanese term that the dictionary de nes variously as "small
articles; miscellaneous items; accessories; gadgets or small tools,
parts, or attachments; an insigni cant person; small fry." It's no
wonder people don't know what to do with things that fall into such a
vague and all-encompassing category. Still, it's time to bid farewell to
this "just because" approach. These items play an important part in
supporting your lifestyle and therefore they, too, deserve to be handled
one by one and sorted properly. Unlike clothes or books, this category
includes a diverse range of items, and the thought of trying to sort and
organize them may seem daunting. If you deal with them in the proper
order, however, this task is actually quite simple. The basic order for
sorting komono is as follows: 1. CDs, DVDs 2. Skin care products

3. Makeup 4. Accessories 5. Valuables (passports, credit cards, etc.) 6.
Electrical equipment and appliances (digital cameras, electric cords,
anything that seems vaguely "electric") 7. Household equipment
(stationery and writing materials, sewing kits, etc.) 8. Household
supplies (expendables like medicine, detergents, tissues, etc.) 9.
Kitchen goods/food supplies (spatulas, pots, blenders, etc.) 10. Other
(spare change, gurines, etc.) (If you have many items related to a
particular interest or hobby, such as ski equipment or tea ceremony
articles, treat these as a single subcategory.) I recommend this
particular order because it is easier if you start with more personal
items and clearly de ned content rst. If you live alone, you don't
really need to worry about the order as long as you do one subcategory
at a time. Too many people live surrounded by things they don't need
"just because." I urge you to take stock of your komono and save only,
and I mean only, those that bring you joy.

Common types of komono Disposables A surprising number of things are
instantly identi able as disposable without even asking, "Does this
spark joy?" I have already pointed out how important it is to relinquish
the things that you nd it hard to part with. It is equally important
when putting your house in order to actually notice the things you have
kept for "no particular reason." The majority of people are surprisingly
unaware of the odds and ends taking up space in their homes.

GIFTS A plate received as a wedding favor that still sits in its box on
top of the china cabinet. A key holder you received as a souvenir from a
friend that now lies in your drawer. A set of peculiar-smelling incense
presented to you by your colleagues on your birthday. What do these
items all have in common? They were gifts. Someone important to you used
precious time to pick them out and buy them for you. They are an
expression of love and consideration. You can't just throw them away,
right? But let's consider this more carefully. Most of these gifts
remain unopened or have been used only once. Admit it. They simply don't
suit your taste. The true purpose of a present is to be received.
Presents are not "things" but a means for conveying someone's feelings.
When viewed from this perspective, you don't need to feel guilty for
parting with a gift. Just thank it for the joy it gave you when you rst
received it. Of course, it would be ideal if you could use it with joy.
But surely the person who gave it to you doesn't want you to use it out
of a sense of obligation, or to put it away

without using it, only to feel guilty every time you see it. When you
discard or donate it, you do so for the sake of the giver, too.

COSMETIC SAMPLES SAVED FOR TRIPS Do you have a collection of cosmetic
samples that have been hanging around for a year or more unused? Many
people keep these to use on trips, but then never seem to take them when
they travel. I contacted various manufacturers to inquire about the
shelf life of these products. The answers were varied. Some only last a
few weeks, while others are good for a year. When the quantity is very
small, such as for samples, the quality deteriorates faster. To use
possibly outdated cosmetics, especially when you are supposed to be
enjoying your travels, seems rather foolhardy.

ELECTRONICS PACKAGES Boxes are surprisingly bulky. Discard or recycle
the box your cell phone comes in as soon as you unpack it. You don't
need the manual or the CD that comes with it either. You'll gure out the
applications you need through using it. All of my clients have discarded
these things yet none of them has ever been inconvenienced by their
absence. If you do have a problem, you can always get help from the
Internet or the clerk at the shop where you bought it. It is far quicker
to ask a pro for the answer than to struggle to nd one in the manual by
yourself. Some people save the boxes for electrical appliances because
they think they can get more money for the appliances if they ever sell
them. This, however, is a waste. If you consider the rent or mortgage
you pay, turning your space into a storage shed for empty boxes costs
you more than what you could earn selling an appliance in a box. You
don't need to keep them for moving either. You can worry about nding
suitable boxes when the time comes. It's a

shame to let a boring box take up room in your house just because you
might need it someday.

UNIDENTIFIED CORDS If you see a cord and wonder what on earth it's for,
chances are you'll never use it again. Mysterious cords will always
remain just that---a mystery. Are you worried you might need it if
something breaks? Don't be. I have seen countless homes with duplicates
of the same type of cord, but a tangle of cords just makes it harder to
nd the right one. In the end, it is quicker to buy a new one. Keep only
those cords that you can clearly identify and get rid of the rest. Your
collection most likely contains quite a few that belong to defunct
machines you have long since discarded.

BROKEN APPLIANCES I often come across broken TVs and radios in my
clients' homes. Obviously, there is no need to keep these. If you, too,
have broken appliances, see this as an opportunity to contact your local
recycler and get rid of them.

BEDDING FOR THE GUEST WHO NEVER COMES Quilts, pillows, blankets,
sheets---spare sets of bedding take up a lot of room. This is another
common item that gets discarded during my lessons, and again, my clients
rarely miss it. Although it's worth having spare bedding if you have
regular guests, it's unnecessary to keep extra sets if you only have
overnight visitors at most once or twice a year. Bedding stored inde
nitely in the closet often smells so mildewed you wouldn't want to let
your guests use it anyway. Take a whi and see for yourself.

SPARE BUTTONS You will never use spare buttons. In most cases, when a
button falls o , it's a sign that the particular shirt or blouse has
been well worn and loved and has now reached the end of its life. For
coats and jackets that you want to keep for a long time, I recommend
sewing spare buttons to the lining when you rst buy them. For other
clothes, if you lose a button and really want to replace it, you can
always get what you need at a large handicrafts shop. From my work in
the eld, I have come to the conclusion that when a button falls o ,
people often don't bother to sew another one on even when they have kept
the spares. Instead, they either keep wearing the out t without a button
or leave it lying around somewhere in their wardrobe. If you're not
going to use spare buttons anyway, it shouldn't matter that you get rid
of them.

PRODUCTS FROM THE LATEST HEALTH CRAZE Slimming belts, glass bottles for
making ke r, a special blender for making tofu, a weight-loss machine
that mimics the movement of horseback riding---it seems a waste to get
rid of expensive items like these that you bought by mail order but
never fully used. Believe me, I can relate. But you can let them go. The
exhilaration you felt when you bought them is what counts. Express your
appreciation for their contribution to your life by telling them, "Thank
you for the boost you gave me when I bought you," or "Thank you for
helping me get a little more t." Then discard them with the conviction
that you are healthier for having bought them.

FREE NOVELTY GOODS A cell phone screen cleaner that came with a soda
bottle, a ball pen engraved with your school's name, a paper fan you got
at an event, a set of plastic cups won at a fair, glasses bearing a beer
company's

logo, Post-its stamped with a pharmaceutical company's name, a folder
with just ve sheets of blotting paper, a promotional calendar (still in
its tube), a pocket calendar (unused even six months into the year).
None of these are going to bring you any pleasure. Discard or recycle
them without any qualms.

Small change Make "into my wallet" your motto Do you have loose change
lying around---a penny or two in the bottom of your purse, a dime in the
back of a drawer, a quarter on the table? I always nd coins when I'm
helping clients put their house in order. The king of the komono
category, coins can be found in the entrance hall, the kitchen, the
living room, the washroom, on top of furniture, and inside drawers.
Despite the fact that coins are perfectly good cash, they are treated
with far less respect than paper money. It seems strange that they
should be left lying around the house where they are of no use at all.
Whenever my clients come across loose change during tidying, I make sure
it goes straight into their wallets---never into a piggybank. Unlike the
other categories, you don't need to gather coins from every part of the
house. Instead, just pop them into your wallet whenever you stumble on
them. If you put them in a piggybank, you are simply transferring the
place where they will be ignored. People who have lived in the same
house for a long time are particularly prone to forgetting about their
little cache of coins. Frankly, no one I've met who saved pennies
without a clear purpose has ever actually used them. If you are saving
coins with the vague idea that it would be nice to see how many you can
accumulate, now is the time to take them to the bank. The longer you
wait, the heavier your cache will be, and the more bother to take it to
the bank. I have also noticed that for some unfathomable reason many of
my clients start saving coins in bags when their piggybank is full.
Years later during my course, they stumble across a bag bursting with
coins in the back of a cupboard. By that time, it is pungent with the
smell of rust and mold, the coins are discolored, and they

make a dull clinking sound instead of jingling. At this point, my
clients would rather just ignore the bag's existence. Writing this
description is hard enough, but to actually see these coins, stripped of
their dignity as money, is heartrending. I beg you to rescue those
forgotten coins wasting away in your home by adopting the motto "into my
wallet!"

Sentimental items Your parents' home is not a haven for mementos Now
that you have organized your clothes, books, papers, and komono, you can
nally tackle the last category---items that have sentimental value. I
leave this for last because these are the hardest things to discard.
Just as the word implies, mementos are reminders of a time when these
items gave us joy. The thought of disposing of them sparks the fear that
we'll lose those precious memories along with them. But you don't need
to worry. Truly precious memories will never vanish even if you discard
the objects associated with them. When you think about your future, is
it worth keeping mementos of things that you would otherwise forget? We
live in the present. No matter how wonderful things used to be, we
cannot live in the past. The joy and excitement we feel here and now are
more important. So, once again, the way to decide what to keep is to
pick up each item and ask yourself, "Does this spark joy?" Let me tell
you about a client of mine whom I'll call "A." She was a thirty-year-old
mother of two in a ve-member household. When I visited her house for our
second session, it was obvious that the number of things in her home had
decreased. "You really worked hard," I said. "It looks like you must
have gotten rid of about thirty bags' worth of stu ." Looking very
pleased, she said, "Yes, I did! I sent all my keepsakes to my mother's
place." I could hardly believe my ears. She had used the "send it to my
parents" method of tidying. When I rst started this business, I actually
thought that being able to send things "home" was the privilege of
people who came from large houses in the country. The majority of my
clients were single women or young mothers living in Tokyo. If they
asked permission to send things to their parents' house, I said, "Sure.
As long as you do it right away." I

never thought anything of this until my clientele expanded to homes in
rural towns. When I learned the true state of parents' houses, I was
forced to retract my rash words. Now I realize that people who have a
convenient place to send things, such as a parents' house, are actually
quite unfortunate. Even if the house is large with rooms to spare, it is
not some in nitely expanding fourth dimension. People never retrieve the
boxes they send "home." Once sent, they will never again be opened. But
let me get back to my story. Sometime later, A's mother started taking
my course. I knew that if she were to graduate, we would have to do
something about the luggage A had sent home. When I visited the house, I
found that A's room had been left untouched. Her things lled the
bookcase and the closet, and now there were two big boxes parked on the
oor. Her mother's dream was to have a space of her own in which she
could relax, but even though A had moved out long ago, with her things
still enshrined in her room, the only space her mother felt was hers was
the kitchen. This seemed very unnatural. I contacted A and announced,
"You and your mother won't graduate from this course until you have both
dealt with the stu you left at your parents' house." On the day of her
last lesson, A looked extremely happy. "Now I can enjoy the rest of my
life free from care!" She had gone back home and put her things in
order. In the boxes, she had found a diary, photographs of old
boyfriends, a mountain of letters and New Year's cards, and more. "I was
just fooling myself by sending the things I couldn't bear to part with
to my parents. When I looked at each item again, I realized that I had
lived those moments to the fullest and I was able to thank my keepsakes
for the joy they gave me at the time. When I threw them away, I felt
like I was confronting my past for the rst time in my life." That's
right. By handling each sentimental item and deciding what to discard,
you process your past. If you just stow these things away in a drawer or
cardboard box, before you realize it, your past will become a weight
that holds you back and keeps you from living in the here and now. To
put your things in order means to put your

past in order, too. It's like resetting your life and settling your
accounts so that you can take the next step forward. Another item that
is just as di cult to discard is keepsakes from one's children. A
Father's Day present with the words "Thanks, Dad." A picture your son
drew that was selected by the teacher to hang in the school hall, or an
ashtray your daughter made. If these things still bring you joy, it is
ne to keep them. But if your children are already grown and you are
keeping them because you think discarding them will hurt your children's
feelings, ask them. They are quite likely to say, "What? You still have
that? Go ahead and get rid of it." And what about things from your own
childhood? Do you still keep your report cards or graduation certi
cates? When my client pulled out a school uniform from forty years ago,
even I felt my heart constrict with emotion. But it still should be
disposed of. Let all those letters you received years ago from a
girlfriend or boyfriend go. The purpose of a letter is ful lled the
moment it is received. By now, the person who wrote it has long
forgotten what he or she wrote and even the letter's very existence. As
for accessories you received as gifts, keep them only if they bring you
pure joy. If you are keeping them because you can't forget a former
boyfriend, it's better to discard or donate them. Hanging on to them
makes it more likely that you will miss opportunities for new
relationships. It is not our memories but the person we have become
because of those past experiences that we should treasure. This is the
lesson these keepsakes teach us when we sort them. The space in which we
live should be for the person we are becoming now, not for the person we
were in the past.

Photos Cherish who you are now If you have been sorting and discarding
things in the order I recommend, you have likely stumbled across
photographs in many di erent places, perhaps stuck between books on a
shelf, lying in a desk drawer, or hidden in a box of odds and ends.
While many may already have been in albums, I'm sure you found the odd
photo or two enclosed with a letter or still encased in the envelope
from the photo shop. (I don't know why so many people leave photos in
these envelopes.) Because photos tend to emerge from the most unexpected
places when we are sorting other categories, it is much more e cient to
put them in a designated spot every time you nd one and deal with them
all at the very end. There is a good reason to leave photos for last. If
you start sorting photos before you have honed your intuitive sense of
what brings you joy, the whole process will spin out of control and come
to a halt. In contrast, once you have followed the correct order for
tidying (i.e., clothes, books, papers, komono, sentimental items),
sorting will proceed smoothly, and you will be amazed by your capacity
to choose on the basis of what gives you pleasure. There is only one way
to sort photos, and you should keep in mind that it takes a little time.
The correct method is to remove all your photos from their albums and
look at them one by one. Those who protest that this is far too much
work are people who have never truly sorted photos. Photographs exist
only to show a speci c event or time. For this reason, they must be
looked at one by one. When you do this, you will be surprised at how
clearly you can tell the di erence between those that touch your heart
and those that don't. As always, only keep the ones that inspire joy.

With this method, you will keep only about ve per day of a special trip,
but this will be so representative of that time that they bring back the
rest vividly. Really important things are not that great in number.
Unexciting photos of scenery that you can't even place belong in the
garbage. The meaning of a photo lies in the excitement and joy you feel
when taking it. In many cases, the prints developed afterward have
already outlived their purpose. Sometimes people keep a mass of photos
in a big box with the intention of enjoying them someday in their old
age. I can tell you now that "someday" never comes. I can't count how
many boxes of unsorted photographs I have seen that were left by someone
who has passed away. A typical conversation with my clients goes
something like this: "What's in that box?" "Photos." "Then you can leave
them to sort at the end." "Oh, but they aren't mine. They belonged to my
grandfather." Every time I have this conversation it makes me sad. I
can't help thinking that the lives of the deceased would have been that
much richer if the space occupied by that box had been free when the
person was alive. Besides, we shouldn't still be sorting photos when we
reach old age. If you, too, are leaving this task for when you grow old,
don't wait. Do it now. You will enjoy the photos far more when you are
old if they are already in an album than if you have to move and sort
through a heavy boxful of them.

Astounding stockpiles I have seen There are two surprises I frequently
encounter when helping clients put their houses in order: highly unusual
items and sheer numbers. I come across the rst every time. It might be a
music machine used by a singer or the latest cooking utensils owned by
someone who loves to cook. Every day provides exciting encounters with
the unknown. This is only natural, as my clients' interests and
professions are extremely diverse. The real shock is when I discover a
massive stockpile of a simple item that you would nd in any home. As we
work, I always jot down the rough volume of di erent items my clients
own and particularly keep an eye on my stockpile ranking for di erent
items because new records are constantly being made. Once, for example,
I discovered a huge stock of toothbrushes in a client's home. The record
up to that point had been thirty- ve. Even that collection seemed large.
"Perhaps you have a few more than you need," I remarked and we enjoyed a
little laugh together. But the new record far surpassed the old. This
client had sixty toothbrushes! Arranged in boxes in the cupboard under
the sink, they looked like a work of art. It's interesting how the human
mind tries to make sense even out of the nonsensical. I found myself
pondering whether she would go through one a day if she brushed her
teeth too hard, or if perhaps she used a di erent brush for each tooth.
Another surprise was a stock of thirty boxes of plastic kitchen wrap. I
opened the cupboard above the kitchen sink to nd it completely lled with
an array of what looked like large yellow LEGO blocks. "I use plastic
wrap every day so it goes down fast," my client explained. But even if
she used one box a week that supply would last her over half a year.
Regular-size wrap comes in twentymeter rolls. To use up one roll a week,
you would have to cover an eight-inch-diameter plate sixty-six times,
even allowing for rather generous use. Just the thought of repeating the
action of pulling and

tearing plastic wrap that many times would give me carpal tunnel
syndrome. As for toilet paper, the record stock so far is eighty rolls.
"I have loose bowels you see ... I run out very quickly," was the
client's excuse. But even if she used one roll a day, she had at least a
three months' supply. I'm not sure she could have used up one roll a day
even if she spent all day wiping her bottom, and by that time her bottom
would have been rubbed raw. It made me wonder whether I should be giving
her skin cream rather than lessons in cleaning. The ultimate record,
however, was a stockpile of 20,000 cotton swabs, a cache of one hundred
boxes with two hundred swabs each. If my client used one swab a day, it
would take her fty- ve years to use up her supply. By the time she had
nished, she might have developed amazing techniques for cleaning her
ears. The last swab used on the last day would appear almost sacred. You
may nd these accounts hard to believe, but I'm not kidding. The strange
thing is that these clients never realized how many items they actually
had until they began putting their house in order. And even though they
owned a huge stockpile, they always felt as if they didn't have enough
and were anxious about running out. For people who stockpile, I don't
think there is any amount that would make them feel secure. The more
they have, the more they worry about running out and the more anxious
they become. Even though they still have two left, they will go out and
buy ve more. Unlike a shop, if you run out of something at home, it's
not a big deal. It may cause you temporary stress, but it does no
irreparable damage. But how should we handle these stockpiles? Although
the best solution would appear to be to use all the items up, in many
cases they are past their expiration date and must be thrown out. I
highly recommend that you get rid of excess stock all at once. Give it
away to friends who need it, recycle it, or take it to a donation shop.
You may think this is a waste of money, but reducing your stock and
relieving yourself of the burden of excess is the quickest and most e
ective way to put your things in order. Once you've experienced the
freedom of a life without surplus stock, you won't want to give it up
and will naturally stop

stockpiling. My clients tell me that now life is more fun because when
they run out of something they enjoy seeing how long they can last
without it or trying to substitute other things. It's important to
assess what you have on hand now and eliminate excess.

Reduce until you reach the point where something clicks Sort by
category, in the correct order, and keep only those things that inspire
joy. Do this thoroughly and quickly, all in one go. If you follow this
advice, you will dramatically reduce the volume of things you own,
experience an exhilaration you have never known before, and gain con
dence in your life. What is the perfect amount of possessions? I think
that most people don't know. If you have lived in Japan or the United
States all your life, you have almost certainly been surrounded by far
more than you need. This makes it hard for many people to imagine how
much they need to live comfortably. As you reduce your belongings
through the process of tidying, you will come to a point where you
suddenly know how much is just right for you. You will feel it as
clearly as if something has clicked inside your head and said, "Ah! This
is just the amount I need to live comfortably. This is all I need to be
happy. I don't need anything more." The satisfaction that envelops your
whole being at that point is palpable. I call this the "just-right click
point." Interestingly, once you have passed this point, you'll nd that
the amount you own never increases. And that is precisely why you will
never rebound. The click point di ers from one person to another. For a
shoe lover, it might be one hundred pairs of shoes, while a book lover
might not need anything but books. Some people, like me, have more
loungewear than clothes for going out, while others may prefer to go
naked in the home and therefore have no loungewear at all. (You'd be
surprised at how many fall into this latter category.) As you put your
house in order and decrease your possessions, you'll see what your true
values are, what is really important to you in your life. But don't
focus on reducing, or on e cient storage methods, for that matter. Focus
instead on choosing the things that

inspire joy and on enjoying life according to your own standards. This
is the true pleasure of tidying. If you have not yet felt a click, don't
worry. You can still reduce. Tackle this job with con dence.

Follow your intuition and all will be well "Choose those things that
spark joy when you touch them." "Hang those clothes that would be
happier on hangers." "Don't worry about throwing away too much. There
will come a moment when you know what is just right." If you have read
this far, you have probably noticed that in my method your feelings are
the standard for decision making. Many people may be puzzled by such
vague criteria as "things that give you a thrill of pleasure" or "click
point." The majority of methods give clearly de ned numerical goals,
such as "Discard anything you haven't used for two years," "Seven
jackets and ten blouses is the perfect amount," "Get rid of one thing
every time you buy something new." But I believe this is one reason
these methods result in rebound. Even if these methods temporarily
result in a tidy space, automatically following criteria proposed by
others and based on their "know-how" will have no lasting e ect---unless
their criteria happens to match your own standards of what feels right.
Only you can know what kind of environment makes you feel happy. The act
of picking up and choosing objects is extremely personal. To avoid
rebound, you need to create your own tidying method with your own
standards. This is precisely why it is so important to identify how you
feel about each item you own. The fact that you possess a surplus of
things that you can't bring yourself to discard doesn't mean you are
taking good care of them. In fact, it is quite the opposite. By paring
down to the volume that you can properly handle, you revitalize your
relationship with your belongings. Just because you dispose of something
does not mean you give up past experiences or your identity. Through the
process of selecting only those things that inspire joy, you can
identify precisely what you love and what you need.

When we honestly confront the things we own, they evoke many emotions
within us. Those feelings are real. It is these emotions that give us
the energy for living. Believe what your heart tells you when you ask,
"Does this spark joy?" If you act on that intuition, you will be amazed
at how things will begin to connect in your life and at the dramatic
changes that follow. It is as if your life has been touched by magic.
Putting your house in order is the magic that creates a vibrant and
happy life.

4

Storing your things to make your life shine

Designate a place for each thing This is the routine I follow every day
when I return from work. First, I unlock the door and announce to my
house, "I'm home!" Picking up the pair of shoes I wore yesterday and
left out in the entranceway, I say, "Thank you very much for your hard
work," and put them away in the shoe cupboard. Then I take o the shoes I
wore today and place them neatly in the entranceway. Heading to the
kitchen, I put the kettle on and go to my bedroom. There I lay my
handbag gently on the soft sheepskin rug and take o my outdoor clothes.
I put my jacket and dress on a hanger, say, "Good job!" and hang them
temporarily from the closet doorknob. I put my tights in a laundry
basket that ts into the bottom right corner of my closet, open a drawer,
select the clothes I feel like wearing inside, and get dressed. I greet
the waist-high potted plant by the window and stroke its leaves. My next
task is to empty the contents of my handbag on the rug and put each item
away in its place. First I remove all the receipts. Then I put my wallet
in its designated box in a drawer under my bed with a word of gratitude.
I place my train pass and my business card holder beside it. I put my
wristwatch in a pink antique case in the same drawer and place my
necklace and earrings on the accessory tray beside it. Before closing
the drawer, I say, "Thanks for all you did for me today." Next, I return
to the entrance and put away the books and notebooks I carried around
all day (I have converted a shelf of my shoe cupboard into a bookshelf).
From the shelf below it I take out my "receipt pouch" and put my
receipts in it. Then I put my digital camera that I use for work in the
space beside it, which is reserved for electrical things. Papers that
I've nished with go in the recycle

bin beneath the kitchen range. In the kitchen, I make a pot of tea while
checking the mail, disposing of the letters I've nished with. I return
to my bedroom, put my empty handbag in a bag, and put it on the top
shelf of the closet, saying, "You did well. Have a good rest." From the
time I get in the door to the moment I close the closet, a total of only
ve minutes has passed. Now I can go back to the kitchen, pour myself a
cup of tea, and relax. I did not give you this account to boast about my
beautiful lifestyle, but rather to demonstrate what it's like to have a
designated spot for everything. Keeping your space tidy becomes second
nature. You can do it e ortlessly, even when you come home tired from
work, and this gives you more time to really enjoy life. The point in
deciding speci c places to keep things is to designate a spot for every
thing. You may think, "It would take me forever to do that," but you
don't need to worry. Although it seems like deciding on a place for
every item must be complicated, it's far simpler than deciding what to
keep and what to discard. Since you have already decided what to keep
according to type of item and since those items all belong to the same
category, all you need to do is store them near each other. The reason
every item must have a designated place is because the existence of an
item without a home multiplies the chances that your space will become
cluttered again. Let's say, for example, that you have a shelf with
nothing on it. What happens if someone leaves an object that has no
designated spot on that shelf? That one item will become your downfall.
Within no time that space, which had maintained a sense of order, will
be covered with objects, as if someone had yelled, "Gather round,
everybody!" You only need to designate a spot for every item once. Try
it. You'll be amazed at the results. No longer will you buy more than
you need. No longer will the things you own continue to accumulate. In
fact, your stock on hand will decrease. The essence of e ective storage
is this: designate a spot for every last thing you own. If you ignore
this basic principle and start experimenting with the vast range of
storage ideas being promoted, you will be sorry.

Those storage "solutions" are really just prisons within which to bury
possessions that spark no joy. One of the main reasons for rebound is
the failure to designate a spot for each item. Without a designated
spot, where are you going to put things when you nish using them? Once
you choose a place for your things, you can keep your house in order. So
decide where your things belong and when you nish using them, put them
there. This is the main requirement for storage.

Discard rst, store later The participants of my courses are all very
surprised when I show them the before-and-after pictures of my clients'
places. The most common response is "The room looks so bare!" It's true.
In many cases, my clients choose to leave nothing on the oor and nothing
to obstruct the line of vision. Even the bookcases have disappeared. But
this doesn't mean they have cast o all their books. Rather, the
bookcases are now in the closet or cupboard. Putting bookcases in the
cupboard is one of my standard storage practices. If your closet is
already lled to bursting, you may think that your bookcase would never
t. In fact, 99 percent of my readers probably feel this way. But there
is actually plenty of room. The amount of storage space you have in your
room is actually just right. I can't count how many times people have
complained to me that they don't have enough room, but I have yet to see
a house that lacked su cient storage. The real problem is that we have
far more than we need or want. Once you learn to choose your belongings
properly, you will be left only with the amount that ts perfectly in the
space you currently own. This is the true magic of tidying. It may seem
incredible, but my method of keeping only what sparks joy in the heart
is really that precise. This is why you must begin by discarding. Once
you have done that, it's easy to decide where things should go because
your possessions will have been reduced to a third or even a quarter of
what you started out with. Conversely, no matter how hard you tidy and
no matter how e ective the storage method, if you start storing before
you have eliminated excess, you will rebound. I know because I've been
there myself. Yes, me. Even though I am warning you not to become a
storage expert, even though I urge you to forget about storing until you
have reduced your possessions, not long ago, 90 percent of my thoughts
were focused solely on storage. I began thinking seriously

about this issue from the time I was ve, so this part of my career
lasted even longer than my passion for discarding, which I only
discovered as a teenager. During that period, I spent most of my time
with a book or magazine in one hand trying out every kind of storage
method and making every possible mistake. Whether it was my own room, my
siblings' rooms, or even my school, I spent my days examining what was
in the drawers and cupboards and moving things a few millimeters at a
time, trying to nd the perfect arrangement. "What would happen if I
moved this box over there?" "What would happen if I took out this
divider?" No matter where I was, I would close my eyes and rearrange the
contents of a cupboard or room in my mind as if they were pieces of a
jigsaw puzzle. Having spent my youth steeped in this topic, I fell under
the illusion that storage was some form of intellectual contest, the
object of which was to see how much I could t into a storage space by
rational organization. If there were a gap between two pieces of
furniture, I would squeeze in a storage unit and stack it with things,
gloating triumphantly when the space was lled. Somewhere along the way,
I had begun to see my things and even my house as an adversary that I
had to beat, and I was constantly in ghting mode.

Storage: pursue ultimate simplicity When I rst started this business, I
assumed that I had to demonstrate my ability to come up with miraculous
storage designs ---clever solutions that you might see in a magazine,
such as a set of shelves that t perfectly into a tiny space that no one
else would have thought to use. I had some strange notion that this was
the only way to satisfy my clients. In the end, however, such clever
ideas are almost always impractical to use and serve only to gratify the
designer's ego. Just to give an example, once when I was helping to
organize a client's home, I came across a turntable, much like those
used underneath revolving tabletops in Chinese restaurants. It had
originally served as the base of a microwave, but the oven was long
gone. As soon as I saw it, I had the brilliant idea of turning it into a
storage item. I was having trouble deciding where it could be used as it
was quite large and thick, but then my client happened to mention that
she had so many salad dressings she could not keep them organized. I
opened the cupboard she indicated and, sure enough, it was lled with
bottles of salad dressing. I took them all out and tried inserting the
turntable. It t perfectly. I loaded it up and voilà! I had a storage
space that looked as neat and fancy as a store display. She could get at
the bottles in the back simply by turning the table. How convenient! My
client was thrilled and everything seemed perfect. It was not long
before I realized my mistake. At our next lesson, I checked her kitchen.
While most of it was still neat and tidy, when I opened the door of the
cupboard under the sink, I saw that the inside was a mess. When I asked
why, she explained that every time she spun the turntable, the bottles
slid and fell over. In addition, she had too many bottles, so she rested
the extra on the edge of the turntable, making it harder to spin.

As you can see, I had been so focused on using the turntable to create
an amazing storage space that I had failed to really see what I was
storing---bottles that slide and topple easily. When I thought about it
more carefully, I also realized that no one needs frequent access to
stock at the back of a cupboard, so there was no need for a turntable.
Besides, round shapes take up too much room and create wasted space,
which makes them unsuitable for storage. In the end, I removed the
turntable, placed the bottles in a square box and returned them to the
cupboard. Although plain and conventional, according to my client this
method was far easier to use. From this experience, I came to the
conclusion that storage methods should be as simple as possible. There
is no point in thinking up complicated strategies. When in doubt, ask
your house and the item being stored what is the best solution. Most
people realize that clutter is caused by too much stu . But why do we
have too much stu ? Usually it is because we do not accurately grasp how
much we actually own. And we fail to grasp how much we own because our
storage methods are too complex. The ability to avoid excess stock
depends on the ability to simplify storage. The secret to maintaining an
uncluttered room is to pursue ultimate simplicity in storage so that you
can tell at a glance how much you have. I say "ultimate simplicity" for
a reason. It is impossible to remember the existence of every item we
own even when we simplify our storage methods. There are still times in
my own house, where I have worked hard to keep storage simple, that I
notice an item I had completely forgotten about in a closet or drawer.
If my storage were more complex---for example, if I divided my things
into three levels according to frequency of use or according to
season---I am sure that many more items would be left to rot in the
darkness. Therefore, it makes more sense to keep storage as simple as
possible.

Don't scatter storage spaces For the reasons described above, my storage
method is extremely simple. I have only two rules: store all items of
the same type in the same place and don't scatter storage space. There
are only two ways of categorizing belongings: by type of item and by
person. This is easy to grasp if you consider someone who lives alone as
opposed to someone who lives with family. If you live alone or have a
room of your own, storage is very simple---just designate one place for
storing each type of item. You can keep categories to a minimum by
following those used for sorting. Start with clothes, then books, then
documents, komono, and nally mementos. If you are sorting your things in
this order, you can store each category in its own designated spot as
soon as you have chosen what to keep. You can even categorize more
loosely than that. Instead of dividing your things by detailed type, use
broad similarities in material, such as "cloth-like," "paper-like," and
"things that are electrical," as your criteria and choose one place for
each of these. This is much easier than trying to visualize where you
might use an object or the frequency with which you use it. With my
method, you will be able to categorize your things more accurately. If
you have already been selecting what to keep on the basis of what speaks
to your heart, then you will understand what I mean because you have
already collected items by category, spread them out in one spot, and
held them in your hand to make your decision. The work you have been
doing has actually honed your ability to sense what belongs together and
to choose appropriate places for storing them. If you live with your
family, rst clearly de ne separate storage spaces for each family
member. This is essential. For example, you can designate separate
closets for you, your husband, and your children, and store whatever
belongs to each person in his

or her respective closet. That's all you need to do. The important point
here is to designate only one place per person if at all possible. In
other words, storage should be focused in one spot. If storage places
are spread around, the entire house will become cluttered in no time. To
concentrate the belongings of each person in one spot is the most e
ective way for keeping storage tidy. I once had a client who asked me to
help her child be tidy. Her daughter was three years old. When I visited
her house, I found that her daughter's things were stored in three di
erent places: clothes in the bedroom, toys in the living room, and books
in the Japanese tatami room. Following the basic principles of sorting
and storing, we gathered everything in the tatami room. From that time
on, her daughter began to choose her own clothes to wear and put away
her things where they belonged. Although I was the one who had given the
instructions, I was surprised. Even a three-year-old can tidy! Having
your own space makes you happy. Once you feel that it belongs to you
personally, you want to keep it tidy. If it is hard to give everyone his
or her own room, you can still give each person his or her own storage
space. Of the many people I've met who are not good at tidying, most had
parents who cleaned their rooms for them or they never had a space that
they felt was their very own. These people often store their clothes in
their children's dresser and their books in their partner's bookcase.
But not having a space you can call your own is dangerous. Everyone
needs a sanctuary. I realize that when you begin tidying, there is a
real temptation to start with spaces or things that belong to the entire
household, such as the living room, soaps and medicines, or various
appliances and household supplies. But please leave those for later.
First, start by sorting only your own things. Choose what you want to
keep and store it in your very own space. By doing so, you will learn
the basics of how to put your house in order. Just as with choosing
which belongings to keep, following the right order is crucial.

Forget about " ow planning" and "frequency of use" Serious books on
tidying commonly advise their readers to consider the ow plan when
designing storage. I am not saying this advice is erroneous. There are
many people who advocate practical storage methods based on careful
consideration of the line of tra c in the house, so what I am saying
here is intended to apply only to my own storage method. And I say,
forget about ow planning. When one of my clients, a woman in her fties,
had nished sorting and storing her own things, we tackled her husband's
belongings. She told me that her husband had to have everything right at
hand, whether it was the remote control or a book. When I examined their
living space, I found that, indeed, her husband's things were stored all
over the house. There was a small bookshelf for his books beside the
toilet, a place for his bags in the entrance hall, and drawers for his
socks and underwear near the bath. But that did not a ect my policy. I
always insist that storage be focused in a single place and therefore I
told my client to move her husband's underwear, socks, and bags into the
closet where his suits were hanging. She looked a bit anxious. "But he
likes to keep things where he uses them," she said. "What if he's
upset...." A common mistake many people make is to decide where to store
things on the basis of where it's easiest to take them out. This
approach is a fatal trap. Clutter is caused by a failure to return
things to where they belong. Therefore, storage should reduce the e ort
needed to put things away, not the e ort needed to get them out. When we
use something, we have a clear purpose for getting it out. Unless for
some reason it is incredibly hard work, we usually don't mind the e ort
involved. Clutter has only two possible causes: too much e ort is
required to put things away or it is unclear where things belong. If we
overlook this vital point, we are

likely to create a system that results in clutter. For people like me
who are naturally lazy, I strongly recommend focusing storage in one
spot. More often than not, the notion that it's more convenient to keep
everything within arm's reach is a biased assumption. Many people design
their storage layout to match the ow plan within their house, but how do
you think that ow plan developed in the rst place? In almost every case,
ow plan is determined not by what a person does during the day but by
where he or she stores things. We may think that we have stored things
to suit our behavior, but usually we have unconsciously adjusted our
actions to match where things are stored. Laying out storage space to
follow the current ow plan will only disperse storage throughout the
house. That, in turn, will increase the chances that we will accumulate
more possessions and forget what we already have, making life more di
cult. Considering the average size of a Japanese dwelling, a storage
layout that follows the ow plan is not going to make that much di
erence. If it only takes ten to twenty seconds to walk from one end of
your home to the other, do you really need to worry about ow plan? If
you are aiming for an uncluttered room, it is much more important to
arrange your storage so that you can tell at a glance where everything
is than to worry about the details of who does what, where, and when.
There is no need to get complicated. Just designate where to keep your
things in accordance with the design of your home and your storage
problems will be solved. Your house already knows where things belong.
This is why the storage method I use is so amazingly simple. To be
frank, I can remember where everything is kept in almost all my clients'
homes. That's how simple my method is. I have never considered the ow
plan when helping clients organize, yet none of them has had any
problems. On the contrary, once they've created a simple storage plan,
they never have to ponder where something belongs; it becomes natural to
put things away, and consequently, there is no more clutter in the home.
Store everything similar in the same place or in close proximity. Don't
disperse your storage space. If you follow this advice, you will

nd that you have created a very natural ow plan. There is also no need
whatsoever to consider frequency of use when designing storage space.
Some books on tidying o er methods that classify things into six levels
according to frequency of use: daily, once every three days, once a
week, once a month, once a year, and less than once a year. Am I the
only one whose head swims at the very thought of dividing my drawers
into six compartments? At the most, I use only two categories for
frequency of use: things I use often and things I don't. Take the
contents of a drawer, for example. You will naturally start keeping the
things you use less in the back of the drawer and those you use more in
the front. There is no need to decide this when you rst lay out your
storage space. When you are choosing what to keep, ask your heart; when
you are choosing where to store something, ask your house. If you
remember to do this, you will instinctively know how to proceed with
organizing and storing your things.

Never pile things: vertical storage is the key There are people who
stack everything in piles, be it books, papers, or clothes. But this is
a great waste. When it comes to storage, vertical is best. I am
particularly obsessed with this point. I store every item vertically if
possible, including clothes, which I fold and stand on edge in my
drawers, and stockings, which I roll up and stand in a box. The same is
true for stationery and writing tools: whether boxes of staples,
measuring tapes, or erasers, I stand them on edge. I even store my
laptop in the bookcase as if it were indeed a notebook. If you have
storage space that should be su cient yet falls short, try standing
things vertically. You'll nd that this solves most problems. I store
things vertically and avoid stacking for two reasons. First, if you
stack things, you end up with what seems like inexhaustible storage
space. Things can be stacked forever and endlessly on top, which makes
it harder to notice the increasing volume. In contrast, when things are
stored vertically, any increase takes up space and you will eventually
run out of storage area. When you do, you'll notice, "Ah, I'm starting
to accumulate stu again." The other reason is this: stacking is very
hard on the things at the bottom. When things are piled on top of one
another, the things underneath get squished. Stacking weakens and
exhausts the things that bear the weight of the pile. Just imagine how
you would feel if you were forced to carry a heavy load for hours. Not
only that, but the things in the pile virtually disappear because we
forget that they even exist. When we pile our clothes one on top of the
other, the clothes at the bottom are used less and less frequently. The
out ts that no longer thrill my clients even though they loved them at
the time of purchase are very often the ones that spent a long time at
the bottom of the pile. This applies to papers and documents as well. As
soon as another document is placed on top, the rst document recedes a
little further

from our awareness, and before we know it, we put o dealing with it or
even forget about it altogether. So for these reasons, I recommend
storing vertically anything that can be stood up. Try taking a pile you
already have and standing it up. Just by doing that you will become more
aware of the volume of things in that pile. Vertical storage can be used
anywhere. Messy fridges are common, but their contents can be organized
quickly and simply by standing things on end. I happen to love carrots,
for example. If you open my fridge, you'll nd carrots standing in the
drink holders on the door.

No need for commercial storage items The world is full of handy storage
items. Adjustable dividers, cloth racks that can be hung from the rod in
your closet, narrow shelves that t into small spaces. You can nd storage
items you never imagined existed at any store, from the local dollar
shop to high-end fancy furniture and housewares stores. I was once a
storage fanatic myself, so at one period, I tried just about every item
there was on the market, including the weirdest and most exotic. Yet
there are almost none left in my house. The storage items you'll nd in
my house are several sets of clear plastic drawers for my clothes and
komono, a set of cardboard drawers I have used since I was in junior
high school, and a rattan basket for my towels. That's it. And all of
them are kept inside the built-in closet. Other than these, there are
the built-in shelves in the kitchen and washroom and the shoe cupboard
in the entranceway. I don't need a bookcase because I store my books and
papers on one of the shelves in the shoe cupboard. The built-in closets
and shelves, far from being large, are smaller than average. Basically,
the only storage items you need are plain old drawers and boxes---you
don't need anything special or fancy. People often ask me what I
recommend, no doubt expecting me to reveal some hitherto secret storage
weapon. But I can tell you right now: there is no need to buy dividers
or any other gadget. You can solve your storage problems with things you
already have in the house. The most common item I use is an empty
shoebox. I have tried all kinds of storage products, but have never
found any other that is free and still surpasses the shoebox. It gets
above average marks for all ve of my criteria: size, material,
durability, ease of use, and attractiveness. These well-balanced
attributes and its versatility are its greatest merits. Shoes come in
boxes with cute designs as well. I frequently ask my clients, "Do you
have any shoeboxes?" when I visit their homes.

Shoeboxes have in nite uses. I commonly use them to store socks and
stockings in drawers. Shoebox height is perfect for standing up rolled
stockings. In the washroom, they can be used to store bottles of
shampoo, conditioner, etc., and they're also perfect for holding
detergents and other household cleaning items. In the kitchen, they can
be used to stock foodstu s as well as garbage bags, cloths, and so on. I
also use them to hold cake pans, pie plates, and other cooking items
that get less frequent use. The box can then be stored on an upper
shelf. For some reason, many people seem to store their baking pans in
plastic bags, but they are much easier to use when stored in a shoebox.
This extremely easy solution is very popular with my clients. I am
always pleased when they tell me that they bake more often since
reorganizing. The lid of a shoebox is shallow and can be used like a
tray. It can be placed in the cupboard to hold your cooking oils and
spices, keeping the base of the cupboard clean. Unlike many shelf
liners, these lids don't slip and are much easier to replace. If you
keep cooking utensils such as your ladle and spatula in the kitchen
drawers, you can use the shoebox lid to hold them. This keeps the
utensils from rolling about noisily in the drawer every time you open
and close it, and because it acts as a divider, you can use the
remaining space more e ectively. Of course, there are many other types
of boxes that make handy storage items. Those that I use most frequently
include the plastic cases that hold business cards and those that come
with portable music players made by Apple. In fact, the boxes that
contain many Apple products are the right size and design for storage,
so if you have any, I recommend using them as dividers in your drawers.
They are perfect for storing writing tools. Another standard item is
extra plastic food containers, which can be used to store small items in
the kitchen. Basically, any square box or container of the right size
will do. Large cardboard boxes or electrical appliance boxes, however,
are too big for storage dividers, inconvenient for other types of
storage, and just plain ugly. Please get rid of them. Whenever you come
across likely storage boxes while you are cleaning and sorting your

belongings, set them aside in one spot until you are ready to start
storing. Be sure to discard or recycle any that are left once your house
is in order. Never hang on to them in the belief that you might use them
someday. I don't recommend using round, heart-shaped, or irregularly
shaped containers as dividers because they usually waste space. However,
if a particular box gives you a thrill when you hold it, that's di
erent. To discard it or to keep it without using it would be a waste, so
here you should follow your intuition and use it for storage. You can,
for example, use such boxes in a drawer for hair accessories, or to
store cotton swabs or your sewing kit. Create your own original
combinations by matching an empty box to t an item that needs storing.
The best method is to experiment and enjoy the process. When my clients
use what they already have in the house like this, they always nd that
they have exactly what they need to store their things. They don't need
to go out and buy storage items. Of course, there are plenty of great
designer items out there. But right now, the important thing is to nish
putting your house in order as soon as possible. Rather than buying
something to make do for now, wait until you have completed the entire
process and then take your time looking for storage items that you
really like.

The best way to store bags is in another bag Handbags, purses, and other
bags that are not in use are empty. At one point in this business, it
struck me that this was a great waste of space, especially as they are
often kept in prime storage locations. Not only do they take up more
room because they can't be folded, but also they are often stu ed with
tissue paper to keep their shape. In Japanese homes where storage is
extremely limited, this seemed like an unpardonably extravagant use of
space. The fact that the tissue paper often starts to shred just adds
insult to injury. Determined to nd a solution, I began to experiment.
First, I decided to do away with the tissue paper. After all, getting
rid of things that don't spark joy is key to the KonMari Method.
Instead, I tried stu ng the bag with small o -season items. In summer, I
used scarves and mittens, and in winter, I used items such as bathing
suits. The bags not only kept their shape but also doubled as storage
space. I was delighted to nd a solution that seemed to kill two birds
with one stone. But within a year, I had abandoned this approach.
Although in theory it seemed like a great idea, in practice, having to
remove the items every time I wanted to use a handbag was a pain, and
once removed, those items cluttered up the closet. Of course, I did not
give up. I kept looking for some kind of stu ng that would not shred. My
next idea was to put small items in a thin cloth bag rst before lling
the purse. Removal was easy and the cloth bag actually looked nice even
when exposed in the cupboard. I was pleased to have discovered yet
another groundbreaking solution. But this method, too, had a hidden
drawback. I could not see the o -season items inside, and when their
season came around, I completely forgot to empty two of the inner bags.
It wasn't until a year later that I nally noticed them, and by then,
their contents were looking very forlorn. This made me pause for
thought. Despite the fact that my policy for clothes and

other items is to keep o -season things in sight, I had foolishly
believed that I would remember to take out what I could not see. I
emptied out the cloth bags and freed the items inside, but the handbags
they had been supporting now looked wilted. I needed something to help
them keep their shape, but I certainly didn't want to ll them with o
-season clothes that I would likely forget. Not knowing what to do, I
decided to place one bag inside another just for the time being. This,
in fact, turned out to be the perfect solution. By storing bags inside
each other, I halved the amount of storage space needed, and I could
keep track of their contents by letting the straps dangle outside. The
key is to put the same type of bags together. Sets should consist of
handbags made from similar material, such as sti leather or thickly
woven cloth, or of purses for special occasions, such as weddings and
funerals. Dividing by material and/or by type of use means that you only
need to take out one set whenever you need a handbag. This is much
easier. Keep in mind, however, that you should not store too many
handbags in one. My rule of thumb is to keep no more than two in any one
bag and to make sure that I store them so that I won't forget what's
inside. In the case of knapsacks, which fold up surprisingly small, I
recommend storing them all inside a single knapsack. To summarize, the
best way to store purses, handbags, and other bags is to make sets
according to the material, size, and frequency of use and to store them
one inside the other, like nested boxes. All straps and handles should
be left in plain view. If the handbag used for storage came in a bag,
you can store the set in that. Line up these sets in your closet or
wardrobe where you can see them. I stand them on the top shelf. The
process of storing bags inside another bag, of nding the right
combinations, is a lot of fun, much like making a jigsaw puzzle. When
you nd just the right pair, where the outer and inner bags t so well
together that they support one another, it is like witnessing a meeting
that was destined to be.

Empty your bag every day There are some things you need on a daily
basis, such as your wallet, your bus or train pass, and your date book.
Many people see no point in taking these things out when they come home
because they will use them again the next day, but this is a mistake.
The purpose of a purse or messenger bag is to carry your things for you
when you're away from home. You ll your bag with the things you need,
such as documents, your cell phone, and your wallet, and it carries them
all without complaint, even if it is lled to bursting. When you put it
down and it scrapes its bottom on the oor, it utters no word of
criticism, only doing its best to support you. What a hard worker! It
would be cruel not to give it a break at least at home. Being packed all
the time, even when not in use, must feel something like going to bed on
a full stomach. If you treat your handbags like this, they will soon
look tired and worn. If you do not make a habit of unpacking your bag,
you are also quite likely to leave something inside when you decide to
use another bag, and before you know it, you will have forgotten what
you have in each one. Unable to nd a pen or lip balm, you will wind up
buying a new one. The most common items found in my clients' handbags
when we tidy up their rooms are tissues, coins, crumpled receipts, and
used chewing gum wadded in its wrapper. There is a real danger that
important items like accessories, memo pads, or documents may become
mixed up with these. So, empty your bag every day. This is not as
bothersome as it sounds. You just need to make a place for the things
inside it. Find a box and place your train pass, company ID, and other
important items vertically inside it. Then put the box just like that
into a drawer or cupboard. Any box will do, but if you can't nd the
right size, a shoebox will work ne. Or you can make a space in one
corner of a drawer, without using a box at all. Appearance is important,
so if you're using a box, don't hesitate to look for one

that you really like. One of the best places to keep this box is on top
of the set of drawers you use for storage, and it is more convenient if
that is close to where you keep your bag. If you can't empty your bag
sometimes, that's all right. There are times when I come home very late
at night that I don't bother to empty my bag because I plan to use it
again for work early the next morning. Just between you and me, while
writing this book, there have been times when I came home and fell
asleep on the oor without even changing my clothes. The important thing
is to create an environment where your bag can have a rest by
designating a speci c place to store everything you usually carry inside
it.

Items that usurp oor space belong in the closet If you have built-in
closets in your home, most of the things in your house can be stored
inside them. Japanese closets are ideal storage spaces. They are deep
and wide, are divided into top and bottom by a broad and extremely
sturdy shelf, and have a cupboard built into the wall above. But many
Japanese people do not know how to take advantage of this space. For
those of you who have closets like this, the best policy is to use these
faithfully. No matter how hard you might try to design some ingenious
device to solve all your storage problems, the end result is almost
always more di cult to use than what is already there. The basic method
for e ective use of a closet is as follows. First, as a general rule, o
-season items should be stored in the cupboard above the closet. This
includes seasonal ornaments, skiwear, and hiking or other seasonal
sportswear and goods. This is also the best spot for large mementos that
will not t in a bookcase, such as a wedding album or photo albums. But
don't put them in cardboard boxes. Instead, stand them up toward the
front of the cupboard as you would books in a bookcase. Otherwise, you
are unlikely to ever see them again. Regular clothes should be stored in
the closet. If you use clear plastic cases to store them, I strongly
recommend the drawer rather than the box type. The instant clothes are
put away in a box, they become a pain to remove, and in most cases,
people never bother to take them out even when they are back in season.
And, of course, fold and stand the clothes on edge in the drawer.
Bedding is best stored on the upper shelf of the closet where it is less
exposed to humidity and dust. The bottom space can be used to store
electrical appliances such as fans and space heaters during the o
-season. The best way to use a Japanese-style closet is to think of

it as a small room and to store the things inside it in drawers or other
storage units. I had one client who kept all her clothes loose in the
closet. When we opened the door, it looked like a garbage dump and the
clothes resembled a tangled mess of noodles. It is far more e cient to
move all your storage units into your closet. This is where I usually
put steel racks, bookcases, and plywood cupboards or shelves, which can
also be used to store books. I also store any large items that take up
oor space, such as suitcases, golf clubs, electrical appliances, or
guitars, in the closet. I'm sure many of my clients did not believe they
could ever t all their things into their closet, but once they followed
my method for thoroughly sorting and discarding, it was quite simple.

Keep things out of the bath and the kitchen sink How many bottles of
shampoo and conditioner line your bathtub? Di erent family members may
use di erent products, or you may have several kinds that you use
depending on your mood or for once-a-week treatments. But these are such
a bother to move when you clean the bath. Kept on the oor in the shower
or on the edge of the bath, they become slimy. To avoid this, some
people use a wire basket as a container, but from my own experience,
this makes things even worse. I once bought a wire basket big enough to
t all the soaps, shampoos, and even facial masks used by my family. My
delight at this convenient item was short-lived. At rst, I dried it
every time I had a bath, but soon wiping every wire became a chore and I
did it only once every three days, then every ve days, then even less,
until I had completely forgotten to take care of it. One day, I noticed
that the shampoo bottle was red and slimy on the bottom. Examining the
rack, I saw that it was so covered in slime I could not bear to look at
it. Almost in tears, I scrubbed the wire rack clean and not long after
got rid of it. It was just too much trouble and every time I got in the
bath and saw it, it reminded me of that disgusting slime episode. I
should have realized that the bath is the most humid place in the house,
which obviously makes it the most unsuitable place for storing anything.
There is no need to keep soaps and shampoos out when we are not using
them, and the added exposure to heat and moisture when they aren't in
use is bound to a ect their quality. It is therefore my policy to keep
everything out of the bath or shower. Whatever is used in the bath
should be dried after use anyway, so it makes far more sense to just
wipe down the few items we use with our bath towel and then put them
away in the cupboard. While this may

seem like more work at rst glance, it is actually less. It is much
quicker and easier to clean the bath or shower without these items
cluttering that space, and there will be less slime buildup. The same is
true for the kitchen sink area. Do you keep your sponges and dish
detergent by the sink? I store mine underneath it. The secret is to make
sure the sponge is completely dry. Many people use a wire sponge rack
with suction cups that stick to the sink. If you do, too, I recommend
that you remove it immediately. It cannot dry out if it is sprayed with
water every time you use the sink, and it will soon start to smell. To
prevent this, squeeze your sponge tightly after use and hang it up to
dry. You can use a clothespin to pin it to your towel rack or to the
handle of a kitchen drawer if you don't have a rack. Personally, I
recommend hanging sponges outside, such as on the veranda. I dry not
only my sponges but also my cutting boards, colanders, and dishes on my
veranda. Sunlight is a good disinfectant, and my kitchen always looks
very tidy because I don't need a dish rack. In fact, I don't even own a
dish rack. I put all the dishes I wash into a large bowl or colander and
place this on the veranda to dry. I can wash them in the morning and
just leave them outside. This is an excellent solution for people living
on their own or for those who don't use many dishes. Where do you store
your oil, salt, pepper, soy sauce, and other seasonings? Many people
keep them right beside the stove because they want them close at hand
for the sake of convenience. If you are one of these people, I hope you
will rescue them right now. For one thing, a counter is for preparing
food, not for storing things. Counter space beside the stove, in
particular, is exposed to splatters of food and oil, and the seasonings
kept here are usually sticky with grease. Rows of bottles in this area
also make it much harder to keep clean, and the kitchen area will always
be covered in a lm of oil. Kitchen shelves and cupboards are usually
designed to store seasonings and spices, so put them away where they
belong. Quite often, a long, narrow drawer is located next to the oven
that can be used for this purpose.

Make the top shelf of the bookcase your personal shrine I once worked as
a Shinto shrine maiden for ve years. I have loved shrines since I was in
grade school and would often drop by our community shrine to pay my
respects to the local deity. Even people who don't love shrines as I do
still have protective talismans and good-luck charms in their homes. I
have found countless charms from shrines all over Japan, such as Izumo
Taisha, in my clients' homes. The people I meet not only work hard to re
ne both body and mind but also remember to ask the gods for extra luck.
While this is commendable, my clients have more than enough charms to
spare. Please keep in mind that charms are not something you buy but
something with which you are entrusted. They are e ective only for one
year after you receive them, so those that are past their expiration
dates should be returned as soon as possible. You do not need to take a
charm back to the same place you bought it, but do remember that Shinto
charms should be taken to a shrine and Buddhist charms to a temple. What
should be done with charms and talismans that are still e ective? They
are actually intended to be carried on your person, by attaching them to
your key ring, putting them in your purse, or clipping them to the metal
rings if you use a re llable date book. But there is a limit to how many
you can carry like this, and if you visit several temples and shrines a
year, you may have quite a collection. To carry them all around with you
is pretentious, and having too many will not inspire joy in anyone. One
of my clients was a thirty-one-year-old woman who worked for a foreign
consulting rm. Like many other Japanese women, she enjoyed having her
fortune told and visiting power spots. Her house was lled with charms
she had collected over the years. They emerged

from such places as a box kept deep in a desk drawer and from between
the pages of her books. Altogether we found thirty-four charms,
including one given to her by her grandmother for success in her studies
and several talismans from shrines famous for romance. Many had expired.
In addition, she had a mini Buddha from India, a mini Virgin Mary from
Europe, and various crystals and other power stones. In cases like this,
I recommend that my clients make a personal altar in a corner of their
house. Although I use the word "altar," there is no need to worry about
the direction it faces or the design. Just make a corner that is
shrine-like. I recommend the top shelf in a bookcase because locating it
above eye level makes it more shrinelike. One theme underlying my method
of tidying is transforming the home into a sacred space, a power spot
lled with pure energy. A comfortable environment, a space that feels
good to be in, a place where you can relax---these are the traits that
make a home a power spot. Would you rather live in a home like this or
in one that resembles a storage shed? The answer, I hope, is obvious.

Decorate your closet with your secret delights "Don't open that,
please!" is a common refrain. My clients usually have a drawer, a box,
or a closet that they don't want to show me. We all have things that we
would rather other people didn't know about us, yet which we feel are
important. Common items in this category are posters of pop idols and
other fan memorabilia, and hobby-related books. The posters are often
rolled up in the back of the closet and CDs stowed in a box. But this is
a waste. Your room at least should be the one place where you can pursue
and enjoy your interests to your heart's content. So if you like
something, don't hide it away. If you want to enjoy them but don't want
your friends or others to know, I have a solution. Transform your closet
into your own private space, one that gives you a thrill of pleasure.
Use these treasures to decorate the back wall of the closet behind your
clothes or the inside of the door. You can decorate your closet with
anything, whether private or not. Use posters, photos, ornaments,
whatever you like. There are no limits on how to decorate your storage
space. No one will complain and no one will see. Your storage space is
your private paradise, so personalize it to the fullest.

Unpack and de-tag new clothes immediately One of the many things that
amazes me when I help my clients tidy is the number of items that are
still in their packages. Food and sanitary items I can understand, but
why do people shove clothes such as socks and underwear in their drawer
without removing them from the package? They take up more space that way
and are also more likely to be forgotten. My father liked to stock up on
socks. Every time he went to the supermarket, he would buy gray or black
socks to wear with his suits and store them in their packages in his
drawer. Gray sweaters were another item he liked to keep on hand, and I
often came across them in the back of the closet, still wrapped in their
plastic packages. I always felt rather sorry for these clothes. I had
thought this habit was unique to my father, but when I started visiting
my clients' homes, I realized that there are many people like him. The
stock usually consists of something the client regularly wears, the most
common being consumables such as socks, underwear, and stockings. The
one thing these clients have in common is that they have far more stock
than they need. I was astounded to nd that they buy more of the same
item before they have unpacked those previously purchased. Perhaps the
fact that they are in packages dulls the person's sense of ownership.
The record number of stockings I discovered in a client's house, for
example, was eightytwo pairs. Still in their packages, they lled up an
entire plastic storage case. Granted, when you buy something, it is
easiest to just throw it into your drawer still packaged. And perhaps
there is some pleasure in ripping o the wrapper when you rst wear it.
But the only di erence between packaged goods in your drawer and those
in the store is the place where they are kept. People commonly assume
that it is cheaper to buy things in bulk when on sale. But I believe the
opposite is true. If you consider the cost of storage, it is just as

economical to keep these things in the store, not in your home.
Moreover, if you buy and use them as you need them, they will be newer
and in better condition. This is why I urge you to refrain from stocking
up on things. Instead, buy only what you need, remove all items from
their packages immediately, and put them away. If you already have a
large stock of something, at least remove them from their packages.
Being left in the package does clothes nothing but harm. The most common
item to be left in the package is stockings. When you remove them, take
out the sti liner, too. You won't need that at home. Stockings take up
25 percent less room once they are out of the package and folded up.
They are also far more likely to be used this way because they are
easier to get at. I think it is only when you have removed something
from the package that you can really call it your own. Similar to
clothes in the package are those with the tags still on. I frequently nd
skirts or cardigans in my clients' homes with the price tags or brand
name still on them. In most cases, the client has forgotten their
existence and looks surprised to see them, despite the fact that these
items have been hanging in plain sight in their closet. For a long time,
I wondered what makes such clothes invisible. Determined to nd an
explanation, I went to observe the clothing sections in various
department stores. After continuing my research for some time, I
realized that there is a noticeable di erence between clothes in
someone's closet and those hanging on a rack in a store. The latter have
a very di erent aura from the hardworking clothes we use every day. They
exude a crisp primness, and clothes with their price tags still on
retain that primness. This is how I see it: clothes in a store are
products, whereas clothes in the home are personal possessions. Clothes
that still have their price tag on have not yet been made our own and
therefore they don't quite "belong." Overpowered by the aura of our
"legitimate" clothes, they are less noticeable. It is only natural that
we overlook and eventually even forget them as we look through our
wardrobe.

Some people worry that if they remove the tags their value will drop if
they ever take them to a recycle shop, but that is a contradiction. If
you are going to buy clothes, choose them with the intention of
welcoming them into your home and caring for them. When you buy them,
remove the tags immediately. In order for your clothes to make the
transition from store products to personal possessions, you need to
perform the ritual of cutting the "umbilical cord" that links them to
the shop.

Don't underestimate the "noise" of written information Advanced students
generally demand an even higher level of comfort in their space once
they have successfully resolved the issues of excessive belongings and
storage. At rst glance, the homes of some of my clients are so
uncluttered that they do not even appear to need my assistance. One such
client was a woman in her thirties who lived with her husband and their
six-year-old daughter. She had no qualms about discarding, and at our
rst lesson she got rid of two hundred books and thirty-two bags of
garbage. She was primarily a homemaker and spent her time taking care of
the house, hosting teas for other mothers with children twice a month,
and holding regular owerarranging classes in her home. She had frequent
visitors and was quite conscious about keeping her home tidy so that she
would not feel embarrassed to receive surprise guests. She lived in a
twobedroom home with a combined dining room and kitchen, and their
belongings t neatly into the built-in closets and two head-height wire
racks. The plain wood oors were bare and always well polished. Her
friends wondered how she could be tidier than she already was, but she
still seemed discontent. "We don't have a lot of things, but somehow I
just don't feel settled. I feel like there's one more step I need to
take." When I visited her house, it was tidy, but just as she had said,
something didn't feel quite right. The rst thing I do at times like this
is open the doors of all the storage areas. When I opened the main
closet, I found what I had been expecting. Labels proclaiming "Great
Storage Solutions!" were stuck to the clear plastic drawers, packages of
room deodorizers were emblazoned with "Freshens Air Instantly!" and the
cardboard boxes announced "Iyo Oranges." Everywhere I looked, words,
words, and more words leaped out at

me. Here was the last "step" my client was seeking. A deluge of
information whenever you open a closet door makes a room feel "noisy."
Particularly if the words are in your own language, they jump into your
line of vision, and your brain treats them as information to be sorted.
This creates commotion in your mind. In the case of my client, every
time she wanted to choose her clothes, she was assailed by such messages
as "Iyo Oranges" and "Freshens Air Instantly!" almost as if someone were
muttering constantly in her ear. Strangely, just closing the cupboard
doors does not conceal the ood of information. The words become static
that lls the air. From my own experience, the storage spaces of homes
that feel "noisy" even though they look very neat on the surface usually
are over owing with unnecessary information. The neater the house and
the more sparse its furnishings, the louder this information feels. So
start by removing the product seals from your storage containers. This
is absolutely essential, just as you remove the tags from new clothes to
welcome them as your personal belongings. Tear the printed lm o packages
that you don't want to see, such as deodorizers and detergents. Spaces
that are out of sight are still part of your house. By eliminating
excess visual information that doesn't inspire joy, you can make your
space much more peaceful and comfortable. The di erence this makes is so
amazing it would be a waste not to try it.

Appreciate your possessions and gain strong allies One of the homework
assignments I give my clients is to appreciate their belongings. For
example, I urge them to try saying, "Thank you for keeping me warm all
day," when they hang up their clothes after returning home. Or, when
removing their accessories, I suggest they say, "Thank you for making me
beautiful," and when putting their bag in the closet, to say, "It's
thanks to you that I got so much work done today." Express your
appreciation to every item that supported you during the day. If you nd
this hard to do daily, then at least do it whenever you can. I began to
treat my belongings as if they were alive when I was a high school
student. I had my own cell phone. Although the screen was still
monochrome, I loved the compact design and pale blue color. I was not an
addicted user, but I liked my phone so much that I broke the school
rules and slipped it into the pocket of my school uniform every day. I
would take it out occasionally to admire it and smile to myself.
Technology progressed and everyone was getting cell phones with color
screens. I hung on to my outdated model as long as I could, but nally it
had become too scratched and worn, and I had to replace it. When I got
my new cell phone, I hit upon the idea of texting my old phone. It was
my rst replacement and I was probably feeling quite excited. After
thinking for a moment, I typed the simple message "Thank you for
everything" and added a heart symbol. Then I pressed SEND. My old phone
pinged immediately and I checked my texts. Of course it was the message
I had just sent. "Great. My message reached you. I really wanted to say
thanks for all you have done," I said to my old phone. Then I closed it
with a click. A few minutes later, I opened my old phone and was
surprised to nd that the screen was blank. No matter which button I
pressed,

the screen did not respond. My cell phone, which had never broken since
the day I rst got it, had gone dead after receiving my message. It never
worked again, as if the phone, realizing that its job was done, had
resigned from its post of its own accord. Of course, I know some people
nd it hard to believe that inanimate objects respond to human emotion,
and it could indeed just have been coincidence. Still, we often hear
about athletes who take loving care of their sports gear, treating it
almost as if it were sacred. I think the athletes instinctively sense
the power of these objects. If we treated all things we use in our daily
life, whether it is our computer, our handbag, or our pens and pencils,
with the same care that athletes give to their equipment, we could
greatly increase the number of dependable "supporters" in our lives. The
act of possessing is a very natural part of our daily life, not
something reserved for some special match or contest. Even if we remain
unaware of it, our belongings really work hard for us, carrying out
their respective roles each day to support our lives. Just as we like to
come home and relax after a day's work, our things breathe a sigh of
relief when they return to where they belong. Have you ever thought
about what it would be like to have no xed address? Our lives would be
very uncertain. It is precisely because we have a home to return to that
we can go out to work, to shop, or to interact with others. The same is
true for our belongings. It is important for them to have that same
reassurance that there is a place for them to return to. You can tell
the di erence. Possessions that have a place where they belong and to
which they are returned each day for a rest are more vibrant. Once my
clients have learned to treat their clothes with respect, they always
tell me, "My clothes last longer. My sweaters don't pill as easily, and
I don't spill things on them as much either." This suggests that caring
for your possessions is the best way to motivate them to support you,
their owner. When you treat your belongings well, they will always
respond in kind. For this reason, I take time to ask myself occasionally
whether the storage space I've set aside for them will make them happy.
Storage, after all, is the sacred act of choosing a home for my
belongings.

5

The magic of tidying dramatically transforms your life

Put your house in order and discover what you really want to do In
Japan, the image of a class representative is someone who is popular,
has leadership qualities, and likes to stand out, and we use the term
"class-rep type" for anyone with these qualities. In contrast, I am the
"organizer type," an eccentric who works away quietly and unobtrusively
in the corner of the classroom, organizing the shelves. I mean this
literally and quite seriously. The rst o cial task I was given in
elementary school was "tidying." I can vividly recall that day. Everyone
was vying for jobs like feeding the school pets or watering the plants,
but when the teacher said, "Who would like to be responsible for
organizing and tidying the classroom?" no one raised their hand but me,
and I did so with great enthusiasm. In retrospect, my tidying genes were
already activated even at that early age. From previous chapters, you
already know how I spent my days at school, happily and con dently
reorganizing the classroom, lockers, and bookshelves. When I share this
story, people often say, "You're so lucky you knew what you liked at
such a young age. I'm jealous. I have no idea what I'd like to do...."
But I actually only realized quite recently how much I like organizing.
Although I spend almost all my time involved in tidying, either teaching
my clients in their homes or giving lectures, when I was young, my dream
was to get married. Tidying was such an integral part of my daily life
that it wasn't until the day I started my own business that I realized
it could be my profession. When people asked me what I liked to do, I
would hesitate and then nally say in desperation, "Read books," all the
while wondering, "What do I like to do?" I completely forgot about being
assigned the role of class organizer in grade school. Fifteen

years later, I had a sudden ashback while tidying my room. In my mind, I
could see my teacher writing my name on the blackboard and realized with
surprise that I had been interested in this eld since I was very young.
Think back to your own school days and the things you enjoyed doing.
Perhaps you were responsible for feeding the pets or maybe you liked
drawing pictures. Whatever it was, the chances are that it is related in
some way to something that you are doing now, as a natural part of your
life, even if you are not doing it in the same way. At their core, the
things we really like do not change over time. Putting your house in
order is a great way to discover what they are. One of my clients has
been a good friend of mine since college. Although she originally worked
for a major IT company after graduating, she discovered what she really
likes doing through tidying. When we nished putting her house in order,
she looked at her bookcase, which now contained only those books that
captivated her, and realized that the titles were all related to social
welfare. The many books she had bought to study English or hone her
computer skills after entering the workforce were gone, while those on
social welfare, which she had bought as a junior high school student,
remained. Looking at them, she was reminded of the volunteer work she
had done as a babysitter for many years before entering the company.
Suddenly she realized that she wanted to contribute to building a
society where parents could work without feeling anxious about their
kids. Aware for the rst time of her passion, she spent the year after my
course studying and preparing, then quit her job and started a child
care company. She now has many clients who rely on her services and
enjoys each day to the fullest as she explores how to further improve
her business. "When I put my house in order, I discovered what I really
wanted to do." These are words I hear frequently from my clients. For
the majority, the experience of tidying causes them to become more
passionately involved in their work. Some set up their own companies,
others change jobs, and still others take more interest in their current
profession. They also become more passionate about

their other interests and about their home and family life. Their
awareness of what they like naturally increases and, as a result, daily
life becomes more exciting. Although we can get to know ourselves better
by sitting down and analyzing our characteristics or by listening to
others' perspectives on us, I believe that tidying is the best way.
After all, our possessions very accurately relate the history of the
decisions we have made in life. Tidying is a way of taking stock that
shows us what we really like.

The magic e ect of tidying "Up to now, I believed it was important to do
things that added to my life, so I took seminars and studied to increase
my knowledge. But through your course on how to put my space in order, I
realized for the rst time that letting go is even more important than
adding." This comment was made by a client in her thirties who loved to
study and who had developed a vast network of contacts. Her life changed
drastically after she took my course. The primary item she did not want
to part with was her enormous collection of seminar notes and materials,
but when she nally disposed of them, she felt as if a huge weight had
been lifted from her. After getting rid of almost ve hundred books she
had been intending to read someday, she found that she received new
information daily. And when she discarded her huge stack of business
cards, the people that she had been wanting to meet started calling her
and she was able to meet them quite naturally. Whereas before she had
been into spirituality, when the course concluded she said contentedly,
"Tidying has far more e ect than feng shui or power stones and other
spiritual goods." Since then, she has leaped headlong into a new life,
quitting her job and nding a publisher for her book. Tidying
dramatically changes one's life. This is true for everyone, 100 percent.
The impact of this e ect, which I have dubbed "the magic of tidying," is
phenomenal. Sometimes I ask my clients how their lives changed after
taking the course. Although I have grown accustomed to their answers, in
the beginning even I was surprised. The lives of those who tidy
thoroughly and completely, in a single shot, are without exception
dramatically altered. The client I just described had been messy all her
life. When her mother saw her room clutter-free, she was so impressed
that she signed up for my course, too. Although she believed herself to
be a tidy person, the sight of her daughter's room convinced her that
she

was not. She came to enjoy discarding so much that she had no regrets
about getting rid of her tea ceremony equipment, which had cost \$250,
and looked forward eagerly to trash and recycle pickup days.
"Previously, I had no con dence. I kept thinking that I needed to
change, that I should be di erent, but now I can believe that I am okay
just the way I am. By gaining a clear standard by which I can judge
things, I gained a great deal of con dence in myself." As you can see
from her testimony, one of the magical e ects of tidying is con dence in
your decision-making capacity. Tidying means taking each item in your
hand, asking yourself whether it sparks joy, and deciding on this basis
whether or not to keep it. By repeating this process hundreds and
thousands of times, we naturally hone our decision-making skills. People
who lack con dence in their judgment lack con dence in themselves. I,
too, once lacked con dence. What saved me was tidying.

Gaining con dence in life through the magic of tidying I have come to
the conclusion that my passion for tidying was motivated by a desire for
recognition from my parents and a complex concerning my mother. Being
the middle child of three siblings, I did not get much attention from my
parents after the age of three. Of course, this was not intentional, but
being sandwiched between my older brother and the youngest child, my
little sister, I could not help but feel this way. My interest in
housework and tidying began when I was about ve, and I believe that I
was trying in my own way not to make trouble for my parents, who were
clearly busy taking care of my other two siblings. I also became
conscious from a very young age of the need to avoid being dependent on
other people. And, of course, I wanted my parents to praise and notice
me. From the time I was a rst grader, I used an alarm clock to wake up
before everyone else. I did not like being dependent on others, found it
hard to trust them, and was very inept at expressing my feelings. From
the fact that I spent my recesses alone, tidying, you can guess that I
wasn't a very outgoing child. I really enjoyed wandering around the
school by myself, and I still prefer to do things alone, including
traveling and shopping. This is very natural for me. Because I was poor
at developing bonds of trust with people, I had an unusually strong
attachment to things. I think that precisely because I did not feel
comfortable exposing my weaknesses or my true feelings to others, my
room and the things in it became very precious. I did not have to
pretend or hide anything in front of them. It was material things and my
house that taught me to appreciate unconditional love rst, not my
parents or friends. To tell

the truth, I still don't have a lot of self-con dence. There are times
when I am quite discouraged by my inadequacies. I do, however, have con
dence in my environment. When it comes to the things I own, the clothes
I wear, the house I live in, and the people in my life, when it comes to
my environment as a whole, although it may not seem particularly special
to anyone else, I am con dent and extremely grateful to be surrounded by
what I love, by things and people that are, each and every one, special,
precious, and exceedingly dear to me. The things and people that bring
me joy support me. They give me the con dence that I will be all right.
I want to help others who feel the way I once did, who lack self-con
dence and nd it hard to open their hearts to others, to see how much
support they receive from the space they live in and the things that
surround them. This is why I spend my time visiting people's homes and
instructing them in how to tidy.

An attachment to the past or anxiety about the future "Discard anything
that doesn't spark joy." If you have tried this method even a little,
you have realized by now that it is not that di cult to identify
something that brings you joy. The moment you touch it, you know the
answer. It is much more di cult to decide to discard something. We come
up with all kinds of reasons for not doing it, such as "I didn't use
this particular pot all year, but who knows, I might need it
sometime...." or "That necklace my boyfriend gave me, I really liked it
at the time...." But when we really delve into the reasons for why we
can't let something go, there are only two: an attachment to the past or
a fear for the future. During the selection process, if you come across
something that does not spark joy but that you just can't bring yourself
to throw away, stop a moment and ask yourself, "Am I having trouble
getting rid of this because of an attachment to the past or because of a
fear for the future?" Ask this for every one of these items. As you do
so, you'll begin to see a pattern in your ownership of things, a pattern
that falls into one of three categories: attachment to the past, desire
for stability in the future, or a combination of both. It's important to
understand your ownership pattern because it is an expression of the
values that guide your life. The question of what you want to own is
actually the question of how you want to live your life. Attachment to
the past and fears concerning the future not only govern the way you
select the things you own but also represent the criteria by which you
make choices in every aspect of your life, including your relationships
with people and your job. When a woman who is very anxious about the
future chooses a partner, for example, she is less likely to select
someone purely because she likes and enjoys being with him. She might
choose

someone she doesn't really like simply because the relationship seems
advantageous to her or because she is afraid that if she doesn't choose
him, she may not nd anyone else. When it comes to career choices, the
same type of person is more likely to choose a job with a large company
because it will give her more choices in the future, or to work toward
certain quali cations as a guarantee rather than because she actually
likes the work and wants to do it. A person who has a strong attachment
to the past, on the other hand, nds it hard to move on to a new
relationship because she can't forget the boyfriend she broke up with
two years ago. She also nds it hard to try out new methods even when the
current method is no longer e ective because it worked up to this point.
When one or the other of these thought patterns makes it hard to throw
things away, we can't see what we really need now, at this moment. We
aren't sure what would satisfy us or what we are looking for. As a
result, we increase the number of unnecessary possessions, burying
ourselves both physically and mentally in super uous things. The best
way to nd out what we really need is to get rid of what we don't. Quests
to faraway places or shopping sprees are no longer necessary. All you
have to do is eliminate what you don't need by confronting each of your
possessions properly. The process of facing and selecting our
possessions can be quite painful. It forces us to confront our
imperfections and inadequacies and the foolish choices we made in the
past. Many times when confronting my past during the tidying process, I
have been so ashamed I felt like my face was on re. My collection of
scented erasers from grade school, the animation-related trinkets that I
collected in junior high school, clothes I bought in high school when I
was trying to act grown-up but that didn't suit me at all, handbags I
bought even though I didn't need them just because I liked the look of
them in the shop. The things we own are real. They exist here and now as
a result of choices made in the past by no one other than ourselves. It
is dangerous to ignore them or to discard them indiscriminately as if
denying the choices we made. This is why I am against both letting
things pile up and dumping things indiscriminately. It is only when we
face the things we own one by

one and experience the emotions they evoke that we can truly appreciate
our relationship with them. There are three approaches we can take
toward our possessions: face them now, face them sometime, or avoid them
until the day we die. The choice is ours. But I personally believe it is
far better to face them now. If we acknowledge our attachment to the
past and our fears for the future by honestly looking at our
possessions, we will be able to see what is really important to us. This
process in turn helps us identify our values and reduces doubt and
confusion in making life decisions. If we can have con dence in our
decisions and launch enthusiastically into action without any doubts
holding us back, we will be able to achieve much more. In other words,
the sooner we confront our possessions the better. If you are going to
put your house in order, do it now.

Learning that you can do without Once people get down to really tidying,
they produce bag after bag of garbage. I have heard that the
participants in my courses often compare notes on how many bags they
have thrown away or share reports on what turned up in their house. The
record number of garbage bags lled to date was by a couple who disposed
of two hundred bags' worth of stu , plus more than ten items that were
too large to put in bags. Most people laugh when they hear this and
imagine that the couple must have had a very large house with lots of
storage room, but they are wrong. They lived in a very ordinary
two-story, four-room dwelling. It had slightly more oor area than many
Japanese homes because it also had an attic, but the di erence in space
was not that great. Although there did seem to be a lot of things in
view, the home did not appear at rst glance to have that much garbage in
it. In other words, any house has the potential to produce the same
volume. When I have my clients sort through and get rid of their
belongings, I don't stop halfway. The average amount discarded by a
single person is easily twenty to thirty 45-liter bags, and for a family
of three it's closer to seventy bags. The sum total of all the garbage
so far would exceed twenty-eight thousand bags, and the number of items
discarded must be over one million. Yet despite the drastic reduction in
their belongings, no one has ever complained that they had a problem
later because I told them to get rid of something. The reason is very
clear: discarding those things that don't spark joy has no adverse e
ects whatsoever. When they nish tidying, all of my clients are surprised
that they notice no inconvenience in their daily lives. It is a strong
reminder that they have been living all this time surrounded by things
that they don't need. There are no exceptions. Even clients who have
less than a fth of their possessions left at the end feel this way.

Of course, I am not saying that my clients have never regretted
discarding something. Far from it. You should expect this to happen at
least three times during the tidying process, but don't let it worry
you. Even though my clients have regretted parting with something, they
never complain. They have already learned through experience that any
problem caused by lack of something can be solved through action. When
my clients relate the experience of getting rid of something they
shouldn't have, they all sound extremely cheerful. Most of them laugh
and say, "For a moment I thought I was in trouble, but then I realized
it wasn't life threatening." This attitude does not stem from an
optimistic personality nor does it mean they have become careless in
their response to missing something. Rather, it shows that by selecting
what to discard, they have changed their mind-set. What if, for example,
they need the contents of a document that they disposed of earlier?
First, because they have already pared down the amount of documents they
own, they can quickly con rm that they do not have it, without having to
search all over. The fact that they do not need to search is actually an
invaluable stress reliever. One of the reasons clutter eats away at us
is because we have to search for something just to nd out whether it's
even there, and many times, no matter how much we search, we cannot seem
to nd what we are looking for. When we have reduced the amount we own
and store our documents all in the same place, we can tell at a glance
whether we have it or not. If it's gone, we can shift gears immediately
and start thinking about what to do. We can ask someone we know, call
the company, or look up the information ourselves. Once we have come up
with a solution, we have no choice but to act. And when we do, we notice
that the problem is often solved surprisingly easily. Instead of su
ering from the stress of looking and not nding, we take action, and
these actions often lead to unexpected bene ts. When we search for the
content elsewhere, we may discover new information. When we contact a
friend, we may deepen that relationship or he or she may introduce us to
someone who is well versed in the eld. Repeated experiences like these
teach us that if

we take action we will be able to obtain the necessary information when
we need it. Life becomes far easier once you know that things will still
work out even if you are lacking something. There is another reason that
my clients never complain about discarding things---and this is the most
signi cant. Because they have continued to identify and dispense with
things that they don't need, they no longer abdicate responsibility for
decision making to other people. When a problem arises, they don't look
for some external cause or person to blame. They now make their own
decisions and are aware that considering what action to take in any
situation is what really matters. Selecting and discarding one's
possessions is a continuous process of making decisions based on one's
own values. Discarding hones one's decision-making skills. Isn't it a
waste to squander the opportunity to develop this capacity by saving
things? When I visit my clients' homes, I never throw anything away. I
always leave the nal decision up to them. If I chose what to discard for
them, there would be no point in tidying. It is by putting one's own
house in order that one's mind-set is changed.

Do you greet your house? The rst thing I do when I visit a client's home
is to greet their house. I kneel formally on the oor in the center of
the house and address the house in my mind. After giving a brief
self-introduction, including my name, address, and occupation, I ask for
help in creating a space where the family can enjoy a happier life. Then
I bow. It is a silent ritual that only takes about two minutes, but it
does elicit some strange looks from my clients. I began this custom
quite naturally based on the etiquette of worshipping at Shinto shrines.
I don't remember exactly when I started doing it, but I believe I was
inspired to do so because the tense expectancy in the air when a client
opens the door resembles the atmosphere when one passes under a shrine
gate and enters the sacred precincts. You may think that this ritual
could only have a placebo e ect, but I have noticed a real di erence in
the speed with which tidying occurs when I perform it. Incidentally, I
don't wear sweats or work clothes when I tidy. Instead, I usually wear a
dress and blazer. Although occasionally I don an apron, my priority is
on design over practicality. Some clients are surprised and worry that I
might ruin my clothes, but I have no trouble moving furniture, climbing
onto kitchen counters, and doing the other active work involved in
tidying while dressed up. This is my way of showing respect for the
house and its contents. I believe that tidying is a celebration, a
special sendo for those things that will be departing from the house,
and therefore I dress accordingly. I am con dent that when I show
respect by the clothes I choose to wear and begin the work of tidying by
greeting the house, it will in turn be happy to tell me what the family
no longer needs and where to put the things remaining so that the family
can be comfortable and happy in this space. This attitude speeds up
decision making at the storage stage

and eliminates doubt from the entire tidying process so that everything
ows more smoothly. Perhaps you don't believe that you could do this.
Perhaps you think you have to be a professional like me to hear what the
house has to say. In fact, however, the owners understand their
possessions and their house the best. As we progress through the
lessons, my clients begin to see clearly what they need to discard and
where things naturally belong, and the tidying work proceeds smoothly
and speedily. There is one fail-proof strategy to quickly hone your
sense of what you need and where things belong: greet your house every
time you come home. This is the rst homework assignment I give my
clients at my private lessons. Just as you would greet your family or
your pet, say, "Hello! I'm home," to your house when you return. If you
forget when you walk in the door, then later, when you remember, say,
"Thank you for giving me shelter." If you feel shy or embarrassed to say
these things out loud, it is ne to say them silently in your mind. If
you do this repeatedly, you will start to feel your house respond when
you come home. You will sense its pleasure passing through like a gentle
breeze. Then you will gradually be able to feel where it would like you
to tidy and where it would like you to put things. Carry on a dialogue
with your home while tidying. I know this sounds totally impractical and
fantastic, but if you ignore this step, you will nd that the job goes
less smoothly. In essence, tidying ought to be the act of restoring
balance among people, their possessions, and the house they live in.
Conventional approaches to tidying, however, tend to focus solely on the
relationship between people and their belongings and do not pay
attention to their dwelling. I, however, am very conscious of the
important role the house plays, because whenever I visit a client's home
I can feel how much it cherishes its inhabitants. It is always there,
waiting for my clients to return and standing ready to shelter and
protect them. No matter how exhausted they are after a long day's work,
it is there to refresh and heal them. When they don't feel like working
and wander around the house in their birthday suit, the home accepts
them just as they are. You won't nd anyone

more generous or welcoming than this. Tidying is our opportunity to
express our appreciation to our home for all it does for us. To test my
theory, try putting your house in order from the perspective of what
would make it happy. You will be surprised at how smoothly the
decision-making process goes.

Your possessions want to help you I have spent more than half my life
thinking about tidying. I visit people's homes every day and spend time
confronting their possessions. I do not think there is any other
profession in which I would be able to see everything a person owns or
examine the contents of closets and drawers, just as they are. Although
I have visited many homes, naturally no one's possessions or way of
organizing is identical. Yet all these possessions share one thing in
common. Think about why you have the things you do. If you answer,
"Because I chose them," "Because I need them," or "Because of a variety
of coincidences," all of these responses would be correct. But without
exception, all the things you own share the desire to be of use to you.
I can say this with certainty because I have examined very carefully
hundreds of thousands of possessions in my career as a tidying
consultant. When examined carefully, the fate that links us to the
things we own is quite amazing. Take just one shirt, for example. Even
if it was mass-produced in a factory, that particular shirt that you
bought and brought home on that particular day is unique to you. The
destiny that led us to each one of our possessions is just as precious
and sacred as the destiny that connected us with the people in our
lives. There is a reason why each one of your belongings came to you.
When I share this perspective, some people say, "I neglected this out t
so long it's all wrinkled. It must be pretty indignant with me," or "If
I don't use it, it will curse me." But from my own experience, I have
never encountered any possession that reproached its owner. These
thoughts stem from the owner's sense of guilt, not from the person's
belongings. Then what do the things in our homes that don't spark joy
actually feel? I think they simply want to leave. Lying forgotten in
your closet, they know better than anyone else that they are not
bringing joy to you now.

Everything you own wants to be of use to you. Even if you throw it away
or burn it, it will only leave behind the energy of wanting to be of
service. Freed from its physical form, it will move about your world as
energy, letting other things know that you are a special person, and
come back to you as the thing that will be of most use to who you are
now, the thing that will bring you the most happiness. A piece of
clothing might come back as a new and beautiful out t, or it may
reappear as information or a new connection. I promise you: whatever you
let go will come back in exactly the same amount, but only when it feels
the desire to return to you. For this reason, when you part with
something, don't sigh and say, "Oh, I never used this," or "Sorry I
never got around to using you." Instead, send it o joyfully with words
like, "Thank you for nding me," or "Have a good journey. See you again
soon!" Get rid of those things that no longer spark joy. Make your
parting a ceremony to launch them on a new journey. Celebrate this
occasion with them. I truly believe that our possessions are even
happier and more vibrant when we let them go than when we rst get them.

Your living space a ects your body Once the process of tidying is under
way, many of my clients remark that they have lost weight or that they
have rmed up their tummies. It's a very strange phenomenon, but when we
reduce what we own and essentially "detox" our house, it has a detox e
ect on our bodies as well. When we discard everything in one go, which
sometimes means disposing of forty garbage bags of stu in one day, our
bodies may respond in a way that resembles a short fast. We may get a
bout of diarrhea or break out in pimples. There is nothing wrong with
this. Our bodies are just getting rid of toxins that have built up over
the years, and they will be back to normal, or in fact in even better
shape, within a day or two. One of my clients cleared out a closet and
shed that she had neglected for ten years. Immediately after, she had a
strong bout of diarrhea after which she felt much lighter. I know it
sounds like false advertising to claim that you can lose weight by
tidying or that it will make your skin clearer, but it is not
necessarily untrue. Unfortunately, I can't show you before-and-after
pictures of my clients, but I have witnessed with my own eyes how their
appearance changes when their rooms are tidied. Their gures are more
streamlined, their skin is more radiant, and their eyes shine brighter.
When I rst started this business, I found this fact quite intriguing.
But when I thought about it carefully, I realized that it isn't that
strange. I think of it like this. When we put our house in order, the
air inside becomes fresh and clean. Reducing the amount of stu in our
space also reduces the amount of dust, and we actually clean more often.
When we can see the oor, the dirt stands out and we want to clean.
Because clutter has been eliminated, it's much easier to clean and
therefore we do it more thoroughly. The fresher air in the room must
certainly be good for the skin. Cleaning involves energetic movement,
which would naturally contribute to

losing weight and staying t. And when our space is completely clean, we
don't have to worry about tidying, so we are free to focus on the next
issue that is important in our lives. Many people want to be slim and t,
and that becomes their focus. They start to walk longer distances and
eat less junk food, and these actions contribute to weight loss without
consciously dieting. But I think the main reason tidying has this e ect
is because through this process people come to know contentment. After
tidying, many clients tell me that their worldly desires have decreased.
Whereas in the past, no matter how many clothes they had, they were
never satis ed and always wanted something new to wear, once they
selected and kept only those things that they really loved, they felt
that they had everything they needed. We amass material things for the
same reason that we eat---to satisfy a craving. Buying on impulse and
eating and drinking to excess are attempts to alleviate stress. From
observing my clients, I have noticed that when they part with excess
clothing, their tummies tend to slim down, when they discard books and
documents, their minds tend to become clearer, when they reduce the
number of cosmetics and tidy up the area around the sink and bath, their
complexion tends to become clear and their skin smooth. Although I have
no scienti c basis for this theory, it is very interesting to see that
the part of the body responding corresponds closely to the area that is
put in order. Isn't it wonderful that tidying your house can also
enhance your beauty and contribute to a healthier, trimmer body?

Is it true that tidying increases good fortune? Due to the popularity of
feng shui, people often ask me whether tidying will bring them good
fortune. Feng shui is a method for increasing good fortune by organizing
one's living environment. It began gaining in popularity in Japan about
fteen years ago and is now quite well known. For many people, feng shui
is what rst gets them interested in organizing and tidying their house.
I am not a feng shui expert, but I did study the basics as part of my
research on tidying. Whether or not you believe that it can improve your
fortune is up to you, but since ancient times people in Japan have been
applying their knowledge of feng shui and orientation principles to
their daily lives. I myself also apply the wisdom of our forebearers in
my practice of tidying. For example, when I fold and stand clothes on
edge in the drawer, I arrange them by color to form a gradation from
dark to light. The proper order is to place clothes that are lighter in
color at the front of the drawer and gradually progress to darker colors
at the back. I don't know whether or not this increases good fortune,
but when clothes are arranged in a gradation of color, it feels great to
look at them whenever you open the drawer. For some reason, having
lighter clothes at the front seems to have a calming e ect. If you
organize your living environment so that it feels comfortable and so
that every day you feel energized and happy, wouldn't you say that your
good fortune has increased? The concepts underpinning feng shui are the
dual forces of yin and yang and the ve elements (metal, wood, water, re,
and earth). The basic belief is that everything has its own energy and
that each thing should be treated in a way that suits its
characteristics. To me, this seems perfectly natural. The philosophy of
feng shui is really about living in accordance with the rules of

nature. The purpose of my approach to tidying is exactly the same. The
true purpose of tidying is, I believe, to live in the most natural state
possible. Don't you think it is unnatural for us to possess things that
don't bring us joy or things that we don't really need? I believe that
owning only what we love and what we need is the most natural condition.
By putting our house in order, we can live in our natural state. We
choose those things that bring us joy and cherish what is truly precious
in our lives. Nothing can bring greater happiness than to be able to do
something as simple and natural as this. If this is good fortune, then I
am convinced that putting our house in order is the best way to achieve
it.

How to identify what is truly precious After a client has nished the
process of selecting what to keep and what to discard, there are times
when I will retrieve a few things from the "keep" pile and ask once
again, "This T-shirt, and this sweater, here, do they really spark joy?"
With a look of surprise, my client inevitably says, "How did you know?
Those are all things that I couldn't decide if I should keep or throw
away." I am not a fashion expert nor do I retrieve these things on the
basis of how old they look. I can tell by my clients' expression when
they are choosing---the way they hold the item, the gleam in their eyes
when they touch it, the speed with which they decide. Their response is
clearly di erent for things they like and things they are not sure of.
When faced with something that brings joy, their decision is usually
instantaneous, their touch is gentle, and their eyes shine. When faced
with something that doesn't bring them joy, their hands pause, and they
cock their head and frown. After thinking for a few moments, they throw
the item onto the "keep" pile. At that moment, there is a tightness in
their brow and around their lips. Joy manifests itself in the body, and
I don't let these physical signs escape me. To be honest, however, I can
actually tell which items do not spark joy in my clients' hearts even
without watching them during the selection process. Before I visit their
homes, I give them a private lesson on the KonMari Method. This lecture
alone has a signi cant impact, and often when I make my rst visit to
their house they have already begun tidying. One of my prize students, a
woman in her thirties, had discarded fty garbage bags of belongings by
the time I got there. She opened her drawers and closet proudly and
said, "There's nothing more to get rid of in here!" Her room certainly
looked di erent from the photographs she had shown me. The sweater that
had been thrown

carelessly over the dresser was now neatly stored away, and the dresses
that had been jammed to bursting on the rod had been thinned out so that
now there was some room between them. Yet even so, I pulled out a brown
jacket and a beige blouse. They looked no di erent from the rest of the
clothes she had decided to keep. Both were in good condition and looked
like they had been worn. "Do these really bring you joy?" I asked. The
expression on her face changed instantly. "That jacket, you know I love
the design, but I really wanted one in black. They didn't have a black
one in my size.... Not having a brown jacket, I thought that I would buy
it anyway, but in the end it just didn't seem to suit me and I only wore
it a few times. "As for the blouse, I was really attracted to the design
and to the material, so I actually bought two of them. I wore the rst
one until it couldn't be worn, but for some reason I just don't seem to
choose the second one anymore." I had never seen how she treated these
items nor did I know anything about the circumstances surrounding their
purchase. All I did was observe carefully the clothes hanging in her
closet. When you examine things closely, you can begin to discern
whether or not those things bring their owner joy. When a woman is in
love, the change in her is apparent to everyone around her. The love she
receives from her partner, the con dence that love gives her, and her
desire to make the e ort to look beautiful for him all give her energy.
Her skin glows, her eyes shine, and she becomes even more beautiful. In
the same way, things that are loved by their owner and treated with care
are vibrant and radiate an aura of wanting to be of more service to
their owner. Things that are cherished shine. This is why I can tell at
a glance whether something truly sparks joy. The genuine emotion of joy
resides in the body and in the possessions of the owner, and therefore
it can't be concealed.

Being surrounded by things that spark joy makes you happy Everyone has
things that they love, things that they cannot imagine parting with,
even though other people shake their heads in disbelief when they see
them. I see the things that other people nd precious every day, and you
would be amazed at the strange and incomprehensible articles that
capture people's hearts---a set of ten nger puppets each with one eye
only and every eye di erent, a broken alarm clock shaped like the
Morinaga Noobow character, a driftwood collection that looks more like a
heap of scrap wood. But the immediate response to my hesitant, "Does
this ... um, really spark joy?" is an emphatic "Yes!" There is no
arguing with their con dent gaze and shining eyes because I, too, have
one such item: my Kiccoro T-shirt. Kiccoro ("Forest Child") was one of
two o cial mascots for Aichi Expo 2005, which promoted love for the
earth and renewable, ecofriendly technology. The larger mascot, Morizo,
is perhaps better known. Kiccoro was Morizo's sidekick, a little, lime
green, roly-poly character, and my T-shirt shows only Kiccoro's face. I
wear it around the house all the time. It is one thing that I just
cannot bring myself to part with, even if people were to ridicule me,
saying, "How can you keep this? Aren't you embarrassed? How can you wear
that? You should throw it away." Let me be clear. The clothes I wear at
home are generally cute and pretty. I usually wear girly things, such as
camisoles with layers of pink frills and ower-print cotton ensembles,
around the house. The only exception is my Kiccoro T-shirt. It is quite
a curious article, shocking green in color with just Kiccoro's eyes and
half-open, fulllipped mouth, and the tag clearly indicates that it's a
children's size. As the Expo was held in 2005, I've been wearing it for
many years even though I have no sentimental memories from the event
itself.

Just reading what I've written here makes me feel embarrassed to be
hanging on to such a thing, yet whenever I see it, I can't bring myself
to throw it away. My heart starts beating faster as soon as I see
Kiccoro's lovely round eyes. The contents of my drawers are organized so
that I can see at a glance what's there. This T-shirt sticks out like a
sore thumb among all my graceful, feminine clothes, yet that just makes
it more endearing. It's so old now, you would think that it would be
stretched out of shape or stained, but it's not, so I can't nd any
excuse in that area for discarding it. The fact that the tag declares it
was made in some other country even though it was a Japanese expo could
have ruined its appeal for me, yet I still can't throw it away. These
are the types of things you should boldly hang on to. If you can say
without a doubt, "I really like this!" no matter what anyone else says,
and if you like yourself for having it, then ignore what other people
think. To tell the truth, I would not want anyone else to see me wearing
my Kiccoro T-shirt. But I keep it for the little joys it gives me, the
giggle I get when I take it out and look at it all on my own, the
contentment I feel when Kiccoro and I are sweating together as we clean
and wondering what to tackle next. I can think of no greater happiness
in life than to be surrounded only by the things I love. How about you?
All you need to do is to get rid of anything that doesn't touch your
heart. There is no simpler way to contentment. What else could this be
called but "the magic of tidying"?

Your real life begins after putting your house in order Although I have
spent this entire book talking about tidying, tidying is not actually
necessary. You won't die if your house isn't tidy, and there are many
people in the world who really don't care if they can't put their house
in order. Such people, however, would never pick up this book. You, on
the other hand, have been led by fate to read it, and that means you
probably have a strong desire to change your current situation, to reset
your life, to improve your lifestyle, to gain happiness, to shine. For
this very reason, I can guarantee that you will be able to put your
house in order. The moment you picked up this book with the intention of
tidying, you took the rst step. If you have read this far, you know what
you need to do next. Human beings can only truly cherish a limited
number of things at one time. As I am both lazy and forgetful, I can't
take proper care of too many things. That is why I want to cherish
properly the things I love, and that is why I have insisted on tidying
for so much of my life. I believe, however, that it is best to tidy up
quickly and get it over with. Why? Because tidying is not the purpose of
life. If you think that tidying is something that must be done every
day, if you think it is something that you will need to do all your
life, it is time to wake up. I swear to you that tidying can be done
thoroughly and quickly, all in one go. The only tasks that you will need
to continue for the rest of your life are those of choosing what to keep
and what to discard and of caring for the things you decide to keep. You
can put your house in order now, once and forever. The only ones who
need to spend their lives, year in and year out, thinking about tidying
are people like me who nd joy in it and who are passionate about using
tidying to make the world a better place. As for you, pour your time and
passion into what brings you the most joy, your mission in life. I am
convinced that

putting your house in order will help you nd the mission that speaks to
your heart. Life truly begins after you have put your house in order.

Afterword

The other day I woke up to nd my neck and shoulders frozen sti . I could
not even get out of bed and had to call an ambulance. Although the cause
was not clear, I had spent the previous day at a client's house, looking
into the cupboard above the closet and moving heavy furniture. As I had
not done anything else, the conclusion was that I had tidied too much. I
must be the only patient to ever have "too much tidying" written on her
medical record. Even so, as I lay in bed slowly regaining motion in my
neck, 90 percent of my thoughts were about tidying. This experience made
me appreciate the ability to look up into cupboards. I wrote this book
because I wanted to share the magic of tidying. The deep emotions in my
heart when sending o things that have ful lled their purpose, emotions
much like those experienced at a graduation; the thrill I feel at the
"click" of fate, when something nds where it is meant to be; and, best
of all, the fresh, pure air that lls a room after it has been put in
order---these are the things that make an ordinary day, with no special
event, that much brighter. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank all those who supported me in writing this book when all I am
really capable of is tidying---Mr. Takahashi of Sunmark Publishing, my
family, all my possessions, my home. I pray that through the magic of
tidying more people will be able to experience the joy and contentment
of living surrounded by the things they love. ---Marie "KonMari" Kondo

About the author

Marie "KonMari" Kondo runs an acclaimed consulting business in Tokyo
helping clients transform their cluttered homes into spaces of serenity
and inspiration. With a three-month waiting list, her KonMari Method of
decluttering and organizing has become an international phenomenon. The
Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up is a best seller in Japan, Germany,
and the UK, with more than two million copies sold worldwide, and has
been turned into a television drama for Japanese TV. She has been
featured on more than thirty major Japanese television and radio
programs and in the London Times, the Sunday Times, Red magazine, and
You magazine, among others.

What's next on your reading list? Discover your next great read! Get
personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.


