![](e9781982143114/images/9781982143114.jpg)

[]{#cover.xhtml}

::: ipadfp
![Cover: The Gift, by Dr. Edith Eva
Eger](e9781982143114/images/9781982143114.jpg){.imagefp .cover
epub:type="cover" role="doc-cover"}
:::

[]{#SS_US_adult_signup_front.xhtml}

::: signup-top
Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on
new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster.
Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.
:::

::: signup-middle
[CLICK HERE TO SIGN
UP](https://www.simonandschuster.com/ebook-signup/front/9781982143114 "Simon & Schuster Mailing List Sign-up Link")
:::

::: signup-bottom
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this
ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to
receive exclusive offers in your inbox.
:::

[]{#title.xhtml}

[]{#dedication.xhtml}

::: {.section .dedication role="doc-dedication"}
[]{#dedication.xhtml_page_v .pagebreak aria-label="page v"
role="doc-pagebreak"}To my patients. You are my teachers. You gave me
the courage to return to Auschwitz and to begin my journey toward
forgiveness and freedom. You continue to inspire me through your honesty
and courage.
:::

[]{#intro.xhtml}

::: {.section .introduction role="doc-introduction"}
# []{#intro.xhtml_page_vi .pagebreak aria-label="page vi" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#intro.xhtml_page_vii .pagebreak aria-label="page vii" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#intro.xhtml_page_viii .pagebreak aria-label="page viii" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#intro.xhtml_page_ix .pagebreak aria-label="page ix" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#intro.xhtml_page_x .pagebreak aria-label="page x" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#intro.xhtml_page_1 .pagebreak aria-label="page 1" role="doc-pagebreak"}Introduction [UNLOCKING OUR MENTAL PRISONS]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## *I learned how to live at a death camp* {.h2c}

In the spring of 1944, I was sixteen, living with my parents and two
older sisters in Kassa, Hungary. There were signs of war and prejudice
all around us. The yellow stars we wore pinned to our coats. The
Hungarian Nazis---*nyilas*---who occupied our old apartment. Newspaper
accounts of battlefronts and German occupation spreading across Europe.
The worried glances my parents exchanged at the table. The awful day
when I was cut from the Olympic gymnastics team because I was Jewish.
Yet I had been blissfully preoccupied with ordinary teenage concerns. I
was in love with my first boyfriend, Eric, the tall, intelligent boy I'd
met in book club. I replayed our first kiss and admired the new blue
silk dress that my father had designed for me. I marked my progress in
the ballet and gymnastics studio, and joked with Magda, my beautiful
eldest sister, and Klara, who was studying violin at a conservatory in
Budapest.

[]{#intro.xhtml_page_2 .pagebreak aria-label="page 2"
role="doc-pagebreak"}And then everything changed.

One cold dawn in April the Jews of Kassa were rounded up and imprisoned
in an old brick factory at the edge of town. A few weeks later, Magda
and my parents and I were loaded into a cattle car bound for Auschwitz.
My parents were murdered in the gas chambers the day we arrived.

My first night in Auschwitz, I was forced to dance for SS officer Josef
Mengele, known as the Angel of Death, the man who had scrutinized the
new arrivals as we came through the selection line that day and sent my
mother to her death. "Dance for me!" he ordered, and I stood on the cold
concrete floor of the barracks, frozen with fear. Outside, the camp
orchestra began to play a waltz, "The Blue Danube." Remembering my
mother's advice---*No one can take from you what you've put in your
mind*---I closed my eyes and retreated to an inner world. In my mind, I
was no longer imprisoned in a death camp, cold and hungry and ruptured
by loss. I was on the stage of the Budapest opera house, dancing the
role of Juliet in Tchaikovsky's ballet. From within this private refuge
I willed my arms to lift and my legs to twirl. I summoned the strength
to dance for my life.

Each moment in Auschwitz was hell on earth. It was also my best
classroom. Subjected to loss, torture, starvation, and the constant
threat of death, I discovered the tools for survival and freedom that I
continue to use every day in my clinical psychology practice as well as
in my own life.

As I write this introduction in the fall of 2019, I am ninety-two. I
earned my doctorate in clinical psychology in 1978 and I've been
treating patients in a therapeutic setting for over forty years. I have
worked with combat veterans and survivors of sexual assault; students,
civic leaders, and CEOs; people battling []{#intro.xhtml_page_3
.pagebreak aria-label="page 3" role="doc-pagebreak"}addiction and those
struggling with anxiety and depression; couples grappling with
resentment and those longing to rekindle intimacy; parents and children
learning how to live together and those discovering how to live apart.
As a psychologist; as a mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother; as
an observer of my own and others' behavior; and as an Auschwitz
survivor, I am here to tell you that the worst prison is not the one the
Nazis put me in. The worst prison is the one I built for myself.

Although our lives have probably been very different, perhaps you know
what I mean. Many of us experience feeling trapped in our minds. Our
thoughts and beliefs determine, and often limit, how we feel, what we
do, and what we think is possible. In my work I've discovered that while
our imprisoning beliefs show up and play out in unique ways, there are
some common mental prisons that contribute to suffering. This book is a
practical guide to help us identify our mental prisons and develop the
tools we need to become free.

The foundation of freedom is the power to choose. In the final months of
the war, I had very few options, and no way to escape. Hungarian Jews
had been among the last in Europe to be deported to death camps, and
after eight months in Auschwitz, just before the Russian army defeated
Germany, my sister and I and a hundred other prisoners were evacuated
from Auschwitz and marched from Poland, through Germany, to Austria. We
performed slave labor in factories along the way, and rode on top of
trains transporting German ammunition, our bodies used as human shields
to protect the cargo from British bombs. (The British bombed the trains
anyway.)

[]{#intro.xhtml_page_4 .pagebreak aria-label="page 4"
role="doc-pagebreak"}When my sister and I were liberated at
Gunskirchen---a concentration camp in Austria---in May 1945, a little
over a year after we'd been taken prisoner, my parents and almost all
the people I knew were dead. My back had broken from constant physical
abuse. I was starving, covered in sores, and could barely move from
where I lay in a pile of corpses; people who had been sick and starving
like me, whose bodies had given up. I couldn't undo what had been done
to me. I couldn't control how many people the Nazis had shoved into the
cattle cars or crematoria, trying to exterminate as many Jews and
"undesirables" as they could before the end of the war. I couldn't alter
the systematic dehumanization or slaughter of the over six million
innocents who died in the camps. All I could do was decide how to
respond to terror and hopelessness. Somehow, I found it within myself to
choose hope.

But surviving Auschwitz was only the first leg of my journey to freedom.
For many decades, I remained a prisoner of the past. On the surface, I
was doing well, putting my trauma behind me and moving on. I married
Béla, the son of a prominent family in Prešov who had been a partisan
during the war, fighting the Nazis in the mountain forests of Slovakia.
I became a mother, fled the Communists in Europe, immigrated to America,
lived on pennies, rose out of poverty, and, in my forties, went to
college. I became a high school teacher, and then returned to school for
a master's in educational psychology and a doctorate in clinical
psychology. Even late in my graduate training, committed to helping
others heal and trusted with some of the toughest cases during my
clinical rotations, I was still in hiding---running from the past,
denying my grief and trauma, minimizing and pretending, trying to please
others and do things perfectly, []{#intro.xhtml_page_5 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 5" role="doc-pagebreak"}blaming Béla for my chronic
resentment and disappointment, chasing after achievement as though it
could make up for all I'd lost.

One day I arrived at the William Beaumont Army Medical Center at Fort
Bliss, Texas, where I held a competitive clinical internship, and put on
my white coat and name tag: Dr. Eger, Department of Psychiatry. But for
a split second the words blurred and it seemed to say, Dr. Eger,
Impostor. That's when I knew I couldn't support others in healing if I
didn't heal myself.

My therapeutic approach is eclectic and intuitive, a blend of insight-
and cognitive-oriented theories and practices. I call it choice therapy,
as freedom is fundamentally about choice. While suffering is inevitable
and universal, we can always choose how we respond, and I seek to
highlight and harness my patients' power to choose---to effect positive
change in their lives.

My work is rooted in four core psychological principles:

First, from Martin Seligman and positive psychology, the concept of
"learned helplessness"---that we suffer most when we believe that we
have no efficacy in our lives, that nothing we do can improve the
outcome. We flourish when we harness "learned optimism"---the strength,
resiliency, and ability to create the meaning and direction of our
lives.

Second, from cognitive-behavioral therapy, the understanding that our
thoughts create our feelings and behavior. To change harmful,
dysfunctional, or self-defeating behaviors, we change our thoughts; we
replace our negative beliefs with those that serve and support our
growth.

Third, from Carl Rogers, one of my most influential mentors, the
importance of unconditional positive self-regard. Much of our suffering
stems from our misconception that we can't be []{#intro.xhtml_page_6
.pagebreak aria-label="page 6" role="doc-pagebreak"}loved *and*
genuine---that if we are to earn others' acceptance and approval, we
must deny or hide our true selves. In my work I strive to extend
unconditional love to my patients, and to guide them to discover that we
become free when we stop wearing masks and fulfilling the roles and
expectations others assign us, and start unconditionally loving
ourselves.

Finally, I work from the understanding, shared with my beloved mentor,
friend, and fellow Auschwitz survivor Viktor Frankl, that our worst
experiences can be our best teachers, catalyzing unforeseen discoveries
and opening us up to new possibilities and perspectives. Healing,
fulfillment, and freedom come from our ability to choose our response to
whatever life brings us, and to make meaning and derive purpose from all
we experience---and in particular, from our suffering.

Freedom is a lifetime practice---a choice we get to make again and again
each day. Ultimately, freedom requires hope, which I define in two ways:
the awareness that suffering, however terrible, is temporary; and the
curiosity to discover *what happens next*. Hope allows us to live in the
present instead of the past, and to unlock the doors of our mental
prisons.

Three-quarters of a century after liberation, I still have nightmares. I
suffer flashbacks. Till the day I die, I will grieve the loss of my
parents, who never got to see four generations rise from the ashes of
their deaths. The horror is still with me. There's no freedom in
minimizing what happened, or in trying to forget.

But remembering and honoring are very different from remaining stuck in
guilt, shame, anger, resentment, or fear about []{#intro.xhtml_page_7
.pagebreak aria-label="page 7" role="doc-pagebreak"}the past. I can face
the reality of what happened and remember that although I have lost,
I've never stopped choosing love and hope. For me, the ability to
choose, even in the midst of so much suffering and powerlessness, is the
true gift that came out of my time in Auschwitz.

It may seem wrong to call anything that came out of the death camps a
gift. How could anything good come from hell? The constant fear that I'd
be pulled out of the selection line or the barrack at any moment and
thrown in the gas chamber, the dark smoke rising from the chimneys, a
pervasive reminder of all I'd lost and stood to lose. I had no control
over the senseless, excruciating circumstances. But I could focus on
what I held in my mind. I could respond, not react. Auschwitz provided
the opportunity to discover my inner strength and my power of choice. I
learned to rely on parts of myself I would otherwise never have known
were there.

We all have this capacity to choose. When nothing helpful or nourishing
is coming from the outside, that is precisely the moment when we have
the possibility to discover who we really are. It's not what happens to
us that matters most, it's what we do with our experiences.

When we escape our mental prisons, we not only become free *from* what
has held us back, but free *to* exercise our own free will. I first
learned the difference between negative and positive freedom on
liberation day at Gunskirchen in May 1945 when I was seventeen. I was
lying on the muddy ground in a pile of the dead and dying when the
Seventy-First Infantry arrived to free the camp. I remember the
soldiers' eyes full of shock, bandanas tied over their faces to block
out the stench of rotting flesh. In those first hours of freedom, I
watched my fellow former prisoners---those []{#intro.xhtml_page_8
.pagebreak aria-label="page 8" role="doc-pagebreak"}who were capable of
walking---leave through the prison gates. Moments later, they returned
and sat listlessly on the damp grass or on the dirt floors of the
barracks, unable to move forward. Viktor Frankl noted the same
phenomenon when Soviet forces liberated Auschwitz. We were no longer in
prison, but many of us weren't yet able, physically or mentally, to
recognize our freedom. We were so eroded by disease, starvation, and
trauma, we had no capacity to take responsibility for our lives. We
could hardly remember how to be ourselves.

We'd finally been released *from* the Nazis. But we weren't yet free.

I now recognize that the most damaging prison is in our mind, and the
key is in our pocket. No matter how great our suffering or how strong
the bars, it's possible to break free from whatever's holding us back.

It is not easy. But it is so worth it.

In *The Choice*, I told the story of my journey from imprisonment to
liberation and then on to true freedom. I've been astounded and humbled
by the book's global reception and by all the readers who shared stories
of how they have confronted their own pasts and worked to heal their
pain. We were able to connect, sometimes in person, sometimes through
email, social media, or video calls, and many of the stories I heard are
included in this book. (Names and other identifying details have been
changed to protect privacy.)

As I wrote in *The Choice*, I don't want people to read my story and
think, "There's no way my suffering compares to hers." I want people to
hear my story and think, "If she can do it, so can
[]{#intro.xhtml_page_9 .pagebreak aria-label="page 9"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I!" Many have asked for a practical guide to the
healing I've done in my own life and with my patients in my clinical
work. *The Gift* is that book.

In each chapter, I explore a common prison of the mind, illustrating its
effects and challenges with stories from my life and clinical work, and
closing with keys to free ourselves from that mental prison. Some of the
keys are questions that could be used as journal prompts or in
discussion with a trusted friend or therapist; others are actionable
steps you can take right now to improve your life and relationships.
Though healing is not a linear process, I've organized the chapters in
an intentional sequence that reflects the arc of my own journey toward
freedom. That said, the chapters can also stand alone or be read in any
order. You're the director of your own journey; I invite you to use the
book in whatever way best serves you.

And I offer three initial guideposts to start you on the path to
freedom.

We do not change until we're ready. Sometimes it's a tough
circumstance---perhaps a divorce, accident, illness, or death---that
forces us to face up to what isn't working and try something else.
Sometimes our inner pain or unfulfilled longing gets so loud and
insistent that we can't ignore it another minute. But readiness doesn't
come from the outside, and it can't be rushed or forced. You're ready
when you're ready, when something inside shifts and you decide, *Until
now I did that. Now I'm going to do something else.*

Change is about interrupting the habits and patterns that no longer
serve us. If you want to meaningfully alter your life, you
[]{#intro.xhtml_page_10 .pagebreak aria-label="page 10"
role="doc-pagebreak"}don't simply abandon a dysfunctional habit or
belief; you replace it with a healthy one. You choose what you're moving
toward. You find an arrow and follow it. As you begin your journey, it's
important to reflect not only on what you'd like to be free *from*, but
on what you want to be free *to* do or become.

Finally, when you change your life, it isn't to become the *new* you.
It's to become the *real* you---the one-of-a-kind diamond that will
never exist again and can never be replaced. Everything that's happened
to you---all the choices you've made until now, all the ways you've
tried to cope---it all matters; it's all useful. You don't have to throw
everything out and start from scratch. Whatever you've done, it's
brought you this far, to this moment.

The ultimate key to freedom is to keep becoming who you truly are.
:::

[]{#ch01.xhtml}

# []{#ch01.xhtml_page_11 .pagebreak aria-label="page 11" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 1 [WHAT NOW?]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Victimhood {.h2c}

In my experience, victims ask, "Why me?" Survivors ask, "What now?"

Suffering is universal. But victimhood is optional. There is no way to
escape being hurt or oppressed by other people or circumstances. The
only guarantee is that no matter how kind we are or how hard we work,
we're going to have pain. We're going to be affected by environmental
and genetic factors over which we have little or no control. But we each
get to choose whether or not we stay a victim. We don't get to choose
what happens to us, but we do get to choose how we respond to our
experience.

Many of us stay in a prison of victimhood because, subconsciously, it
feels safer. We ask "Why?" over and over, believing that if we could
just figure out the reason, the pain would lessen. Why did I get cancer?
Why did I lose my job? Why did my partner have an affair? We search for
answers, for understanding, as if there's a logical reason to explain
why things []{#ch01.xhtml_page_12 .pagebreak aria-label="page 12"
role="doc-pagebreak"}happened the way they did. But when we ask why,
we're stuck searching for someone or something to blame---including
ourselves.

Why did this happen to me?

Well, why *not* you?

Maybe I went to Auschwitz and survived so I could talk to you now, so I
could live as an example of how to be a survivor instead of a victim.
When I ask "What now?" instead of "Why me?" I stop focusing on why this
bad thing happened---or is happening---and start paying attention to
what I can do with my experience. I'm not looking for a savior or a
scapegoat. Instead, I begin to look at choices and at possibilities.

My parents didn't have a choice in how their lives ended. But I have
many choices. I can feel guilty that I survived when so many millions,
including my mother and father, perished. Or I can choose to live and
work and heal in a way that releases the hold of the past. I can embrace
my strength and freedom.

Victimhood is rigor mortis of the mind. It's stuck in the past, stuck in
the pain, and stuck on the losses and deficits: *what I can't do* and
*what I don't have*.

This is the first tool for moving out of victimhood: approach whatever
is happening with a gentle embrace. It doesn't mean you have to like
what's happening. But when you stop fighting and resisting, you have
more energy and imagination at the ready to figure out "What now?" To
move forward instead of nowhere. To discover what you want and need in
this moment, and where you want to go from here.

Every behavior satisfies a need. Many of us choose to stay victims
because it gives us license to do zero on our own behalf. Freedom comes
with a price. We're called to be accountable for []{#ch01.xhtml_page_13
.pagebreak aria-label="page 13" role="doc-pagebreak"}our own
behavior---and to take responsibility even in situations we didn't cause
or choose.

Life is full of surprises.

A few weeks before Christmas, Emily---forty-five, mother of two, happily
married for eleven years---sat down with her husband after the children
had gone to bed. She was about to suggest they watch a movie when he
looked at her and calmly said the words that would upend her life.

"I met someone," he said. "We're in love. I don't think you and I should
be married anymore."

Emily was completely floored. She couldn't see a way forward. And then
the next surprise came. She had breast cancer; a large tumor that
required immediate, aggressive chemotherapy. During the first weeks of
treatment, she felt paralyzed. Her husband postponed discussion about
the state of their marriage to see her through the months of chemo, but
Emily was in a daze.

"I thought my whole life had come to an end," she said. "I thought I was
a dying woman."

But when I spoke to her eight months after her diagnosis, she'd just had
surgery and received more unexpected news: she'd achieved complete
remission.

"The doctors never would have predicted it," she said. "It's really a
miracle."

Her cancer is gone. But so is her husband. After her chemo ended, he
told her he'd made his decision. He'd rented an apartment. He wanted a
divorce.

[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_14 .pagebreak aria-label="page 14"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"I was so frightened to die," Emily told me. "Now I
have to learn to live."

She's consumed by worry for her children, by the hurt of betrayal,
concerns over finances, and loneliness, so vast it's like she's fallen
off the edge of a cliff.

"I'm still finding it so hard to say yes to my life," she said.

The divorce has thrown her into her worst fear made real, a deep-seated
terror of abandonment she's harbored since she was four, when her mother
became clinically depressed. Her dad turned silent about her mom's
illness, escaping into work, leaving Emily to make it on her own. When
her mother later died by suicide, it confirmed the reality she knew yet
sought to avoid: that the people you love disappear.

"I've always been in a relationship, since I was fifteen," she said. "I
never learned to be happy on my own, with myself, to love myself." Her
voice breaks when she says those words: *love myself*.

I often say that we need to give our children roots, and give them
wings. We need to do the same for ourselves. The only one you have is
you. You're born alone. You die alone. So start by getting up in the
morning and going to the mirror. Look yourself in the eye and say, "I
love you." Say, "I'm never going to leave you." Hug yourself. Kiss
yourself. Try it!

And then keep showing up for yourself all day, every day.

"But how do I deal with my husband?" Emily asked. "When we meet, he
seems totally calm and relaxed. He's happy with his decision. But all my
emotions come out. I start crying. I can't control myself when I see
him."

"You can if you want to," I told her. "But you have to want to, and I
can't make you want to. I don't have that power. You do.
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_15 .pagebreak aria-label="page 15"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Make a decision. You may feel like screaming and
crying. But don't act on it unless it's in your best interest."

Sometimes it just takes one sentence to point the way out of victimhood:
*Is it good for me?*

Is it good for me to sleep with a married man? Is it good for me to eat
a piece of chocolate cake? Is it good for me to beat my cheating husband
on the chest with my fist? Is it good for me to go dancing? To help a
friend? Does it deplete me or empower me?

Another tool for moving out of victimhood is to learn to cope with
loneliness. It's what most of us fear more than anything else. But when
you're in love with yourself, alone doesn't mean lonely.

"Loving yourself is good for your kids, too," I told Emily. "When you
show them that you'll never lose you, you show them that they're not
losing you, either. That you're here now. Then they can live their
lives, rather than you worrying about them, and them worrying about you,
and everybody worrying, worrying. To your children, and to yourself, you
say, 'I'm here. I'm showing up for you.' You'll give them---and
yourself---what you never had: a healthy mother."

When we start loving ourselves, we start patching up the holes in our
hearts, the gaping places that feel like they'll never be filled. And we
start making discoveries. "Aha!" we learn to say. "I didn't see it that
way before." I asked Emily what discoveries she'd made in the last eight
months of turmoil. Her eyes brightened.

"I've discovered how many wonderful people I have around me---my family,
friends, people I didn't know before who became friends during my
therapy. When the doctor told me I had cancer, I thought my life had
come to an end. Now I've met so many people. I've learned I can fight,
that I'm powerful. It took []{#ch01.xhtml_page_16 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 16" role="doc-pagebreak"}me forty-five years to learn
that, but I'm lucky I know it now. My new life is already beginning."

We can all find strength and freedom, even within terrible
circumstances. Honey, you're in charge, so take charge. Don't be
Cinderella, sitting in the kitchen waiting for a guy with a foot fetish.
There are no princes or princesses. You have all the love and power you
need within. So write down what you want to achieve, the kind of life
you want to live, the kind of partner you want to have. When you go out,
look like a million-dollar baby. Join a group of people dealing with
similar struggles, where you can care for each other and commit
yourselves to something bigger than yourselves. And then get curious.
What's next? How's it going to turn out?

Our minds come up with all sorts of brilliant ways to protect us.
Victimhood is a tempting shield because it suggests that if we make
ourselves blameless, our grief will hurt less. As long as Emily
identified as the victim, she could pass all the blame and
responsibility for her well-being on to her ex-husband. Victimhood
offers a false respite by deferring and delaying growth. The longer we
stay there, the harder it is to leave.

"You're not a victim," I told Emily. "It's not who you are---it's what
was done to you."

We can be wounded *and* accountable. Responsible *and* innocent. We can
give up the secondary gains of victimhood for the primary gains of
growing and healing and moving on.

The whole reason to step out of victimhood is so we can step into the
rest of our lives. Barbara was trying to navigate this
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_17 .pagebreak aria-label="page 17"
role="doc-pagebreak"}pivot when she contacted me a year after her
mother's death. She looked young for sixty-four, her skin smooth,
highlights in her long blond hair. But she seemed to hold a heavy burden
in her chest, and her wide blue eyes were full of sorrow.

Barbara's relationship with her mother had been complicated, and so her
grief was also complicated. Demanding and controlling, her mother had
sometimes explicitly reinforced Barbara's victimhood, fixating on
problems like bad grades and breakups, stoking Barbara's belief that she
was flawed and helpless and would never amount to much. In some ways, it
was a relief to be free from her mother's distorted and critical
perspective. But she also felt restless and unsettled. A recent back
injury had interrupted the job she loved at a local café, and she had
trouble falling asleep at night, her mind churning with questions. *Is
my time almost up? What have I failed at? What have I done to be
remembered? What is the outcome of my life?*

"I feel sad and anxious and insecure," she said. "I just can't come to
any peace."

I often see this happen to middle-aged women who have lost their
mothers. The unfinished emotional business of the relationship lives
on---and death makes it feel impossible that there will ever be closure.

"Have you released your mom from the past?" I asked.

Barbara shook her head. Her eyes filled with tears.

Tears are good. They mean we've been pierced by an important emotional
truth. If I ask a question that prompts a patient to cry, it's like
striking gold. We've hit on something essential. Yet the
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_18 .pagebreak aria-label="page 18"
role="doc-pagebreak"}moment of release is as vulnerable as it is
profound. I leaned in, all present, no rush.

Barbara wiped her face and took a long, shaky breath. "I want to ask you
about something," she said. "A memory from childhood I keep replaying
nonstop in my mind."

I asked her to close her eyes while she described the incident, to tell
it in present tense, as though it were happening now.

"I'm three," she began. "We're all in the kitchen. My dad's at the
breakfast table. My mom is standing over me and my older brother. She's
angry. She lines us up side by side and says, 'Who do you like best, me
or your father?' My dad is watching it happen, and he starts to cry. He
says, 'Don't do that. Don't do that to the kids.' I want to say that I
love my dad best; I want to go over and sit in his lap and hug him. But
I can't do that. I can't say that I love him or I'll make my mom mad.
I'll get in trouble. So I say I like my mom the best. And now..." Her
voice cracked, tears rolling down her cheeks. "Now I wish I could take
it back."

"You were a good survivor," I told her. "A smart cookie. You did what
you had to do to survive."

"Then why does it hurt so much?" she said. "Why can't I just let it go?"

"Because that little girl doesn't know she's safe now. Take me to her
there in the kitchen," I said. "Tell me what you see."

She described the window facing the backyard, the yellow flowers on the
handles of the cabinet doors, how her eyes were exactly the height of
the oven dials.

"Talk to that little girl. How is she feeling now?"

"I love my dad. But I can't say it."

"You're powerless."

[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_19 .pagebreak aria-label="page 19"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Tears spilled down her cheeks to her chin. She
wiped at them, then cradled her face in her hands.

"You were a child then," I said. "You're an adult now. Go to that
precious, one-of-a-kind little girl. Be her mother now. Take her hand
and tell her, 'I'm going to take you out of here.' "

Barbara's eyes were still closed. She swayed side to side.

"Hold her hand," I continued. "Walk her to the door, down the front
steps, out to the sidewalk. Walk her up the block. Turn the corner. Tell
the little girl, 'You're not stuck there anymore.' "

The prison of victimhood often gets established in childhood, and even
when we're adults, it can keep us feeling as powerless as we did when we
were young. We can release ourselves from victimhood by helping that
inner child feel safe, and by letting her experience the world with an
adult's autonomy.

I guided Barbara to keep holding the hand of the wounded little girl. To
take her for a walk. Show her the flowers in the park. Spoil her and
love her right up. Give her an ice cream cone or a soft teddy bear to
squeeze---whatever she wanted most to feel safe. "And then take her down
to the beach," I said. "Show her how to kick the sand. Tell her, 'I'm
here and we're going to be angry.' Kick the sand with her. Yell and
shout. Then take her home. Not back to the kitchen, but where you live
now. The place where you'll always show up to take care of her."

Barbara's eyes were still closed, her mouth and cheeks more relaxed. But
a furrow of tension still gathered between her eyes.

"That little girl was stuck in the kitchen, and she needed you to get
her out," I said. "You rescued her."

She nodded slowly, but the tension didn't leave her face.

Her work in the kitchen wasn't done. There were others to rescue.

"Your mother needs you, too," I said. "She's still standing in
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_20 .pagebreak aria-label="page 20"
role="doc-pagebreak"}that kitchen. Open the door for her. Tell her it's
time for both of you to be free."

Barbara imagined going to her father first, to the breakfast table where
he still sat in silence, his cheeks wet with tears. She kissed him on
the forehead and spoke the love she'd had to hide as a child. Then she
went to her mother. She put a hand on her shoulder, looked into her
troubled eyes, and nodded toward the open door, the patch of green lawn
visible from where they stood. When Barbara opened her eyes, something
in her face and shoulders appeared to relax.

"Thank you," she said.

Releasing ourselves from victimhood also means releasing others from the
roles we've assigned them.

I had a chance to use this tool myself a few months ago, when I was on a
speaking tour in Europe and invited my daughter Audrey to go with me.
When she'd been in middle school and high school, training as a Junior
Olympic swimmer, getting up at five in the morning for practice, her
hair green from the constant exposure to chlorine, her father had
usually been the one to accompany her to swim meets all over Texas and
the Southwest. This was how Béla and I had managed the demands of our
careers and three children---we'd acted as partners, splitting
responsibilities. But that meant we each missed out on things. Traveling
with Audrey now couldn't replace the time we'd lost when she was
younger. But it seemed like a welcome way to honor our relationship.
Besides, this time I was the one who needed a chaperone!

We went to the Netherlands, and then on to Switzerland,
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_21 .pagebreak aria-label="page 21"
role="doc-pagebreak"}where we sank our teeth into napoleon pastries as
rich and sweet as the ones my father used to sneak home for me at night
when he'd been out playing billiards. I'd been back to Europe numerous
times since the war, but it was incredibly healing for me to be there,
so close to my childhood and my trauma, with my magnificent daughter, to
share silence and conversation, to hear her plans for launching a second
career as a grief and leadership coach. One night, after I gave a speech
to a roomful of global executives at a business school in Lausanne,
someone surprised me by asking, "What's it like, traveling with Audrey?"

I searched for the words to adequately convey how special this time was
to me. I mentioned that middle children often get short shrift in
families, and that Audrey had been raised largely by her older sister,
Marianne, while I was running their little brother, John, all over El
Paso---and even as far as Baltimore---in search of therapies for some
undiagnosed developmental delays of great concern. John went on to
graduate from the University of Texas as one of the top ten students in
his class, and is now a respected civic leader and advocate for people
with disabilities. I'm forever grateful he was able to receive
interventions and vital support. But I've always felt guilty for the
ways John's unique needs occupied my attention and interrupted Audrey's
childhood, for the six-year age gap between Marianne and Audrey, for the
burden my own trauma put on my children. Saying this impromptu, in
public, was cathartic for me. It felt good to recognize it, to
apologize.

But at the airport the next morning, Audrey confronted me.

"Mom," she said, "we have to change the story of who I am. I don't see
myself as a victim. I need you to stop seeing me that way."

My chest tightened with discomfort, with the rush to defend
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_22 .pagebreak aria-label="page 22"
role="doc-pagebreak"}myself. I thought I'd been portraying her as a
survivor, not a victim. But she was absolutely right. In trying to
discharge my own guilt, I'd cast her in the role of the neglected child.
I'd put us all in roles: I was the victimizer, Audrey the victim, and
Marianne the rescuer. (Or, in another version of the same story, I cast
John as the victim, myself as the rescuer, and Béla, whom I was so angry
with in those years, as the victimizer.) The role of victim is often
passed back and forth in relationships and families. But there can't be
a victim without a victimizer. When we stay a victim, or put someone
else in that role, we reinforce and perpetuate the harm. In focusing on
what Audrey *hadn't* had growing up, I was undermining her survivor
strength---her capacity to see any experience as an opportunity for
growth. And I was trapping myself in a prison of guilt.

The first time I saw the power of the perspective shift from victim to
survivor in action was as a clinical intern at the William Beaumont Army
Medical Center, in the mid-1970s. One day I was assigned two new
patients, both Vietnam veterans, both paraplegics with injuries of the
lower spinal cord, both unlikely to walk again. They had the same
diagnosis, the same prognosis. The first spent hours curled up in the
fetal position on his bed, full of rage, cursing God and country. The
other preferred to be out of bed, sitting up in his wheelchair. "I'm
seeing everything differently now," he told me. "My children came to
visit me yesterday, and now that I'm in this wheelchair, I'm so much
closer to their eyes." He wasn't happy to be disabled, to have
compromised sexual function, to wonder if he'd ever be able to run a
race with his daughter or dance at his son's wedding. But he
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_23 .pagebreak aria-label="page 23"
role="doc-pagebreak"}could see that his injury had afforded him a new
perspective. And he could choose to see his injury as limiting and
incapacitating---or as a new source of growth.

More than forty years later, in the spring of 2018, I saw my daughter
Marianne make a similar choice. While traveling in Italy with her
husband, Rob, she tripped on a set of stone steps and fell on her head,
suffering a traumatic brain injury. For two weeks, we didn't know if she
would survive. Or, if she survived, who she would be. Would she be able
to speak? Would she remember her children, her three beautiful
grandsons, Rob, her siblings, me? Throughout those insufferable days
when her life hung in the balance, I reached again and again to touch
the bracelet Béla gave me when she was born, a thick braid made from
three kinds of gold. When we'd fled Czechoslovakia in 1949, I smuggled
it out in Marianne's diaper. I've worn it every day since, a talisman of
the life and love that emerge even from destruction and death, a
reminder that there's such a thing as survival against the odds.

For me, there is no more difficult feeling than fear mixed with
powerlessness. I was gutted by Marianne's suffering, terrified that we'd
lose her---and there was nothing concrete to *do* about it, to heal her,
to prevent the worst from happening. The fear would rise, and I'd say
her Hungarian nickname, "Marchuka, Marchuka," the syllables a kind of
prayer. I realized it's what I'd done in Auschwitz when I danced for
Josef Mengele. Gone inward. Created a sanctuary inside myself, a place
to keep my spirit safe within the turmoil of threat and uncertainty.

Miraculously, Marianne survived. She doesn't remember the first weeks
after the fall. Perhaps she went inward, too. Somehow---through
excellent medical care, the constant support and presence of her husband
and family, her own inner resources---she was able,
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_24 .pagebreak aria-label="page 24"
role="doc-pagebreak"}bit by bit, to regain physical and cognitive
function, to remember her children's names. At first, it was difficult
for her to swallow, and her sense of taste was distorted. I cooked for
her nonstop, determined to try all of the foods she used to love. One
day she asked me to make trepanka, a potato dish served with sauerkraut
and brinza, a Czech farmer's cheese. It was the food I most craved when
I was pregnant with her! When I watched her try a first bite and smile,
I felt deep in my bones that she was going to be okay.

In just a year and a half, she's made a stunning recovery and is living
and working as she did before the injury, with strength, brilliance,
creativity, and passion.

Though many aspects of her recovery are out of her control, not easily
explained, a matter of sheer luck, she's also made choices that I know
have helped her heal. When you're in a vulnerable position, with limited
energy, it is especially crucial to choose how to spend your time.
Marianne has chosen to think like a survivor, focusing on what she needs
to do to keep improving, listening to her body to know when it's time to
rest, and feeling and expressing gratitude for her health and all the
people who are supporting her recovery. When she wakes up in the
morning, she asks herself, "What am I going to do today? When will I do
my therapy exercises? What projects do I want to work on? What do I need
to do to take care of myself?"

Attitude isn't everything. We can't erase hardships or make ourselves
well with our outlook alone. But how we spend our time and mental energy
does affect our health. If we resist and rail against what we're
experiencing, we take away from our growth and healing. Instead, we can
acknowledge the awful thing that is happening *and* find the best way to
live with it.

This is especially true when we come up against setbacks or
[]{#ch01.xhtml_page_25 .pagebreak aria-label="page 25"
role="doc-pagebreak"}complications in our healing process. Brain
injuries generally mean that patients are not as good at many of the
things they used to do with ease or skill. Marianne is still working
hard to reestablish all the neural networks that were damaged by the
fall. She tires easily with too much standing or walking, and struggles
with language retrieval. Except for the initial weeks of recovery, her
memories are intact, but sometimes she can't find the words for
things---the name of a country she's visited or a vegetable she wants to
buy at the farmers market. She's had to learn new methods for doing what
she used to do effortlessly. When she prepares for a speech, she can't
just write down three points and trust her brain to remember the
connections and fill in the gaps, as she did before her injury. Now she
has to write down the entire speech---every word, every transition.

But interestingly, there are other things she does with more flexibility
and innovation. She's always been an accomplished home chef, and once
had a cooking column in a San Diego newspaper. After her fall, she has
had to reteach herself how to cook. In the process, she has begun
inventing new recipes and going about old processes in a new way. She
and Rob live in Manhattan now, but they spend as much of the summer as
they can in La Jolla, where I live. This past summer she wanted to make
me a cold cherry soup she'd prepared once for a dinner party in New
York. She bought a bunch of sour cherries and reread two old Hungarian
cookbooks, only to abandon the cookbooks and go about it her own
way---preparing the soup cold instead of heating it and then cooling it
down, adding three different kinds of fruit. Without the constant
adaptations she's had to make since the injury, she probably would have
made the soup the same way []{#ch01.xhtml_page_26 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 26" role="doc-pagebreak"}she had before. Instead, she
embraced the practice of reinvention her injury has required and let it
guide her to something new. And it was delicious!

I can see in her eyes sometimes how tiring and frustrating it is to work
so hard to do things she once took for granted. But she's also attuned
to the possibilities.

"It's funny," she told me, "but I feel like I'm intellectually alive in
a different way." Her face lit up the way it had as a child when she'd
learned to read. "To tell you the truth, it's kind of fun and
thrilling."

This isn't an uncommon experience for people who've survived similar
injuries. Marianne's neurologist told her a number of his patients,
never skilled artists, suddenly found after a major brain injury that
they could draw or paint---and do it remarkably well. Something about
the broken and reconfigured neural pathways allows many survivors to
find they're in possession of gifts they never had or knew about before.

What a beautiful reminder that the things that interrupt our lives, that
stop us in our tracks, can also be catalysts for the emerging self,
tools that show us a new way to be, that endow us with new vision.

This is why I say that in every crisis there is a transition. Awful
things happen, and they hurt like hell. And these devastating
experiences are also opportunities to regroup and decide what we want
for our lives. When we choose to respond to what's happened by moving
forward and discovering our freedom *to*, we release ourselves from the
prison of victimhood.

[]{#ch01a.xhtml}

### []{#ch01a.xhtml_page_27 .pagebreak aria-label="page 27" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM VICTIMHOOD {.h3}

- ***That was then, this is now.*** *Think of a moment in childhood or
  adolescence when you felt hurt by another's actions, large or small.
  Try to think of a* specific *moment, not a generalized impression of
  that relationship or time of life. Imagine the moment as though you
  are reliving it. Pay attention to sensory details---sights, sounds,
  smells, tastes, physical sensations. Then picture yourself as you are
  now. See yourself enter the past moment and take your past self by the
  hand. Guide yourself out of the place where you were hurt, out of the
  past. Tell yourself, "Here I am. I'm going to take care of you."*
- ***In every crisis there is a transition.*** *Write a letter to a
  person or situation that has caused you pain, recently or in the past.
  Be specific about what the person did, or about what happened that you
  didn't like. Put it all on the table. Say how the actions, words, or
  events affected you. Then write another letter to the same person or
  situation---but this time write a thank-you letter, expressing
  gratitude for what the person has taught you about yourself or how the
  situation has prompted you to grow. The goal of the thank-you letter
  is not to pretend to like something you didn't like, or to force
  yourself to be happy about something painful. Acknowledge that what
  happened wasn't right and that it hurt. And also notice the healing
  power in shifting your point of view from a powerless victim to who
  you really are: a survivor, a person of strength.*
- []{#ch01a.xhtml_page_28 .pagebreak aria-label="page 28"
  role="doc-pagebreak"}***Harness your freedom to***. *Make a vision
  board---a visual representation of what you want to create or embrace
  in your life. Cut out pictures and words from magazines, old
  calendars, etc.---there are no rules, just see what attracts you.
  Paste the images and words to a sheet of poster board or a big piece
  of cardboard. Notice what patterns emerge. (This is a wonderful
  practice to do together with dear friends---and with plenty of good
  food!) Keep your vision board close by and look at it every day. Let
  this intuitive creation be an arrow to follow.*

[]{#ch02.xhtml}

# []{#ch02.xhtml_page_29 .pagebreak aria-label="page 29" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 2 [NO PROZAC AT AUSCHWITZ]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Avoidance {.h2c}

One day when Marianne was five and we were living in a tiny apartment in
Baltimore, she came home from school crying. She hadn't been invited to
a birthday party, and her heart was crushed, her face red with emotion,
her cheeks covered in tears. I didn't know anything about how to be
present with feelings. I didn't know how to let her have her own
feelings. In those days, I was in complete denial about my past. I never
spoke of Auschwitz. Even my own children wouldn't know I was a survivor
until Marianne was in middle school and found a book about the
Holocaust. When she showed her father the pictures of starving, skeletal
people in Auschwitz and demanded to know what terrible calamity had
people dying behind barbed wire, it broke my heart to listen as he told
her I'd been a prisoner there. I hid in the bathroom, unsure how to meet
my daughter's eyes.

When Marianne came home from kindergarten in tears, her sadness made me
sad and uncomfortable. So I led her by the []{#ch02.xhtml_page_30
.pagebreak aria-label="page 30" role="doc-pagebreak"}hand into the
kitchen and made her a chocolate milkshake. I served her a big piece of
Hungarian seven-layer chocolate cake. That was my remedy---eat something
sweet. Cure your discomfort with food. Food was my answer to everything.
(Especially chocolate. And especially Hungarian chocolate, with unsalted
butter. Don't ever put salt in the butter and make a Hungarian
anything!)

I didn't know it then, but we disable our children when we take away
their suffering. We teach them that feelings are wrong or scary. But a
feeling is only a feeling. There's no right or wrong. There's just my
feeling and yours. We are wiser not to try to reason others out of their
feelings, or try to cheer them up. It's better to allow their feelings
and keep them company, to say, "Tell me more." To resist saying what I
used to tell my children when they were upset because someone had teased
or excluded them: "I know how you feel." It's a lie. You can't ever know
how someone else feels. It's not happening to you. To be empathetic and
supportive, don't take on other people's inner life as if it is your
own. That's just another way of robbing others of their experience---and
of keeping them stuck.

I like to remind my patients: the opposite of depression is
*expression*.

What comes out of you doesn't make you sick; what stays in there does.

I recently talked with a beautiful man who counsels children in the
Canadian foster care system. He helps young people grieve the loss of
family, security, and safety that many never had in the first place. I
asked what motivates his work, and he told me about a conversation he
had with his father, who was dying of cancer. []{#ch02.xhtml_page_31
.pagebreak aria-label="page 31" role="doc-pagebreak"}"Why do you think
you got cancer?" he asked. His father replied, "Because I never learned
to cry."

Of course, many factors account for each person's potential for health
and disease, and we do great damage to ourselves when we believe we're
to blame for our illnesses or injuries. But I can say with certainty
that the emotions we don't allow ourselves to express or release stay
bottled inside, and whatever we're holding on to affects our body
chemistry and finds expression in our cells and neural circuitry. In
Hungary we say, "Don't inhale your anger to your breast." It can be
harmful to hold on to feelings and keep them locked inside.

Trying to shield others or ourselves from our feelings doesn't work in
the long run. But many of us are trained from a young age to disown our
inner responses---in other words, to give up our genuine selves. A child
says, "I hate school!" and a parent replies, "Hate is a strong word," or
"Don't say hate," or "It can't be *that* bad." A child falls down and
skins her knee, and a grown-up says, "You're okay!" In trying to help
children regroup or bounce back from hurt or difficulty, caring adults
can minimize what the child is going through, or inadvertently teach
that some things are permissible to feel and others aren't. Sometimes
the cues to change or deny a feeling are less subtle: *Calm down! Get
over it. Don't be such a crybaby*.

More than by what we say, children learn by watching what we do. If
adults create a home environment where anger isn't allowed to be
expressed, or where anger is vented in harmful ways, children learn that
strong feelings aren't permissible or safe.

Many of us are in the habit of reacting instead of responding to
[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_32 .pagebreak aria-label="page 32"
role="doc-pagebreak"}what's going on. We've often learned to hide from
our emotions---suppress them, medicate them, run away.

One of my patients, a physician addicted to prescription drugs, called
me early one morning. "Dr. Eger," he said, "I realized last night there
was no Prozac at Auschwitz." It took me a moment to digest what he'd
said. There's a huge difference between selfmedicating, as he was doing,
and taking necessary medications that have the potential to save lives.
But he made a good point. He'd begun reaching outside himself for an
escape from his feelings, and he'd become hooked on drugs he didn't
need.

At Auschwitz, nothing came from without. There was no way to numb
ourselves, to take the edge off, to check out for a while, to forget the
reality of torture and hunger and imminent death. We had to learn to be
good observers of ourselves and our circumstances. We had to learn to
just be.

Yet I don't remember ever crying in the camps. I was too occupied with
survival. The feelings came later. And when they came, for many, many
years I managed to avoid them, to keep running away.

But you can't heal what you don't feel.

More than thirty years after the war, as part of my ongoing work as a
trauma specialist with the US military, I was asked to serve on a
prisoner-of-war advisory committee. Every time I visited Washington, DC,
to meet with the committee, someone would ask if I'd been to the
Holocaust Memorial Museum. I'd already returned to Auschwitz, I'd stood
on the ground where I was separated from my parents, under the sky that
had received their bodies as they became smoke. Why would I go to a
museum []{#ch02.xhtml_page_33 .pagebreak aria-label="page 33"
role="doc-pagebreak"}about Auschwitz and other concentration camps?
*Been there, done that*, I thought. For six years I served on the
committee, and for six years I avoided setting foot in the museum. And
then one morning I was sitting at the mahogany table in our meeting
room, my name etched on a little plaque in front of me. And I realized
that was then, this is now. I'm Dr. Eger. I made it out.

And as long as I avoided the museum, as long as I convinced myself I'd
already overcome the past and had no need to face it again, a part of me
was still stuck there. A part of me wasn't free.

So I gathered all my courage and visited the museum. It was every bit as
excruciating as I'd feared. I got so flooded with emotion when I saw the
photographs of the arrival platform at Auschwitz in May 1944 that I
almost couldn't breathe. And then I came to the cattle car. It was a
replica of an old German train car built to transport livestock.
Visitors could climb inside and feel how dark and small a space it was;
feel what it was like to be packed in so tight you were sitting on top
of other people; imagine sharing one bucket of water and one bucket for
waste with hundreds of people; imagine riding all day and all night
without stopping, the only food a stale loaf of bread shared among eight
or ten other prisoners. I stood outside the cattle car, completely
paralyzed. Frozen. People crowded behind me, waiting quietly,
respectfully, for me to step inside. For many minutes I couldn't do
it---and then it took every ounce of strength I could muster to coax one
foot and then the other through the narrow door.

Inside, a wave of terror came over me and I thought I might vomit. I
curled up in a heap, reliving the final days I saw my parents alive. The
relentless churn of the wheels on the track. []{#ch02.xhtml_page_34
.pagebreak aria-label="page 34" role="doc-pagebreak"}When I was sixteen,
I didn't know we were going to Auschwitz. I didn't know that soon my
parents would be dead. I had to survive the discomfort and uncertainty.
But somehow, that was easier than reliving it now. This time I had to
feel it. This time I cried. I lost track of time sitting there in the
dark with my pain, barely noticing as other visitors entered, shared the
dark, moved on. I sat for an hour, maybe two.

When I finally got out, I felt different. A little lighter. Emptied out.
All my grief and fear weren't gone. Every swastika in every photograph,
every hardened eye of an SS officer standing guard made me flinch. But
I'd allowed myself to revisit the past and face the feelings I'd been
running from for so many years.

There are many good reasons why we avoid our feelings: they're
uncomfortable, or they're not the feelings we think we should be having,
or we're afraid of how they might hurt others, or afraid of what they
could mean---what they might reveal about the choices we've made or the
ones we will make going forward.

But as long as you're avoiding your feelings, you're denying reality.
And if you try to shut something out and say, "I don't want to think
about it," I guarantee that you're going to think about it. So invite
the feeling in, sit down with it, keep it company. And then decide how
long you're going to hold on to it. Because you're not a fragile little
somebody. It's good to []{#ch02.xhtml_page_35 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 35" role="doc-pagebreak"}face every reality. To stop
fighting and hiding. To remember that a feeling is just a feeling---it's
not your identity.

One September morning sixteen years ago, Caroline was just starting a
load of laundry, enjoying a quiet day alone in her house in rural
Canada, when there was a knock at the door. She could see through the
front window that it was Michael, her husband's cousin. Michael was her
age---in his early forties. He had been in trouble much of his
life---theft, petty crime, drug abuse---and was finally ready for a
second chance. Though he'd recently moved in with his girlfriend,
Caroline and her husband had been the family members who'd taken him in
to help him turn his life around, setting him up with a job and a stable
environment. He'd become a fixture in their lives, another trusted adult
who often joined Caroline, her husband, and her three stepsons for
dinner.

As much as she cared for Michael and felt good about helping him, for a
second Caroline considered pretending she wasn't home. Her husband was
out of town, the boys were finally back in school after summer break,
and she didn't want Michael's visit to interrupt all the things she'd
planned to accomplish on her first morning alone in three months. But it
was Michael---a relative she loved, who loved her in return, who relied
on her family. She opened the door and invited him in for coffee.

"Boys are back at school already," she said, making small talk as she
put the mugs and cream on the table.

"I know."

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_36 .pagebreak aria-label="page 36"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"Tom's gone, too, for a couple of days."

That's when he pulled out a handgun. He put it to her head, told her to
get on the floor. She knelt by the refrigerator.

"What are you doing?" she said. "Michael, what are you doing?"

She could hear him undoing his belt, unzipping his jeans.

Her throat was dry. Her heart pounded. She'd taken a self-defense class
in college, and words formed in her mouth, the things she'd been taught
to say if someone assaulted you. Use his name. Talk about family. She
kept the words coming, her voice somehow sure and steady, talking about
Michael's parents, the boys, family holidays, favorite fishing spots.

"Okay, I won't rape you," he finally said. His voice was so offhand and
casual, as though he were saying, "I don't think I'll have any coffee
after all."

But he kept the gun pressed to her head. She couldn't see his face. Was
he high? What did he want? He seemed to have planned this out, to know
he would find her home alone. Was he going to rob her?

"Take anything you want," she said. "You know where to find everything.
Just take it, all of it."

"Yeah," he said. "That's what I'm gonna do."

She felt him move, as though ready to step away. Then he stood still
again, gun hard against her skull.

"I don't know why I'm doing this," he said.

A noise filled the room. Her head throbbed and burned in pain.

The next thing she knew, she was gaining consciousness. She didn't know
how long she'd been passed out on the kitchen floor. She couldn't see
anything. She tried to get up, but there was so []{#ch02.xhtml_page_37
.pagebreak aria-label="page 37" role="doc-pagebreak"}much blood she kept
slipping, falling back down on the floor. She heard footsteps on the
basement stairs.

"Michael?" she called out. "Help me!"

It didn't make any sense to ask the person who'd just shot her for help,
but it was a reflex. He was family. And there wasn't anyone else there
to ask.

"Michael?" she called again.

Another shot rang out. A second bullet blast into the back of her head.

This time, she didn't pass out. This time, she played dead. She lay on
the floor, trying not to breathe. She could hear Michael walking around
the house. She waited, waited, holding perfectly still. Then the back
door closed. Still, she lay on the floor. Maybe he was testing her,
tricking her, waiting for her to get up so he could shoot her again.
More than pain, more than terror, what she felt was rage. How dare he do
this to her? How dare he leave her for dead, leave her for the boys to
find when they came home from school? She was damned if she'd let
herself die before she could tell someone who'd done this to her, get
Michael into custody before he could hurt anyone else.

Finally, the house was completely quiet. She opened her eyes, but she
couldn't see anything. The bullets had damaged something in her brain or
optic nerve. She crawled unsteadily across the room and pulled herself
up to the kitchen counter, feeling around for the phone. She found the
receiver, but when she tried to pick it up, it kept slipping from her
hands. When she managed to grasp it, she remembered that she couldn't
see to dial. She banged randomly at the buttons, dropped the phone,
picked it up, tried again. But she couldn't get it to work.

She gave up and crawled slowly, unable to see where she was
[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_38 .pagebreak aria-label="page 38"
role="doc-pagebreak"}going or think what to do. Every once in a while,
she'd catch a glimpse of light through the fog of blindness, and
eventually she managed to follow the light to the front door, and then
outside. They lived on a five-acre lot, the nearest neighbor too far
away to hear her if she screamed. She'd have to crawl for help. She made
it down the driveway and started up the road of her subdivision,
screaming and screaming. She knew someone had finally seen her when she
heard a woman let out a bloodcurdling wail, like in a horror film. Soon
people came running. Someone shouted to call an ambulance. She could
recognize some of her neighbors' voices, but they didn't seem to know
who she was. She realized her face was so disfigured and blown apart
that they didn't recognize her. She spoke fast, spitting out details:
Michael's name, the color of his car, the approximate time when he'd
shown up at the house, every detail she could remember. She might not
have another chance.

"Call my in-laws," she gasped. "Tell them to make sure the boys are safe
at school. Tell Tom and the boys I love them."

Caroline knows her parents and in-laws and stepsons were brought to the
hospital to say goodbye, that her father-in-law asked a Catholic priest
to come, and her mother brought her Anglican minister. The Catholic
priest gave her last rites.

Weeks later, the priest visited her at her in-laws' house, where she was
recuperating, and told her, "I've never met anybody who's come back."

"Come back from where?" she asked.

"My darling," he said, "you were cold on the table."

It's truly a miracle that precious Caroline survived.

But if you've lived through a trauma and come out the other side, you
know that surviving is only the first battle.

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_39 .pagebreak aria-label="page 39"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Violence leaves a long and terrible wake. When
Caroline reached out to me a few months before Michael was due to be
released on parole, almost sixteen years had passed since the shooting,
but the psychological wounds were still fresh.

"We see stories on TV," she said, "about a person who suffered a trauma
and is coming home. People say, 'We're going to take them home now and
make them safe so their lives can go on.' I look at my husband and say,
'If they only knew.' Just because you lived, just because you're going
home, life is not magically better. Any person who's been traumatized
has a long road to travel."

For Caroline---as for me---some of the residual effects of the trauma
are physical. When the swelling on her brain went down, Caroline's
vision slowly returned, but she still has upper, lower, and peripheral
blindness. She can't hear well. She has nerve deprivation in her hands
and arms. When she gets nervous, her brain and body seem disconnected.
She has trouble feeling and moving her limbs.

The crime has also taken a toll on her family and community. It's forced
everyone to face an evil committed by a loved one, a neighbor, a
friend---to suffer a terrible breach of trust. For a long time,
Caroline's youngest stepson, who was only eight when this happened,
wouldn't leave her alone in a room. She'd try to coax him to join his
brothers or the rest of the family, but he'd say, "No, I'll stay here
with you. I know you don't like to be alone." When she was able to walk
and drive and regain some independence, her oldest stepson became the
protective parent, following her around, hovering to make sure she
didn't hurt herself. And for a long time, her middle stepson was afraid
to hug her or touch her. He was afraid he'd hurt her.

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_40 .pagebreak aria-label="page 40"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Caroline told me that while some friends and loved
ones have coped with the trauma by becoming overprotective, others have
dealt with it by minimizing what happened.

"People are often uncomfortable when they know," she said. "They don't
want to talk about it. They think if they don't talk about it, that
makes it go away. That it's over and done with and we'll just move on.
Or they call it my 'accident.' I didn't *accidentally* back into a gun!
But people don't want to use words like 'crime' or 'shooting.' "

Even her father-in-law, Michael's uncle---who was present in the
aftermath of the shooting, who took Caroline and her family in for three
or four months when she couldn't function on her own---would tell
people, "She's back to normal, one hundred percent."

"Are you kidding me?" Caroline said with a rueful laugh. "But it made
him feel better."

Now, in many ways, stability has returned. The boys are adults, married,
a couple with kids of their own. Caroline and her husband live in the
US, thousands of miles away from Michael, across an international
border, where the chances that he would track them down seeking revenge
for her testifying are slim, nearly impossible. But the fear hasn't
dissolved.

"He was family," Caroline said. "He lived in our home. We trusted him.
And the last thing he said to me was, 'I don't know why I'm doing this.'
If he didn't know why he tried to kill me---and he's family---who else
out there is going to try to hurt me just because?"

Caroline told me she's scared all the time, always expecting somebody to
come and finish what Michael started. She doesn't go outside and garden,
something she used to enjoy, because []{#ch02.xhtml_page_41 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 41" role="doc-pagebreak"}someone could walk up behind
her and she wouldn't know they were there. Even indoors she's on
constant alert. She doesn't move around her house without an alarm
button she can press if someone breaks in. If she misplaces the alarm,
she can't breathe until she finds it.

"For a while, I went back and lived in the home where he shot me," she
said. "I wasn't going to let him take my home away from me. I was going
to take it back."

But it was too terrifying and painful to live in the place where she'd
nearly died. They moved far away, to a safe and friendly community in
the southern United States, near a beautiful lake where they take their
boat on the weekends. Even so, she lives in fear.

"Sixteen years of living like this isn't living," she said.

She felt imprisoned by the past, and she desperately wanted to be free.

As we spoke, I heard so much love and strength and determination in
Caroline. I also recognized four behaviors she was practicing that were
keeping her stuck in the past and stuck in fear.

For one thing, she was exerting a lot of energy trying to change her
feelings, to convince herself to feel differently from the way she
actually felt.

"I'm blessed," she said. "I know I'm blessed! I'm alive. I have all
these people who love me."

"Yes!" I said. "It's true. But don't try to cheer yourself up when you
feel sad. It's not going to help. You're just going to feel guilty, that
you should be feeling better than you're feeling. Try this instead.
Acknowledge the feeling. It's grief. It's fear. It's sadness. Just
acknowledge it. And then give up the need for others' approval. They
can't live your life. They can't feel your feelings."

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_42 .pagebreak aria-label="page 42"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In addition to trying to reason herself out of her
very reasonable sadness and fear, Caroline lived in the prison of trying
to protect *others* from her feelings. The people who love us want the
best for us. They don't want us to hurt. And so it's tempting to show
them the version of ourselves they long to see. But when we deny or
minimize what we're feeling, it backfires.

Caroline told me that since the shooting, she and her husband had always
had dogs, but when their dog died recently, her husband, not
understanding how much a dog improved her sense of safety, said he
needed time before they brought a new one into their family.

"I was really angry," she said. "But I couldn't tell him that. The
logical thing would've been to say, 'I'm afraid to be alone without a
dog.' But I wouldn't say it. I think he would understand---but I didn't
want him to know I still have that level of fear. I don't know why."

I told her she was protecting him from worry. From guilt. But she was
also depriving him, not letting him in. Denying him the opportunity to
try to protect her.

Caroline said she was doing the same thing with her sons. "I don't think
they know how imprisoned I am. I try not to let them know."

"But you're lying. You're not being the whole you to your family. You're
depriving yourself of freedom. And you're depriving them, too. Your
strategy for dealing with your difficult emotions has become another
problem."

In protecting others from her feelings, Caroline was avoiding taking
responsibility for them.

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_43 .pagebreak aria-label="page 43"
role="doc-pagebreak"}And in remaining consumed by fear, she was giving
too much power to Michael and the past.

"My husband and I were just three years married," she said. "We were
joining together as a new family, the boys embracing me as their mother,
starting a beautiful life. And Michael took it." Her chin stiffened. She
clenched her hands into fists.

"He took it?"

"He targeted me. He came to my house with a gun. He put two bullets in
my head and left me for dead."

"Yes, he held a gun. Yes, you did what you had to do to stay alive. But
nobody can take your inner life or responses from you. Why do you give
him more power?"

She'd been victimized in a horrifically cruel and violent way. She had
every right to every feeling about it---rage, sorrow, fear, grief.
Michael had almost robbed her of her life. But that was sixteen years
ago. Even when he was released on parole, he was only a distant
threat---far away, with no permission to travel, and no way to find her.
Yet she was giving her power away to him, allowing him to live on in her
body. She had to get clear of that. To express and release the rage so
it didn't continue to pollute her inner life.

I told her to mentally put Michael in a chair, tie him up, beat him.
Shout at him. "How could you do this to me?" Get her anger going. Scream
it out.

She said she was too afraid to do that.

"The fear was learned. You had no idea what fear was when you were born.
Don't let it take over your life. Love and fear don't go together.
Enough. You don't have time to live in fear."

"If I get mad at him and beat him---there's going to be nothing left of
the chair."

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_44 .pagebreak aria-label="page 44"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"He was a sick person. Sick people have sick minds.
And you get to choose how long you let a sick person's choices keep you
from the life you want."

"I don't want to be so scared and sad anymore," she said. "I'm lonely.
I've hidden myself away from making new friends and doing new things.
I've shut myself in. My face looks tight and worried. I'm always tense
and pursed in my mouth. I think my husband would like to have the happy
woman back that he married. *I'd* like to have the happy woman back that
he married."

Sometimes the feelings we run from aren't the uncomfortable or painful
ones. Sometimes we avoid the *good* feelings. We shut ourselves off from
passion and pleasure and happiness. When we've been victimized, there's
a part of our psyche that identifies with the victimizer, and sometimes
we adopt that punitive, victimizer stance toward ourselves, denying
ourselves the permission to feel good, depriving ourselves of our
birthright: joy. That's why I often say that yesterday's victims can
easily become today's victimizers.

Whatever you practice, you become better at. If you practice tension,
you're going to have more tension. If you practice fear, you'll have
more fear. Denial will lead to denying more and more of your truth.
Caroline had developed a practice of paranoia. *Don't drive too fast.
Don't go too fast in the boat. Don't go there. Don't do that*.

"No more *don't, don't, don't*," I told her. "I want to give you lots of
dos. I *do* have a choice. I *do* have a life to live. I *do* have a
role. I *do* live in the present. I *do* pay attention to what I'm
focusing on, []{#ch02.xhtml_page_45 .pagebreak aria-label="page 45"
role="doc-pagebreak"}and it's definitely in alignment with the goals I'm
choosing: what gives me pleasure, what gives me joy."

I told Caroline, "I want you to practice engaging and observing your
senses---seeing, touching, smelling, tasting. It's time to smile. It's
time to laugh. It's time to be lighthearted."

"I'm alive," Caroline said. "I'm so happy I'm alive."

"Yes! Now make sure you practice that happiness every day, every minute,
in how you love and talk to yourself."

I gave her one more freedom exercise. I told her to write down what
happened, and then go in the backyard with a shovel and start digging a
hole. "It's hot," I said, "and you're perspiring. Keep going till you
have a hole three feet deep. And bury that piece of paper. Put the soil
back over it and go back inside, ready to be born again and have a new
beginning because you've put that part to rest."

A month after we spoke, Caroline wrote to tell me she'd been back to
Canada to meet her newborn grandson, and she and her husband had driven
past their old home, where she had been shot. The oak and maple trees,
just slender saplings when they lived there, had grown tall. The new
owners had added a front deck. *Somehow, it doesn't hurt my heart as
much as it used to*, she wrote. The sadness she harbored for all they
left behind had lessened.

This is what it means to face and release the past. We drive on by.
We're not living there anymore.

When we're in the habit of denying our feelings, it can be hard even to
identify what we're feeling, much less face it, express
[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_46 .pagebreak aria-label="page 46"
role="doc-pagebreak"}it, and finally release it. One way we get stuck is
by confusing thoughts with feelings. I'm surprised how often I hear
people say things like, "I feel I should head downtown this afternoon
and run a few errands," or, "I feel like highlights would really
brighten your eyes." These aren't feelings! They're thoughts. Ideas.
Plans. Feelings are energy. With feelings there's no way out but
*through*. We have to be with them. It takes so much courage to be,
without having to do anything about anything---to just simply be.

The other day I got a call from a man whose father was struggling with a
terminal disease. He asked if I could please visit his father and their
family. I've seen many difficult things in my life, but this family's
suffering really hit me. The father was confined to a wheelchair and
couldn't speak, eat, or move his own body, and his wife and son were so
scared, jumping up and down to reposition his arms or legs or blankets,
doing what they could to mitigate his discomfort---but powerless to halt
the progress of his illness.

I didn't know what would be useful for him or the family. I was quiet. I
asked his wife to hold his hand, to give him a kiss, and just be. I held
the father's other hand. Our eyes met, and I could see all his feelings
of powerlessness and helplessness. By simply being present, we gave him
permission for it all to come to the surface, without judgment.
Together, we did our best to become comfortable with discomfort. We sat
together for a long time.

The son called four days later to say that his father had passed. I
shared that I felt I had done little to support them, and yet, the son
was insistent I had helped them immensely. Perhaps what they found
useful was the opportunity to practice presence. To sit with each other
and with the disease and with our mortality, without succumbing to the
need to fix or change any part of it.

[]{#ch02.xhtml_page_47 .pagebreak aria-label="page 47"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Inspired by this family, I managed to do something
I've never been able to do before. I hate to be confined or tied down,
because it sends me careening into panic. For procedures like MRIs, I've
always asked to be sedated. But last week I decided to try my next
routine MRI---I must have them to check my back---without any medication
to relax me.

An MRI machine is dark and confining---and extremely loud. I was put
inside and the noise started up. Lying there in my thin hospital gown in
the tube, my crooked spine pressed against the cold plastic pad, I felt
fear slice through me. The banging was so loud it sounded like bombers
were coming to deliver a blast, like the whole building might collapse
in a heap of rubble. I thought I was going to scream and kick and have
to be pulled out. But I said to myself, "The more noise I hear, the more
relaxed I become." And I did it. I made it for forty minutes in that
machine without a pill. The ability to be still with my discomfort
didn't happen overnight. But as the years pass, I keep practicing.

This is how we release ourselves from the prison of avoidance---we let
the feelings come. We let them move through us. And then we let them go.

[]{#ch02a.xhtml}

### []{#ch02a.xhtml_page_48 .pagebreak aria-label="page 48" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM AVOIDANCE {.h3}

- ***Feel so you can heal.*** *Develop a daily practice of checking in
  on your feelings. Pick a neutral time---for example, when you're
  sitting down to a meal, waiting in the checkout line at the grocery
  store, or brushing your teeth. Take a few deep breaths and ask
  yourself, "What am I feeling right now?" Scan your body for sensations
  like tightness, tingling, pleasure, or pain. See if you can identify a
  feeling and just name it, without judgment or trying to change it.*
- ***Everything is temporary.*** *When observing your feelings at
  neutral times becomes a comfortable habit, next try tuning into your
  feelings when you are flooded by a strong emotion, positive or
  negative. If you can, step away from the situation or interaction that
  is provoking the feeling of joy, sorrow, anger, and so on. Sit in
  stillness for a moment and breathe---it might help to close your eyes
  or lightly rest your hands on your lap or abdomen. Start by naming
  your feeling. Then, see if you can locate the feeling in your body.
  Get curious about it. Is it hot or cold? Loose or tight? Does it burn
  or ache or throb? Finally, observe how the feeling changes or
  dissipates.*
- ***The opposite of depression is expression.*** *Think of a recent
  conversation with a friend, partner, colleague, or family member when
  you avoided saying what you were feeling. It isn't too late to take
  responsibility for your feelings and express your truth. Tell the
  person []{#ch02a.xhtml_page_49 .pagebreak aria-label="page 49"
  role="doc-pagebreak"}that you've been reflecting on the conversation
  and would like to follow up. Arrange a convenient time to speak, and
  say something like, "You know, I didn't know how to express this at
  the time, but I realize I was feeling \_\_\_\_ when \_\_\_\_."*

[]{#ch03.xhtml}

# []{#ch03.xhtml_page_50 .pagebreak aria-label="page 50" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_51 .pagebreak aria-label="page 51" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 3 [ALL OTHER RELATIONSHIPS WILL END]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Self-Neglect {.h2c}

One of our first fears is of abandonment. Thus we learn early how to get
the A's: attention, affection, approval. We figure out what to do and
whom to become to get our needs met. The problem is not that we do these
things---it's that we keep doing them. We think we must in order to be
loved.

It's very dangerous to put your whole life into someone else's hands.
*You* are the only one you're going to have for a lifetime. All other
relationships will end. So how can you be the best loving,
unconditional, no-nonsense caregiver to yourself?

In childhood, we receive all sorts of messages---spoken and
unspoken---that shape our beliefs about how we matter and what we're
worth. And we can carry these messages into adulthood.

[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_52 .pagebreak aria-label="page 52"
role="doc-pagebreak"}For example, Brian's father abandoned the family
when Brian was ten, and he became the man of the house, taking care of
his mother, doing everything in his power to make life easier for her,
to soothe her pain---and to make sure she wouldn't leave, too. He
brought this caretaker identity into adulthood and kept choosing
relationships with needy women. He resented them for the constant
sacrifice they demanded, and yet he had difficulty setting healthy
boundaries. He thought that to be loved, he had to be needed.

Another patient, Matthew, was born to a mother who had not chosen to
become pregnant with him. She felt burdened by motherhood and entered
into it with no sense of anticipation or enthusiasm. When parents are
stressed or disappointed or unfulfilled, their children pick up the tab,
carrying the burden into their own lives. As an adult, Matthew still
held a terrible fear of abandonment that manifested in rage. He was
cruel to his girlfriends, and would go on rants in public, yelling at
people, once even throwing a dog across a parking lot. He was so afraid
of being left that he turned the fear into a self-fulfilling prophecy,
behaving in such a way that people had no choice but to step away from
him. Then he could say, "I knew it all along." He became who he dreaded
in an attempt to control his fear of abandonment.

Even if we didn't experience a discernible event or trauma that forced
us to fight to be loved or seen, most of us can remember times we
protected others or performed for them in order to secure their
approval. We may have come to believe that we're loved for our
achievements, or for the role we fill in the family, or because we take
care of others.

Unfortunately, many families, in trying to motivate children
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_53 .pagebreak aria-label="page 53"
role="doc-pagebreak"}to do well for themselves, create a culture of
achievement in which the child's "being" gets entwined with her "doing";
she's taught she matters not for who she is, but for how she performs
and behaves. Children are under such intense pressure to get good
grades, be high-performing athletes or musicians, ace college entrance
tests, earn a degree at a select college or university that will lead to
a high-paying job in a competitive field. But if a good report card or
good manners earn love, that's not love at all. It's manipulation. When
so much emphasis is placed on achievement, children don't get to
experience unconditional love---that they're loved no matter what, that
they're free to be themselves, that it's permissible to make mistakes,
that we're all in a process of learning and becoming, and that learning
can be exciting and joyful.

My grandson Jordan is a photographer, and he was recently hired to take
portraits at an acting studio in Los Angeles. A director who just days
earlier had won two Oscars was visiting the acting class that day.
Someone asked him where he had decided to display his trophies, and he
surprised everyone by admitting he'd tucked them away in a drawer. "I
don't want my kids to come home from school every day," he said, "and
see my Oscars and think, *What am I possibly going to do to compare?*" I
laughed when Jordan told me this, because he is also the son of an
extraordinarily successful man. His father, Marianne's husband, Rob, won
a Nobel Prize in economics. And Rob also keeps his prize in a drawer,
tossed in next to the wine opener!

There's no need to hide our success from our children. But this director
and my precious Rob have a lovely way of acknowledging that their awards
and accomplishments are not *who* they are. They don't confuse who they
are with what they do. When we []{#ch03.xhtml_page_54 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 54" role="doc-pagebreak"}conflate achievement with
worth, success as well as disappointment can become a burden on our
children.

Marianne told me a sweet story that's a good reminder of a very
different legacy we can choose to pass on. My oldest
great-grandson---her grandson Silas---came to stay with Marianne and Rob
in New York one weekend. He said, "Granny, I heard that Papa won a big,
important award." He asked to see it. Marianne pulled it out of the
drawer and Silas stared at it for a long time, running his finger over
his grandfather's name etched into the gold plaque: Robert Fry Engle,
III. Finally, he said, "My middle name is Frye. Why does it say Fry?"
Marianne said, "Well, who do you think you're named after?" Silas was
delighted to discover that part of his name came from his grandfather.
Later, a family friend came over for dinner and Silas proudly asked,
"Have you seen my prize?" He ran to the drawer and pulled it out. "See?"
he said. "My name's on it. Papa and I have a prize!"

It's not good to live with success looming over you, feeling burdened by
the need to reach a certain height to be worthy of love. And yet the
strengths and skills of our ancestors are also a part of us. It's our
legacy. It's our prize, too. We honor our children when we can create a
culture not of self-aggrandizement or self-effacement, of
overachievement or underachievement---but a culture of the *joy* of
achievement. The joy of working hard. Of nurturing our gifts. Not
because we have to. Because we're free to. Because we're blessed with
the gift of life.

My daughter Audrey and her son David have taught me so much about
nurturing gifts rather than fulfilling expectations.
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_55 .pagebreak aria-label="page 55"
role="doc-pagebreak"}David is an incredibly bright and creative person.
As soon as he could read, he had a photographic memory for sports stats.
I'll never forget watching *The Wizard of Oz* with him when he was two
and he deduced that the woman riding her bicycle in the storm was the
Wicked Witch. But while he excelled in extracurricular activities in
high school---playing soccer, writing songs, performing with the choir,
starting the school's first comedy club---and scored very high on
standardized tests, his grades were a problem. Audrey and her husband,
Dale, were often called into the counselor's office because David was in
danger of failing classes. His senior year, when he was accepted at two
small private colleges, he reluctantly told his parents that he didn't
feel ready to go.

Education has always been a strong value in our family---in part because
Béla and I missed opportunities when our lives were interrupted by war.
But Audrey didn't guilt David or lay down the law. She listened. And
when she learned about a new music academy opening in Austin, where they
live, she told David that if he could get in, he could take a gap year
to focus on music, and then figure out his college plans. He jumped on
the opportunity, recorded a demo of original songs, and earned a spot at
the music school.

Taking time to focus on something he loved and was good at---and feeling
supported by his parents in doing things at his own speed, in his own
way---gave David the focus and motivation to later pursue a career path
he cared about. When he did go to college---on a choir scholarship---he
knew what he wanted to do, and he genuinely wanted to be there. He was
making a choice that served him, not just doing what he had to do to
fulfill someone else's expectation. Now he has a journalism degree and a
job he loves as a sportswriter. And music continues to be an important
and joyful part of his life. I'm moved and impressed
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_56 .pagebreak aria-label="page 56"
role="doc-pagebreak"}by Audrey and Dale's parenting, and by David's
capacity to know and express his truth.

Too often we're boxed in by expectations, by the sense that we have a
specific role or function to fulfill. Often in families, children are
given a label: the responsible child, the jokester, the rebel. When we
give children a name, they play the game. And when there's a "best" in
the family---a high achiever or good girl or good boy---there's usually
a "best worst." As one of my patients put it, "My brother was very
disruptive as a child. The way I got attention was being cooperative and
being good." But a label is not an identity. It's a mask---or a prison.
My patient said it beautifully: "You can only be the good girl for so
long. Bubbling under the surface, my real personality was trying to get
out and my environment wasn't encouraging of that." Our childhoods end
when we begin to live in someone else's image of who we are.

Instead of limiting ourselves to one role or version of ourselves, it's
good to recognize that each of us has an entire family inside. There's
the childish part, the one who wants everything now and fast and easy.
There's the childlike part---the curious free spirit, adept at following
whims, instincts, and desires without judgment or fear or shame. There's
the teenager who likes to flirt and risk and test boundaries. There's
the rational adult who thinks things through, makes plans, sets goals,
figures out how to reach them. And there are the two parents: the caring
parent and the scaring parent. The one who is kind and loving and
nurturing, and the one who comes in with voice raised and finger
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_57 .pagebreak aria-label="page 57"
role="doc-pagebreak"}wagging, who says, "You should, you must, you have
to." We need our entire inner family to be whole. And when we're free,
this family works in balance, as a team, everyone welcome, no one absent
or silenced or ruling the roost.

My inner free spirit helped me survive Auschwitz, but without my
responsible adult on board, she can make a lot of messes, as my
granddaughter Rachel---Audrey's beautiful daughter---can attest. Since
she was young, Rachel has loved to cook, and it warmed my heart when she
asked if I'd teach her some Hungarian recipes. I decided to show her how
to make one of my favorite dishes: chicken paprikash. It was a special
kind of heaven to be in the kitchen with Rachel, the smell of onions
sautéing in butter (*a lot* of butter!) and chicken fat. But soon I
noticed her father, Dale, at my elbow, wiping up the spatters of
schmaltz and dustings of spice that flew from my spoon. Even patient,
down-to-earth Rachel was growing exasperated. "Stop!" she finally said,
grabbing my arm before I threw a bunch of garlic and paprika into the
pot. "If I'm going to learn the recipe, I have to measure and write down
how much you're putting in."

I didn't want to slow down. I love to cook by instinct, to let go of
measuring and planning and just go by heart. But that wasn't giving
Rachel the foundation she needed. To effectively pass down my strength
and skills, I couldn't rely on my inner free spirit alone. I needed my
inner rational adult and caring parent in the room to round out the
team.

Now, Rachel makes the best chicken paprikash and szekely goulash, and
when I made a nut roll the other day, I had to call her to tell me
whether to add a half or full cup of water to the dough. She didn't have
to look at the recipe. "It's a half cup!" she said.

[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_58 .pagebreak aria-label="page 58"
role="doc-pagebreak"}It can be especially challenging to balance our
inner family when we think our very survival depends on filling a
specific role. After decades of maintaining an unhealthy pattern with
her sisters and parents, Iris is trying to break out of the confining
role she grew accustomed to filling in her family.

Her father served in WWII and was discharged from the army after a tank
he'd worked on exploded with men on board. He became a psychiatric
nurse, but began drinking heavily and suffering from depression,
paranoia, and schizophrenia, so much so that by the time Iris, the
youngest of four children, was born, he regularly spent large stretches
of time in the hospital. She remembers him as a gentle, sensitive,
brilliant man. She loved to sit in his lap after her bath and have him
comb the tangles out of her wet hair. Or she would pretend to fall
asleep on the couch in the evenings so he'd carry her up to bed. It felt
good to be in his arms. When she was twelve, he had a massive heart
attack. By the time the ambulance arrived, his heart had been stopped
for twelve minutes. The medical team managed to revive him, but he was
severely brain damaged and became a permanent resident at the same
hospital where he'd once worked. He died when she was eighteen.

At a young age, Iris learned to fill the caregiver role in her family.
In one of her earliest memories, her parents had been in a heavy
discussion. She could sense the tension and slipped into the room,
hoping to lighten the mood. Her father scooped her up and held her.
"You're my favorite," he said. "You don't cause any trouble."

This message was reinforced by Iris's mother and sisters. She earned the
A's in her family by being the responsible one, the
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_59 .pagebreak aria-label="page 59"
role="doc-pagebreak"}person others could depend on. Her mother, a
hardworking, nonjudgmental person always sensitive to the hurt or shame
or embarrassment underlying others' behavior, remained steadfastly loyal
to Iris's father throughout his worst years, but had a nervous breakdown
when Iris was a teenager. Years later, when she herself was ailing, she
told Iris, "I feel I'm in the middle of a stormy sea, and you're my
rock."

Much of Iris and her mother's relationship centered around their mutual
concern for Iris's sisters, who'd endured rough and chaotic lives,
suffering among them the traumas of sexual abuse and domestic violence,
as well as struggles with addiction and suicidal depression. Iris and
her sisters are now in their fifties, and she continues to grapple with
complex feelings that stem in large part from her caretaking role in the
family.

"I live with a huge feeling of responsibility in my heart," she told me.
"I was called 'the lucky one.' I didn't experience abuse. My father was
away in the mental hospital when I was very little and he was at his
most crazy. I've never wanted to take my own life. I'm happily married
to a kind man and have three wonderful children, now adults. I feel
guilty at times about the good things that have come my way. I feel
heartbreak for my sisters. I feel selfish for not doing more for them.
And I'm exhausted at times---maybe from trying to maintain security, or
live life as the girl who didn't cause any trouble because everyone
else's problems were so much bigger. I daydream about winning the lotto
and buying them each a house, setting them up financially for the rest
of their lives. Then I might feel freer of this guilt I carry."

Iris is a beautiful woman, with blond curly hair and full lips. She
seemed preoccupied, her blue eyes darting as she spoke---the agitation
that comes from a life of trying to earn the A's. []{#ch03.xhtml_page_60
.pagebreak aria-label="page 60" role="doc-pagebreak"}Iris had imprisoned
herself in her perception of her role and identity: to make things
better for others, to lighten the load, to not cause a fuss or have big
problems, to be the capable, dependable, responsible one. She had also
become a prisoner of guilt---survivor's guilt for her journey being
easier than her mother's and sisters'. How could I guide Iris out of a
life of patterning herself as the responsible "good girl" and wishing
she could fix others?

"You can't do anything for your sisters," I told her, "until you start
loving yourself."

"I don't know how," she said. "This year I've had hardly any contact
with them. And I'm relieved, which feels terrible. I worry about them.
Are they okay? Could I do more? And I *could* do more. That's the truth.
And yet, when I do more, it becomes toxic and all-consuming. So I'm in a
mess. I don't know how to move on.

"I'm lost about how to re-form any connection," she said. "And I'm torn,
because while I do want to reconnect with them, when I'm really honest
with myself, it's so much easier when we're not in touch. And that feels
awful."

There were two things I hoped she could let go of: guilt and worry.
"Guilt is in the past," I told her. "Worry is in the future. The only
thing you can change is right here in the present. And it's not up to
you to decide what to do for your sisters. The only one you can love and
accept is *you*. The question isn't how can you love your sisters
enough. It's how you can love *yourself* enough."

She nodded, but I saw hesitation in her eyes, something held back in her
smile, as though the very thought of loving herself was
uncomfortable---or at least unfamiliar.

[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_61 .pagebreak aria-label="page 61"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"Honey, when you concentrate on what more you can
do for your sisters, it isn't healthy. It's not healthy for you. And
it's not healthy for *them*. You cripple them. You make them depend on
you. You deprive them of being responsible grown-ups."

I suggested that maybe they weren't the ones with the need. Maybe *she*
was. Sometimes we have the need to be needed. We don't feel we're
functioning well if we're not rescuing people. But when you depend on
being needed, you're likely to marry an alcoholic. They're
irresponsible, you're responsible. You re-create that pattern.

I told Iris, "This is a good time for you to marry *you*. Otherwise,
you're going to make a bad situation worse, not better."

She was quiet, her expression disoriented. "That's so hard," she said.
"I still feel guilty."

When they were children, her eldest sister was very angry and
frightening. At the time, no one knew she had experienced sexual abuse.
Iris would come home from school and lock herself in her bedroom to
avoid her sister's volatility. She and the other sisters would beg their
parents, "Can't you get rid of her? Can't you control her?" One day the
eldest sister had an enormous fight with their father and pushed him
through a screen door. That was when their parents sent her to a girls'
home---and from there, her life became ever rockier.

"I might have been the reason my parents chose to send her away," Iris
said.

"If you want to have a loving relationship with your sisters," I said,
"it can't be based on needing each other. It's because you *want* each
other. So, you can choose. Do you want to have guilt, or do you want to
have love?"

To choose love is to become kind and good and loving *for you*.
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_62 .pagebreak aria-label="page 62"
role="doc-pagebreak"}To stop rehashing the past. To stop apologizing for
not being there to save everyone. It means saying, "I did the best I
could."

"But it feels like part of my whole life journey is to somehow find a
solution to what happened to the three of us," Iris said. "As the only
person in my family who didn't have a major struggle, I was the only one
who could keep it together back then. And now I feel disloyal when I'm
not helping them."

One of the first questions I ask patients is, "When did your childhood
end?" When did you start protecting or taking care of someone else? When
did you stop being yourself, and start filling a role?

I told Iris, "You may have grown up very fast. You became a little
adult, taking care of other people, being the responsible one. And
feeling guilty that no matter what you did, nothing was enough."

She nodded, tears filling her eyes.

"So now you decide: when is enough enough?"

It's difficult to relinquish our old ways of earning the A's and
discover a new way to build love and connection, one that hinges on
interdependence, not dependence; on love, not need.

When I'm trying to help a patient get at his or her early patterning I
often ask, "Is there anything you do in excess?" We often use substances
and behaviors to medicate our wounds: food, sugar, alcohol, shopping,
gambling, sex. We can even do healthy things in excess. We can become
addicted to work or exercise or restrictive diets. But when we're hungry
for affection, attention, and approval---for the things we didn't get
when we were young---nothing is ever going to be enough to fill the
need. []{#ch03.xhtml_page_63 .pagebreak aria-label="page 63"
role="doc-pagebreak"}You're going to the wrong place to fill the void.
It's like going to the hardware store to buy a banana. The thing you're
looking for isn't there. And yet, many of us keep going to the wrong
store.

Sometimes we get addicted to needing. Sometimes we get addicted to being
needed.

Lucia is a nurse, and she told me she thinks it's in her genetic code to
focus on others, to ask, "What do you need? How can I help?" It took
decades of marriage to a demanding man, stepping in to raise his
children, including a daughter with disabilities, years of being told
"Do this! Do that!" before she started to ask, "What about me? Who am I
in this situation?"

Now she's learning to be more assertive, to stop disconnecting from her
own preferences and desires. Sometimes it garners a rocky response from
others. The first time she set a boundary with her husband, refusing to
get up from the couch to fix him a snack, he yelled, "I ordered you!"

She took a deep, stabilizing breath, and said, "I don't take orders. If
you speak to me that way again, I'll leave the room."

She's learning to recognize that the clinching feeling at the top of her
gut when she starts to say yes to a request is a signal to stop and ask
herself, "Is this what I want to do? Will I be resentful if I do this?"

It's good to be *self*-ish: to practice self-love and self-care.

When Lindsey and Jordan were young, Marianne and Rob made a commitment
to give each other solo nights away from the family scene. On Marianne's
night out, Rob agreed to be home with the kids, and vice versa. One week
a famous economist was []{#ch03.xhtml_page_64 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 64" role="doc-pagebreak"}going to be visiting from
London, and Rob wanted to hear him speak. But the event was on
Marianne's night out; she'd already purchased tickets to see a play with
a friend, and he'd already made a commitment to be home with the kids.
When he told Marianne he couldn't find a babysitter on such short
notice, she could have called her friend to reschedule, and contacted
the theater to try to exchange their tickets for another night. We can
always make the choice to accommodate, to be flexible. The problem is
that many of us rush to fix and adjust out of habit. We take too much
responsibility for others' problems, training them to rely on us instead
of on themselves, and paving our own way toward resentment down the
road. Marianne gave Rob a kiss on the cheek and said, "Gosh, hon, it
sounds like you have a dilemma. I hope you can figure it out." In the
end, he brought the children with him to the lecture and they played
under the auditorium chairs in their pajamas.

Sometimes life requires us to go with the flow, sometimes it's the right
thing to prioritize others' needs, to modify our plans. And of course,
we want to do everything in our power to support our loved ones, to be
sensitive to their needs and desires, to engage in teamwork and
interdependence. But generosity isn't generous if we chronically give at
the expense of ourselves, if our giving makes us a martyr or fuels our
resentment. Love means that we practice self-love, that we strive to be
generous and compassionate toward others---*and* to ourselves.

I often say that love is a four-letter word spelled T-I-M-E.
[]{#ch03.xhtml_page_65 .pagebreak aria-label="page 65"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Time. While our inner resources are limitless, our
time and energy are limited. They run out. If you work or are in school;
if you have children, a relationship, friends; if you volunteer,
exercise, or belong to a book club, support group, or house of worship;
if you're caring for an aging parent or someone with medical or special
needs---how do you structure your time so you don't neglect yourself?
When do you rest and replenish? How do you create a balance between
working, loving, and playing?

Sometimes the hardest way to show up for ourselves is to ask for help.
For a few years I've been dating a gentle man and a gentleman, Gene, my
wonderful swing dance partner. When he had to be in the hospital for a
few weeks, I visited every day, and he was happy to let me baby him a
little---hold his hand, spoon-feed him meals. It's wonderful when
someone gives you the gift of giving. I was sitting with him one
afternoon and noticed he was shivering. He admitted he'd been quite
cold, but for Gene, kindness is number one, and he was so worried about
coming across as demanding that he'd decided not to ask for a warmer
blanket. In trying not to be a burden on anyone else, he neglected
himself.

I used to do that, too. In our early immigrant days, Béla and I lived
with Marianne in a tiny maid's apartment at the back of a house in Park
Heights, Baltimore. We had arrived in the country penniless---we had to
borrow the ten dollars to get off the boat---and struggled to feed our
family. In tough []{#ch03.xhtml_page_66 .pagebreak aria-label="page 66"
role="doc-pagebreak"}circumstances, I held it as a point of pride to put
food on Béla and Marianne's plates first---to serve myself only if there
was enough to go around. It's true that generosity and compassion are
vital to foster. But selflessness doesn't serve anyone---it leaves
everyone deprived.

And being self-reliant doesn't mean you refuse care and love from
others.

Audrey was home for a visit during her college years at the University
of Texas, Austin, a hotbed of activism and progressive politics. She
opened my bedroom door on a Saturday morning and was horrified to find
me in bed in my designer nightgown, Béla feeding me bites of fresh
papaya.

"Mother!" she cried. I was disgusting to her in that moment---froufrou,
dependent. I'd offended her sensibilities of what it means to be a woman
of strength.

What she didn't see was the choice I'd made, to honor and embrace my
husband's delight in caring for me. He lived for Saturdays when he'd get
up early and drive across the border to the produce market in Juarez and
search for the ripest red papayas that I loved. It brought him joy. And
it brought me joy, too, to share in the sensory ritual, to receive what
he longed to give.

When you're free, you take responsibility for being who you really are.
You recognize the coping mechanisms or behavior patterns you've adopted
in the past to get your needs met. You reconnect with the parts of
yourself you had to give up, and reclaim the []{#ch03.xhtml_page_67
.pagebreak aria-label="page 67" role="doc-pagebreak"}whole person you
weren't allowed to be. You break the habit of abandoning yourself.

Remember: you have something no one else will ever have. You have you.
For a lifetime.

That's why I talk to myself all the time. I say, "Edie, you're one of a
kind. You're beautiful. May you be more and more Edie every day."

I am no longer in the habit of denying myself, emotionally or
physically. I'm proud to be a high-maintenance woman! My wellness
regimen includes acupuncture and massage. I do regular beauty treatments
that aren't necessary but feel good. I have facials. I get my hair
painted---not just dyed one color, but three, from dark to light. I go
to the department store makeup counter and experiment with new ways of
doing my eyes. If I hadn't learned to develop inner self-regard, no
amount of pampering on the outside could change the way I feel about
myself. But now that I hold myself in high esteem, now that I love
myself, I know that taking care of myself on the inside can include
taking care of myself on the outside, too---treating myself to nice
things without suffering guilt, letting my appearance be an avenue for
self-expression. And I've learned to accept a compliment. When someone
says, "I like your scarf," I say, "Thank you. I like it, too."

I'll never forget the day I took teenage Marianne clothes shopping and
she tried on an outfit I'd picked out for her and said, "Mom, it's not
me." Her comment startled me. I worried I had raised her to be picky or
even ungrateful. But then I []{#ch03.xhtml_page_68 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 68" role="doc-pagebreak"}realized what a gift it is to
have children who know their own minds, who know what is "me" and what
is "not me."

Honey, find *you* and keep filling it up with more you. You don't have
to work to be loved. You just have to be *you*. May you be more and more
you every day.

[]{#ch03a.xhtml}

### []{#ch03a.xhtml_page_69 .pagebreak aria-label="page 69" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM SELF-NEGLECT {.h3}

- ***Anything we practice, we become better at.*** *Spend at least five
  minutes every day savoring pleasant sensations: the first sip of
  coffee in the morning, the feel of warm sun on your skin or a hug from
  someone you love, the sound of laughter or rain on the roof, the smell
  of baking bread. Take time to notice and experience joy.*
- ***Work, love, play.*** *Make a chart that shows your waking hours
  each day of the week. Label the time you spend every day working,
  loving, and playing. (Some activities might fit in more than one
  category; if so, use all the labels that apply.) Then add up the total
  hours you spend working, loving, and playing in a typical week. Are
  the three categories roughly in balance? How could you structure your
  days differently so you do more of whatever is currently receiving the
  least of your time?*
- ***Show yourself some love.*** *Reflect on a time within the last week
  when someone demanded something of you or asked you for a favor. How
  did you respond? Was your response out of habit? Necessity? Desire?
  How did your response feel in your body? Was your response good for
  you? Now reflect on a time within the last week when you asked---or
  wanted to ask---someone for help. What did you say? How did it work
  out? Was your response good for you? What can you do today to be*
  self-*ish*---*to show yourself love and care?*

[]{#ch04.xhtml}

# []{#ch04.xhtml_page_70 .pagebreak aria-label="page 70" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_71 .pagebreak aria-label="page 71" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 4 [ONE BUTT, TWO CHAIRS]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Secrets {.h2c}

In Hungary we have an expression: *If you sit with one butt on two
chairs, you become half-assed*.

If you're living a double life, it's going to catch up with you.

When you're free, you're able to live with authenticity, to stop
straddling the gap between two chairs---your ideal self and your real
self---and become congruent. You learn to sit fully in the chair of your
own fulfillment.

Robin was struggling in the gap between two chairs when she came to see
me, her marriage on the brink of collapse. She'd grown exhausted trying
to live up to her husband's exacting demands, and their marriage had
become passionless and empty. She felt she needed an oxygen mask just to
get through the day. In search of relief and joy, she began an affair.

Cheating is a dangerous game. Nothing is more exciting than
[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_72 .pagebreak aria-label="page 72"
role="doc-pagebreak"}a new lover. When you're in a new bed, you're not
talking about who's going to take out the garbage, whose turn it is to
drive the carpool to soccer practice. It's all pleasure, no
responsibility. And it's temporary. For a while after the affair began,
Robin had felt alive to joy, more optimistic, more nourished, able to
tolerate the status quo at home because her hunger for affection and
intimacy was being fed elsewhere. But then her lover gave her an
ultimatum. She had to choose: her husband, or him.

She booked her first session with me because she was stuck, unable to
make up her mind. At her first appointment, she went around and around,
detailing the pros and cons of two seemingly impossible choices. While a
divorce would keep her lover from leaving, it would devastate her two
children. But if she stayed in the marriage, she'd have to give up the
one person who made her feel seen and cherished. It was either her kids'
happiness or her own fulfillment.

But the fundamental choice she needed to make wasn't about which man to
be with. Whatever she was doing with her husband---withdrawing, hiding,
keeping secrets---she would continue to do with the lover, or in any
romantic relationship, until she chose to change. Her freedom wasn't
about choosing the right man. It was about finding a way to express her
desires, hopes, and fears in any relationship.

Sadly, this is a common problem. Even a marriage begun with passion and
connection can grow to feel like a prison cell. It happens slowly over
time, and it's often difficult to see when and how the bars are built.
There are the usual intrusions---stress over money or work or children
or extended family or illness---and because the couple lacks the time or
the tools to resolve these irritations, the worry and hurt and anger
build up. After a while []{#ch04.xhtml_page_73 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 73" role="doc-pagebreak"}it's even harder to express
these feelings, because they lead to tension or arguments, and so it's
preferable to avoid the topics altogether. Before two people know it,
they're living separate lives. The door is open for someone else to come
in and attempt to fill what's been lost.

When a relationship is strained, it's not one person's fault. Both
people are doing things to maintain the distance and disputes. Robin's
husband was a perfectionist. He criticized her and was judgmental and
hard to please. At first, it was tough for her to recognize that she was
also doing things to damage the relationship: pulling away, going to
another room, disengaging, disappearing. Most of all, keeping her
unhappiness a secret. The affair was a secondary secret. The primary
secret was all that she had begun habitually concealing from her
husband---her daily ups and downs, sorrows and pleasures, longing and
grief.

Honesty starts with learning to tell the truth to yourself.

I told Robin I would keep treating her if she liked, but only if she put
the affair on hold as she worked to be in a more honest relationship
with herself.

I gave her two exercises. The first I call Vital Signs. It's a quick way
of taking your own temperature, becoming aware of your inner climate and
the emotional weather you're putting into the world. We're always
communicating, even when we're not saying a word. The only time we don't
communicate is when we're in a coma. Several times a day, make a
conscious effort to check in with your body, to ask yourself, "Do I feel
soft and warm, or cold and stiff?"

[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_74 .pagebreak aria-label="page 74"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Robin didn't like discovering how often she was
stiff, rigid, closed off. Over time, the act of taking her emotional
temperature helped her soften. This is when I introduced the second
exercise, Pattern Interruption---a way to consciously replace a habitual
response with something else. When Robin felt herself wanting to
withdraw or withhold from her husband, she would make a conscious effort
not to disappear. She'd soften her gaze and look at her husband with
loving eyes---something she hadn't done for a long time. One evening at
the dinner table, she gently reached for his hand.

It was a tiny step toward intimacy. They still had a lot of repairs to
make if they were to rebuild their relationship. But they'd begun.

Healing can't happen as long as we're hiding or disowning parts of
ourselves. The things we silence or cover up become like hostages in the
basement, trying more and more desperately to get our attention.

I know because I tried to hide my past for years, to conceal what had
happened to me, to hide my grief and rage. When Béla and I fled
Communist Europe after the war and came to America with Marianne, I
wanted to be normal. I didn't want to be the shipwrecked person I was, a
mother who was also a Holocaust survivor. I worked in a garment factory,
cutting loose threads off the seams of little boys' underwear, paid
seven cents per dozen, too scared to say anything in English for fear
others would hear my accent. I just wanted to fit in, to be accepted. I
[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_75 .pagebreak aria-label="page 75"
role="doc-pagebreak"}didn't want people to feel sorry for me. I didn't
want my scars to show.

It wasn't until decades later, when I was finishing my training as a
clinical psychologist, that I realized the cost of my double life. I was
trying to heal others without healing myself. I was an impostor. On the
outside, I was a doctor. On the inside, a terrified sixteen-year-old was
quaking, cloaked in denial, overachievement, and perfectionism.

Until I could face the truth, I had my secret, and my secret had me.

My secret also had my children, in ways I'm still growing to understand.
The childhood memories Marianne, Audrey, and John have shared---the fear
and tension they sensed under the surface without knowing what it was
about---are similar to what I've read in letters from readers around the
world who are children of Holocaust survivors.

Ruth, whose parents were Hungarian survivors, told me about the impact
her parents' silence had on her growing up. On the one hand, she had a
wonderful childhood. Her father and mother were outwardly joyful and
relieved to have immigrated to Australia, happy to be able to offer
their children a good education, to send them to ballet and piano
classes, to raise them in a peaceful environment, to celebrate their
accomplishments and friendships. "We're lucky," they'd often say. "Thank
goodness." There was no obvious stamp of trauma.

But there was a disconnect between Ruth's inner and outer
[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_76 .pagebreak aria-label="page 76"
role="doc-pagebreak"}experience. Her parents' positivity about the
present in contrast with their silence about the past left her feeling
anxious. A sense of foreboding threaded its way through many
experiences, however pleasurable or mundane. Picking up on her parents'
unspoken trauma and fear, she, too, developed a belief that something
was wrong, that something terrible was about to happen. She became a
successful psychiatrist and a mother, but no matter how accomplished she
was, she harbored a chronic sense of dread and asked, *Why do I feel
this way*? Even her professional training in psychiatry didn't give her
the right lens to understand.

When he turned nineteen, Ruth's youngest son asked her to take him and
his brother to Hungary. He wanted to learn more about his grandparents,
who were no longer alive. And with the rise of right-wing extremism
around the globe, and an understanding that those who don't know history
are doomed to repeat it, he felt especially committed to knowing more
about the past. But Ruth balked. She'd been to Hungary as a young woman,
during the height of Communism, and it had not been a pleasant
experience. She had no desire to return.

Then a friend recommended a book to her---*The Choice*!---and reading it
gave her new courage and a strong imperative to face her parents' past.
She agreed to the trip.

It turned out that retracing her parents' past with her sons was an
intensely transformative and healing experience. They visited a
synagogue that houses an exhibition on the Budapest ghetto. For the
first time, she saw pictures that detailed what her mother had lived
through. It was painful and difficult to take in the truth. But it was
also helpful and empowering. She []{#ch04.xhtml_page_77 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 77" role="doc-pagebreak"}gained insight and a new sense
of connection to her parents---she understood why they'd been so
reluctant to talk about the past, appreciating that they were trying to
protect her, and themselves. But hiding or minimizing our truth doesn't
protect our loved ones. Protecting them means working to heal the past
so we don't inadvertently pass the trauma on to them. As Ruth confronted
her family's legacy, she was able to feel congruence within herself. To
come to terms with the root of her anxiety and begin to release it.

My healing didn't start until a fellow student at the University of
Texas gave me a copy of Viktor Frankl's *Man's Search for Meaning* and I
finally worked up the courage to read it. I had so many excuses, so many
reasons to resist: *I don't need to read someone else's account of
Auschwitz,* I told myself. *I was there! Why feel the pain all over
again? Why open myself up to nightmares? Why revisit hell?* But when I
finally cracked the book open in the middle of the night while my family
slept and the house was quiet, something unexpected happened: I felt
seen. Frankl had been where I'd been. It felt like he was speaking
directly to me. Our experiences weren't identical. He was in his
thirties when he was imprisoned, already an acclaimed psychiatrist; I
was a sixteen-year-old gymnast and ballet student dreaming of my
boyfriend. But the way he wrote about our shared past changed my life. I
saw a new possibility for myself---a way to give up secrets and hiding,
to stop fighting and running away from the past. His words---and later,
his mentorship---gave me the courage and inspiration to face
[]{#ch04.xhtml_page_78 .pagebreak aria-label="page 78"
role="doc-pagebreak"}and express my truth, and in speaking my secret,
reclaim my genuine self.

Reckoning and release are impossible when we keep secrets---when we
operate under a code of denial, delusion, or minimization.

Sometimes the demand to keep a secret is unspoken or unconscious.
Sometimes others buy our silence with threats or force. Either way,
secrets are harmful because they create and sustain a climate for shame,
and shame is the bottom line of any addiction. Freedom comes from facing
and telling the truth---and, as I'll explore in the next chapter, this
is only possible when we create a climate of love and acceptance within
ourselves.

[]{#ch04a.xhtml}

### []{#ch04a.xhtml_page_79 .pagebreak aria-label="page 79" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM SECRETS {.h3}

- ***If you sit with one butt on two chairs, you become half-assed.***
  *Place two chairs side by side. Begin by sitting on one chair, legs
  uncrossed. Feel the way your feet rest against the floor. Feel your
  sit bones heavy on the chair. Feel your spine lengthen out of your
  pelvis, your head extend from your neck. Soften your shoulders away
  from your ears. Take a few deep, nourishing breaths, lengthening with
  the inhale, grounding with the exhale. Now move so you are sitting
  with one butt cheek on one chair, the other cheek on the other chair.
  Check in with your feet, your sit bones, your spine, neck, head, and
  shoulders. How do your body and breath feel when you straddle two
  chairs? Finally, return to one chair. Ground your feet and sit bones.
  Lengthen your spine and neck. You're back home. Follow your breath as
  you realign and become congruent.*
- ***Honesty starts with learning to tell the truth to yourself.*** *Try
  the Vital Signs exercise that Robin used to heal her marriage. Several
  times a day, make a conscious effort to check in with your body and
  take your own emotional temperature. Ask yourself, "Do I feel soft and
  warm, or cold and stiff?"*
- ***Tell the truth in the safe presence of others.*** *Support groups
  and twelve-step programs can be a wonderful place to share your
  truth---and learn from others who []{#ch04a.xhtml_page_80 .pagebreak
  aria-label="page 80" role="doc-pagebreak"}are doing the same. Find a
  local or online meeting where you will be in the company of people who
  can relate to and empathize with your experience. Attend at least
  three meetings before you decide whether or not it's for you.*

[]{#ch05.xhtml}

# []{#ch05.xhtml_page_81 .pagebreak aria-label="page 81" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 5 [NO ONE REJECTS YOU BUT YOU]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Guilt and Shame {.h2c}

It took me decades to forgive myself for surviving.

I graduated from college in 1969. I was forty-two years old, a mother of
three, an immigrant. It had required significant courage and resources
to learn English and return to school. And I was graduating with honors!

But I didn't go to my graduation ceremony. I was too ashamed.

Like many survivors, in the years after the war I'd grappled with
crippling guilt. It had been twenty-four years since my sister Magda and
I were liberated. But I still couldn't understand why I had lived when
my parents and grandparents and six million others had perished. Even an
occasion of celebration and accomplishment was tainted by my certainty
that I was damaged goods, unworthy of joy, that every bad thing was
somehow my fault, that it was only a matter of time before everyone
discovered how broken I was.

Guilt is when you blame yourself, when you believe something is your
fault. It's important to separate guilt from remorse.
[]{#ch05.xhtml_page_82 .pagebreak aria-label="page 82"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Remorse is an appropriate response to a harmful
mistake we've made or a wrong we've committed. It's more akin to grief.
It means accepting that the past is the past, that it can't be undone,
and allowing yourself to feel sad about it. I can feel remorse *and*
recognize that all I've lived through, all the choices I've made, have
brought me to today. Remorse is in the present. And it can coexist with
forgiveness and freedom.

But guilt keeps you stuck. It's rooted in shame---when you believe "I'm
not worthy"; when you think that you're not enough, that nothing is
enough, no matter what you do. Guilt and shame can be extremely
debilitating. But they're not real assessments of who we are. They're a
pattern of thought that we choose and get stuck in.

You always have a choice about what to do with the information life
hands you. I once gave a lecture at a conference, and midway through my
presentation, a dignified-looking man walked out. I almost froze on the
stage, caught up in a barrage of negative self-talk: "I'm no good. I
don't deserve to have been invited to present at this conference. I'm
out of my league." A few minutes later, the auditorium door opened, and
the same man came back in and sat down. He'd probably just gotten up to
have some water or use the restroom, but by that time I'd already put
myself under the guillotine.

No one is born with shame. But for many of us, the shame message starts
early. When Lindsey, my oldest grandchild, was in elementary school, she
was placed in a class for "talented and gifted" children (the very
notion of this label frustrates me---*all* children are talented and
gifted, one-of-a-kind diamonds!). She sometimes had trouble keeping up,
and her teacher began to call her "my little caboose." Precious Lindsey
took her teacher's []{#ch05.xhtml_page_83 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 83" role="doc-pagebreak"}words to heart. She became
convinced that she wasn't capable enough to be in the class, that she
didn't belong, that she wasn't worthy. She was ready to drop out. But I
talked to her about the importance of not letting her teacher define
her. So she stayed in the class. And years later, when she wrote her
college admittance essay, she titled it, "When the Caboose Became the
Engine." She graduated with honors from Princeton.

My shame messages began early, too, at age three, when I became
cross-eyed. Before I had surgery to correct my eye, my sisters would
sing cruel songs: *you're so ugly and puny you'll never find a husband*.
Even my mother would say, "It's a good thing you're smart, because you
have no looks." These were difficult messages, and hard to unlearn. But
ultimately the trouble wasn't what my family told me. The trouble was
that I believed it.

And kept believing it.

When Marianne and Rob and their kids lived in La Jolla, I used to go to
their house every Monday to cook dinner. Sometimes I made American food,
sometimes Hungarian. It was the highlight of my week, nourishing my
grandchildren, feeling a part of their daily lives. One evening I was in
the kitchen with pots bubbling and pans sizzling on the stove. Marianne
came home from work in her beautiful silk suit and immediately began
pulling lids out of the cupboard, matching each one to the correct pot.
My heart sank. I was trying to be helpful, to make my family happy, and
there she was, showing me that I wasn't doing it right. That I wasn't
good enough. It took me a while to realize that the message of my
failure wasn't []{#ch05.xhtml_page_84 .pagebreak aria-label="page 84"
role="doc-pagebreak"}coming from Marianne---it was coming from me. To
counteract my belief that I was damaged, I strove for perfection,
believing I could achieve and perform my way out of shame. But we're
human, no more, no less, and human means fallible. Freedom lies in
accepting our whole, imperfect selves and giving up the need for
perfection.

Ultimately, guilt and shame don't come from the outside. They come from
the inside. Many of my patients seek out therapy when they're going
through a painful divorce or breakup. They're grieving the death of a
relationship, and the disappearance of all the hopes, dreams, and
expectations it represented. But usually they don't talk about the
grief---they talk about the feeling of rejection. "He rejected me." "She
rejected me." But rejection is just a word we make up to express the
feeling we have when we don't get what we want. Who said everyone should
love us? Which god said that we should get what we want, when we want
it, how we want it, the way we want it? And who said that having it all
is any guarantee? No one rejects you but you.

So choose the meaning you make. When I give a speech and receive a
standing ovation and embrace a hundred people afterward who greet me
with tears and say, "You changed my life," and then one person shakes my
hand and says, "Your talk was very good, *but*...," I can choose how I
respond. I can fall into a pit of insecurity, thinking, "Oh my god, what
did I do wrong?" Or I can recognize that the critique might have more to
do with the people offering it than with me---with the expectations they
brought to the lecture, or with the way they feel strong and intelligent
by []{#ch05.xhtml_page_85 .pagebreak aria-label="page 85"
role="doc-pagebreak"}finding something to criticize. Or I can ask
myself, "Is there anything helpful here that can support my growth and
creativity?" Whether I plan to integrate the feedback, or release it, I
can say, "Thank you for your opinion" and move on.

If we're to live free of shame, we don't let others' evaluations define
us.

And most of all, we choose how we talk to ourselves.

Spend a day listening to your self-talk. Pay attention to what you're
paying attention to---that's what you reinforce. These thoughts will
influence how you feel. And how you feel is going to dictate how you
act. But you don't have to live by these standards and messages. You
weren't born with shame. Your genuine self is already beautiful. You
were born with love and joy and passion, and you can rewrite your
internal script and reclaim your innocence. You can become a whole
person.

For as long as Michelle can remember, when people met her on the street
they'd say, "I would give anything to be you." Tall, thin, beautiful,
professionally successful, with a lovely, soft energy that people wanted
to be near, she was picture-perfect on the outside---and dying inside.

Countless times I've seen this devastating dynamic in my practice:
driven husband, wife who is a very good actress---the "hostess with the
mostest." She's faultlessly kind and generous to others, but not a very
good caretaker to herself. He's an actor, too, very loving and romantic
when company is there, but in private, becoming more like her boss or
parent, telling her what she should and shouldn't do, how she should
spend her time and []{#ch05.xhtml_page_86 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 86" role="doc-pagebreak"}money. By pleasing, placating,
and accommodating in reaction to the husband's dominance, the wife
abdicates her adult power, lets him make all the decisions. And then
gets even by depriving herself of food because it's the one thing she
can control. She detaches from and minimizes her feelings of
powerlessness by literally minimizing herself---making her body smaller
and smaller. In the direst cases, even when she wants to start eating
again, she can't. Her body rejects the nutrients.

Michelle had a very entrenched eating disorder by the time she began
therapy (not with me---with a wonderful practitioner in her city). But
it wasn't anorexia that drove her to seek help---it was problems in her
marriage. Her husband was often dismissive and unkind, leaving her
feeling like a scared kid with an angry dad. She knew rationally that
she was a strong, successful, middle-aged woman, not a powerless child.
But inside, she was terrified to stand up to him. When his outbursts of
anger began to worry and frighten their children, she knew she needed
new tools.

But learning to stand up for herself meant opening up her intense
shame---all the pain she was trying to hold down by starving. When she
started eating again---a process I always recommend doing under
supervision of a medical doctor or in a specialized in- or outpatient
program---all the trauma and feelings she'd tried to keep at bay rose up
like a tidal wave. Childhood sexual abuse, a mother who was dismissive
and emotionally cut off, parents who punished her with beatings, or
worse, turned her invisible, not speaking to her at all, treating her as
if she wasn't there. It was overwhelming to feel the terror and pain, to
let the past in. She could only do it in small doses. She'd allow
herself to feel, and then starve herself, allow herself to feel, then
starve again.

[]{#ch05.xhtml_page_87 .pagebreak aria-label="page 87"
role="doc-pagebreak"}The process brought up an excruciating fear of
abandonment.

"I've always clung to the people I feel care about me, that see me, hear
me, accept the real me," Michelle said. "When I was a kid, it was a
teacher I felt safe with. As I got older, it was a professor, then my
therapist. There's always a person I'm anxiously attached to. Logically,
as an adult in my forties, I know I'm safe and cared for. Yet often I
feel like that eight-year-old girl again, terrified that I'm going to
lose love, terrified that I'm going to do something that'll make others
not care about me."

Remember, you're the only one you'll never lose. You can look outside
yourself to feel cherished---or you can learn to cherish yourself.

Three years since beginning therapy, Michelle has made tremendous
progress. She's eating healthy foods in healthy portions. She's no
longer exercising in excess. She's able to tell her husband when his
criticism is hurtful, and use mindfulness techniques to ease the fear
responses in her body. And she continues to work on releasing the shame
she carries, shame that emerges in three harmful thought patterns: *it's
my fault*, *I don't deserve it*, and *it could have been worse*.

She told me, "I keep thinking, 'Why didn't I do things differently?'
Logically, I know it wasn't my fault, the things that happened to me,
but there's a part of me that's still struggling with really believing
it."

If you want to take charge of your thinking, first examine what you're
practicing, and then decide: is it empowering or depleting me? Before
you say anything, especially to yourself, ask, "Is it kind and loving?"

Michelle's childhood ended when the sexual and physical abuse began when
she was eight, just at the age when our frontal []{#ch05.xhtml_page_88
.pagebreak aria-label="page 88" role="doc-pagebreak"}lobes begin to
develop, and we start to think logically. We want to understand things.
But certain things we'll never understand. Sometimes we develop guilt in
order to gain a sense of control over things that are completely out of
our control, that we didn't cause or choose.

"Stop trying to find a reason for the abuse," I said, "and start
practicing kindness. Pick an arrow that you follow."

"Ah, kindness," she said, letting out a low laugh. "Being kind to others
has always come naturally. But being kind to myself is a struggle. At
some level, I think I don't deserve the goodness in my life. I don't
fully believe it's okay for me to be happy."

"You can say, 'That used to be me.' And regain power over your thinking.
One word is all you need: permission. I give myself permission for
pleasure.' "

She began to cry.

"Honey, take back your power."

But she was using minimization instead, telling herself things could be
so much worse. Even though she got hit with a paddle, at least her
parents didn't put cigarettes out on her arm, she'd tell herself.

I told her to get rid of the "shoulds." To make her language kinder.
"Tune in to the way you speak to yourself," I said. "Acknowledge you
were wounded. And then choose what you let go and what you replenish.
You got in the habit of minimizing your pain, and wanting to make
yourself smaller. Now build a new habit. Release shame by replacing it
with kindness, by making sure your dialogue is full of 'yes I am, yes I
can, yes I will!' "

[]{#ch05.xhtml_page_89 .pagebreak aria-label="page 89"
role="doc-pagebreak"}While visiting the Midwest once on a speaking tour,
I was invited to eat dinner with a lovely family. The food was earthy
and delicious, the conversation pleasant, but when I complimented the
daughter, the mother kicked me under the table. Later, over coffee and
dessert, she whispered, "Please don't lavish praise on her. I don't want
her to grow up conceited." In trying to keep our children or ourselves
modest, we risk making ourselves less than we really are---less than
whole. It's time to give yourself a kiss on the hand and say, "Attaboy!
Attagirl!"

Loving yourself is the only foundation for wholeness, health, and joy.
So fall in love with yourself! It's not narcissistic. Once you begin to
heal, what you discover will not be the *new* you, but the *real* you.
The you that was there all along, beautiful, born with love and joy.

[]{#ch05a.xhtml}

### []{#ch05a.xhtml_page_90 .pagebreak aria-label="page 90" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM GUILT AND SHAME {.h3}

- ***You made it.*** *If there's some part of yourself you routinely
  resent or criticize, imagine yourself being very little, so tiny you
  can crawl inside your body and say hello to each of your organs, to
  each part of yourself. If you believe that everything is your fault,
  then gently hold your heart, hug that wounded part of you, and
  exchange it for a loving self. Tell yourself, "Yes, I made a mistake.
  It doesn't make me a bad person. My doing is not the entirety of my
  being. I am good." If your trauma is still living in your body,
  embrace it, because you survived it. You're still here. You made it.
  My breathing has been very limited since my back broke during the war,
  so I like to go inside myself and say hello to my breathing, to my
  lungs. Find your vulnerable part and love it all over.*
- ***What you pay attention to grows stronger.*** *Spend a day listening
  to your self-talk. Is it full of "I should," "I shouldn't," and "yes,
  but"? Do you tell yourself, "It's my fault," or "I don't deserve it,"
  or "It could have been worse"? Replace these messages of guilt or
  shame with a daily practice of kind and loving self-talk. As soon as
  you wake up in the morning, go to the mirror and look at yourself with
  loving eyes. Say, "I'm powerful. I'm kind. I'm a person of strength."
  Then kiss yourself on the back of each hand. Smile at yourself in the
  mirror. Say, "I love you."*

[]{#ch06.xhtml}

# []{#ch06.xhtml_page_91 .pagebreak aria-label="page 91" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 6 [WHAT DIDN'T HAPPEN]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Unresolved Grief {.h2c}

One day two women came to see me back-to-back. The first had a daughter
who was a hemophiliac. She'd just come from the hospital, and she wept
the whole hour, feeling the intense pain of watching her child suffer.
My next patient had come from the country club. She also spent the hour
weeping. She was upset because her new Cadillac had been delivered, and
it had come in the wrong shade of yellow.

On the surface, her reaction seemed out of proportion, her tears
unearned. But often a minor disappointment represents a larger grief.
Her sense of loss wasn't about the Cadillac---it was about her
relationships with her husband and son, the sorrow and resentment she
felt that her desires for her family went unmet.

These two beautiful women reminded me of one of the most fundamental
principles of my work: how it is a universal experience
[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_92 .pagebreak aria-label="page 92"
role="doc-pagebreak"}for life not to turn out as we want or expect. Most
of us suffer because we have something we don't want, or we want
something we don't have.

All therapy is grief work. A process of confronting a life where you
expect one thing and get another, a life that brings you the unexpected
and unanticipated.

This is the epitome of what most soldiers face in combat. I've worked
with many combat veterans throughout my career, and they often tell me
the same thing: that they were sent to a place they were unprepared for,
and that they were told one thing and found another.

Grief is often not about what happened. It's about what didn't happen.
When Marianne went to her first high school prom in a gorgeous orange
silk dress, Béla told her, "Have fun, honey. When your mother was your
age she was in Auschwitz and her parents were dead." I was speechless
with fury. My children knew by then that I was a survivor, but how dare
he burden our precious daughter with my past? How dare he ruin her night
with something that had nothing to do with her? It was completely
unfair. Totally inappropriate.

But I was also so upset because he was right. I never got to put on an
orange silk dress and go to a dance. Hitler interrupted my life, and the
lives of millions of others.

I'm a prisoner and a victim when I minimize or deny my pain---and I'm a
prisoner and a victim when I hold on to regret. Regret is the wish to
change the past. It's what we experience when we can't acknowledge that
we're powerless, that something already happened, that we can't change a
single thing.

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_93 .pagebreak aria-label="page 93"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I wish my mother had had a better guide through a
sudden loss when she was nine. She woke up to find that her mother, who
slept beside her, had stopped breathing, her body gone cold in the
night. They buried her that day. There was no time to mourn, and all the
years I knew her, my mother struggled with unresolved grief. She
immediately took on the responsibility of caring for her younger
siblings and cooking for the family, watching her father turn to alcohol
to dull his pain and loneliness. By the time she married and became a
mother herself, her grief had calcified, the shock and sorrow of her
early loss tight around her like a cage. She hung a portrait of her
mother on the wall above the piano and talked to it as she went about
her chores. In the soundtrack of my childhood, my sister Klara practices
violin, and my mother begs her dead mother for help and strength. Her
grief seemed like a fourth child, in need of constant tending. It's good
to feel all the aspects of grief---sadness, anger, powerlessness. But my
mother got stuck there.

When we have unresolved grief, we often live with overwhelming rage.

Lorna had a brother who drank a lot. One night he went for a walk and
was hit by a car and died. A year later, she is struggling to accept
that he's gone. "I told him and told him not to drink!" she says. "Why
didn't he listen? He was supposed to help me take care of our mother.
How could he be so selfish?" She can't change that he was addicted to
alcohol, that he kept right on drinking despite his family's best
efforts to intervene, that he was inebriated when he died. She can't
change a thing---and it's hard to accept our powerlessness.

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_94 .pagebreak aria-label="page 94"
role="doc-pagebreak"}When my grandchildren were young, a schoolmate was
riding his bike one afternoon when he cut in front of traffic and died.
Marianne was asked to talk to his classmates, to help them process all
the complex feelings that come with loss---the way it forces us into a
reckoning with our own mortality, with the fragility of life. She came
prepared to address their sadness and fear. But the students'
overwhelming response to the tragedy wasn't sorrow. It was guilt. "I
could have been nicer to him," they said. "He could have been at my
house instead of riding his bike alone, but I never wanted to invite him
over." The students enumerated all the ways they might have prevented
the boy's death. By holding themselves responsible, they were seeking
control. But as long as they continued to blame themselves, they'd be
avoiding their grief.

We don't have control, but we wish we did.

Resolving grief means both to release ourselves from responsibility for
all the things that weren't up to us, and to come to terms with the
choices we've made that can't be undone.

Marianne helped the children name all the decisions that weren't in
their control: the boy's choice to ride his bike that day, the route he
took, what he was or wasn't paying attention to when he rode off the
curb into the street, what the driver of the car was or wasn't paying
attention to as she moved into the intersection. And she helped them
face their remorse for choices they *had* made: the sleepovers and
birthday parties they hadn't invited the boy, the teasing remarks, the
times they'd laughed or stayed silent when he was the butt of a prank.
This is the work we get to do in the present: to grieve what happened or
didn't happen, to own up to what we did or didn't do, and to choose our
response now. Being more attuned to how their behavior might hurt or
marginalize others wasn't going to bring their classmate
[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_95 .pagebreak aria-label="page 95"
role="doc-pagebreak"}back. But they could embrace the opportunity to
become more aware---to act with greater kindness and compassion.

It's so hard to be where we are, in the present. To accept what was and
is, and move on. For twenty years, my patient Sue has come to see me
every year around the anniversary of her son's death. When he was
twenty-five, he shot himself with the gun she kept in her bedside table.
He's been dead now almost as long as he was alive, and she's still
healing, still trapped sometimes in the unrelenting eddy of guilt. *Why
did I own a gun? Why didn't I secure it properly? Why did I allow him to
find it? Why was I so unaware of his depression and troubles?* She can't
seem to forgive herself.

Of course, she wishes he hadn't died. She longs to erase all the
factors, large and small, that may have contributed to his death. But
her son didn't end his life because she owned a gun. He didn't kill
himself because of anything she did or didn't do.

But as long as she stays in guilt, she doesn't have to acknowledge that
he died. As long as she can blame herself, she doesn't have to accept
what *he* chose to do. If he could see her suffering now, he would
probably say, "Mom, I was going to kill myself anyway. I didn't want you
to die with me."

It's good to keep crying for those we've lost, to keep feeling the ache,
to let ourselves be in the sorrow and accept that it's not ever going to
go away. I was invited to speak at a support group for grieving parents
where they shared memories and pictures, cried together, showed up for
each other. It was beautiful to witness this connected and supportive
way of living grief.

I also noticed some ways I could guide them toward greater freedom
within their grief. For example, they began the meeting by going around
in a circle and introducing themselves and the child who had died. "I
lost my daughter to suicide," one said; []{#ch06.xhtml_page_96
.pagebreak aria-label="page 96" role="doc-pagebreak"}another, "I lost my
son when he was two." Each person used the verb "lost" in describing his
or her grief.

"But life is not about lost and found," I told them.

It's about celebrating that the spirits of our loved ones came to
us---sometimes for a few short days, sometimes for many decades---and
it's about letting go. About acknowledging the sorrow and joy that
coexist in this moment, and embracing all of it.

Parents often say, "I'd die for my child." I heard a few of the parents
in the grief group express the wish to trade places with their deceased
children---to die so their children could live. After the war, I felt
the same way. I would have gladly died to bring my parents and
grandparents back.

But now I know that instead of dying for my dead, I can *live* for them.

And live for my children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren---for
all my loved ones who are still here.

If we can't move on from our guilt and make peace with our grief, it's
damaging to our loved ones, and not a compliment to those who've died.
We have to let the dead be dead, to stop yanking them up again and
again, to let them go and to live our own best lives so they can rest in
peace.

Sofia is at a critical place in her grief.

Her mother was a dynamic teacher and celebrated psychologist who
finished her master's degree at age fifty (like me!) and became
certified in Viktor Frankl's logotherapy (like me!)---a theory and
method of guiding patients to discover meaning in their lives and
experience. She was still working at age seventy, and had just published
[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_97 .pagebreak aria-label="page 97"
role="doc-pagebreak"}her first book, when she started having back pain.
She was an exceptionally healthy woman---Sofia can't remember her ever
having so much as a cold---but suddenly she was refusing food, avoiding
family events and social functions because her back hurt so intensely.
She saw a specialist who found nothing wrong. She went from specialist
to specialist, trying to discover the root of the pain, and finally a
gastroenterologist performed the tests that revealed her diagnosis:
stage-four pancreatic cancer. She died a month later.

For a year, Sofia was in constant mourning, crying all the time. The
passage of time has dulled her intense shock and sadness, and the pain
is less raw and consuming---but she's in a precarious place, a
crossroads where she can choose to heal or stay stuck. To heal doesn't
mean to get over it, but it does mean that we are able to be wounded and
whole, to find happiness and fulfillment in our lives despite our loss.

"She died so suddenly," Sofia told me. "There was no time to prepare,
and I have so many regrets."

"Do you have guilt? Do you think there's something you could have done
that you didn't do?"

"Yes," she said. "My mom was so strong, I never thought she was dying. I
scolded her for not eating. I was trying to help her, but if I'd known
they were her last days, I would have reacted differently."

She was imprisoned by two words: what if. *What if I'd known she was
dying? What if I'd known I was about to lose her?* But what-ifs don't
empower us. They deplete us.

I told Sofia, "Today you can say, 'If I knew then what I know now, I
would have done things differently.' And that's the end of the guilt.
Because you owe it to your mom to turn that guilt around. Just say,
'That used to be me. Now I will begin to cherish the memories that no
one can take away.' You had her for []{#ch06.xhtml_page_98 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 98" role="doc-pagebreak"}thirty-four wonderful years.
There will never be another mom like that. There will never be another
therapist like that. So cherish the person she was and the time you had,
and don't waste another moment on guilt, because guilt does not produce
love. Ever."

Guilt stops us from enjoying our memories. And it prevents us from
living fully now.

"When you're guilty, you're not available to be playful, to have
intimacy," I told Sofia. "And you're tarnishing the beautiful things.
The memory of blow-drying your mom's hair in the hospital, helping her
feel elegant and pretty as she wished to be in her final days. The gift
that she went quickly, without suffering for years and years, unable to
control her faculties."

Sometimes we may feel that we're cheating on the dead if we laugh too
much, that we're abandoning them if we have too much fun, forgetting
them if we're happy.

"But you belong dancing with your husband," I said, "not sitting at home
crying for your mom. So get rid of that punitive parent voice in
you---the *should've*, *could've*, *why didn't I*. You're not free when
you're guilty. If your mom were sitting with you now, what would she
tell you she wishes for you?"

"For my sisters and me to be happy. For us to live a full life."

"And you can give her that gift. Have a full life. Celebrate. Your whole
life is ahead of you now. I see her winking at you, encouraging you. So
show up for your sisters and your husband. Love each other. And when
you're ninety-two you can think of me, and how your life began when your
precious mother died and you made the decision to have a full life, and
not be a victim of any circumstance. It's your job now to give her a
gift: let go. Let go."

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_99 .pagebreak aria-label="page 99"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Grief has so many layers and flavors: sorrow, fear,
relief, survivor's guilt, existential questioning, diminished safety,
fragility. Our whole sense of the world is interrupted and rearranged.
The adage says, "Time heals all wounds." But I disagree. Time doesn't
heal. It's what you do with the time.

Sometimes people compensate for the upheaval of grief by trying to keep
everything the same---jobs, routines, and relationships remain static.
But when you've had a big loss, nothing is the same anymore. Grief can
be an invitation to revisit our priorities and decide again---to
reconnect to our joy and purpose, recommit to being the best we can be
right now, to embrace that life is pointing us in a new direction.

When grief came knocking---which it does, to you, to me, to
everyone---Daniel wasn't content to live automatically, doing the same
thing over and over. He was ready to switch gears and take back his
power.

As he put it, "Something so hard or tragic can happen that a person has
to make a choice to continue being the same way, or make a change for
the better."

His story of loss began as a love story. He met Tracy when he was
eighteen years old. Both indigenous Canadians, they were studying the
same subjects---environmental science and indigenous studies---at
university. Right away they became good conversationalists and good
friends, talking for hours at a stretch, relaxed and happy in each
other's company.

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_100 .pagebreak aria-label="page 100"
role="doc-pagebreak"}But now Daniel reflects, "There was a lot we didn't
talk about that we probably should have."

Daniel was twenty-five when they married, thirty when their son, Joseph,
was born. They moved across the country to Tracy's home province. That's
when things began to sour. She was thriving academically and
professionally---she finished her master's degree and started working on
her doctorate, and was a respected environmental expert and sought-after
consultant. But being back at home underscored all the reasons she'd
left in the first place: rampant alcoholism and drug addiction in the
community, as well as violence and deaths. And, though Daniel didn't
know it yet, she was again in proximity to tragic abuse that had
occurred within her own family. She fell into a tailspin, often drinking
and raging, and she and Daniel separated. Joseph was just two.

They did their best to coparent in a respectful way, sharing custody
fifty-fifty, managing not to fight around their son. But Tracy's life
was growing more tumultuous. Her driver's license was suspended, he
presumes for drunk driving, and on several occasions when Daniel dropped
Joseph off, he felt uneasy, a fleeting sense that she might be high. He
confronted her about his concerns, and she said she was dealing with
difficult personal issues, but had it under control.

Once, concerned for her welfare, Daniel left Joseph at home with a
babysitter and went looking for her. He found her at a relative's house,
sleeping off a hangover. When she woke up, she seemed distraught. He sat
on the bed with her. Sobbing, she revealed that when she was twelve
she'd been sexually abused by members of her own family. At age
eighteen, she'd confronted her parents, and her mother sat tightlipped
and rigidly silent []{#ch06.xhtml_page_101 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 101" role="doc-pagebreak"}while her father threw it
back in her face, blaming her for what had happened. Daniel was shocked.
He knew she'd had it rough as a kid, that she and her siblings had been
beaten. But he'd had no idea about the sexual abuse. It helped him
understand how much she was hurting---and it ignited a new set of
concerns. He told her, "From now on I can't have Joseph around anyone
who does that to a child. So that's the new rule. No contact with your
parents until this is brought out and talked about." She agreed. But a
month later she filed for divorce. And a year later she gave their son
to her father to watch. When Daniel found out, he took her to court and
earned full custody.

With Tracy's blessing, Daniel moved to be closer to his family. They
planned for Tracy to move, too, to be near Joseph and far away from the
chaos of abuse and addiction at home. In the meantime, Daniel regularly
drove Joseph to visit her, and she sometimes traveled to see them. She
seemed a ghost of herself---deep shadows under her eyes, her body
somehow lethargic yet agitated. But when Daniel expressed concern, she
was dismissive, face taut and eyes vacant.

And then she went missing.

No one knows the exact day she disappeared. Some say she had been in the
company of a drug dealer. Joseph was five the last time he saw his
mother.

"It was shocking," Daniel told me. "Mind-boggling. She was an
accomplished woman. Her community looked to her for help in the
environmental field. I'd always known her to be a great person. When I
look back at it now, I guess all those things were lying buried, never
dealt with, catching up."

He'd been grieving already---for the loss of his best friend as a life
partner, the loss of their marriage, the loss of his coparent. But
[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_102 .pagebreak aria-label="page 102"
role="doc-pagebreak"}now the grief was absolute---and ominous. Tracy was
gone all of a sudden, and forever. No one would likely ever know why.
She'd become one of countless missing and murdered indigenous women in
the United States and Canada, where indigenous women face murder rates
as much as ten times the national average.

Daniel felt like he was spinning through a revolving door, recounting
all the ways he'd failed her---every hurtful thing he'd ever said or
done or been a part of, all the ways he'd missed understanding just how
alone and out of place she must have felt in the world. He was surprised
to find that her disappearance stirred up his own older grief, things he
didn't realize were still festering inside, unhealed---the ways he
hadn't known or accepted himself as a child, the onslaught of racism
he'd experienced in school, the years he'd spent hating himself and
contemplating suicide, the trouble he'd always had communicating his
desires and boundaries. He'd been taught to be tough, to carry on,
isolate, shut down his feelings, all in the guise of moving forward and
onward. It was the same now. Well-intentioned people told him to toughen
up and be a man, that she was in a better place now, that God had a
plan.

These things may be true. "But they don't help you get the pain and
turmoil out of your body," he said.

For three years, grief pushed him to his knees and held him underground.

"I could work and laugh and function," he said, "but I was on cruise
control a lot of the time." If something triggered him, the bad feeling
would last for days or weeks. Saddest of all, he knew he had no tools to
help Joseph work through his emotions.

There didn't seem to be a way out. He consciously accepted that he would
be depressed and unhappy the rest of his life.

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_103 .pagebreak aria-label="page 103"
role="doc-pagebreak"}But what he was willing to accept for himself, he
couldn't accept for his son. His love for Joseph was his saving grace,
the catalyst that allowed change to come about.

In order to better guide his son, Daniel started reading about grief.
Reading led to talking. He started therapy, and in doing his own grief
work, he found a new professional calling, completing a grief-therapy
certification program and envisioning the life he wanted, unwaveringly
repeating and believing it would happen, even if he didn't know how.

Now Daniel works with Child and Family Services and also runs boys'
grief groups in the public schools, counseling troubled children and
teens, many of whom have been in care since they were two or three. He
says that a lot of grief work is about being quiet---about holding
space. Sometimes he and the boys go for walks, or build a fire outside,
or sit in silence at McDonald's.

"My career keeps me practicing," he said. "Helping others through the
forest I walked through, I'm always reflecting, doing my own constant
tending, keeping Tracy in my heart, staying aware of where I am and how
I'm doing."

In my experience, grief brings us together---or it pushes us apart.
Either way, we're never the same. Daniel is a beautiful example of how
it's possible for grief to guide us in a positive direction.

And his story reminds us that grief isn't something you only do once.
Grief will always be a part of their lives and relationship. And as
Joseph grows and matures, Daniel will have to figure out all over again
how to talk to him about his mother. There will always be questions with
no answers.

[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_104 .pagebreak aria-label="page 104"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Some things you'll never understand. Don't even try
to.

There are so many reasons why---why this or that happened, or didn't;
why we are where we are; why we do what we do. Grief forces us to get
clear about what's my business, what's your business, and what's God's
business.

When the kapo at Auschwitz pointed at the smoke rising from the
crematorium and said, "You can start talking about your mother in the
past tense. She's already dead," my sister Magda told me, "The spirit
never dies." She's right. When I go and speak at a school, I'm doing it
out of love for my parents, so I can keep their memories alive, to learn
from the past so we don't repeat it.

And I talk to my parents. Not in the bereft way my mother called on her
mother for help. But to cultivate the place in my heart where their
spirits still live. To call them to witness how rich and full my life
is---to see what they allowed to grow and thrive in the world.

I inherited my father's taste for fashion and couture, and every time I
get dressed, I say to him, "Papa, look at me! You always said I was
going to be the best-dressed girl in town." When I put myself together
well, when I feel that contentment and chutzpah, it's a ritual of
celebration for my father.

To my mother, I offer thanks. For her wisdom, for how she taught me to
find the power within. I even thank her for the times she told me, "I'm
glad you have brains, because you have no looks"! Thank you, Mama, for
doing the best with what you had. Thank you for the strength you had to
take care of your drunk, grief-stricken father, to feed and nourish your
family and ours. Thank you for inspiring me to discover my inner
resources. I love you. I'll never forget you.

Grieving is difficult, but it can also feel good. You can revisit
[]{#ch06.xhtml_page_105 .pagebreak aria-label="page 105"
role="doc-pagebreak"}the past. You can even embrace it. You're not stuck
there. You're here now. And you're strong.

You can come to terms with what was and what wasn't. And you can
concentrate not on what you lost, but on what is left: the choice to
live every moment as a gift, to embrace what *is*.

[]{#ch06a.xhtml}

### []{#ch06a.xhtml_page_106 .pagebreak aria-label="page 106" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM UNRESOLVED GRIEF {.h3}

- ***Let the dead be dead.*** *Grief changes, but it doesn't go away.
  Denying your grief won't help you heal---nor will it help to spend
  more time with the dead than you do with the living. If someone you
  love has died, give yourself thirty minutes every day to honor the
  person and the loss. Take an imaginary key, unlock your heart, and
  free your grief. Cry, yell, listen to music that reminds you of your
  loved one, look at pictures, read old letters. Express and be with
  your grief, 100 percent. When the thirty minutes have passed, tuck
  your loved one safely inside your heart and get back to living.*
- ***The spirit never dies.*** *It's possible for grief to guide us in a
  positive direction, toward a life with more joy and meaning and
  purpose. Talk to the loved one who has passed. Say what you're
  thankful for: the memories you cherish, the skills he or she taught
  you, the gifts you carry with you because that person touched your
  life. Then ask, "What do you wish for me?"*

[]{#ch07.xhtml}

# []{#ch07.xhtml_page_107 .pagebreak aria-label="page 107" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 7 [NOTHING TO PROVE]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Rigidity {.h2c}

When a couple tells me they never fight, I say, "Then you don't have
intimacy, either."

Conflict is human. When we avoid conflict, we're actually moving closer
to tyranny than to peace. Conflict itself isn't imprisoning. What keeps
us trapped is the rigid thinking we often use to manage conflict.

The prison bars of rigid thinking can be hard to recognize because
they're often gilded in good intentions. Many people seek me out for
therapy because they want to improve their relationships---to find a
better way to communicate with their partners or children, to have more
peace and intimacy. But often I discover that they're not in therapy to
learn how to negotiate conflict; they want my help in convincing others
to conform to their point of view. If you come in with an agenda, if
you're keeping score or trying to change someone else, then you're not
free. Freedom is when you embrace your power to choose your own
response.

My patients say it all the time: "I want him to..." or, "I want
[]{#ch07.xhtml_page_108 .pagebreak aria-label="page 108"
role="doc-pagebreak"}her to..." But you can't want something for another
person. You can only discover what's right *for you*.

This is one of the most important tools for managing conflict: stop
denying someone else's truth. I love a good tongue sandwich. But my
friend says, "How can you eat that? I get sick just thinking about it."
So who's right? He's right for him, and I'm right for me. You don't have
to agree. You don't have to give up your truth---and please don't ever
do that! Freedom comes in letting go of the need to be right.

When I realized decades after the war that in order to heal I had to go
back to Auschwitz and face the past, I invited my sister Magda to come
with me. We had kept each other alive when we were prisoners; we had
been each other's reason to live. I wanted to go back with her to the
place where our parents were murdered. To face what happened, to grieve,
to be at the site of constant terror and death and say, "We made it!"
But she thought I was an idiot. Who would willingly return to hell? My
sister, the only person on the planet who shared so much with me, the
person to whom I credit my very survival, had a completely different
response to our common experience. And neither one of us is wrong or
right, better or worse, healthier or unhealthier. I'm right for Edie,
Magda's right for Magda. We are both human---beautiful and fallible, no
more, no less. And we're both right. I went back to Auschwitz alone.

This is what I think Jesus meant when he advised us to "turn the other
cheek." When you turn the other cheek, you look at the same thing from a
new perspective. You can't change the situation, you can't change
someone else's mind, but you can look at reality differently. You can
accept and integrate multiple points of view. This flexibility is our
strength.

[]{#ch07.xhtml_page_109 .pagebreak aria-label="page 109"
role="doc-pagebreak"}It's what allows us to be assertive---not
aggressive or passive or passive-aggressive. When we're aggressive, we
decide for others. When we're passive, we let others decide for us. And
when we're passive-aggressive, we prevent others from deciding for
themselves. When you're assertive, you speak in statements. When I
wanted to go back to school, I was afraid of Béla's opinion, afraid he
would resent my time away from the family, afraid he wouldn't like us
being introduced as "Dr. and Mr. Eger." But when you're a whole person,
an adult, you don't have to ask anyone's permission. So don't put your
life in someone else's hands. Just make a statement: "I've decided to go
back to school and get my doctorate." Give the other person the
information and freedom they need to be assertive about their wants and
hopes and fears.

The key to maintaining your freedom during a conflict is to hold your
truth while also relinquishing the need for power and control.

It helps when we can meet others as they are, not as we expect them to
be. I have a patient who is often in conflict with his teenage daughter.
One session, he was upset because when they'd escalated into a fight
about whether or not she could use the car, his daughter blew up at him,
calling him names and using profanity. He wanted me to be the judge, to
hear the evidence and pronounce his daughter guilty, to take his side.
But we don't empower others---or ourselves---when we launch into
complaints, when we say here's-what-you-did this, here's-what-you-did
that. No one grows with criticism. So eliminate it. No criticism. None,
ever.

We do this for others, but most of all for ourselves, so we can live
free of unrealistic expectations, and free of the anger that
[]{#ch07.xhtml_page_110 .pagebreak aria-label="page 110"
role="doc-pagebreak"}comes when our expectations are not met. I'm very
selective about who's going to get my anger, because when I'm angry, I'm
the one who suffers.

Unhealthy conflict has everything to do with being locked in a
better-than, less-than mind-set. When Béla and I were traveling in
Europe one summer, we discovered that the Bolshoi Ballet tour was
scheduled to come through Paris while we were there. I'd always dreamed
of seeing them perform. Béla bought me a ticket and dropped me off at
the theater, but wouldn't go inside. I thought it was about the
money---that he didn't want to spend more on a second ticket. I came out
at intermission, entranced by the performance, and encouraged him to
come in for the second half. "There are open seats," I said. "Get a
ticket and come enjoy this with me." But he wouldn't go in. "I don't
give money to Russians," he said. "Not after what the Communists did to
me in Czechoslovakia." He'd convinced himself that this was how he could
avenge the cruelties and imprisonment he'd suffered. I argued with him,
urged him to reconsider, told him, "These artists have nothing to do
with what happened to you." But of course I couldn't change his mind. I
went back into the theater and enjoyed the rest of the performance, for
me. On one hand, it's too bad he couldn't set aside his judgment and
anger, and sit with me in the dark, enjoying something breathtakingly
beautiful. On the other hand, I can't say my way was better than his
way. Béla's way was better for Béla, my way was better for me.

Many of us live as though we have something to prove. We can become
addicted to having the last word. But if you're trying to prove that
you're right or you're good, you're trying to make yourself into
something that doesn't exist. Every human is fallible. Every human makes
mistakes. You're not helpless---and you're []{#ch07.xhtml_page_111
.pagebreak aria-label="page 111" role="doc-pagebreak"}not a saint,
either. You don't have to prove your worth. You can just embrace it,
celebrate that you're imperfect and whole, that there will never be
another you. Drop the agenda. If you have something to prove, you're
still a prisoner.

This is even true in the face of someone else's unkindness or
persecution.

My friend's daughter came home from kindergarten very upset because her
classmate had called her "poopy-face." My friend asked me how she could
help her daughter deal with the conflict. It's important that we give up
the need to defend ourselves. We're all probably going to face bullies.
But if someone calls you a poopy-face, don't say, "I'm not a
poopy-face!" Don't defend yourself against a crime you never committed.
It just becomes a power struggle. The bully throws you a rope, you pick
up the other end, and you're both tugging and exhausted. It takes two to
fight. But it takes one to stop. So don't pick up the rope. Tell
yourself, "The more he talks, the more relaxed I become." And remind
yourself that it's not personal. When someone calls you "poopy-face"
he's really talking about how he sees himself.

I lectured once at the Satyagraha House in Johannesburg---a home where
Mohandas Gandhi once lived, now a museum and retreat center. He was able
to bring the British Empire to its knees, without any bloodshed, without
the rhetoric of hate.

This is one of the ways I was able to survive Auschwitz. I was
surrounded every moment by dehumanizing words---you're worthless, you're
dirty, the only way you'll leave this place is as a corpse. But I didn't
let the words penetrate my spirit. []{#ch07.xhtml_page_112 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 112" role="doc-pagebreak"}Somehow I was blessed with
the insight that the Nazis were more imprisoned than I was. I first
understood this the night I danced for Mengele. My physical body was
trapped in a death camp, but my spirit was free. Mengele and the others
would always have to reckon with what they'd done. I was numb with shock
and hunger, I was terrified of being murdered, but I still had an inner
sanctuary. The Nazis' power came from systematic dehumanization and
extermination. My strength and freedom were within.

Joy is a wonderful role model for how to dissolve rigid thinking. For
many years, she was married to an abusive man. He treated her with
disdain and contempt, hurting her verbally and financially, regularly
threatening her with a gun to her head. She survived by keeping
journals, meticulously cataloguing their interactions, what each of them
said and did. It was a bid for sanity---keeping track of the truth day
by day.

When I work with a patient who is in an abusive relationship, I always
say: If your partner ever hits you, leave right away. Go to a
transitional living center. Stay with a friend or relative. Take the
kids, ask for help, and get out.

If you don't leave the first time, the abuser isn't going to take you
seriously. And each instance of abuse will make it harder and harder to
leave. The violence will usually get worse the longer you stay. And it
will get more difficult to reverse the psychological aspects of the
abuse, the things the abuser wants you to believe---that you're nothing
without him, that when he hits you, it's your fault. Every minute you
stay, you're []{#ch07.xhtml_page_113 .pagebreak aria-label="page 113"
role="doc-pagebreak"}putting yourself in harm's way. You are much too
precious for that!

When someone hits you, it's an instant wake-up call. You know what
you're dealing with. It isn't easy to leave, but once you have the
awareness of your partner's capacity and tendency for violence, the
problem is 50 percent solved. When the abuse is more covert and
psychological, you may doubt what you see. You may ask, "Is this
*really* happening to me?" If someone physically harms you, you know.
Yes, it's happening. Yes, I've got to go.

Without the physical scars of abuse, it was difficult for Joy to leave
the relationship. (This is another common experience for people trapped
in an abusive dynamic---the fear, and too often the reality, that we
won't be believed.) Eventually, realizing it was only a matter of time
before her husband acted on his threats, Joy divorced him, and he slowly
drank himself to death.

After he died, anger boiled through her. She had been clinging to the
hope that one day he might apologize for the years of
unkindness---recognize his mistakes, admit she was right to have left
him. When he died, she had to accept that she'd never get an apology.
She'd never get to win the fight. In an effort to make peace with the
past, she went back to the journals she'd kept. What she read shocked
her---not how cruel her husband had been, but how cruel she had been to
him.

"I bullied my husband," she said. "I was thinking, 'He's abusing me,'
but I was doing it right back to him. Keeping the kids from him, denying
him things, using the kids as tools to get to him, just because I wanted
to hurt him. I was so desperate. I thought there was no other way out. I
couldn't see beyond the terrible situation. But he wasn't the only one
making trouble in our marriage. I was, too."

[]{#ch07.xhtml_page_114 .pagebreak aria-label="page 114"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Many volatile relationships are complicated. While
nothing excuses domestic violence or abuse, there often isn't a right
person and a wrong person, a good spouse and a bad spouse. Both partners
are contaminating the relationship.

When I met Alison, she'd been divorced for twelve years. Sean, her ex,
had entered her life shortly after the end of a tumultuous relationship
with a guy who split her lip open during a fight, and then, when she
left him, broke into her house and slashed her mattress apart with a
knife. Sean swooped in like a savior---a caretaker and cheerleader who
helped her feel safe and also helped launch her singing career, managing
her tours and recording contracts, setting her up with master classes
and performances with legendary musicians.

Though generous and caring, Sean could also be controlling. Alison
relied on him, yet resented him for being in charge of her life, and she
began to retaliate, vying for control by starving herself. She was
hospitalized three times for an eating disorder, but the self-harm only
escalated. When she began burning herself on the arm and leg, Sean lost
hope. He had an affair, and then another, and eventually ended their
eighteen-year marriage.

More than a decade later, Alison was still fighting with him. Over
intellectual property rights to the songs they'd written together. Over
his unfortunate attempt to seduce the student she'd sent to him for
professional advice. Their marriage had ended long ago, but they were
still locked in a power struggle, both making harmful choices.

I told Alison if she wanted to bring an end to the hostilities, she
needed to look not at the causes of the conflict, but at the
maintainers.

[]{#ch07.xhtml_page_115 .pagebreak aria-label="page 115"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"How are you maintaining a point of view that isn't
serving you anymore?" I asked.

Alison was preoccupied by the desire to prove Sean's guilt and her
innocence. She essentially had him on trial in her mind, her inner life
an ongoing courtroom drama. But it was an unwinnable fight.

"Honey," I told her, "you can be dead right---and you're still dead. So
do you want to be happy, or do you want to be right?"

The best way to let go of the need for control is to become *powerful*.
Power has nothing to do with brawn or domination. It means you have the
strength to respond instead of react, to take charge of your life, to
have total ownership of your choices. You are powerful because you're
not giving your power away.

If you take back your power and *still* want to be right, then choose to
be kind, because kindness is always right.

Limbering up our thinking can not only alter our relationship, but
change our perceptions, the way we see and feel in the world.

As Alison began to free herself from the prison of rigidity, she was
able to draw clearer boundaries with her ex and find renewed agency in
her career, and she began planning an international tour. But then two
physical challenges emerged suddenly and disturbed her hard-won peace.
She developed a severe vocal tremor that made singing a challenge and
threatened her career; and she injured her back. It hurt to go about her
daily activities, and the things she did for fun and
self-care---gardening, yoga---were unavailable until she healed. Her
face was drawn []{#ch07.xhtml_page_116 .pagebreak aria-label="page 116"
role="doc-pagebreak"}into a stiff grimace, and I could hear her pain in
the jagged way she spoke.

"I was doing so well," she said. "And now I'll probably have to cancel
my tour."

Life isn't fair. And when we're hurting, our anger, worry, and
frustration are completely legitimate. But we can face any circumstance,
however unpleasant or unjust, with rigidity or flexibility.

"When your body hurts," I told her, "don't punish it, or resent it, or
demand things of it. Say, 'I'm listening.' "

Alison developed a practice to move from rigidity to flexibility. She
started with a statement of the problem, not minimizing or denying her
pain or frustration.

"I don't like it," she said. "It hurts. It's inconvenient."

Then she stopped resisting and resenting her body, and started
listening. She became curious.

"What do you want to tell me?" she asked. "What's in my best interest?
What serves and empowers me now?"

For a while, her body told her the same thing: slow down. Rest. So she
listened, and eventually her back began to improve. She was able to try
a restorative yoga class. Back on the mat, she found that she was able
to move more gently and mindfully now that she was less preoccupied with
pushing herself and more attuned to her inner experience. Her definition
of "getting it right" had changed. Before she hurt her back, she had
something to prove---how long she could hold a difficult arm balance,
how deeply she could twist. Now she was less imprisoned by expectations.

We don't have to like the difficult or painful things that happen to us.
But when we stop fighting and resisting, we have []{#ch07.xhtml_page_117
.pagebreak aria-label="page 117" role="doc-pagebreak"}more energy and
imagination to move forward, instead of nowhere.

Joy discovered this, too. Like Alison, she'd been stuck in the prison of
rigid thinking for years after her divorce, trapped in the mind-set of
dichotomies: good/bad, right/wrong, victim/victimizer. Because she saw
things in such stark and absolute terms, the stakes were always
high---all or nothing, life or death, with nothing in between. This made
any conflict, even a minor dispute, feel treacherous. Because there was
no room in her mind-set for nuance or complexity, Joy couldn't bear for
anyone to disagree with her.

"They might as well be pointing at me and saying, 'You're fat, you're
ugly, you're worthless,' " she said.

When she discovered a more complex truth---that she had also been
culpable in her marriage, that she wasn't always right---something
remarkable happened. Her vision seemed to change. She could perceive
colors more intensely. Freed from her black-and-white thinking and rigid
interpretation of the past, the world appeared more vivid and vibrant.
She drove her children crazy, pointing at flowers---yellow, red, purple,
blue---saying, "Look at that! Look! Look!"

Flexibility is strength. I learned it when I was training as a gymnast,
and it's why I go swing dancing as often as my body can handle, why I
end each speech with a high kick.

And it's true for the psyche as well as for the body. You're strong when
you're supple and limber. So get up each morning and stretch. Develop
the mental range of motion that keeps you free.

[]{#ch07a.xhtml}

### []{#ch07a.xhtml_page_118 .pagebreak aria-label="page 118" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM RIGIDITY {.h3}

- ***Give a gentle embrace.*** *Choose a current challenge in your
  life---an injury or physical ailment, an ongoing tension or conflict,
  or any circumstance that has you feeling restricted, limited, or
  confined. Start by speaking your truth. What don't you like about it?
  How does it make you feel? Then get curious. Ask, "What is this
  situation telling me? What's in my best interest? What serves and
  empowers me now?"*
- ***Meet others as they are.*** *Write down the name of a person with
  whom you're in conflict. Then write all your complaints about this
  person. For example:* My daughter is rude and ungrateful. She calls me
  names and uses toxic language. She has no respect for me. She flat-out
  ignores me and breaks curfew. *Now, rewrite the list; this time, state
  what you observe, without any editorializing, interpretation,
  judgment, or assumptions. Eliminate rigid words like "always" and
  "never." Simply state the facts:* Sometimes my daughter raises her
  voice and uses swear words. Once or twice a week, she comes home later
  than 11:00 p.m.
- ***Cooperation, not domination.*** *Choose one thing from your list of
  observations that you'd like to address with the other person. Find a
  neutral time to talk---not in the heat of conflict. First, say what
  you notice: "I've noticed that a couple of times a week you come home
  later than []{#ch07a.xhtml_page_119 .pagebreak aria-label="page 119"
  role="doc-pagebreak"}11:00 p.m." Then, get curious about the other
  person's point of view. A simple question works best: "What's up?"
  Next, without blaming or shaming the other person, say what you want:
  "It's important to me that you get enough sleep during the week. And
  I'd like to know that you're home safe before I go to bed." Finally,
  invite the person to collaborate on a plan: "What ideas do you have
  for a solution that works for both of us?" It's okay if the conflict
  isn't resolved right away. The important thing is to shift into a
  cooperative way of addressing conflict---to privilege the relationship
  over either person's need for power and control.*
- ***Treat others as they are capable of becoming.*** *Visualize a
  person with whom you're experiencing conflict. Now envision this
  person's highest self. It might help to close your eyes and picture
  the person surrounded by light. Put your hand over your heart. Say, "I
  see you."*

[]{#ch08.xhtml}

# []{#ch08.xhtml_page_120 .pagebreak aria-label="page 120" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_121 .pagebreak aria-label="page 121" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 8 [WOULD YOU LIKE TO BE MARRIED TO YOU?]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Resentment {.h2c}

The biggest disruptor of intimacy is low-level, chronic anger and
irritation.

My resentment toward Béla---for his impatience and temper, for the ways
he remained stuck in the past, for the disappointment that sometimes
showed in his face when he looked at our son---festered for so many
years that I thought the only way to be free was to divorce him. It was
only after we'd split, and completely disrupted our children's lives,
not to mention our own, that I realized my disappointment and anger had
little to do with Béla---and everything to do with me, with my own
unfinished emotional business and unresolved grief.

The suffocation I felt in our marriage wasn't Béla's fault; it was the
price of all the years I'd spent disowning my feelings: sorrow for my
mother, who gave up an independent, cosmopolitan life working for a
consulate in Budapest, and gave up a man she loved but was forbidden to
marry because he wasn't []{#ch08.xhtml_page_122 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 122" role="doc-pagebreak"}Jewish, to do what others
expected her to do. Fear of repeating the loneliness of my parents'
marriage. Grief over my first love, Eric, who died in Auschwitz. And
grief for my parents. I got married and became a mother before I'd come
to terms with my losses. And suddenly I was forty, the age my mother had
been when she died. It felt like I was running out of time to live how I
wanted to live: free. But instead of finding freedom by discovering my
own genuine purpose and direction, I decided that freedom meant being
away from Béla's yelling, cynicism, irritation, and
disappointment---from the things I imagined limited me.

When we're angry, it's often because there's a gap between our
expectations and reality. We think it's the other person who's trapping
and aggravating us---but the real prison is our unrealistic
expectations. Often, we marry like Romeo and Juliet, without really
knowing each other. We fall in love with love, or with an image of a
person to whom we've assigned all the traits and characteristics we
crave, or with someone with whom we can repeat the familiar patterns we
learned in our families of origin. Or we present a false self, seeking
love and a secure relationship by giving up who we really are. Falling
in love is a chemical high. It feels amazing---and it's temporary. When
the feeling fades, we're left with a lost dream, with a sense of loss
over the partner or relationship we never had in the first place. So
many salvageable relationships are abandoned in despair.

But love isn't what you feel. It's what you do.

There's no going back to the early days of a relationship, to the time
before you became angry and disappointed and cut off. There's something
better: a renaissance. A new beginning.

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_123 .pagebreak aria-label="page 123"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Marina, a dancer and performance artist, was trying
to figure out if such a rebirth was possible in her marriage---whether
she and her husband could move forward together in a healthy way, or if
the way to freedom meant finally letting go of the relationship.

"We've been fighting every day for eighteen years," she told me,
twisting her long hair into a loose bun. Sometimes the fights were
violent. Her husband didn't hit her, but he acted out---shoved chairs,
threw his phone against the wall, overturned the bed she was sitting on.

"I try to avoid being at home," she said, "because every conversation
turns into him telling me what I did wrong." Afraid to stand up to him,
afraid to walk out of the room when he was raging, she tried to maintain
her dignity and keep the peace. But she was losing self-respect, feeling
more and more disempowered. And she was worried about how the constant
fighting was affecting their teenage daughter. She didn't want to
continue as things were, yet was unsure how to chart a path
forward---unclear about her options.

Every choice has a price, something you gain, and something you lose.
One choice we can always make is to do nothing. To decide not to decide.
To keep on going the way we are. At the other extreme, Marina could
decide to leave the relationship and file for divorce.

"You don't have to be stuck," I told her. "You don't have to sit there
in a bad situation." However, I cautioned, a divorce can be an extreme
way of continuing to do nothing. "What do you gain from a divorce? It
gives you a piece of paper that says you're now free to marry someone
else."

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_124 .pagebreak aria-label="page 124"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Divorce doesn't resolve the emotional business of
the relationship. It just gives you legal permission to repeat the same
pattern with someone else! It doesn't make you free. Whether Marina
decided to leave her husband or stay in the marriage, her work was the
same: to uncover the needs and expectations she brought to the marriage,
and to heal the wounds she had brought with her, that she would keep
carrying for the rest of her life until she dealt with them.

We examined her expectations first. "Did you know about your husband's
anger when you married him?" I asked.

She shook her head vehemently. "He wins hearts," she said. An
accomplished actor, he knows how to make his audience fall in love with
him. Before they were married, she only saw this side of him---the
charmer, the philosopher, the romantic. "Now the shoes fly."

"So what keeps you there?" I asked. As I've said, every behavior
satisfies a need. Even an imprisoning and terrifying situation can serve
us in some way. "Do you need the financial security? Or maybe you need
the fighting?"

"I'm scared to be alone."

We all carry a fear of abandonment from infancy. But as she described
her childhood in Western Europe, it was clear that her fear of
abandonment had been compounded by outright neglect. When she was
fourteen, her father said he could no longer stand to live with her
mother, and left. He never once came back to visit his children---he
didn't even call to check in. Marina's mother was too distraught to cope
with the needs of the family, so Marina stepped in to fill the role,
putting the younger []{#ch08.xhtml_page_125 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 125" role="doc-pagebreak"}children to bed, staying up
late to bake bread and prepare food for the next day.

A year later, when the Berlin Wall came down, her mother made her own
devastating announcement. She'd met an East German man through a
newspaper ad. She was moving to former East Germany to be with him,
taking the younger children with her. Marina would stay behind. She'd
have to fend for herself. She handed Marina the rental agreement for a
room in a house and left the next day. She didn't so much as call for
more than a year.

The fact that Marina survived at all is a huge testament to her inner
strength and resiliency. She stayed in the rental house for a few months
until new tenants moved in, including a father who tried to seduce her,
coming to her room at night with a glass of wine. She broke her lease,
left school, and moved from town to town throughout Western Europe,
working multiple jobs, house-sitting for people away on vacation, at one
point living on an artists' commune, another time staying at a
rehabilitation farm where people in recovery came to take care of
horses. She developed a dangerous eating disorder, convinced that she
must be a terrible person to have been left by both her parents,
thinking that if she could make herself disappear, maybe her parents
would finally notice she was missing. When Marina was sixteen, the owner
of the rehab farm, herself an active alcoholic, turned Marina out. She
stood on the street with a suitcase in each hand, homeless and alone. In
despair, she called her mom and begged for help. But her mother was
still steeped in her own struggle and refused.

"From that moment on, I knew I was completely alone in the world,"
Marina said.

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_126 .pagebreak aria-label="page 126"
role="doc-pagebreak"}In her early twenties, she moved to Berlin in
search of better work opportunities, and through connections began to
train with a performance group, living in an old trailer in the backyard
of her school. It wasn't an easy life. The trailer was unheated. She
froze her way through the fierce Berlin winters, endured rigorous
training. But the new life suited her. While dancing, she felt strong
and free. She couldn't starve herself and detach from her body anymore,
and for the first time, she no longer wanted to. She had discovered
passion and purpose: the joy of moving her body, the power of movement
and expression.

She fell in love with another performer, who'd grown up in East Germany
during the Cold War. It was difficult for him to communicate his
emotions, to show love.

"Like my parents, I guess," Marina said ruefully.

Two years after they broke up, he died by suicide. Intellectually she
knew his death wasn't her fault, that even if they'd stayed together,
she couldn't have saved him. But the loss hit her hard.

"They found him a week or two after he died," she said. "He was
completely alone."

We all go into relationships carrying messages we learned in childhood.
Sometimes it's a literal phrase someone repeated---like when my mother
told me, "A bad husband is better than no husband." Sometimes it's
something we gleaned from others' actions or the home environment.

"Honey," I told Marina, "I'm hearing that you carry a message
inside---that if you love someone, they'll leave you."

Tears sprang into her eyes. She wrapped her arms around herself as
though the room had suddenly gone cold.

When we're imprisoned, it's the damaging messages that stick.

"But there's another message I hear in your story," I told her.
[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_127 .pagebreak aria-label="page 127"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"That you're a woman of strength. Once you were
that scared, lonely girl standing on the street with your suitcases.
Many times you could have died, and you didn't. Now look at you. Out of
something you didn't want, you made something good. *You're* good."

Believing at a fundamental level that she wasn't worthy of love, Marina
had chosen a partner and patterns of behavior that reinforced this
belief. I often see this dynamic in military marriages. When it's only a
matter of time before you'll have to deploy or move and start your life
anew, it's hard to trust that someone will really stick with you through
the distance and disruption. One way to cope with the fear of how much
it will hurt to be apart---or the fear that someone will leave us or be
unfaithful---is to avoid being close. Marina had married a man who
charmed her into feeling safe and adored, only to use their relationship
as a punching bag. He was carrying his own pain into the
relationship---and his method of coping with his unresolved emotional
business, to rage and blame, just reinforced Marina's internalized
message that to love is to be hurt and abandoned.

"Perhaps you're both using the fighting to fight intimacy," I said. "So
let's look at your pattern."

Many couples have a three-step dance, a cycle of conflict they keep
repeating. Step one is frustration. It's left to fester, and pretty soon
they move on to step two: fighting. They yell or rage until they're
tired, and fall into step three: making up. (Never have sex after a
fight. It just reinforces the fighting!) Making up seems like the end of
the conflict, but it's really a continuation of the cycle. The initial
frustration hasn't been resolved. You've just set yourselves up for
another go-round.

I wanted to give Marina some tools to help her stop the dance
[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_128 .pagebreak aria-label="page 128"
role="doc-pagebreak"}at step one. What were the frustration triggers
that kept launching them into the same imprisoning dance?

"You're either contributing to the relationship or you're contaminating
it," I said. "How do each of you contaminate the marriage?"

"When I want to have a discussion with him---express a feeling or bring
something up---he's afraid of being guilty, that something's his fault."
His preferred defense was offense---to turn the tables and attack Marina
with blame and criticism.

"And what's your part in it?" I asked.

"I try to explain myself. Or I say, 'Stop,' and he explodes and starts
kicking or throwing or smashing something."

I gave her an assignment, a detour to get them off the path they kept
choosing. "The next time he tells you you're wrong, your answer is
'You're right.' He can't fight with that. And you're not lying, because
everybody makes mistakes; anybody could improve. Just say, 'Yes, you're
right.' "

If we deny an accusation, we're still accepting blame. We're taking
responsibility for something that isn't ours.

"The next time he's angry, ask yourself, 'Whose problem is it?' Unless
you caused the problem, you're not responsible when he tries to put the
monkey on your back. Give the monkey back. Say, 'Sounds like you're in a
tough position. Sounds like you're mad about that.' When he tries to
make his feelings about you, give the feeling back to him. It's his
feeling to face and you hope he'll let go. When you step into the ring,
he's looking at you, not at his feeling. Stop rescuing him."

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_129 .pagebreak aria-label="page 129"
role="doc-pagebreak"}When Marina and I spoke a few weeks later, she said
the de-escalation tools were working. Their fights had radically
diminished.

"But I have so much resentment against him," she said. This time, it
wasn't his anger she wanted to talk about. It was her own. "In my mind,
I make him responsible for everything."

"So do the opposite," I said. "Thank him."

She stared at me, eyebrows raised in surprise.

"You choose your attitude. So thank him. And thank your parents, too.
They're helping you become a very good survivor."

"And just ignore what happened? Leave out what they did?"

"Make peace with it."

Many of us didn't have the loving and caring parents we desired and
deserved. Maybe they were preoccupied, angry, worried, depressed. Maybe
we were born at the wrong time, in a season of friction or loss or
financial strain. Maybe our caregivers were dealing with their own
trauma, and they weren't always responsive to our needs for attention
and affection. Maybe they didn't pick us up and say, "We always wanted a
child just like you."

"You're grieving over the parents you never had," I told Marina. "And
you can grieve over the husband you don't have."

Grief helps us face and ultimately release what happened or didn't
happen. And it opens up space to see what *is* and choose where we go
from here.

"Would you like to be married to you?" I asked.

She gave me a confused look.

"What do you like about you?"

She was silent, her brow creased as though taken aback, or maybe she was
just searching for the words.

She began hesitantly, but her voice became fuller as she spoke. Her eyes
brightened and a flush rose in her cheeks.

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_130 .pagebreak aria-label="page 130"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"I like that I care about other people," she said.
"I like that I have passion---that I love climbing high. I like that I
don't give up."

"Write it down, honey," I said. "Carry those words in your purse."

Taking an honest inventory is so important. It's easy to reach for
critiques of others and ourselves, to focus on wrongs and complaints.
But all of us are good. We choose what we focus on.

"What's good about your husband?" I asked.

She paused, squinting slightly, as though trying to see into the
distance. "He cares," she said. "Even though he is like he is, I know he
cares about me. And he's working hard. I injured my shoulder, and he
helped me. There are times when he supports me."

"Are you stronger with him, or without him?"

Only you can decide if a relationship depletes or empowers you. But it's
not a question to answer quickly. You can't know the truth about your
relationships until you deal with your own wounds, until you bury and
leave behind all the things from the past you're still dragging around.

My decision to divorce Béla was unkind and unnecessary, but it was
useful in one way: it created more silence and space for me to start to
face my past and my grief. It didn't liberate me from my emotions and
trauma, from flashbacks, from feeling numb, anxious, isolated, and
afraid. Only I could do that.

"Be careful what you do when you're restless," my sister Magda had
warned me. "You can start to think the wrong things. He's too this, he's
too that, I've suffered enough. You end up missing the same things that
drove you crazy."

[]{#ch08.xhtml_page_131 .pagebreak aria-label="page 131"
role="doc-pagebreak"}And I did miss Béla. The way he danced and wore joy
on his sleeve. His relentless humor, how he made me laugh in spite of
myself. His steadfast appetite for risk.

Two years after our divorce, we remarried. But we didn't return to the
same marriage we'd had before. We weren't resigned to each other; we'd
chosen each other anew, and this time without the distorted lens of
resentment and unmet expectations.

"Your husband is getting your anger," I told Marina. "But maybe he's not
the one you're really angry with."

We cast others in the roles that help us enact the story we've decided
to tell. When we tell a new story---when we come home to our
wholeness---our relationships might improve. Or we might find that we
don't need them anymore, that they don't have a place in the story of
freedom.

You don't have to figure it out in a hurry. In fact, it's best to stop
figuring and figuring and trying to understand. It's an answer that will
come only by playing more, by living your life as fully as possible, and
being who you already are: a person of strength.

[]{#ch08a.xhtml}

### []{#ch08a.xhtml_page_132 .pagebreak aria-label="page 132" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM RESENTMENT {.h3}

- ***Change the dance steps.*** *Many couples have a three-step dance, a
  cycle of conflict they keep repeating. It starts with frustration,
  escalates to fighting, and appears to restore harmony when they make
  up. Until the initial frustration is resolved, the peace won't last
  for long. What frustration triggers keep going unresolved in your
  relationship? How can you change the dance at step one, before you
  fall into the old cycle? Decide on one thing to do differently the
  next time frustration brews. Then do it. Take note of how it went and
  celebrate any change.*
- ***Take care of your own emotional business.*** *Reflect on a message
  about love that you may have learned as a child and may be carrying
  into your relationships. For example, Marina was carrying the message
  that if you love someone, they leave. What did your childhood teach
  you about love? Fill in this sentence:* If you love someone,
  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
- ***Would you like to be married to you?*** *What qualities do you
  think create a comfortable and thriving relationship? Would you like
  to be married to someone such as you? What strengths do you bring to
  the table? Make a list. What behaviors might be challenging to live
  with? Make a list. Are you living in a way that brings out your best
  self?*

[]{#ch09.xhtml}

# []{#ch09.xhtml_page_133 .pagebreak aria-label="page 133" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 9 [ARE YOU EVOLVING OR REVOLVING?]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Paralyzing Fear {.h2c}

I'd been teaching psychology at a high school in El Paso for a few
years---and had even been awarded teacher of the year---when I decided
to return to school for a master's in educational psychology. One day my
clinical supervisor came to me and said, "Edie, you've got to get a
doctorate."

I laughed. "By the time I get a doctorate I'll be fifty," I said.

"You'll be fifty anyway."

Those are the smartest four words anyone ever said to me.

Honey, you're going to be fifty anyway---or thirty or sixty or ninety.
So you might as well take a risk. Do something you've never done before.
Change is synonymous with growth. To grow, you've got to evolve instead
of revolve.

In America, the slang term for a psychologist is *shrink*. But I like to
call myself a stretch! To meet survivor to survivor, and guide you to
release your self-limiting beliefs and embrace your potential.

[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_134 .pagebreak aria-label="page 134"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I studied Latin as a girl, and I love the phrase
*Tempura mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis*. Times are changing, and we
are changing with the times. We aren't stuck in the past, or stuck in
our old patterns and behaviors. We're here now, in the present, and it's
up to us what we hold on to, what we let go, and what we reach for.

Gloria is still carrying a heavy burden. She fled the civil war in El
Salvador when she was four, grew up in an extremely violent household
where her mother was repeatedly beaten by her father, and then, when she
was thirteen and visiting family in El Salvador, was raped by her pastor
uncle, the man who had christened her. He assaulted her on Christmas
Eve, destroying her faith along with her sense of safety. No one
believed her when she came forward about the assault, and the uncle who
raped her is still a practicing pastor.

"I'm holding on to so much anguish and hurt," she said. "Everything is
covered in fear. I don't want to lose my husband or children to the
past. I need things to change, but I just don't know how to change, or
where to start."

She thought that pursuing a degree in social work might help her find
purpose in the present and unlock the hold of the past, but hearing her
clients' experiences of victimization only deepened her sense of despair
and helplessness, and she abandoned the degree. She hated feeling
defeated, hated that her children saw her struggling. Now, along with
the frequent intrusions and feeling of panic from the past, she lives
every day terrified that her children will be harmed the way she was.

[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_135 .pagebreak aria-label="page 135"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"I do my best to make sure they're safe," she said.
"But I won't always be there to protect them. I don't want them to live
in fear. I don't want to pass on the fear."

But everyday events, like dropping her daughter off at camp, provoke
enormous fear. "I'm up all night, thinking, 'What's going to happen to
her? Is something happening to her right now?' "

We should never stop seeking safety and justice, doing everything in our
power to protect ourselves, our loved ones, our neighbors, our fellow
humans. But we have a choice how much of our lives we give over to fear.

Fear uses the most insistent, relentless, provocative words: *what if,
what if, what if?* When fear comes like a panic storm, and your body
shakes and your heart races and the trauma you already survived
threatens to swallow you, take your own precious hand and say, "Thank
you, fear, for wanting to protect me." Then say, "That was then, this is
now." Say it over and over again. You already made it. Here you are.
Wrap your arms around yourself and rub your own shoulders. "Attagirl,"
you say. "Love you."

You never know what's coming from the outside. You can't predict who
might show up to cause harm---yell an insult, throw a punch, break a
promise, betray your trust, drop a bomb, start a war. I wish I could
tell you that tomorrow the world will be safe from cruelty and violence
and prejudice, from rape and depravity and genocide. But that world may
not ever come. We live in a world with danger, and so we live in a world
with fear. Your safety *isn't* guaranteed.

But fear and love don't coexist. And fear doesn't have to rule your
life.

Releasing the fear starts with you.

[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_136 .pagebreak aria-label="page 136"
role="doc-pagebreak"}When we've been hurt or betrayed, it isn't easy to
let go of the fear that we'll be hurt again.

Fear's favorite words are "I told you so." *I told you* you'd regret it.
*I told you* it was too risky. *I told you* it wouldn't turn out well.

And we hate to disappoint our hunches.

We hold on to fear, thinking vigilance will protect us, but fear becomes
a relentless cycle, a self-fulfilling prophecy. A better protection
against suffering is to know how to love and forgive yourself, to be
safe for yourself, to not punish yourself for the mistakes and hurt and
pain that are inevitable parts of life.

This was Kathleen's struggle when I spoke with her in the aftermath of
her husband's affair.

She'd been happily enjoying her twelfth year of marriage to a handsome,
accomplished doctor, taking a pause in her career to focus on their
young sons, when she got the phone call. A man she'd never heard of
claimed to run an escort service and threatened to expose her husband's
affair with one of the escorts and ruin his career if she didn't pay up.
It was sordid and outlandish, the stuff of soap operas and nightmares.
But when she confronted her husband, he said it was true. He'd engaged
the services of an escort. The man who'd called Kathleen was her pimp.

Kathleen went into a state of shock. She shook uncontrollably, she
couldn't eat or sleep. Her world was upside down and inside out. How had
she been so oblivious to the truth? She entered a state of perpetual
vigilance, prodding her life for clues that would help her understand
why her husband had cheated, and for evidence that he might be straying
again.

But over time---and with lots of help from a marriage counselor---the
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_137 .pagebreak aria-label="page 137"
role="doc-pagebreak"}infidelity became an opportunity for her and her
husband to rediscover their marriage, to rekindle intimacy. As they
regained stability, he surprised her by becoming more attentive and
romantic. Their marriage felt more joyful. They hosted a giant Christmas
party, their house full of light. On Valentine's Day, her husband woke
her before dawn and led her down the dark hall to the staircase bedecked
in rose petals and twinkling tea lights. They sat in their robes
together and cried. Sweetness and trust had returned to their
relationship.

Little did she know he was weeks away from another destructive
decision---the start of another affair with a young colleague---or that
in a few months she would stumble on a passionate letter that he'd
written to his lover.

Kathleen and I spoke two years after the devastating discovery that he'd
betrayed her again. She chose to stay in the marriage, and once more
they engaged in intensive couples therapy and rebuilt their
relationship, from the ground up. She told me that in many ways their
bond feels stronger than ever. Her husband is less walled off, less
prone to edginess, more affectionate---he hugs and kisses and comforts
her, checks in frequently, video calls her from work or dials out from
his work phone so she knows he's really where he says he is. He's open
about why he cheated again---"I was a powerful narcissist, trying to
have it all," he says---and speaks his heartfelt regret.

But Kathleen is still imprisoned by fear.

"I have the loving, attentive husband I've always wanted," she said.
"But I can't accept it. I can't believe it. I play the mind movies all
day, reliving the past, waiting for the other shoe to drop, for him to
cheat again. I know that I'm robbing myself of my own life. I know I
need to learn to trust him again. I'm trying to stay
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_138 .pagebreak aria-label="page 138"
role="doc-pagebreak"}in the present. But I can't escape the fear. I
can't stop policing and monitoring him."

When we're living with a lot of doubt, we're on the lookout for signs
that will calm---or confirm!---our fears. But whatever we're looking for
on the outside, we need to address within.

"Maybe it's not your husband that you're doubting," I said. "Maybe it's
you. I heard you say four times, 'I can't.' "

Her bright eyes filled with tears.

"You're not giving yourself enough credit. So let's work on dissolving
that self-doubt."

The prison of fear can become a catalyst for growth and empowerment. To
enact this transformation, language is one of our most powerful tools.

"Let's start with that 'I can't,' " I told her. "First of all, it's a
lie. *I can't* means I'm helpless. And unless you're an infant, that
simply isn't true."

When we say "I can't," what we're really saying is "I won't." *I* won't
*accept it. I* won't *believe. I* won't *escape the fear. I* won't *stop
policing and monitoring him*. The language of fear is the language of
resistance. And if we're resisting, we're working very hard to ensure
that we go nowhere. We deny growth and curiosity. We're revolving, not
evolving, shutting down opportunities for change.

I asked Kathleen to eliminate *I can't* from her vocabulary.

If you're going to take away something, you'll be more successful if you
can replace it with something else. If you're skipping a cocktail,
replace it with another beverage you enjoy. If you want to stop
withdrawing and hiding from a loved one, like Robin in an earlier
chapter, replace the habit of leaving the room with staying, with
regarding your partner with a smile and kind eyes.

I told Kathleen, "Anytime you start to say 'I can't,' replace it
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_139 .pagebreak aria-label="page 139"
role="doc-pagebreak"}with 'I can.' " I *can* let go of the past. I *can*
stay in the present. I *can* love and trust myself.

I pointed her to two more fear-based phrases she'd used back-to-back in
the first minute of our conversation: *I'm trying* and *I need to*.

"You said you're trying to live in the present," I said. "But trying is
lying. You're either doing it or you're not." If you say, "I'm trying,"
you don't actually have to do it. You let yourself off the hook. "It's
time to stop trying and start doing."

When we're on the cusp of taking action, many of us use the phrase "I
need to." It sounds like we're identifying goals and setting priorities.
Kathleen wanted to change the relentless fear and vigilance in her
marriage, and she said, "I know *I need to* learn to trust him again."

"But that's another lie," I told her. "Needs are things without which we
can't survive. Breathing, sleeping, eating."

We can stop burdening and pressuring ourselves, telling ourselves that
something is necessary for our survival when it isn't. And we can stop
looking at our choices as obligations.

"You don't *need* to trust your husband," I said. "You *want* to. And if
you want to, you can choose to."

When we talk as though we're forced or obligated or incapable, that's
how we're going to think, which means that's also how we'll feel, and
consequently, how we'll behave. We become captives to fear: I need to do
this, *or else*; I want to do that, *but I can't*. To free yourself from
the prison, pay attention to your language. Listen
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_140 .pagebreak aria-label="page 140"
role="doc-pagebreak"}for the *I can't*, the *I'm trying*, the *I need
to*, and then see if you can replace these imprisoning phrases with
something else: *I can, I want, I'm willing, I choose*. This is the
language that empowers us to change.

Kathleen doesn't have any guarantees that her husband won't cheat again.
If she leaves the marriage, she has no foolproof armor against being
betrayed by someone else. But she has tools to free herself from
paralysis.

Whose responsibility is it if your dreams and behaviors aren't aligned?
One patient said he felt he would be more on top of things at work and
more patient with his family if he had better sleep habits---but he was
still drinking five cups of coffee. Another patient longed for a stable,
committed relationship, but she kept waking up in a different man's bed.
These patients' goals and choices didn't match. I'm all for positive
thinking, but it goes nowhere unless it's followed by positive action.

And we can stop working so hard to go nowhere.

One of the ways we resist change is by being hard on ourselves. A
patient told me she wanted to lose weight, but when she came to see me
she'd spend half the session berating herself. "I'm pigging out on ice
cream," she'd say. "I'm pigging out on chocolate cake." The minute you
put yourself down, you're never going to change. But if you say, "Today
I'm not going to put sugar in my cappuccino," then you're *doing*
something about it. This is how growth and learning and healing
happen---by what you do, little by little, on your own behalf.

Sometimes seemingly trivial changes can have a big impact.
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_141 .pagebreak aria-label="page 141"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Michelle, who had struggled for years with
anorexia, had always avoided doughnuts. She'd been afraid of them her
whole life---afraid that if she ate one, she'd eat the whole box. Afraid
that if she let herself indulge in even one small bite, she'd become fat
in an instant. Afraid that she would lose control. Afraid that if she
gave herself permission to experience pleasure, if she dared to let go,
she'd fall apart.

But she knew that as long as she lived in fear of an old-fashioned
glazed, she was still in prison. One morning she summoned her courage,
walked into a bakery---even the jingly bell on the door and the smell of
sugar made her sweat---and bought two doughnuts and brought them to her
therapy session. In a supportive place, with the comfort of her
therapist sharing the experience, Michelle let herself feel the fear,
all those deep-seated anxieties about her self-image and self-worth,
about losing control. And then she got curious about the experience.
Together, she and her therapist took bites of doughnut. Michelle felt
the crunch of the glazed icing on her tongue. The soft, cakey texture
when she bit in. The rush of sugar flooding her body. She turned her
anxiety into excitement!

We aren't born with fear. Somewhere along the way, we learn it.

I'll never forget the day when Audrey was ten. She had a friend over and
they were playing in her room. Just as I walked past her open door with
a basket of laundry, an ambulance screamed by, siren blaring, a sound
that even now continues to startle me. I was amazed to see Audrey dive
straight under her bed. Her friend stared at her, baffled by her
reaction. Somehow, probably []{#ch09.xhtml_page_142 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 142" role="doc-pagebreak"}by seeing *me* jump at the
sound of a siren, my daughter had learned to be afraid. She'd
internalized my fear.

Often the emotional responses that get ingrained in us aren't even our
own---they're ones we've learned from watching others. So you can ask
yourself, "Is this my fear? Or someone else's?" If the fear really
belongs to your mother or father or grandparent or spouse, you don't
have to carry it anymore. Just put it down. Release your hold. Leave it
behind.

Then make a list of the fears that remain.

This is how you begin to face your fears, rather than fighting them, or
running from them, or medicating them.

I did this fear exercise with my patient Alison, the professional
singer. She was struggling in the wake of a divorce, and dealing with
some physical ailments---a vocal tremor, back pain---that hindered her
ability to perform. Her list of fears included:

> *Being alone.*
>
> *Losing my income.*
>
> *Being poor, possibly homeless.*
>
> *Being sick and not having anyone there to help me.*
>
> *Not being accepted by others.*

I asked her to go over her list and decide how realistic each fear was.
If it was realistic---a valid concern given the facts of her life---she
circled it and put an R next to it. If the fear was unrealistic, she
crossed it off her list. She discovered that two of her fears weren't
realistic. With income from royalties and retirement savings, she
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_143 .pagebreak aria-label="page 143"
role="doc-pagebreak"}had a safety net. Even if she lost income, which
was likely given the tours she'd had to cancel, it wasn't likely that
she'd lose her house and end up on the streets. She crossed off *being
poor, possibly homeless*. She also crossed off *not being accepted by
others*. Events in her life showed a different truth---that she was an
admired performer, a cherished friend. More important, she realized that
whether or not she was accepted by someone else wasn't up to her. She
was learning to love herself. What others thought about her was up to
them.

The three remaining fears got Rs: *being alone, losing my income,* and
*being sick and not having anyone there to help me.*

I asked her to generate a list of things she could do today on her own
behalf to protect herself and build the life she wanted. If she was
afraid of being alone and wanted to be in a relationship again, she
could sign up on a dating app, spend a day making eye contact with
strangers (you never know who you'll meet!), go to a Codependents
Anonymous meeting so she could enter a new relationship in a healthier
place than she'd been when she married her ex. To face her fear of being
sick with no one to take care of her, she could research resources
available should she be in need of care. What home health organizations
were in the area? What did they cost? Were they covered by insurance?
And so on. It's not that we make our fears go away. We don't let them
dominate. We invite the other voices in the room to do some talking. And
then we *do* something. We take charge. We ask for help.

Often when we're stuck it's not that we don't know *what* to do. It's
that we're afraid we won't do it well enough. We're self-critical. We
hold high standards. We want others' approval---most of
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_144 .pagebreak aria-label="page 144"
role="doc-pagebreak"}all, our own---and think we can earn it by being
Superman or Superwoman. But if you're perfectionistic, you're going to
procrastinate, because perfect means never.

Here's another way to think about it. If you're perfectionistic, you're
competing with God. And you're human. You're going to make mistakes.
Don't try to beat God, because God will always win.

It doesn't take courage to strive for perfection. It takes courage to be
average. To say, "I'm okay with me." To say, "Good enough is good
enough."

Sometimes our fears are painfully realistic, our resources for meeting
them limited.

This was the case for Lauren, the mother of two young children who, in
her early forties, was diagnosed with cancer. Her disease was its own
prison. Her fears about the future---about dying, about her children
growing up without her---became a second set of bars. One day she told
me what scared her most of all---that she would die without having
really lived. She was trapped in an emotionally and physically abusive
marriage. She longed to protect her children and live free from her
husband's control and violence. But it seemed impossible to leave.
Cancer had rendered her physically and financially vulnerable,
compounding an already dangerous situation. To leave seemed too big a
risk.

We explored the fact that there's a difference between stress and
distress. Distress is constant threat and uncertainty, like we had in
Auschwitz---when we took a shower, we never knew what was going to come
out of the spigot, water or gas. Distress is toxic. It
[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_145 .pagebreak aria-label="page 145"
role="doc-pagebreak"}can mean never knowing when a bomb will drop on
your house, never knowing where you will sleep each night. Stress, on
the other hand, is actually a good thing. It requires us to face a
challenge, to find creative solutions, to trust ourselves.

It is so challenging and dangerous to leave the cycle of abuse that most
women return multiple times to their abuser before breaking free---if
they ever do. It would no doubt be challenging for Lauren, too. She
would likely struggle---to feed her children on a limited income, to
manage a household and her treatment regimen as a single parent. But she
would no longer be living every day under the threat of violence. She
would no longer be in distress.

Yet leaving would require her to exchange a known reality for an unknown
one. This is usually what stops us from taking risks. We'd rather stick
with what we know, painful or untenable as it is, than face what we
don't know.

When you risk, you *don't* know how it will turn out. It's possible that
you won't get what you want, that things will be worse. But you'll still
be better off, because you'll be living in the world as it is, not in an
imaginary reality created by your fear.

Lauren decided to leave her husband. She said, "I don't know how much
time I have left. I'm not going to spend the rest of my life being told
I'm worthless."

When I witness patients going nowhere, spinning on a relentless
merry-go-round of self-destructive behavior, I confront them.

[]{#ch09.xhtml_page_146 .pagebreak aria-label="page 146"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"Why are you choosing a self-destructive life? Do
you want to die?"

They say, "Yes, sometimes I do."

It's a profoundly human question: *To be or not to be?*

I hope you always choose to be. You're going to be dead anyway someday,
and you'll be dead for a very long time. Why not become curious? Why not
see what this life has to offer you?

Curiosity is vital. It's what allows us to risk. When we're full of
fear, we're living in a past that already happened, or a future that
hasn't arrived. When we're curious, we're here in the present, eager to
discover what's going to happen next. It's better to risk and grow, and
maybe fail, than to remain imprisoned, never knowing what could have
been.

[]{#ch09a.xhtml}

### []{#ch09a.xhtml_page_147 .pagebreak aria-label="page 147" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM PARALYZING FEAR {.h3}

- ***I can. I want. I'm willing.*** *For one day, keep track of every
  time you say* I can't, I need, I should, and I'm trying. *"I can't"
  means I won't. "I need" and "I should" mean I'm abdicating my freedom
  of choice. And "I'm trying" is lying. Eliminate this language from
  your vocabulary. You can't let go of something unless you replace it
  with something else. Replace the language of fear with something
  else:* I can, I want, I'm willing, I choose, I am.
- ***Change is synonymous with growth.*** *Do one thing differently
  today than you did yesterday. If you always drive the same way to
  work, take a different route---or ride your bike or take a bus. If
  you're usually too rushed or preoccupied to chat with the checker at
  the grocery store, try making eye contact and conversation. If your
  family is usually too busy to eat together, try sitting down to a meal
  together without the TV on or cell phones at the table. These small
  steps might seem inconsequential, but they actually train your brain
  to know that you're capable of change, that nothing is locked in
  stone, that your choices and possibilities are endless. And getting
  curious about your life helps turn your anxiety into excitement. You
  don't have to stay where you are, how you are, doing what you're
  doing. Mix things up. You're not stuck.*
- ***Identify your fears.*** *Make a list of your fears. For each fear,
  ask, "Is this my fear? Or someone else's?" If it's a fear
  []{#ch09a.xhtml_page_148 .pagebreak aria-label="page 148"
  role="doc-pagebreak"}you've inherited or taken on, cross it off your
  list. Let it go. It isn't yours to carry. For each remaining fear,
  decide how realistic it is. If it is a valid concern given the facts
  of your life, circle it. For each realistic fear, decide if it causes
  you* distress *or* stress. *Distress is chronic danger and
  uncertainty. If you're living in distress, your foremost
  responsibility is to tend to your safety and survival needs, to the
  degree that this is possible. Do whatever is in your power to protect
  yourself. If the fear is causing you stress, acknowledge that stress
  can be healthy. Notice how stress might be giving you an opportunity
  to grow. Finally, for each of the realistic fears, generate a list of
  things you could do today on your own behalf to strengthen yourself
  and build the life you want.*

[]{#ch10.xhtml}

# []{#ch10.xhtml_page_149 .pagebreak aria-label="page 149" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 10 [THE NAZI IN YOU]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Judgment {.h2c}

When Audrey and I were in Lausanne, Switzerland, last year, I gave a
keynote address to an inspiring group of global executives and
leadership coaches at the International Institute of Management
Development, one of Europe's top business schools. At the dinner after
my address the guests stunned me with their heartfelt toasts of thanks
and appreciation. One man in particular struck me. He was tall, with
wavy hair beginning to gray, his thin face dominated by sad,
intellectual eyes. He said that my words about forgiveness, in
particular, had felt like a gift. Then he began to cry. Tears streaming
down his face, he said, "I have a story, too. It is so hard to tell it."

Audrey caught my eye. Something passed between us, a silent recognition
of trauma's collateral damage, the pain that's passed on when a secret
is kept. When the formal meal concluded, she excused herself and
threaded her way through the crowded room to the man's table. When she
returned, she said, "His name is Andreas and you definitely need to hear
his story."

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_150 .pagebreak aria-label="page 150"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Our schedule was packed, but Audrey arranged for me
to have a private lunch with Andreas the next day, before we flew home.
In a quiet, thoughtful way, he laid out the pieces of his personal
history, jigsaw moments of realization that he had put together over
time.

In the first puzzle piece, he's nine years old and stands with his
father at an exhibition in a small village outside Frankfurt. "Son, this
is a list of all the mayors of this town," his father intones, pointing
with a heavy finger to one name: Hermann Neumann. Hermann is Andreas's
middle name. His father's finger taps the name, his tone a peculiar mix
of sorrow, anger, longing, and pride as he says, "This is your
grandfather."

Andreas's grandfather died a decade before he was born. He had no
personal frame of reference, no idea what sort of man he'd been, what it
felt like to sit on his knee or hear him tell a story. No one spoke of
his grandfather. Instead there was a weighty silence in the place where
the family patriarch should have been. Andreas sensed that his absent
grandfather had something to do with the darkness that sometimes crept
into his father's and uncles' eyes. He was too young to understand that
there was only one way that someone would have been given a formal
administrative post in Germany during the years 1933 to 1945.

It was another nine years before the next puzzle piece crystallized.
Andreas had just returned to Germany after a year as an exchange student
in Chile. His uncle, after years of struggling with alcoholism, had just
passed away, and Andreas went to his apartment to clear out the basement
storage space. He stood in the dim room, letting his eyes adjust,
surveying the shelves packed with books and belongings, trying to
predict how long it would take to empty them, when he saw it. An old
wooden []{#ch10.xhtml_page_151 .pagebreak aria-label="page 151"
role="doc-pagebreak"}suitcase pasted with a sticker that was oddly
familiar. He stepped closer, and realized it was a customs sticker from
Arica, Chile, stamped with the year 1931. The leather tag on the
suitcase bore his grandfather's name. Why had no one in the family
mentioned, when he left for Chile, that his grandfather had also
traveled there? And why did finding the suitcase make him feel so
unsettled?

He asked his parents about it. His father shrugged and left the room.
His mother spoke in vague terms. "I think he was involved in something
or other," she said, "and left for a few months." The early thirties had
been a time of dire economic crisis in Germany. Maybe his grandfather
had sought opportunity elsewhere, as other young Germans did during
those lean years. Andreas convinced himself this was true, and did his
best to ignore the nagging feeling that there was more to the story.

A few years later, he asked his father's other brother for permission to
go through old family documents and memorabilia stored in the back of
his house. Instinct told him that he might find in his grandfather's
past something that could explain the trench of unrest that linked the
generations of his family---his father's and uncles' struggles with
alcohol, their shrouded, closed-off manner that Andreas sensed had
something to do with shame.

He read and sorted for days, and little by little, more pieces emerged.
His grandfather's old passport, stamped by immigration in Chile, showing
his arrival in 1930 and departure in 1931. A telegram sent to his
grandfather in 1942 at his job in Frankfurt where he worked as an office
clerk for one of the big industrial conglomerates. *Have you removed all
the bicycles and belongings from the house in Frankfurt?* the telegram
read, signed by his grandfather's brother. A peculiar message.

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_152 .pagebreak aria-label="page 152"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Then Andreas read the return address. His
great-uncle had sent the message to his grandfather from the Gestapo
headquarters in Marseille. How had his great-uncle been allowed to
access a Nazi Telex machine? Why had his grandfather received a personal
message from a Gestapo office? How deep did his family's Nazi connection
go?

He kept digging through documents and found a letter from a family
friend, notifying them that his great-uncle had died during the war on a
withdrawal mission in France when his car went over a mine. No personal
effects or ID tags had been recovered from the explosion. He also
discovered letters from his grandfather to his grandmother, written from
a prisoner-of-war camp in southern Germany after the war. What alleged
or actual offenses had put his grandfather in prison?

He searched for years for more information, but hit only dead ends.
Despite his grandfather's imprisonment, there didn't appear to be any
evidence of a trial or an investigation into his grandfather's criminal
acts. In a last-ditch effort to fill in the blanks in his family's past,
Andreas contacted archives of the home state where his grandparents had
lived after the war. At last, he was handed a slim file. There were only
a few sheets of paper inside, including a typed chronology that filled
just half the page.

In 1927, when he was twenty years old, his grandfather had joined the
SA---the Sturmabteilung, the first Nazi Party paramilitary group
established to persecute Jews by throwing stones through windows and
setting fire to city blocks, creating a climate of fear and violence and
contributing to Hitler's rise to power. He left the SA in 1930---the
year he'd gone to Chile---only to return to Germany a few months later,
rejoin the SA, and rise in the ranks to become a squad leader and a
member of the Nazi []{#ch10.xhtml_page_153 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 153" role="doc-pagebreak"}Party. These decisions in
1933 facilitated his job at the finance administration office in
Frankfurt, and his mayorship in the village where Andreas's father had
pointed to his name---Hermann Neumann---the four syllables that denoted
the dark legacy he'd inherited.

"I share his name," Andreas said. "My cells stem from his cells. In a
foundational way, I'm a result---a product---of what happened."

His very identity felt contaminated.

And history seemed to be repeating. At the same time that he learned the
truth about his grandfather, the right-wing movement was gaining energy
in an economically devastated eastern Germany.

"I saw pictures of people running after immigrants in Chemnitz," he
said, "and I knew my grandfather had done the same."

He officially changed his middle name from Hermann to Phileas, after the
character Phileas Fogg in Jules Verne's *Around the World in Eighty
Days*, a book that sparked Andreas's curiosity about the world during
his childhood days. The name change was an act to distance himself from
his grandfather, to sever the personal connection to his grandfather's
wrongs, to say, "Yes, I am Hermann's grandson, and I don't need to carry
his first name."

Andreas said he is still trying to release the burden of the past---the
relentless shame that he carries the blood of a perpetrator, that his
very life came into being as a result of the benefits his grandfather
garnered from hurting others, from injustice. It's a collective guilt
that many German people unfortunately carry. If you are German, or Hutu,
or a descendant of those who enforced apartheid or genocide or another
instance of systemic []{#ch10.xhtml_page_154 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 154" role="doc-pagebreak"}violence and injustice, I am
telling you: it wasn't you. Assign the blame to the perpetrators, and
then decide.

"How long are you going to keep picking this up and carrying it around?"
I asked Andreas. "What's the legacy *you* want to pass on?"

Do you want to stay beholden to the past? Or can you find a way to
release your loved ones---and yourself?

Until our trip to Europe, I had no idea how much my own daughter was
struggling with this question.

Neither Audrey nor I remember ever speaking of my past during her
childhood. She learned about the Holocaust at Sunday school and asked
Béla about it. He told her I'd been in Auschwitz. Something clicked into
place. She'd sensed the presence of things we weren't talking about; she
knew there was pain. Yet because she didn't know to ask---or at some
level didn't want to know---the truth had remained hidden.

Now it was in full view. When I began to talk more openly and publicly
about my past, Audrey didn't know what to do with the feelings my
history elicited in her. She wondered how my suffering, and Béla's, too,
might have transferred to her DNA, and worried she would pass the burden
of trauma on to her own children. For years, she avoided books, films,
museums, and events that dealt with the Holocaust.

When we carry a difficult legacy, we often react in one of two ways: we
resist it or detach from it; we fight it or run away. Though from
opposite sides of the same tragedy, Andreas and Audrey were walking the
same path: reckoning with a brutal truth, and figuring out how to hold
it and carry it forward.

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_155 .pagebreak aria-label="page 155"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Other than staying silent in an effort to protect
my children from my pain, I hadn't considered the broader impact of
legacy until the early 1980s, when a fourteen-year-old boy came to his
court-appointed therapy session wearing a brown shirt and brown boots,
leaned his elbow on the table, and started ranting about how to make
America white again, about how to kill all the Jews, niggers, Mexicans,
and chinks. Fury swept through me. I wanted so badly to shake him, to
say, "How dare you talk like that? Do you know who I am? My mother died
in a gas chamber!" Just when I thought I might reach out my hands and
throttle him, I heard a voice within say, "Find the bigot in you."

Impossible, I thought. I'm not a bigot. I'm a Holocaust survivor and an
immigrant. I lost my parents to hate. I used the "colored" bathroom at
the factory in Baltimore in solidarity with my African American
coworkers. I marched for civil rights with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
I'm not a bigot!

But to stop bigotry means you start with yourself. You let go of
judgment and choose compassion.

I took a deep breath, leaned in, gazed at him with as much kindness as I
could muster, and said, "Tell me more."

It was a tiny gesture of acceptance---not of his ideology, but of his
personhood. And it was enough for him to speak a little of his lonely
childhood, absentee parents, and severe neglect. Hearing his story
reminded me that he hadn't joined an extremist group because he was born
with hate. He was seeking what we all want: []{#ch10.xhtml_page_156
.pagebreak aria-label="page 156" role="doc-pagebreak"}acceptance,
attention, affection. It's not an excuse. But attacking him would only
nourish the seeds of worthlessness his upbringing had sown. I had the
choice to alienate him further, or give him another version of refuge
and belonging.

I never saw him again. I don't know if he continued on the path of
prejudice, crime, and violence, or if he was able to heal and turn his
life around. I do know that he walked in ready to kill someone like me,
and he left in a softer mood.

Even a Nazi can be a messenger of God. This boy was my teacher, guiding
me to the choice I always have to replace judgment with compassion---to
recognize our shared humanity and practice love.

All over the world, a resurgence of fascism looms. My great-grandsons
stand to inherit a world still gripped by prejudice and hate, where
children yell racial epithets on the playground and carry guns to
school, where nations build walls to deny asylum to fellow humans. In
this state of fear and vulnerability, it's tempting to hate the haters.
But I feel sorry for people who are taught to hate.

And I identify with them. What if I'd been born a German gentile instead
of a Hungarian Jew? What if I'd heard Hitler proclaim, "Today, Germany,
tomorrow, the world"? I, too, could have been a Hitler Youth, a guard at
Ravensbrück.

We're not all descendants of Nazis. But we each have a Nazi within.

Freedom means choosing, every moment, whether we reach for our inner
Nazi or our inner Gandhi. For the love we were born with or the hate we
learned.

The inner Nazi is the part of you that has the capacity to judge and
withhold compassion, that denies you the permission to be free and
victimizes others when things don't go your way.

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_157 .pagebreak aria-label="page 157"
role="doc-pagebreak"}I'm still learning to let go of my inner Nazi.

I had lunch the other day at a fancy country club with women looking
like a million dollars, every one of them. *Why am I spending an
afternoon with people who look like Barbie dolls?* I thought. Then I
caught myself in the act of judging others, engaging in the same
us-versus-them mentality that killed my parents. When I put my prejudice
aside, I discovered that the women were deep thinkers, that they'd
experienced difficulty and pain. I'd been ready to write them off out of
hand.

Another evening I spoke at a Chabad where a fellow survivor was in
attendance. During the question-and-answer period following my talk, he
asked, "Why did you fall into line so easily in Auschwitz? Why didn't
you rebel?" His voice rose as he spoke. I started to explain that if I'd
tried to fight a guard, I would have been shot right away. Rebellion
wouldn't have freed me. I'd have missed out on the rest of my life. But
then I realized I was reacting to his agitation by trying to defend my
choices in the past. What about the present moment? Perhaps this was the
one opportunity I'd have in my life to offer this man compassion. "Thank
you so much for being here," I said. "Thank you for sharing your
experience."

When we live in the prison of judgment, we don't just victimize others.
We victimize ourselves.

Alex was on a journey toward self-compassion when we met. She showed me
the tattoo on her arm. [RAGE]{.smallcaps}, it said. And then below,
[LOVE]{.smallcaps}.

"That's how I grew up," she said. "My dad was rage. My mom was love."

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_158 .pagebreak aria-label="page 158"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Her father was a police officer who raised her and
her brother in a climate of *wipe that look off your face; don't be a
burden; show no emotion; act like you're fine; mistakes aren't allowed.*
He often came home charged up about work, and Alex learned early to
retreat to her room when his anger started to boil.

"I always thought it was my fault," she told me. "I didn't know what he
was so upset about. No one ever told me, 'This isn't about you. You
didn't do anything wrong.' I grew up thinking *I* was the one who made
him angry, that there was something wrong with me."

This sense of blame and judgment became so internalized that as an adult
she was afraid to ask a store clerk to retrieve an item from a high
shelf.

"I was sure they'd think, 'What an idiot.' "

Alcohol provided temporary relief from her inhibitions, worry, and fear.
Until she ended up in rehab.

When I spoke to Alex, she'd been sober for thirteen years and had
recently left the strenuous emergency dispatcher job she'd worked at for
more than twenty years, which was difficult to balance with the needs of
her disabled daughter. This is a new theme in her life: to respond to
herself with kindness.

And it's a goal she feels is thwarted every time she is with her family.
While her mom embodies warmth, safety, kindness, and love, serving as
the family peacekeeper, able to go with the flow, dropping everything to
be there for her kids and grandkids, making even a routine family dinner
feel as special as a holiday, Alex's dad is still angry and brooding.
She monitors him with a watchful eye, reading his behavior so she can
protect herself.

On a recent camping trip with her parents, she noticed all the negative
comments her dad made about other people.

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_159 .pagebreak aria-label="page 159"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"The people next door were packing up their
campsite and my dad said, 'This is my favorite part---when I watch the
idiots try to figure out what they're doing.' That's how I grew up. My
father watching and laughing when people make mistakes. No wonder I used
to assume people were thinking terrible things about me! No wonder I
used to watch him for any sign of a twitch or grimace---a clue to do
whatever I could to keep him from getting angry. He scared me my whole
life."

"The most obnoxious person is your best teacher," I told her. "He
teaches you what you don't like in him, to examine in yourself. So how
much time do you spend judging yourself? Scaring yourself?"

We looked at the ways she shut *herself* down. The Spanish class she
wanted to take but didn't dare sign up for, the gym she was afraid to
join.

We're all victims of victims. How far back do you want to go, searching
for the source? It's better to start with yourself.

A few months later, Alex shared that she'd worked up the courage and
self-acceptance to register for the Spanish class and join the gym.
"I've been welcomed with open arms," she said. "They've even recruited
me to compete with the women's powerlifting team."

When we relinquish our inner Nazi, we disarm the internal and external
forces that have been holding us back.

"Half of you is your father," I told Alex. "Throw white light his way.
Wrap him up in white light."

It's what I learned in Auschwitz. If I tried to fight the guards, I'd be
shot. If I tried to flee, I'd run into the barbed wire and be
electrocuted. So I turned my hatred into pity. I chose to feel sorry for
the guards. They'd been brainwashed. They'd had their innocence
[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_160 .pagebreak aria-label="page 160"
role="doc-pagebreak"}stolen. They came to Auschwitz to throw children
into a gas chamber, thinking they were ridding the world from a cancer.
They'd lost their freedom. I still had mine.

A few months after our visit to Lausanne, Audrey returned to the
International Institute of Management Development to give a workshop
with Andreas at the High Performance Leadership program.

"We grew up on opposite sides of the transmission line of secrets and
horror," Andreas said. Now they're collaborating to help today's
business leaders focus on inner healing---to face the past and chart the
course toward a better reality.

Among their students are Europeans, primarily from Germany and
neighboring countries, who are in their thirties, forties, and
fifties---a generation or two removed from WWII, curious about what
happened in their families during the war. Other students are from
places in Africa and southeastern Europe that have been ravaged by
violence, who are figuring out how to face and release the tragedies
their families have experienced---or inflicted. This workshop on inner
healing, led by the daughter of a survivor and the grandson of a Nazi,
is such a beautiful example of not only *how* to heal but *why*. For
ourselves, and also for what our healing gives the world. For the new
legacy we pass on.

"I used to participate in the silence about the past," Audrey said. "I
was afraid of the pain." But she realized that in avoiding learning more
she was holding on to grief. "Now I'd rather be curious," she said. "And
I want to help."

Andreas agreed.

[]{#ch10.xhtml_page_161 .pagebreak aria-label="page 161"
role="doc-pagebreak"}"It finally became clear to me why I invested so
much time in the past," he said. "I think my ancestors would want
corrective action to happen, insofar as it's possible. Realizing this,
I'm much more at peace with them. I can stop questioning why they did
what they did. I can focus on what I do now to contribute to peace."

We're born to love; we learn to hate. It's up to us what we reach for.

[]{#ch10a.xhtml}

### []{#ch10a.xhtml_page_162 .pagebreak aria-label="page 162" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM JUDGMENT {.h3}

- ***Our best teachers.*** *The most toxic, obnoxious people in our
  lives can be our best teachers. The next time you're in the presence
  of someone who irks or offends you, soften your eyes and tell
  yourself, "Human, no more, no less. Human, like me." Then ask, "What
  are you here to teach me?"*
- ***We're born to love; we learn to hate.*** *Make a list of the
  messages you heard growing up that divided people into categories:
  us/them; good/bad; right/wrong. Circle any of these messages that
  describe how you see the world today. Notice where you may be holding
  on to judgment. How is this judgment affecting your relationships? Is
  it limiting your choices or ability to take risks?*
- ***What's the legacy you want to pass on?*** *We can't choose what our
  ancestors did, or what was done to them. But we get to create the
  recipe that's handed down. Write a recipe for a life well-lived. Take
  the good things from your family's past and add your own ingredients.
  Give the next generation something delicious and nourishing to build
  on.*

[]{#ch11.xhtml}

# []{#ch11.xhtml_page_163 .pagebreak aria-label="page 163" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 11 [IF I SURVIVE TODAY, TOMORROW I WILL BE FREE]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Hopelessness {.h2c}

In Auschwitz, I was haunted by a persistent thought: does anyone know
Magda and I are here?

Any answer pointed to hopelessness. If people knew and didn't intervene,
then what was the value of my life? And if no one knew, how would we
ever get out?

When hopelessness overwhelmed me, I'd think of what my mother had told
me in the dark, crowded cattle car on our way to prison: "We don't know
where we're going. We don't know what's going to happen. Just remember,
no one can take away what you've put in your mind."

During the long, terrible days and nights in prison, I'd choose what to
hold in my mind. I'd think of my boyfriend, Eric, how our romance
kindled at a time of war, how we'd go picnicking by the river, eating my
mother's delicious fried chicken and potato salad, planning our future.
I'd think of dancing with him in the []{#ch11.xhtml_page_164 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 164" role="doc-pagebreak"}dress my father had made just
before we were forced out of our home---how I tested the dress to make
sure I could dance in it, to make sure the skirt twirled, how Eric's
hands rested against the thin suede belt at my waist. I'd think of the
last words he said to me as he watched my transport leave the brick
factory: "I'll never forget your eyes. I'll never forget your hands."
And I'd picture our reunion, how we would melt into each other's arms
with joy and relief. These thoughts were like a candle I held through
the very darkest hours and months. It's not that daydreaming about Eric
erased the horror. It didn't bring back my parents or ease the pain of
their deaths---or the looming threat of my own. But thinking of him
helped me see past where I was, to envision a tomorrow that included my
beloved, to keep starvation and torture in perspective. I was living
through hell on earth---and it was temporary. If it was temporary, it
could be survived.

Hope really is a matter of life and death. I knew a young woman in
Auschwitz who became certain that the camp would be liberated by
Christmas. She'd seen the new arrivals dwindle, heard rumors that the
Germans were facing major military losses, and convinced herself that it
was only a matter of weeks before we'd be free. But then Christmas came
and went. No one arrived to liberate the camp. The day after Christmas
my friend was dead. Hope had kept her going. When her hope died, she
did, too.

I was reminded of this more than seventy years later, in a hospital in
La Jolla, a few months after the release of my first book, *The Choice*.
For decades, it had been my dream to finally put my story of healing on
the page, to encourage as many people as []{#ch11.xhtml_page_165
.pagebreak aria-label="page 165" role="doc-pagebreak"}possible all over
the world to embark on and continue the journey toward freedom. Lots of
amazing and affirming things were happening---every day I received
moving letters from readers, invitations to speak at conferences and
special events and interviews with international media.

One exciting day, Deepak Chopra invited me to participate in a Facebook
Live event he would be hosting at the Chopra Center in Carlsbad. I was
thrilled. And because physical maintenance takes time at my age, I
immediately went to work. I scheduled hair and makeup appointments so
I'd look and feel my best; I pressed my favorite designer suit; and I
tried to ignore the painful flares I kept feeling in my stomach, burning
cramps that cried out for attention, like the jabs of hunger I'd
experienced in Auschwitz. "Leave me alone," I told my tummy as I fixed
my makeup. "I'm busy right now!"

I got up early the morning of the event and dressed carefully. As I
adjusted my suit jacket in the mirror, I imagined my father watching me.
"Look at me now!" I told him, smiling.

But when a friend came to pick me up to drive me to the Chopra Center,
she found me hunched over, trying to ride another wave of terrible
cramps. "I'm not taking you to the event," she said. "I'm taking you to
the hospital."

I wouldn't hear of it. "It took me two days to get ready!" I said
through gritted teeth. "I'm going to the Chopra Center." She drove there
as fast as she could, and when we arrived, I hurried in, barely managing
to greet Deepak and his wife before falling to my knees in the bathroom.
I clutched the edge of the bowl, terrified I'd embarrass myself by
making a mess on the floor, and then passed out from the pain. The next
thing I knew, Deepak was holding my arms, guiding me back into the car,
and I went []{#ch11.xhtml_page_166 .pagebreak aria-label="page 166"
role="doc-pagebreak"}straight to the hospital, where the doctors found
that a part of my small intestine was twisted and needed to be resected.
I would need surgery immediately. "If you'd waited an hour longer," the
surgeon said, "you'd be dead."

When I woke up from the operation hours later, groggy and numb, the
nurses told me I was the most elegant patient they'd ever seen coming
out of the operating room. Apparently, my makeup was still perfect.

I didn't feel elegant. I felt like a helpless infant---delirious with
medications, unable to make sense of my surroundings, and unable to move
without assistance. I had to push a button for someone to take me to the
bathroom and then would wait in fear that a nurse or medical assistant
wouldn't arrive in time. I didn't feel fully human. I felt reduced to a
collection of basic needs---hunger, thirst, elimination---and was
incapable of meeting them myself.

Worst of all, I was intubated and couldn't speak. To be helpless *and*
voiceless brought back too many horrible memories. I grabbed at the
tube, tried to pull it out. The nurses were worried I'd suffocate myself
and tied my hands down. Now I was truly terrified. My automatic physical
reactions---PTSD symptoms---brought on by the trauma of my past meant
that I couldn't stand being confined. Tight spaces, anything holding me
down sent me into panic. My heart raced dangerously fast, contracting
before it could fill with blood. Tied down and mute in the hospital, I
felt that to continue living was too steep a feat.

My three beautiful children---Marianne, Audrey, and John---had been by
my side since the surgery and tirelessly advocating on my behalf,
ensuring my medications were adjusted to keep me as lucid as possible,
rubbing my favorite Chanel lotion into []{#ch11.xhtml_page_167
.pagebreak aria-label="page 167" role="doc-pagebreak"}my parched skin.
My grandchildren visited. Rachel and Audrey brought me a soft robe. They
were all taking such good care of me, doing all they could to offer
dignity and comfort. But I was hooked up to so many machines. Would I
ever be able to function again without them? I didn't want to be kept
breathing if I couldn't fully live. Once my hands were free, I gestured
for Marianne to bring me a piece of paper and a pen. *I want to
die---happy*, I scrawled.

They reassured me that they'd let me go when it was time, and Marianne
pocketed my note. They didn't seem to understand that I was ready to go
*now*. Later that day Dr. McCaul, my lung doctor, came through on his
rounds and said I was looking good. He'd take the tube out the next day,
he promised. My children smiled and kissed me. "See, Mom," they said.
"You're going to be fine." As the long hours of the afternoon ticked by,
and all my monitors and support machines beeped and clicked around me, I
tried to convince myself. *It's temporary*, I told myself. *I can
survive this*. I dozed and woke up more times than I can count, and then
passed a restless, endless night staring out the little square window of
the hospital room, sleeping and waking again. The sun rose. I'd made it
after all. The tube would come out that day.

*It's temporary*, I repeated, waiting for Dr. McCaul to come and remove
the tube. *It's temporary*. But when the doctor arrived, he paused,
double-checked his notes, and then sighed. "I think we need to give it
another day."

I wasn't able to speak to tell him that I didn't have another day in me.
Not understanding how close I was to giving up, he gave me a reassuring
smile and went about his rounds.

I woke up deep in the middle of that night. My whole body was curled
inward, shutting out the world. I wondered if this was
[]{#ch11.xhtml_page_168 .pagebreak aria-label="page 168"
role="doc-pagebreak"}what it felt like to finally let go. Then I heard
an inner voice: "You did it in Auschwitz. You can do it again now." I
had a choice. I could give in and give up. Or I could choose hope. A new
feeling washed through my body. I felt three generations---my children,
grandchildren, and great-grandchildren---gathering to buoy me up. I
thought of Marianne jumping for joy when she visited me in the hospital
after Audrey was born, shouting, "I got my sister! I got my sister!"
John, whose childhood difficulties taught me that no matter what
happens, we never give up. Lindsey's glowing face when she became a mom.
My great-grandson Hale's sweet voice calling me Gi-Gi Baby. David as a
toddler lifting up his shirt so I could kiss his belly button, crying,
"Do me! Do me!" Jordan as a teenager acting tough with his friends, then
asking for warm milk and honey at bedtime. Rachel's beautiful eyes
gazing at me just that morning as she massaged my feet. I had to live,
because I never wanted to stop looking into those eyes! I felt the gift
of all of them, the gift of life. The pain and fatigue weren't gone, but
my limbs and heart felt alive, thrumming with the call of possibility
and purpose, with the realization that I wasn't done helping others,
that there was more here on this planet that I wanted to do.

When it's our time, it's our time. We can't choose when we die. But I no
longer wanted to. I wanted to live.

The next day, the doctor came back, the tube came out, and Audrey helped
me walk down the hall, pulling all the medication drips and machines
along with us. Nurses lined the hallway, cheering me on, clapping,
amazed to see me out of bed, determined to walk no matter how much
equipment I had to drag with me. Within a week, I was home. When I was
strapped in the hospital bed and chose hope, I didn't know that in a
year I'd get []{#ch11.xhtml_page_169 .pagebreak aria-label="page 169"
role="doc-pagebreak"}an email from Oprah saying that she'd read my book
and wanted to interview me on *SuperSoul Sunday*.

We never know what's ahead. Hope isn't the white paint we use to mask
our suffering. It's an investment in curiosity. A recognition that if we
give up now, we'll never get to see what happens next.

I thought nothing in my life would surpass the happiness I felt when I
found out I was pregnant with my first child. My doctor cautioned me
against continuing the pregnancy, afraid I wasn't physically strong
enough to grow a healthy baby or endure childbirth, but I skipped
through the streets after the appointment, barely able to contain my joy
that after so much suffering and senseless death I would carry life into
the world. I celebrated by eating as much rye bread and raw potato
spaetzle as I could hold. I grinned at my reflection in shop windows. I
put on fifty pounds.

In the decades since Marianne's birth, there's much I've gained and lost
and almost lost. All of it has taught me how much I have, and how to
celebrate each precious moment, without waiting for someone else's
permission or approval. I am reminded again and again: to choose hope is
to choose life.

Hope does not guarantee anything about what will happen in the future.
The scoliosis I've had since the war has stayed with me. It affects my
lung, pushing it closer and closer to my heart. I don't know if I'll
have a heart attack, or when I might wake up unable to breathe.

But choosing hope affects what gets my attention every day. I can think
young. I can choose what I do to fill my day with passion---to dance and
do the high kick as long as I'm able; to []{#ch11.xhtml_page_170
.pagebreak aria-label="page 170" role="doc-pagebreak"}reread books that
are meaningful to me, and go to movies and the opera and theater; to
savor good food and high fashion; to spend time with people who are kind
and have integrity; to remember that loss and trauma don't mean you have
to stop living fully.

"You've seen firsthand the greatest evils of the world," people say.
"How can you hold hope when there's still genocide in the world, when
there's so much evidence to the contrary?"

To ask how hope is possible in the face of dire realities is to confuse
hope with idealism. Idealism is when you expect that everything in life
is going to be fair or good or easy. It's a defense mechanism, just like
denial or delusion.

Honey, don't cover garlic with chocolate. It doesn't taste good.
Likewise, there's no freedom in denying reality, or trying to cloak it
in something sweet. Hope isn't a distraction from darkness. It's a
confrontation *with* darkness.

Shortly after I began writing this book, I happened upon a TV interview
with Ben Ferencz, who at ninety-nine years old is the last living person
to have prosecuted Nazis at Nuremberg, essentially the biggest murder
trial the world has ever known.

Ferencz was only twenty-seven at the time. The son of Jewish Romanian
immigrant parents, he served in the US Army during World War II,
fighting in the Normandy invasion and the Battle of the Bulge. Then, as
the concentration camps were being liberated, he was sent in to gather
evidence. Traumatized by what he saw, he vowed never to return to
Germany.

He went home to New York and was just preparing to begin practicing law
when he was recruited to go to Berlin to investigate
[]{#ch11.xhtml_page_171 .pagebreak aria-label="page 171"
role="doc-pagebreak"}Nazi offices and archives for evidence to aid the
prosecution of the Nuremberg war crimes trials. As he catalogued Nazi
documents, he discovered reports written by the Einsatzgruppen, SS units
deployed as killing squads. The reports listed numbers of men, women,
and children shot in cold blood in towns and villages all over
Nazi-occupied Europe. Ferencz added up the number of dead: more than one
million, slaughtered at home, buried in mass graves.

"Seventy-one years later," Ferencz said, "and I'm still churning."

This is where hope comes in. If he'd clung to idealism, he would have
tried to forget the excruciating truth, or buried it in wishful
thinking---the war's over, the world is better now, it won't happen
again. If he'd lost himself to hopelessness, he would have said,
"Humanity is ugly. Nothing can be done." But Ferencz reached for hope.
He determined to do everything in his power to affirm the rule of law,
to deter similar crimes from ever being committed again, and was
appointed chief prosecutor for the United States in the Einsatzgruppen
case. He was only twenty-seven. It was his first trial.

He's been alive for close to a century, and he continues to advocate for
peace and social justice.

"It takes courage not to be discouraged," he said. But never give up, he
reminds us. There's progress and change all around us---and nothing new
ever happened before.

I remembered his words when I spoke recently in Rancho Santa Fe, a
formerly segregated community north of San Diego where, not that long
ago, Jews weren't allowed to live. Now the community is celebrating the
fifteenth anniversary of welcoming Rancho Santa Fe's first Chabad rabbi.

If we decide something's hopeless or impossible, it will be. If
[]{#ch11.xhtml_page_172 .pagebreak aria-label="page 172"
role="doc-pagebreak"}we take action, who knows what we might manifest?
Hope is curiosity writ large. A willingness to cultivate within yourself
whatever kindles light, and to shine that light into the darkest places.

Hope is the boldest act of imagination I know.

Seeds of despair abound.

I survived Auschwitz and Communist Europe and came to America, land of
the free, and discovered that the bathrooms and drinking fountains in
the factory where I worked in Baltimore were segregated. I'd fled hate
and prejudice, only to find more prejudice and hate.

A few months after I started working on this book, on the last day of
Passover, the Jewish holiday celebrating liberation, an armed man walked
into an Orthodox synagogue near San Diego, where I live, and opened
fire, killing one congregant. He said, "I'm just trying to defend my
nation from the Jewish people." A few months later, in a Walmart in El
Paso, Texas, my former home, another young white man shot and killed
twenty-two people in a murderous act of anti-immigrant,
white-supremacist hate. Did my parents die so the past could be
repeated?

I'll never forget the lurch in my gut when I finished a lecture for a
university class in El Paso many years ago, and the professor asked,
"How many of you know about Auschwitz?" There were at least two hundred
people in that auditorium. Only five students raised their hands.

Ignorance is the enemy of hope.

[]{#ch11.xhtml_page_173 .pagebreak aria-label="page 173"
role="doc-pagebreak"}And it's the *catalyst* for hope.

I had the privilege of meeting one of the survivors of the San Diego
synagogue shooting a few weeks before he started his first year of
college. Born in Israel, he had immigrated to the United States with his
family when he was nine. His parents weren't strongly religious, but he
and his father had recently started attending synagogue every Saturday,
a practice he found helpful "to think, reboot, refresh, sort of reflect
on what I did wrong and right during the week." The morning of the
shooting he was also trying to decide which college to attend, weighing
his options. While his father stayed in the sanctuary to hear the
reading of the Torah, he sat in the front foyer of the synagogue, his
favorite spot to pray and reflect. He was gazing out the window, when
out of the corner of his eye he saw a man enter the building, then the
tip of a gun, bullets flying, a woman falling to the ground. "Run!" he
told himself. He jumped up to flee, but the gunman noticed and ran after
him, yelling, "You'd better run, motherfucker!" He found an empty room,
dove under a desk, pressed himself to the wood. The gunman's footsteps
reached the doorway. My young friend held his breath. The footsteps
retreated. My friend didn't dare move. He was still pressed against the
desk, trying not to breathe, when his father found him. The gunman had
fled the building, his father reassured him. But he remained frozen
under the desk.

"I'm going to speak to you, survivor to survivor," I told him. "This
experience is always going to be with you." I told him the flashbacks
and panic usually don't go away. But what we call
[]{#ch11.xhtml_page_174 .pagebreak aria-label="page 174"
role="doc-pagebreak"}post-traumatic stress disorder is not a
disorder---it's a very normal reaction to loss, violence, and tragedy.
Though he'll never overcome what he witnessed that day, he can come to
terms with it. Even use it, as we can use everything in life, to fuel
our growth and purpose.

That's the hope I offer you.

You could have died, too, somehow. Perhaps there've been times when
you've wanted to. But you didn't. Hope is the conviction that you
survived all that you survived so that you can be a good role model. An
ambassador for freedom. A person who focuses not on what you've lost,
but on what's still here for you, on the work you're called to do.

There's always something to do.

My aunt Matilda, who lived to be one hundred, woke up every morning and
said, "It could be worse, and it could be better." That's how she
started each day. I'm ninety-two, and most days I wake up and feel some
kind of pain. That's reality. It's part of aging, part of living with
scoliosis and damaged lungs. The day I feel no pain is the day I'm dead.

Hope doesn't obscure or whitewash reality. Hope tells us that life is
full of darkness and suffering---and yet if we survive today, tomorrow
we'll be free.

[]{#ch11a.xhtml}

### []{#ch11a.xhtml_page_175 .pagebreak aria-label="page 175" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM HOPELESSNESS {.h3}

- ***Don't cover garlic with chocolate.*** *It's tempting to confuse
  hope with idealism, but idealism is just another form of denial, a way
  of evading a true confrontation with suffering. Resiliency and freedom
  don't come from pretending away our pain. Listen to the way you talk
  about a hard or hurtful situation.* It's okay. It's not that bad.
  Others have it so much worse. I don't have anything to complain about.
  Everything will work out in the end. No pain, no glory! *The next time
  you hear yourself using the language of minimization, delusion, or
  denial, try replacing the words with: "It hurts. And it's temporary."
  Remind yourself, "I've survived pain before."*
- ***It takes courage not to be discouraged.*** *There's progress and
  change all around us; nothing new ever happened before. Set a timer
  for ten minutes and make a list of as many things as you can think of
  that are better now than they were five years ago. Think on the global
  scale---human rights advances, technological innovations, new works of
  art. And think on the personal level---things you've made, achieved,
  or changed for the better. Let the work that still needs doing be a
  catalyst for hope, not despair.*
- ***Hope is an investment in curiosity.*** *Find a comfortable seat or
  lie down and close your eyes. Relax your body. Take a few centering
  breaths. Imagine yourself walking along a path or a road. You're on
  your way to meet your future []{#ch11a.xhtml_page_176 .pagebreak
  aria-label="page 176" role="doc-pagebreak"}self. Where are you
  walking? Along a bright city street? In a forest? Along a country
  lane? Notice your surroundings in vivid sensory detail---pay attention
  to sights, smells, sounds, tastes, and physical sensations. Now you're
  arriving at your future self's doorstep. Where does your future self
  live? In a skyscraper? Log cabin? House with a wide front porch? The
  door opens. Your future self greets you. What does your future self
  look like? What is he or she wearing? Embrace or shake hands. Then
  ask, "What is it you want me to know?"*

[]{#ch12.xhtml}

# []{#ch12.xhtml_page_177 .pagebreak aria-label="page 177" role="doc-pagebreak"}Chapter 12 [THERE'S NO FORGIVENESS WITHOUT RAGE]{.heading_break} {.h1n}

## The Prison of Not Forgiving {.h2c}

People often ask how I can ever forgive the Nazis. I don't have the
godly power to anoint anyone with forgiveness, to spiritually cleanse
others for their wrongs.

But I have the power to free myself.

So do you.

Forgiveness isn't something we do for the person who's hurt us. It's
something we do for ourselves, so we're no longer victims or prisoners
of the past, so we can stop carrying a burden that harbors nothing but
pain.

Another misconception about forgiveness is that the way to make peace
with someone who has harmed us is to say, "I'm done with her."

It doesn't work that way. It's not about cutting someone out. It's about
letting go.

[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_178 .pagebreak aria-label="page 178"
role="doc-pagebreak"}As long as you say you can't forgive someone,
you're spending energy being *against* rather than being *for* yourself
and the life you deserve. To forgive isn't to give someone permission to
keep hurting you. It's not okay that you were harmed. But it's already
done. No one but you can heal the wound.

This kind of release doesn't come easily. It's not an overnight process.
And lots of things get in the way. A desire for justice, or revenge, an
apology, even just acknowledgment.

For years I maintained the fantasy of tracking down Josef Mengele in
Paraguay, where he fled after the war. I'd pose as a sympathizer, a
journalist, to gain access, and then I'd walk into his house and look
him in the face and say, "I'm the girl who danced for you in Auschwitz.
You murdered my mother." I wanted to see the look on his face, the truth
land in his eyes, no place to run. I wanted him to stand before his
wrongs, defenseless. I wanted to feel strong and triumphant because he
was weak. I wasn't after revenge, not exactly. Somehow I sensed that
making someone else hurt wasn't going to take away my pain. But for a
long time, this fantasy gave me such satisfaction. Except that it didn't
take away my rage and grief---it just deferred them.

It's easier to release the past when others see your truth, tell the
truth. When there's a collective process---restorative justice, war
crimes tribunals, truth and reconciliation committees---through which
perpetrators are accountable for the harm they inflicted and the court
of the world holds the truth to the light.

[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_179 .pagebreak aria-label="page 179"
role="doc-pagebreak"}But *your* life doesn't depend on what you get or
don't get from someone else. Your life is your own.

What I say next might surprise you.

There's no forgiveness without rage.

For many years I had tremendous problems with anger. I wouldn't
acknowledge it. It terrified me. I thought that I'd get lost in it. That
once it started, it was never going to end. That it would totally
consume me. But as I've said before, the opposite of depression is
expression. What comes out of our body doesn't make us ill. What stays
in there does. Forgiveness is release, and I couldn't let go until I
gave myself permission to feel and express my rage. I finally asked my
therapist to sit on me, to hold me down so I had a force to push
against, so I could release a primal scream.

Silent rage is self-destructive. If you're not actively, consciously,
intentionally releasing it, you're holding on to it. And that's not
going to do you any good.

Neither is venting anger. That's when you blow your top. It might feel
cathartic in the moment, but others foot the bill. And it can become
addictive. You're not really releasing anything. You're just
perpetuating a cycle---a harmful one.

The best thing to do with anger is to learn to channel it, and then
dissolve it.

It might sound simple enough. But if you've been taught to be
[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_180 .pagebreak aria-label="page 180"
role="doc-pagebreak"}a "good girl" or a "good boy," taught that anger is
unacceptable or frightening, if you've been hurt by someone else's rage,
it isn't easy to let yourself feel---much less express---your anger.

When Lena's husband suddenly told her with no explanation, no
discussion, that he wanted a divorce, she was shocked by loss. A year
later, she's coping admirably, staying on top of work, supporting and
loving her three kids, even beginning to date again, sporting a chic
haircut and bold earrings. Yet she feels stuck on the inside, unable to
move past the feeling that she's been cheated by life.

"I lost something I didn't want to lose," she said. "I wasn't given a
choice." She went through feelings of deep sadness, grief, and guilt.
She summoned strength and energy she didn't know she had to support her
children, proceed with the pragmatic matters of the divorce. But through
it all, she couldn't feel any anger. She'd witnessed a favorite aunt go
through a similarly rattling divorce many years earlier, had watched her
aunt recede from the world, holding her breath for decades, waiting for
her ex-husband to realize he'd made a mistake and beg to come back.
She'd died of cancer, still waiting for her husband to return. Haunted
by her aunt's sorrow, Lena took herself for a walk in the woods one day,
wanting to release the rage she knew must be lurking within, even if she
couldn't feel it. She followed a trail deep into the forest, and stood
among the trees, all alone, prepared to let herself scream as loudly as
she could. But the scream wouldn't come. She was blocked. The more she
tried to embrace her anger, the more numb she felt.

"How can I feel and express my anger?" she asked me. "I'm so scared of
feeling it. I don't want to feel it."

"First, legitimize it," I told her.

[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_181 .pagebreak aria-label="page 181"
role="doc-pagebreak"}You have a right to feel rage. It's a human
emotion. You are human.

When we can't release anger, we're either denying that we were
victimized, or denying that we're human. (That's how a perfectionist
suffers. Silently!) Either way, we're denying reality. Making ourselves
numb, pretending to be fine.

This doesn't set you free.

Scream and pound your fists into a pillow. Go to a beach or mountaintop
alone and yell into the wind. Grab a giant stick, smash and beat the
ground. We sing alone in the car. Why not scream alone? Roll up all the
windows, take a giant breath, and when you exhale, give it voice, let it
crescendo into the world's longest and loudest scream. When a patient
comes to see me, looking rigid or masked, I say, "I feel like screaming
today. Shall we scream?" And we do it together. If you're afraid to
scream alone, find a friend or therapist to scream with you. It's such a
release! And it's so profound, even exhilarating, to hear your own
unadulterated voice, charged with feeling, expressing its most difficult
truth. To hear yourself unmasked. To stand up, claim your space, say, "I
was victimized, but I'm not a victim. I am me."

Anger is a secondary emotion, a defense, armor we put up around the
primary feeling underneath. We burn through anger so we can get to
what's underneath: fear or grief.

Only then can we begin the hardest work of all.

Forgiving ourselves.

One Friday afternoon in August, shortly after I'd started drafting
chapters for this book, I came home to find a man at my front door.
[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_182 .pagebreak aria-label="page 182"
role="doc-pagebreak"}He was dressed in khakis and a polo shirt, an
official-looking ID badge clipped to his chest.

"I'm here from the water company," he said. "I have to check your water
for contamination."

I let him inside, brought him to the kitchen. He turned the water on,
checked the faucets in the bathrooms, and then told me, "I need to call
in my supervisor, we could have a problem with metals." He used his cell
phone to bring in a colleague for support.

A man wearing the same outfit and badge arrived, they tried all the
faucets again, and then told me I'd need to remove anything on my body
that was metal. Watches, belts, jewelry. I took off my necklace and
bracelet. The rings were more difficult. Because of my arthritis, my
rings have been modified with little pins so I can unclasp them,
otherwise I'd never be able to slide them over my swollen joints. But
arthritis also makes it difficult to pull the pins. I asked the men to
help me.

They tested the faucets again and performed some kind of treatment on
the water. Go to the bathroom sink, they told me, and run the water
until it turns blue. I walked down the hall, turned the water on,
watched it flow, waited and waited. Then I knew. I hurried back to the
kitchen, but they were already gone---along with my necklace and
bracelet and rings.

The police said I'd been the latest target of a well-known elder abuse
scheme. I felt so foolish and gullible to have been taken in by the
ruse. I cringed every time I thought of how stupid and trusting I'd
been. I let them in, I let them walk through my house, I handed them my
jewelry. I might as well have written them a check!

The police---and my children---see it differently. Thank
[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_183 .pagebreak aria-label="page 183"
role="doc-pagebreak"}goodness you obeyed, they say. They took things,
but they didn't hurt me. If I'd tried to resist, they could have tied me
up, or worse. Doing everything they asked without a fuss might have
saved my life.

This perspective is helpful. But it doesn't take the feelings away.

The loss of things I've valued and held dear---especially the bracelet,
the one Béla gave me to celebrate Marianne's birth, that I'd smuggled
out of Czechoslovakia by hiding it in her diaper. It's just an object,
yet it stands for something more, for life, motherhood, freedom---all
things worth celebrating and fighting for. My arm feels naked without
it.

Then there was fear. For days I had an obsessive feeling that they were
going to come back and kill me so I wouldn't talk.

Then there was the desire to chew out the criminals, to punish them,
diminish them. "Is this how your mother raised you to be?" I imagined
yelling. "Aren't you ashamed?"

And then there was *my* shame. *I* opened the door. I answered their
questions. I followed their commands, held out my hand so they could
unclasp my ring. I hated the version of me that I saw. Vulnerable.
Frail. Gullible.

But the only one putting those labels on me was me.

What I'm saying is that life keeps giving me opportunities to choose
freedom---to love myself as I am: human, imperfect, and whole. So I
forgave myself, releasing them so I can release me.

I have life to live and work to do and love to share. I don't have time
to hold on to the fear or anger or shame anymore, to give anything else
to two people who already stole something from me. I won't give them
another inch. I won't hand my power away.

[]{#ch12.xhtml_page_184 .pagebreak aria-label="page 184"
role="doc-pagebreak"}During my recent visit to Europe, Audrey and I went
to Amsterdam, where I spoke at the Anne Frank House, and then was
honored in the most spectacular way. Igone de Jongh, the prima ballerina
of the Dutch National Ballet, choreographed and performed a piece
inspired by my first night in Auschwitz when I danced for Mengele.

The performance was on May 4, 2019, the seventy-fourth anniversary of my
liberation at Gunskirchen, and a day of national remembrance in the
Netherlands. The whole country observes two minutes of silence in honor
of those who died in the camps and those who survived. When Audrey and I
arrived at the theater, we were welcomed like celebrities, applauded,
given flowers. People wept and embraced us. The king and queen were late
to the performance, and we were offered their seats.

The performance itself was one of the most exquisite and cherished
experiences of my life. I was completely overwhelmed by the strength,
grace, and passion of Igone de Jongh, by the depiction of beauty and
transcendence---in hell. Even more overwhelming was the portrayal of
Mengele. He was a hungry ghost, sad and empty, approaching and
approaching me, his prisoner, but never fulfilled, trapped by his need
for power and control.

The performers took their bows and the audience rose in thunderous
applause. Just as the clapping was beginning to die down, Igone de
Jongh, her arms full of flowers, came down from the stage and walked
directly to where Audrey and I were sitting. A spotlight beamed down on
us. The ballerina embraced me, []{#ch12.xhtml_page_185 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 185" role="doc-pagebreak"}tears in her eyes, and then
gave me her biggest bouquet. The theater exploded in emotion. I couldn't
see to walk when we left our seats, my eyes still too full of tears.

It took me so many years to work through my anger and grief, to release
Mengele and Hitler, to forgive myself for having survived. But in the
theater with my daughter, watching one of the darkest moments of my past
brought to life on the stage, I knew again what I realized that night in
the barracks---that while Mengele had all the power, while day after day
he chose with his grotesquely wagging finger who would live and who
would die, he was more a prisoner than I was.

I was innocent.

And free.

[]{#ch12a.xhtml}

### []{#ch12a.xhtml_page_186 .pagebreak aria-label="page 186" role="doc-pagebreak"}KEYS TO FREE YOURSELF FROM NOT FORGIVING {.h3}

- ***Am I ready to forgive?*** *Think of a person who has wronged or
  harmed you. Do any of these statements ring true?* What she did was
  unforgivable. He hasn't earned my forgiveness. I'm ready to give her
  the gift of my forgiveness. If I forgive, I'll let him off the hook.
  If I forgive, I'll give him permission to keep hurting me. I'll
  forgive once there's justice, or an apology or acknowledgment. *If you
  relate to one or more of these statements, you are likely spending
  energy being against someone, rather than* for *yourself and the life
  you deserve. Forgiveness isn't something you give someone else. It's
  how you release yourself.*
- ***Acknowledge and release rage.*** *Make a rage date with yourself.
  If the idea of being angry is too terrifying to face alone, ask a
  trusted friend or therapist to help you. Legitimize your anger, then
  choose a way to channel and then dissolve it. Scream and yell. Hit a
  punching bag. Bang the ground with a stick. Break plates on the patio.
  Get the rage moving, let it out so it doesn't fester and contaminate
  you. Don't stop until there's nothing left. In a day or a week, do it
  again.*
- ***Forgive yourself.*** *If I'm having trouble releasing someone who
  has hurt me, it may be that I'm holding on to guilt or shame or
  judgment toward myself. We're born innocent. Imagine you're holding a
  precious baby in your arms. Feel []{#ch12a.xhtml_page_187 .pagebreak
  aria-label="page 187" role="doc-pagebreak"}the warmth and trust of
  this tiny being. Gaze into the curious, wide-open eyes, at the little
  hands that reach as though to take in every detail of the whole,
  unfathomable, bountiful world. This baby is you. Say, "I'm here. I
  live for you."*

[]{#bm01.xhtml}

# []{#bm01.xhtml_page_188 .pagebreak aria-label="page 188" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#bm01.xhtml_page_189 .pagebreak aria-label="page 189" role="doc-pagebreak"}Conclusion [THE GIFT]{.heading_break} {.h1a}

We can't take away suffering, we can't change what happened---but we can
choose to find the gift in our lives. We can even learn to cherish the
wound.

There's a Hungarian adage that says you find the darkest shadow beneath
the candle. Our darkest and brightest places---our shadows and our
flames---are intertwined. My most terrifying night, the first one in
Auschwitz, taught me a vital lesson that has enhanced and empowered my
life ever since. The very worst circumstances gave me the opportunity to
discover the inner resources that helped me again and again to survive.
My years of introspection, of being alone and working hard as a ballet
student and gymnast, helped me survive hell; and hell taught me to keep
dancing for my life.

Life---even with its inevitable trauma, pain, grief, misery, and
death---is a gift. A gift we sabotage when we imprison ourselves in our
fears of punishment, failure, and abandonment; in our need for approval;
in shame and blame; in superiority []{#bm01.xhtml_page_190 .pagebreak
aria-label="page 190" role="doc-pagebreak"}and inferiority; in our need
for power and control. To celebrate the gift of life is to find the gift
in everything that happens, even the parts that are difficult, that
we're not sure we can survive. To celebrate life, period. To live with
joy, love, and passion.

Sometimes we think that if we move on from loss or trauma, if we have
fun and enjoy ourselves, if we continue to grow and evolve, that we're
somehow dishonoring the dead, or dishonoring the past. But it's okay to
laugh! It's okay to have joy! Even in Auschwitz we were celebrating in
our minds all the time, cooking feasts, arguing over how much caraway
you put in the best rye bread, how much paprika in Hungarian chicken
paprikash. We even held a boob contest one night! (Guess who won?)

I can't say that everything happens for a reason, that there's a purpose
in injustice or suffering. But I can say that pain, hardship, and
suffering are the gift that helps us grow and learn and become who we
are meant to be.

During the final days of the war, we were starving to death and
cannibalism broke out in the camp. I was immobile on the muddy ground,
hallucinating with hunger, praying for a way to keep living without
succumbing to eating human flesh. And a voice said, "There's grass to
eat." Even at death's door, I had a choice. I could choose which blade
of grass to eat.

I used to ask, "Why me?" But now I ask, "Why *not* me?" Perhaps I
survived so I can choose what to do with what happened, and how to be
here now. So I can show others how to choose life, so my parents and all
the innocents didn't die in vain. So I can turn all the lessons I
learned in hell into a gift I offer you now: the opportunity to decide
what kind of life you want to have, to []{#bm01.xhtml_page_191
.pagebreak aria-label="page 191" role="doc-pagebreak"}discover the
untapped potential lying in the shadows, to reveal and reclaim who you
really are.

Honey, may you also choose to give up the prison and do the work to be
free. To find in your suffering your own life lessons. To choose which
legacy the world inherits. To hand down the pain---or to pass on the
gift.

[]{#ack.xhtml}

::: {.section .acknowledgments role="doc-acknowledgments"}
# []{#ack.xhtml_page_192 .pagebreak aria-label="page 192" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#ack.xhtml_page_193 .pagebreak aria-label="page 193" role="doc-pagebreak"}ACKNOWLEDGMENTS {.h1bm}

People don't come to me, I always say. They're sent to me.

I've been blessed by the contributions of countless wonderful people
who've been sent to me. It's impossible to name every person who has
moved, inspired, and taken care of me, thus contributing directly or
indirectly to the creation of this book. To all of you who have touched
my life, had faith in me, guided me not to give up---I celebrate your
one-of-a-kind gifts and cherish your presence in my life. Thank you for
replenishing my basket, helping me face the unknown, cope with the
unanticipated and unexpected, and take responsibility for my life and my
freedom.

To my patients, who inspire me never to retire, thank you for the ways
you question me and teach me to be a good guide. And to the many people
around the globe who have found meaning in my work, and especially to
those who have told me their stories, thank you for moving me to share
these lessons so that we all may greet each day full of passion for
life---so that we all may be free.

To my teachers and mentors and all who have supported me to become a
member of the healing arts profession, and to those who continue the
work of guiding others, thank you for the []{#ack.xhtml_page_194
.pagebreak aria-label="page 194" role="doc-pagebreak"}ways you lead by
example---taking care of yourselves while also moving beyond the "me,"
contributing to make a better world, living the teaching that change is
synonymous with growth. Special recognition to Jakob van Wielink and his
colleagues for being my guides and guardians in the Netherlands and
Switzerland, making the trip possible, connecting me to people I was
meant to know, and carrying me to places where I was celebrated and
moved beyond words. May we all use every moment in our lives to empower
each other with our differences and form a human family.

Thank you to the people who support me in my daily life---in particular,
Dr. Scott McCaul and Dr. Sabina Wallach, who have never doubted my
strength to endure; Gene Cook, my dance partner, who lives with utmost
kindness; and Katie Anderson, my right-hand woman, who keeps me on top
of everything, supports me in tackling anything, and models how to be a
take-charge person. Thank you all for looking after my body, mind, and
spirit, always keeping my best interests at heart, and reminding me
every day that self-love is self-care.

Writing my first book was a dream come true. Publishing a second book is
beyond what I ever thought possible. I couldn't have done any of it
without my extraordinary team: my friend and cheerleader Wendy Walker,
an inspirational role model of how to be a true survivor and live in the
present; my insightful editors, Roz Lippel and Nan Graham, and their
wonderful colleagues at Scribner; Jordan and Illynger Engle for the work
they do sharing my message through social media; my agent, Doug Abrams,
and his dream factory at Idea Architects; and my cowriter, Esmé Schwall
Weigand, who takes my words and turns them into poetry.

[]{#ack.xhtml_page_195 .pagebreak aria-label="page 195"
role="doc-pagebreak"}To my daughters, Marianne and Audrey, the most
powerful sisters who practice the art of agreeing to disagree, thank you
for all you've taught me about choosing not to be a victim or a rescuer.
And thank you for the dynamic and sensitive contributions you've made to
this book, helping distill the theoretical and practical dimensions of
my work. To my son, John, thank you for the courage you demonstrate
every day in the way you commit yourself to others.

To the generations that come after me, and the ancestors who came
before, thank you for showing me that we carry the blood of survivors.
That we can always live free, never a victim of anyone or anything.
:::

[]{#SS_recommendpage.xhtml}

:::: buylink_container
::: {#SS_recommendpage.xhtml_author_box .breaktype}
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| More from the Author                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| [![Cover                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |            |
| image](e9781982143114/images/buylink_9781501130816_cover.jpg){.cvr_img}](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Choice/Edith-Eva-Eger/9781501130816?mcd=ebookrec_auto&utm_campaign=ebookrec_auto "Click to buy The Choice"){#SS_recommendpage.xhtml_imagelink_9781501130816} |            |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------+
| [The Choice](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Choice/Edith-Eva-Eger/9781501130816?mcd=ebookrec_auto&utm_campaign=ebookrec_auto "Click to buy the book"){#SS_recommendpage.xhtml_titlelink_9781501130816}                                                               |            |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------+
:::
::::

[]{#SS_teaser_intro_9781501130816.xhtml}

Keep reading for a preview of

*The Choice*

::: teaser_intro_group
![The Choice
Cover](teaser_9781501130816/image/cover_9781501130816.jpg){.portrait_40
role="presentation"}
:::

by

Edith E Eger

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml}

## []{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_11}CHAPTER 1 {.h2a}

## The Four Questions {.h2b}

If I could distill my entire life into one moment, into one still image,
it is this: three women in dark wool coats wait, arms linked, in a
barren yard. They are exhausted. They've got dust on their shoes. They
stand in a long line.

The three women are my mother, my sister Magda, and me. This is our last
moment together. We don't know that. We refuse to consider it. Or we are
too weary even to speculate about what is ahead. It is a moment of
severing---mother from daughters, life as it has been from all that will
come after. And yet only hindsight can give it this meaning.

I see the three of us from behind, as though I am next in line. Why does
memory give me the back of my mother's head but not her face? Her long
hair is intricately braided and clipped on top of her head. Magda's
light brown waves touch her shoulders. My dark hair is tucked under a
scarf. My mother stands in the middle and Magda and I both lean inward.
It is impossible to discern if we are the ones who keep our mother
upright, or if it is the other way around, her strength the pillar that
supports Magda and me.

This moment is a threshold into the major losses of my life. For seven
decades I have returned again and again to this image of the three of
us. I have studied it as though with enough scrutiny I can recover
something precious. As though I can regain the life that precedes this
moment, the life that precedes loss. As if there is such a thing.

I have returned so that I can rest a little longer in this time when our
arms are joined and we belong to one another. I see our sloped
shoulders. The dust holding to the bottoms of our coats. My mother. My
sister. Me.

\*  \*  \*

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_12}Our childhood memories are
often fragments, brief moments or encounters, which together form the
scrapbook of our life. They are all we have left to understand the story
we have come to tell ourselves about who we are.

Even before the moment of our separation, my most intimate memory of my
mother, though I treasure it, is full of sorrow and loss. We're alone in
the kitchen, where she is wrapping up the leftover strudel that she made
with dough I watched her cut by hand and drape like heavy linen over the
dining room table. "Read to me," she says, and I fetch the worn copy of
[Gone with the Wind]{.txit} from her bedside table. We have read it
through once before. Now we have begun again. I pause over the
mysterious inscription, written in English, on the title page of the
translated book. It's in a man's handwriting, but not my father's. All
that my mother will say is that the book was a gift from a man she met
when she worked at the Foreign Ministry before she knew my father.

We sit in straight-backed chairs near the woodstove. I read this
grown-up novel fluently despite the fact that I am only nine. "I'm glad
you have brains because you have no looks," she has told me more than
once, a compliment and a criticism intertwined. She can be hard on me.
But I savor this time. When we read together, I don't have to share her
with anyone else. I sink into the words and the story and the feeling of
being alone in a world with her. Scarlett returns to Tara at the end of
the war to learn her mother is dead and her father is far gone in grief.
"[As God is my witness]{.txit}," Scarlett says, "[I'm never going to be
hungry again]{.txit}." My mother has closed her eyes and leans her head
against the back of the chair. I want to climb into her lap. I want to
rest my head against her chest. I want her to touch her lips to my hair.

"Tara ..." she says. "America, now that would be a place to see." I wish
she would say my name with the same softness she reserves for a country
where she's never been. All the smells of my mother's kitchen are mixed
up for me with the drama of hunger and feast---always, even in the
feast, that longing. I don't know if the longing is hers or mine or
something we share.

We sit with the fire between us.

"When I was your age ..." she begins.

Now that she is talking, I am afraid to move, afraid she won't continue
if I do.

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_13}"When I was your age, the
babies slept together and my mother and I shared a bed. One morning I
woke up because my father was calling to me, 'Ilonka, wake up your
mother, she hasn't made breakfast yet or laid out my clothes.' I turned
to my mother next to me under the covers. But she wasn't moving. She was
dead."

She has never told me this before. I want to know every detail about
this moment when a daughter woke beside a mother she had already lost. I
also want to look away. It is too terrifying to think about.

"When they buried her that afternoon, I thought they had put her in the
ground alive. That night, Father told me to make the family supper. So
that's what I did."

I wait for the rest of the story. I wait for the lesson at the end, or
the reassurance.

"Bedtime," is all my mother says. She bends to sweep the ash under the
stove.

Footsteps thump down the hall outside our door. I can smell my father's
tobacco even before I hear the jangle of his keys.

"Ladies," he calls, "are you still awake?" He comes into the kitchen in
his shiny shoes and dapper suit, his big grin, a little sack in his hand
that he gives me with a loud kiss to the forehead. "I won again," he
boasts. Whenever he plays cards or billiards with his friends, he shares
the spoils with me. Tonight he's brought a petit four laced in pink
icing. If I were my sister Magda, my mother, always concerned about
Magda's weight, would snatch the treat away, but she nods at me, giving
me permission to eat it.

She is standing now, on her way from the fire to the sink. My father
intercepts her, lifts her hand so he can twirl her around the room,
which she does, stiffly, without a smile. He pulls her in for an
embrace, one hand on her back, one teasing at her breast. My mother
shrugs him away.

"I'm a disappointment to your mother," my father half whispers to me as
we leave the kitchen. Does he intend for her to overhear, or is this a
secret meant only for me? Either way, it is something I store away to
mull over later. Yet the bitterness in his voice scares me. "She wants
to go to the opera every night, live some fancy cosmopolitan life. I'm
just a tailor. A tailor and a billiards player."

My father's defeated tone confuses me. He is well known in our
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_14}town, and well liked.
Playful, smiling, he always seems comfortable and alive. He's fun to be
around. He goes out with his many friends. He loves food (especially the
ham he sometimes smuggles into our kosher household, eating it over the
newspaper it was wrapped in, pushing bites of forbidden pork into my
mouth, enduring my mother's accusations that he is a poor role model).
His tailor shop has won two gold medals. He isn't just a maker of even
seams and straight hems. He is a master of couture. That's how he met my
mother---she came into his shop because she needed a dress and his work
came so highly recommended. But he had wanted to be a doctor, not a
tailor, a dream his father had discouraged, and every once in a while
his disappointment in himself surfaces.

"You're not just a tailor, Papa," I reassure him. "You're the best
tailor!"

"And you're going to be the best-dressed lady in Košice," he tells me,
patting my head. "You have the perfect figure for couture."

He seems to have remembered himself. He's pushed his disappointment back
into the shadows. We reach the door to the bedroom I share with Magda
and our middle sister, Klara, where I can picture Magda pretending to do
homework and Klara wiping rosin dust off her violin. My father and I
stand in the doorway a moment longer, neither one of us quite ready to
break away.

"I wanted you to be a boy, you know," my father says. "I slammed the
door when you were born, I was that mad at having another girl. But now
you're the only one I can talk to." He kisses my forehead.

I love my father's attention. Like my mother's, it is precious ... and
precarious. As though my worthiness of their love has less to do with me
and more to do with their loneliness. As though my identity isn't about
anything that I am or have and only a measure of what each of my parents
is missing.

"Good night, Dicuka," my father says at last. He uses the pet name my
mother invented for me. Ditzu-ka. These nonsense syllables are warmth to
me. "Tell your sisters it's time for lights out."

As I come into the bedroom, Magda and Klara greet me with the song they
have invented for me. They made it up when I was three and one of my
eyes became crossed in a botched medical procedure. "You're so ugly,
you're so puny," they sing. "You'll never find a husband." Since the
accident I turn my head toward the ground when I
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_15}walk so that I don't have to
see anyone looking at my lopsided face. I haven't yet learned that the
problem isn't that my sisters taunt me with a mean song; the problem is
that I believe them. I am so convinced of my inferiority that I never
introduce myself by name. I never tell people, "I am Edie." Klara is a
violin prodigy. She mastered the Mendelssohn violin concerto when she
was five. "I am Klara's sister," I say.

But tonight I have special knowledge. "Mama's mom died when she was
exactly my age," I tell them. I am so certain of the privileged nature
of this information that it doesn't occur to me that for my sisters this
is old news, that I am the last and not the first to know.

"You're kidding," Magda says, her voice full of sarcasm so obvious that
even I can recognize it. She is fifteen, busty, with sensual lips, wavy
hair. She is the jokester in our family. When we were younger, she
showed me how to drop grapes out of our bedroom window into the coffee
cups of the patrons sitting on the patio below. Inspired by her, I will
soon invent my own games; but by then, the stakes will have changed. My
girlfriend and I will sashay up to boys at school or on the street.
"Meet me at four o'clock by the clock on the square," we will trill,
batting our eyelashes. They will come, they will always come, sometimes
giddy, sometimes shy, sometimes swaggering with expectation. From the
safety of my bedroom, my friend and I will stand at the window and watch
the boys arrive.

"Don't tease so much," Klara snaps at Magda now. She is younger than
Magda, but she jumps in to protect me. "You know that picture above the
piano?" she says to me. "The one that Mama's always talking to? That's
her mother." I know the picture she's talking about. I've looked at it
every day of my life. "Help me, help me," our mother moans up at the
portrait as she dusts the piano, sweeps the floor. I feel embarrassed
that I have never asked my mother---or anyone---who was in that picture.
And I'm disappointed that my information gives me no special status with
my sisters.

I am used to being the silent sister, the invisible one. It doesn't
occur to me that Magda might tire of being the clown, that Klara might
resent being the prodigy. She can't stop being extraordinary, not for a
second, or everything might be taken from her---the adoration she's
accustomed to, her very sense of self. Magda and I have to work at
getting something we are certain there will never be enough of; Klara
has to worry that at []{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_16}any
moment she might make a fatal mistake and lose it all. Klara has been
playing violin all my life, since she was three. It's not until much
later that I realize the cost of her extraordinary talent: she gave up
being a child. I never saw her play with dolls. Instead she stood in
front of an open window to practice violin, not able to enjoy her
creative genius unless she could summon an audience of passersby to
witness it.

"Does Mama love Papa?" I ask my sisters now. The distance between our
parents, the sad things they have each confessed to me, remind me that I
have never seen them dressed up to go out together.

"What a question," Klara says. Though she denies my concern, I think I
see a recognition in her eyes. We will never discuss it again, though I
will try. It will take me years to learn what my sisters must already
know, that what we call love is often something more conditional---the
reward for a performance, what you settle for.

As we put on our nightgowns and get into bed, I erase my worry for my
parents and think instead of my ballet master and his wife, of the
feeling I get when I take the steps up to the studio two or three at a
time and kick off my school clothes, pull on my leotard and tights. I
have been studying ballet since I was five years old, since my mother
intuited that I wasn't a musician, that I had other gifts. Just today we
practiced the splits. Our ballet master reminded us that strength and
flexibility are inseparable---for one muscle to flex, another must open;
to achieve length and limberness, we have to hold our cores strong.

I hold his instructions in my mind like a prayer. Down I go, spine
straight, abdominal muscles tight, legs stretching apart. I know to
breathe, especially when I feel stuck. I picture my body expanding like
the strings on my sister's violin, finding the exact place of tautness
that makes the whole instrument ring. And I am down. I am here. In the
full splits. "Brava!" My ballet master claps. "Stay right as you are."
He lifts me off the ground and over his head. It's hard to keep my legs
fully extended without the floor to push against, but for a moment I
feel like an offering. I feel like pure light. "Editke," my teacher
says, "all your ecstasy in life is going to come from the inside." It
will take me years to really understand what he means. For now all I
know is that I can breathe and spin and kick and bend. As my muscles
stretch and strengthen, every movement, every pose seems to call out: [I
am, I am, I am. I am me. I am somebody.]{.txit}

\*  \*  \*

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_17}Memory is sacred ground. But
it's haunted too. It's the place where my rage and guilt and grief go
circling like hungry birds scavenging the same old bones. It's the place
where I go searching for the answer to the unanswerable question: [Why
did I survive?]{.txit}

I am seven years old, and my parents are hosting a dinner party. They
send me out of the room to refill a pitcher of water. From the kitchen I
hear them joke, "We could have saved that one." I think they mean that
before I came along they were already a complete family. They had a
daughter who played piano and a daughter who played violin. I am
unnecessary, I am not good enough, there is no room for me, I think.
This is the way we misinterpret the facts of our lives, the way we
assume and don't check it out, the way we invent a story to tell
ourselves, reinforcing the very thing in us we already believe.

One day when I am eight, I decide to run away. I will test the theory
that I am dispensable, invisible. I will see if my parents even know
that I am gone. Instead of going to school, I take the trolley to my
grandparents' house. I trust my grandparents---my mother's father and
stepmother---to cover for me. They engage in a continuous war with my
mother on Magda's behalf, hiding cookies in my sister's dresser drawer.
They are safety to me, and yet they sanction the forbidden. They hold
hands, something my own parents never do. There's no performing for
their love, no pretending for their approval. They are comfort---the
smell of brisket and baked beans, of sweet bread, of [cholent]{.txit}, a
rich stew that my grandmother brings to the bakery to cook on Sabbath,
when Orthodox practice does not permit her to use her own oven.

My grandparents are happy to see me. It is a wonderful morning. I sit in
the kitchen, eating nut rolls. But then the doorbell rings. My
grandfather goes to answer it. A moment later he rushes into the
kitchen. He is hard of hearing, and he speaks his warning too loudly.
"Hide, Dicuka!" he yells. "Your mother's here!" In trying to protect me,
he gives me away.

What bothers me the most is the look on my mother's face when she sees
me in my grandparents' kitchen. It's not just that she is surprised to
see me here---it is as though the very fact of my existence has taken
her by surprise. As though I am not who she wants or expects me to be.

I won't ever be beautiful---this my mother has made clear---but the
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_18}year I turn ten she assures
me that I won't have to hide my face anymore. Dr. Klein, in Budapest,
will fix my crossed eye. On the train to Budapest I eat chocolate and
enjoy my mother's exclusive attention. Dr. Klein is a celebrity, my
mother says, the first to perform eye surgery without anesthetic. I am
too caught up in the romance of the journey, the privilege of having my
mother all to myself, to realize she is warning me. It has never
occurred to me that the surgery will hurt. Not until the pain consumes
me. My mother and her relatives, who have connected us to the celebrated
Dr. Klein, hold my thrashing body against the table. Worse than the
pain, which is huge and limitless, is the feeling of the people who love
me restraining me so that I cannot move. Only later, long after the
surgery has proved successful, can I see the scene from my mother's
point of view, how she must have suffered at my suffering.

I am happiest when I am alone, when I can retreat into my inner world.
One morning when I am thirteen, on the way to school, in a private
gymnasium, I practice the steps to the "Blue Danube" routine my ballet
class will perform at a festival on the river. Then invention takes
hold, and I am off and away in a new dance of my own, one in which I
imagine my parents meeting. I dance both of their parts. My father does
a slapstick double take when he sees my mother walk into the room. My
mother spins faster, leaps higher. I make my whole body arc into a
joyful laugh. I have never seen my mother rejoice, never heard her laugh
from the belly, but in my body I feel the untapped well of her
happiness.

When I get to school, the tuition money my father gave me to cover an
entire quarter of school is gone. Somehow, in the flurry of dancing, I
have lost it. I check every pocket and crease of my clothing, but it is
gone. All day the dread of telling my father burns like ice in my gut.
At home he can't look at me as he raises his fists. This is the first
time he has ever hit me, or any of us. He doesn't say a word to me when
he is done. In bed that night I wish to die so that my father will
suffer for what he did to me. And then I wish my father dead.

Do these memories give me an image of my strength? Or of my damage?
Maybe every childhood is the terrain on which we try to pinpoint how
much we matter and how much we don't, a map where we study the
dimensions and the borders of our worth.

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_19}Maybe every life is a study
of the things we don't have but wish we did, and the things we have but
wish we didn't.

It took me many decades to discover that I could come at my life with a
different question. Not: [Why did I live?]{.txit} But: [What is mine to
do with the life I've been given?]{.txit}

\*  \*  \*

My family's ordinary human dramas were complicated by borders, by wars.
Before World War I, the Slovakian region where I was born and raised was
part of Austro-Hungary, but in 1918, a decade before my birth, the
Treaty of Versailles redrew the map of Europe and created a new state.
Czechoslovakia was cobbled together from agrarian Slovakia, my family's
region, which was ethnically Hungarian and Slovak; the more industrial
regions of Moravia and Bohemia, which were ethnically Czech; and
Subcarpathian Rus', a region that is now part of Ukraine. With the
creation of Czechoslovakia, my hometown---Kassa, Hungary---became
Košice, Czechoslovakia. And my family became double minorities. We were
ethnic Hungarians living in a predominately Czech country, and we were
Jewish.

Though Jews had lived in Slovakia since the eleventh century, it wasn't
until 1840 that Jews were permitted to settle in Kassa. Even then, city
officials, backed by Christian trade guilds, made it difficult for
Jewish families who wanted to live there. Yet by the turn of the
century, Kassa had become one of Europe's largest Jewish communities.
Unlike in other Eastern European countries, such as Poland, Hungarian
Jews weren't ghettoized (which is why my family spoke Hungarian
exclusively and not Yiddish). We weren't segregated, and we enjoyed
plenty of educational, professional, and cultural opportunities. But we
still encountered prejudice, subtle and explicit. Anti-Semitism wasn't a
Nazi invention. Growing up, I internalized a sense of inferiority and
the belief that it was safer not to admit that I was Jewish, that it was
safer to assimilate, to blend in, to never stand out. It was difficult
to find a sense of identity and belonging. Then, in November 1938,
Hungary annexed Košice again, and it felt like home had become home.

My mother stands on our balcony at Andrássy Palace, an old building that
has been carved into single-family apartments. She has draped an
Oriental rug across the railing. She's not cleaning; she's celebrating.
Admiral Miklós Horthy, His Serene Highness the Regent of the
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_20}Kingdom of Hungary, arrives
today to formally welcome our town into Hungary. I understand my
parents' excitement and pride. We belong! Today I, too, welcome Horthy.
I perform a dance. I wear a Hungarian costume: bold floral embroidery on
a bright wool vest and skirt, billowing white-sleeved blouse, ribbons,
lace, red boots. When I do the high kick by the river, Horthy applauds.
He embraces the dancers. He embraces me.

"Dicuka, I wish we were blond like Klara," Magda whispers at bedtime.

We are still years away from curfews and discriminatory laws, but
Horthy's parade is the starting point of all that will come. Hungarian
citizenship has brought belonging in one sense but exclusion in another.
We are so happy to speak our native tongue, to be accepted as
Hungarians---but that acceptance depends on our assimilation. Neighbors
argue that only ethnic Hungarians [who are not Jewish]{.txit} should be
allowed to wear the traditional garments.

"It's best not to let on you're Jewish," my sister Magda warns me. "It
will just make other people want to take away your beautiful things."

Magda is the firstborn; she reports the world to me. She brings me
details, often troubling things, to study and ponder. In 1939, the year
that Nazi Germany invades Poland, the Hungarian Nazis---the
[nyilas]{.txit}---occupy the apartment below ours in Andrássy Palace.
They spit at Magda. They evict us. We move to a new apartment, at
Kossuth Lajos Utca #6, on a side street instead of the main road, less
convenient for my father's business. The apartment is available because
its former occupants, another Jewish family, have left for South
America. We know of other Jewish families leaving Hungary. My father's
sister Matilda has been gone for years already. She lives in New York,
in a place called the Bronx, in a Jewish immigrant neighborhood. Her
life in America seems more circumscribed than ours. We don't talk about
leaving.

Even in 1940, when I'm thirteen, and the [nyilas]{.txit} begin to round
up the Jewish men of Kassa and send them to a forced labor camp, the war
feels far away from us. My father isn't taken. Not at first. We use
denial as protection. If we don't pay attention, then we can continue
our lives unnoticed. We can make the world safe in our minds. We can
make ourselves invisible to harm.

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_21}But one day in June 1941,
Magda is out on her bicycle when the sirens roar. She dashes three
blocks to the safety of our grandparents' house, only to find half of it
gone. They survived, thank God. But their landlady didn't. It was a
singular attack, one neighborhood razed by one bombing. We're told the
Russians are responsible for the rubble and death. No one believes it,
and yet no one can refute it. We are lucky and vulnerable in the same
instant. The only solid truth is the pile of smashed brick in the spot
where a house used to be. Destruction and absence---these become facts.
Hungary joins Germany in Operation Barbarossa. We invade Russia.

Around this time we are made to wear the yellow star. The trick is to
hide the star, to let your coat cover it. But even with my star out of
sight, I feel like I have done something bad, something punishable. What
is my unpardonable sin? My mother is always near the radio. When we
picnic by the river, my father tells stories about being a prisoner of
war in Russia during World War I. I know that his POW experience---his
trauma, though I don't know to call it that---has something to do with
his eating pork, with his distance from religion. I know that war is at
the root of his distress. But the war, this war, is still elsewhere. I
can ignore it, and I do.

After school, I spend five hours at the ballet studio, and I begin to
study gymnastics too. Though it begins as a complementary practice to
the ballet, gymnastics soon grows to be an equal passion, an equal art.
I join a book club, a group made up of girls from my private gymnasium
and students from a nearby private boys' school. We read Stefan Zweig's
[Marie Antoinette: The Portrait of an Average Woman.]{.txit} We talk
about Zweig's way of writing about history from the inside, from the
mind of one person. In the book club, there's a boy named Eric, who
notices me one day. I see him looking closely at me every time I speak.
He's tall, with freckles and reddish hair. I imagine Versailles. I
imagine Marie Antoinette's boudoir. I imagine meeting Eric there. I know
nothing about sex, but I am romantic. I see him notice me, and I wonder,
[What would our children look like? Would they have freckles
too?]{.txit} Eric approaches me after the discussion. He smells so
good---like fresh air, like the grass on the banks of the Hornád River
where we will soon take walks.

Our relationship holds weight and substance from the start.
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_22}We talk about literature. We
talk about Palestine (he is a devoted Zionist). This isn't a time of
carefree dating, our bond isn't a casual crush, a puppy love. This is
love in the face of war. A curfew has been imposed on Jews, but we sneak
out one night without wearing our yellow stars. We stand in line at the
cinema. We find our seats in the dark. It's an American film, starring
Bette Davis. [Now, Voyager]{.txit}, I later learn, is its American name,
but in Hungary it's called [Utazás a múltból]{.txit}, Journey to the
Past. Bette Davis plays an unmarried daughter tyrannized by her
controlling mother. She tries to find herself and her freedom but is
constantly knocked down by her mother's criticisms. Eric sees it as a
political metaphor about self-determination and self-worth. I see shades
of my mother and Magda---my mother, who adores Eric but chastises Magda
for her casual dating; who begs me to eat more but refuses to fill
Magda's plate; who is often silent and introspective but rages at Magda;
whose anger, though it is never directed at me, terrifies me all the
same.

The battles in my family, the front with Russia closing in---we never
know what is coming next. In the darkness and chaos of uncertainty, Eric
and I provide our own light. Each day, as our freedom and choices become
more and more restricted, we plan our future. Our relationship is like a
bridge we can cross from present worries to future joys. Plans, passion,
promise. Maybe the turmoil around us gives us the opportunity for more
commitment, less questioning. No one else knows what will come to pass,
but we do. We have each other and the future, a life together we can see
as clearly as we can see our hands when we join them. We go to the river
one August day in 1943. He brings a camera and photographs me in my
bathing suit, doing the splits in the grass. I imagine showing our
children the picture one day. Telling them how we held our love and our
commitment bright.

When I come home that day, my father is gone. He has been taken to the
forced labor camp. He is a tailor, he is apolitical. How is he a threat
to anyone? Why has he been targeted? Does he have an enemy? There are
lots of things my mother won't tell me. Is it simply because she doesn't
know? Or is she protecting me? Or herself? She doesn't talk openly about
her worries, but in the long months that my father is away, I can feel
how sad and scared she is. I see her trying to make several meals out of
one chicken. She gets migraines. We take in a boarder
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_23}to make up for the loss of
income. He owns a store across the street from our apartment, and I sit
long hours in his store just to be near his comforting presence.

Magda, who is essentially an adult now, who is no longer in school,
finds out somehow where our father is and visits him. She watches him
stagger under the weight of a table he has to heft from place to place.
This is the only detail she tells me of her visit. I don't know what
this image means. I don't know what work it is that my father is forced
to do in his captivity, I don't know how long he will be a prisoner. I
have two images of my father: one, as I have known him my entire life,
cigarette hanging out of his mouth, tape measure around his neck, chalk
in his hand for marking a pattern onto expensive cloth, his eyes
twinkling, ready to burst into song, about to tell a joke. And this new
one: lifting a table that is too heavy, in a no-name place, a
no-man's-land.

On my sixteenth birthday, I stay home from school with a cold, and Eric
comes to our apartment to deliver sixteen roses and my first sweet kiss.
I am happy, but I am sad too. What can I hold on to? What lasts? I give
the picture Eric took of me on the riverbank to a friend. I can't
remember why. For safekeeping? I had no premonition that I would be gone
soon, well before my next birthday. Yet somehow I must have known that I
would need someone to preserve evidence of my life, that I would need to
plant proof of my self around me like seeds.

Sometime in early spring, after seven or eight months at the work camp,
my father returns. It is a grace---he has been released in time for
Passover, which is just a week or two away. That's what we think. He
takes up his tape measure and chalk again. He doesn't talk about where
he has been.

I sit on the blue mat in the gymnastics studio one day, a few weeks
after his return, warming up with a floor routine, pointing my toes,
flexing my feet, lengthening my legs and arms and neck and back. I feel
like myself again. I'm not the little cross-eyed runt afraid to speak
her name. I'm not the daughter afraid for her family. I am an artist and
an athlete, my body strong and limber. I don't have Magda's looks, or
Klara's fame, but I have my lithe and expressive body, the budding
existence of which is the only one true thing I need. My training, my
skill---my life brims with possibility. The best of us in my gymnastics
class have formed an Olympic training team. The 1944 Olympics have
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_24}been canceled due to the
war, but that just gives us more time to prepare to compete.

I close my eyes and stretch my arms and torso forward across my legs. My
friend nudges me with her toe and I lift my head to see our coach
walking straight toward me. We are half in love with her. It's not a
sexual crush. It's hero worship. Sometimes we take the long way home so
we can pass her house, where we go as slowly as possible along the
sidewalk, hoping to catch a glimpse of her through the window. We are
jealous of what we don't know of her life. With the promise of the
Olympics when the war finally ends, much of my sense of purpose rests
within the scope of my coach's support and faith in me. If I can manage
to absorb all she has to teach me, and if I can fulfill her trust in me,
then great things lie in store.

"Editke," she says as she approaches my mat, using my formal name,
Edith, but adding a diminutive. "A word, please." Her fingers glide once
over my back as she ushers me into the hall.

I look at her expectantly. Maybe she has noticed my improvements on the
vault. Maybe she would like me to lead the team in more stretching
exercises at the end of practice today. Maybe she wants to invite me
over for supper. I'm ready to say yes before she has even asked.

"I don't know how to tell you this," she begins. She studies my face and
then looks away toward the window where the dropping sun blazes in.

"Is it my sister?" I ask, before I even realize the terrible picture
forming in my mind. Klara studies at the conservatory in Budapest now.
Our mother has gone to Budapest to see Klara's concert and fetch her
home for Passover, and as my coach stands awkwardly beside me in the
hall, unable to meet my eyes, I worry that their train has derailed.
It's too early in the week for them to be traveling home, but that is
the only tragedy I can think of. Even in a time of war, the first
disaster to cross my mind is a mechanical one, a tragedy of human error,
not of human design, although I am aware that some of Klara's teachers,
including some of the gentile ones, have already fled Europe because
they fear what is to come.

"Your family is fine." Her tone doesn't reassure me. "Edith. This isn't
my choice. But I must be the one to tell you that your place on the
Olympic training team will go to someone else."

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_25}I think I might vomit. I
feel foreign in my own skin. "What did I do?" I comb over the rigorous
months of training for the thing I've done wrong. "I don't understand."

"My child," she says, and now she looks me full in the face, which is
worse, because I can see that she is crying, and at this moment when my
dreams are being shredded like newspaper at the butcher shop I do not
want to feel pity for her. "The simple truth is that because of your
background, you are no longer qualified."

I think of the kids who've spit at me and called me dirty Jew, of Jewish
friends who have stopped going to school to avoid harassment and now get
their courses over the radio. "If someone spits at you, spit back," my
father has instructed me. "That's what you do." I consider spitting on
my coach. But to fight back would be to accept her devastating news. I
won't accept it.

"I'm not Jewish," I say.

"I'm sorry, Editke," she says. "I'm so sorry. I still want you at the
studio. I would like to ask you to train the girl who will replace you
on the team." Again, her fingers on my back. In another year, my back
will be broken in exactly the spot she now caresses. Within weeks, my
very life will be on the line. But here in the hallway of my cherished
studio, my life feels like it is already over.

\*  \*  \*

In the days that follow my expulsion from the Olympic training team, I
plot my revenge. It won't be the revenge of hate; it will be the revenge
of perfection. I will show my coach that I am the best. The most
accomplished athlete. The best trainer. I will train my replacement so
meticulously that I will prove what a mistake has been made by cutting
me from the team. On the day that my mother and Klara are due back from
Budapest, I cartwheel my way down the red-carpeted hall toward our
apartment, imagining my replacement as my understudy, myself the
headlining star.

My mother and Magda are in the kitchen. Magda's chopping apples for the
[charoset.]{.txit} Mother's mixing matzo meal. They glower over their
work, barely registering my arrival. This is their relationship now.
They fight all the time, and when they're not fighting they treat each
other as though they are already in a face-off. Their arguments used to
be about food, Mother always concerned about Magda's weight, but now
[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_26}the conflict has grown to a
general and chronic hostility. "Where's Klarie?" I ask, swiping chopped
walnuts from a bowl.

"Budapest," Magda says. My mother slams her bowl onto the counter. I
want to ask why my sister isn't with us for the holiday. Has she really
chosen music over us? Or was she not allowed to miss class for a holiday
that none of her fellow students celebrates? But I don't ask. I am
afraid my questions will bring my mother's obviously simmering anger to
a boil. I retreat to the bedroom that we all share, my parents and Magda
and me.

On any other evening, especially a holiday, we would gather around the
piano, the instrument Magda had been playing and studying since she was
young, where Magda and my father would take turns leading us in songs.
Magda and I weren't prodigies like Klara, but we still had creative
passions that our parents recognized and nurtured. After Magda played,
it would be my turn to perform. "Dance, Dicuka!" my mother would say.
And even though it was more a demand than an invitation, I'd savor my
parents' attention and praise. Then Klara, the star attraction, would
play her violin and my mother would look transformed. But there is no
music in our house tonight. Before the meal, Magda tries to cheer me up
by reminding me of seders past when I would stuff socks in my bra to
impress Klara, wanting to show her that I'd become a woman while she was
away. "Now you've got your own womanhood to flaunt around," Magda says.
At the seder table she continues the antics, splashing her fingers
around in the glass of wine we've set for Prophet Elijah, as is the
custom. Elijah, who saves Jews from peril. On any other night our father
might laugh, despite himself. On any other night our mother would end
the silliness with a stern rebuke. But tonight our father is too
distracted to notice, and our mother is too distraught by Klara's
absence to chastise Magda. When we open the apartment door to let the
prophet in, I feel a chill that has nothing to do with the cool evening.
In some deep part of myself I know how badly we need protection now.

"You tried the consulate?" my father asks. He isn't even pretending to
lead the seder anymore. No one but Magda can eat. "Ilona?"

"I tried the consulate," my mother says. It is as though she conducts
her part in the conversation from another room.

"Tell me again what Klara said."

[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_27}"Again?" my mother protests.

"Again."

She tells it blankly, her fingers fidgeting with her napkin. Klara had
called her hotel at four that morning. Klara's professor had just told
her that a former professor at the conservatory, Béla Bartók, now a
famous composer, had called from America with a warning: The Germans in
Czechoslovakia and Hungary were going to start closing their fist; Jews
would be taken away come morning. Klara's professor forbade her to
return home to Kassa. He wanted her to urge my mother to stay in
Budapest as well and send for the rest of the family.

"Ilona, why did you come home?" my father moans.

My mother stabs her eyes at him. "What about all that we've worked for
here? We should just leave it? And if you three couldn't make it to
Budapest? You want me to live with that?"

I don't realize that they are terrified. I hear only the blame and
disappointment that my parents routinely pass between them like the
mindless shuttle on a loom. [Here's what you did. Here's what you didn't
do. Here's what you did. Here's what you didn't do.]{.txit} Later I'll
learn that this isn't just their usual quarreling, that there's a
history and a weight to the dispute they are having now. There are the
tickets to America my father turned away. There is the Hungarian
official who approached my mother with fake papers for the whole family,
urging us to flee. Later we learn that they both had a chance to choose
differently. Now they suffer with their regret, and they cover their
regret in blame.

"Can we do the four questions?" I ask to disrupt my parents' gloom. That
is my job in the family. To play peacemaker between my parents, between
Magda and my mother. Whatever plans are being made outside our door I
can't control. But inside our home, I have a role to fill. It is my job
as the youngest child to ask the four questions. I don't even have to
open my Haggadah. I know the text by heart. "Why is this night different
from all other nights?" I begin.

At the end of the meal, my father circles the table, kissing each of us
on the head. He's crying. [Why is this night different from all other
nights?]{.txit} Before dawn breaks, we'll
know.[]{#ch01_teaser_9781501130816.xhtml_page_28}

[]{#SS_teaser_readmore_9781501130816.xhtml}

# Continue Reading... {.exc_rec_header}

<figure>
<div class="exc_image">
<a
href="https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Choice/Edith-Eva-Eger/9781501130816?mcd=ebookrec_custom&amp;utm_campaign=ebook_teaser"
id="SS_teaser_readmore_9781501130816.xhtml_imagelink_9781501130816"
title="An external link to the publisher or retailer web page with instructions to purchase"><img
src="teaser_9781501130816/image/cover_9781501130816.jpg"
class="exc_rec_coverimg" alt="The Choice Cover" /></a>
</div>
</figure>

[The
Choice](https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/The-Choice/Edith-Eva-Eger/9781501130816?mcd=ebookrec_custom&utm_campaign=ebook_teaser "An external link to the publisher or retailer web page with instructions to purchase"){#SS_teaser_readmore_9781501130816.xhtml_titlelink_9781501130816}

Edith E Eger

[]{#authorbio.xhtml}

# []{#authorbio.xhtml_page_196 .pagebreak aria-label="page 196" role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#authorbio.xhtml_page_197 .pagebreak aria-label="page 197" role="doc-pagebreak"}ABOUT THE AUTHOR {.h1bm}

![Photo: Edith Eger, author](e9781982143114/images/author.jpg)

© RDAN ENGLE

[EDITH EGER]{.b1} is an eminent psychologist and Holocaust survivor. She
has worked with veterans, military personnel, and victims of physical
and mental trauma. She lives in La Jolla, California. She is the author
of the award-winning book *The Choice*.[]{#authorbio.xhtml_page_198
.pagebreak aria-label="page 198" role="doc-pagebreak"}

[SimonandSchuster.com](http://www.SimonandSchuster.com)

[www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Edith-Eva-Eger](https://www.simonandschuster.com/authors/Edith-Eva-Eger/554855911)

[![Icon:
Facebook](e9781982143114/images/facebook.jpg){.midd}](http://www.Facebook.com/ScribnerBooks)
[![Icon:
Twitter](e9781982143114/images/twitter.jpg){.midd}](http://www.Twitter.com/ScribnerBooks)
[![Icon: Instagram](e9781982143114/images/instagram.jpg){.midd}
\@ScribnerBooks](http://www.Instagram.com/ScribnerBooks)

[]{#adcard.xhtml}

[]{#adcard.xhtml_page_i .pagebreak aria-label="page i"
role="doc-pagebreak"}[]{#adcard.xhtml_page_ii .pagebreak
aria-label="page ii" role="doc-pagebreak"}ALSO BY EDITH EGER

*The Choice*

[]{#SS_US_adult_signup_back.xhtml}

::: signup-top
We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on
new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster.
Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.
:::

::: signup-middle
[CLICK HERE TO SIGN
UP](https://www.simonandschuster.com/ebook-signup/back/9781982143114 "Simon & Schuster Mailing List Sign-up Link")
:::

::: signup-bottom
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this
ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to
receive exclusive offers in your inbox.
:::

[]{#copyright.xhtml}

::: {.section .copyright-page}
![Logo: Scribner](e9781982143114/images/logo.jpg)

Scribner

An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

1230 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10020

[www.SimonandSchuster.com](http://www.SimonandSchuster.com)

Copyright © 2020 by Dr. Edith Eva Eger

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or
portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information, address
Scribner Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New
York, NY 10020.

First Scribner hardcover edition September 2020

SCRIBNER and design are registered trademarks of The Gale Group, Inc.,
used under license by Simon & Schuster, Inc., the publisher of this
work.

For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please
contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or
<business@simonandschuster.com>.

The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live
event. For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon &
Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
[www.simonspeakers.com](http://www.simonspeakers.com).

*Interior design by Wendy Blum*

*Jacket design by Two Associates*

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.

ISBN 978-1-9821-4309-1

ISBN 978-1-9821-4311-4 (ebook)
:::
