Luck is no mystery. It's a skill you can learn. 3 ways to engineer your
own luck:

Dr. James Austin is a neurologist and author of a book called Chase,
Chance, and Creativity. He's best-known for his theory of the "4 kinds
of luck." (It became virally popular with entrepreneurs, thanks to blog
posts by Mark Andreessen and Naval Ravikant). Let's dive in...

When most people think of luck, they're usually referring to "blind
luck." Pure chance. Fortune. Fate. For example: where you were born, who
your parents are, having good genes This kind of luck is 100% out of
your control. But there are 3 other types that you can control.
Seriously. Here's how to engineer more luck in 2023:

1. Luck from hustling This luck comes from persistence, hard work, and a
bias towards action (vs. overthinking). Example: A salesperson emails
hundreds of prospects so that a few will respond and buy. Action: ● Say
yes to more things. Introduce yourself to new people. Set outreach
quotas. Brainstorm tons of ideas before landing on one.

2. Luck from preparation If you're super experienced in a ﬁeld, you'll
notice when a lucky break happens. (Other people who aren't as skilled
won't see the opportunity). Example: A venture capitalist invests early
in a startup that becomes a unicorn. Action: ● Increase your knowledge,
skill, and expertise in a ﬁeld. The more experienced you are, the more
likely you'll be to predict lucky breaks.

3. Luck from your unique brand Ok, this is the hardest form of luck.
Because you need to become the best in a speciﬁc niche. But once you
establish that? Luck will start to ﬁnd you. Example: A podcast host
becomes so well-known and respected that dream guests ask to be on the
show. Action: ● Keep redeﬁning your speciﬁc niche until you know you can
be the best at it. Make your brand unique.

TL;DR: Blind luck might be out of your control. But the other three are
up to you: 1. 2. 3.

Hustle to create opportunities. Be prepared to recognize opportunities
that others will miss. Build a unique and valuable brand to be in demand
for opportunities.

Thanks for reading! If you enjoyed this, follow me for more frameworks
on social intelligence and personal growth. (Pro tip: Tap the bell icon
in my proﬁle to be one of the ﬁrst to see my new posts)


