CONTENTS Cover Dedication Title Page Copyright Preface Notes
Acknowledgments 1 Depression is a Thing What Is Depression? What Makes
Something an Illness, Anyway? So, What About Depression? Is It an
Illness? Do They Have Depression Everywhere? Is It a Gift? Mind and Body
Notes 2 Too Dry and too Cold Melancholy: An Early Modern Epidemic
Melancholia and Depression A Substance Too Gross Even for Flies: Black
Bile in Antiquity Sickness and Sin: The "Most Oppressive of Demons" in
the Middle Ages An Epidemic of Early Modernity Trading Places: From
Melancholia to Depression in Modernity Does Stealing Office Supplies
Make You an Evil Person? A Note on Guilt False Choices and Their History
Notes

3 Turned Inward The "Abrahamic Tradition" in Depression Studies
Alternatives Carl Jung: Depression as an Opportunity Psychoanalysis in
the Time of The Broken Brain A Painful Case: The Lessons of Osheroff
Notes 4 A Diagnosis in Ascent Blurry Borders A Weak Word Conquers the
World After Meyer: Depression in Ascent Rating Scales and Therapies:
Depression Quantified The Measure of Efficacy Who Gets Depression?
Manualization and its Discontents: The DSM Wars So, Why So Much
Depression? The Drug That Named an Era Notes 5 "Just Chemical" Imbalance
Before Antidepressants Enter the Antidepressants Books of the Times
Backlash: Clinical Trials and Other Tribulations Antidepressants Go
Global After Prozac: New Biopsychiatry of Depression From Brain to
Person Notes 6 Darkness Legible

Mood and Metaphor The Depression Memoir as Genre and Source You Don't
Get It Getting Real How Did I Get Here? Seen and Not Seen The Body and
Biology Gender In Bed Taunted by the Beautiful and the Good Oblivion
Treatments, Recoveries, Damages, and Regrets Memoir as Manifesto Notes
Epilogue: Depression's Past and Future Sorrow Is Everywhere You Turn
History Against Compulsive Repetition The Way Forward Notes Note on the
Historiography Notes Partial Bibliography Index End User License
Agreement

List of Illustrations Chapter 1 Figure 1: A (futile) attempt at a
comprehensive list of depression symptoms in all context...

Figure 2: This image was brought in to a class on depression by a
Nigerian student. It's n... Chapter 2 Figure 3: This image is usually
considered the most iconic representation of melancholia. ... Figure 4:
This Ngram shows the change of frequency in the use of the terms
"melancholia" a... Chapter 3 Figure 5: Karl Abraham contrasted this
painting with others that showed nurturing mothers.... Chapter 4 Figure
6: Mark Rothko's later paintings avoided lush colors. Many wondered if
these late p... Chapter 5 Figure 7: Prozac: a medicine that named an
era. Actress Carrie Fisher, who wrote with wit ... Figure 8: This
schematic gives an idea of how neurotransmitters convey messages between
th...

Dedication For Laura, River, and Julia

The Empire of Depression A New History Jonathan Sadowsky

polity

Copyright Â© Jonathan Sadowsky 2021 The right of Jonathan Sadowsky to be
identified as Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance with
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. First published in 2021
by Polity Press Polity Press 65 Bridge Street Cambridge CB2 1UR, UK
Polity Press 101 Station Landing Suite 300 Medford, MA 02155, USA All
rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the
purpose of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. ISBN-13:
978-1-5095-3166-0 A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Sadowsky, Jonathan Hal, author. Title: The empire of depression :
a new history / Jonathan Sadowsky. Description: Cambridge, UK ; Medford,
MA : Polity Press, 2021. \| Series: History of health and illness \|
Includes bibliographical references and index. \| Summary: "How
depression colonized the world"-- Provided by publisher. Identifiers:
LCCN 2020016685 (print) \| LCCN 2020016686 (ebook) \| ISBN 9781509531646
(hardback) \| ISBN 9781509531660 (epub) Subjects: LCSH: Depression,
Mental. \| Depression, Mental--History. Classification: LCC RC537 .S293
2020 (print) \| LCC RC537 (ebook) \| DDC 616.85/27--dc23 LC record
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020016685 LC ebook record available
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020016686 The publisher has used its best
endeavors to ensure that the URLs for external websites referred to in
this book are correct and active at the time of going to press. However,
the publisher has no responsibility for the websites and can make no
guarantee that a site will remain live or that the content is or will
remain appropriate. Every effort has been made to trace all copyright
holders, but if any have been overlooked the publisher will be pleased
to include any necessary credits in any subsequent reprint or edition.
For further information on Polity, visit our website: politybooks.com

Preface When is sorrow sickness? The writer Virginia Heffernan had a bad
break-up. This happens to a lot of people. It can make you sad,
sometimes for a long time. At some point, though, Heffernan began to
feel that the grief over lost love was overtaken by something else, an
illness. Worse, the depression seemed to grow on its own, to become
something separate from the grief, disconnected from the break-up.
Trying to understand what was happening, she wondered if her search for
happiness was the problem -- was she depressed because she expected too
much out of life? Or perhaps, she thought (as many people with
depression do), she was simply a bad person. Was the depression an
excuse for not having a career -- was she simply lazy? Not an easy
question to answer, because excessive self-criticism is a sign of
depression. Was her depression an excuse for laziness? Or was that very
question the depression talking? These puzzles are not new. What
happened next, though, is a product of more recent history -- and the
history of a recent product. Heffernan got a prescription for
antidepressants. Sitting on a train, she poured the pills into her hand
and looked at them wondering if the chasm she felt in herself could
truly be filled by these chemicals.1 A lot of people have been asking
this question in recent decades. The question holds a mix of hope and
fear. Many feel some relief if the answer is yes. Not only relief from
the illness, but also from the torment of doubt over whether they have
an illness. If a medicine works, that might reassure that the illness is
real. Still, many look at these chemicals with worry, and not just
because, like all medicines, they can have unwanted side effects. It can
also seem weird that your basic outlook -- optimistic or pessimistic,
self-hating or self-loving -- might be a chemical process. While these
questions have grown acute in the antidepressant era, the link of body
to mood, of stuff to spirit, has been an enigma for centuries. And
nothing arouses the puzzlement as much as the terrible pain on which we
paste the label: depression.

This book is about that pain. A pain that isolates, but one always set
in a social domain. A pain of soul and body that reminds us how hard it
is to say where soul ends and the body begins. A pain found in diverse
places and times, changing its features to suit the village where it
arrives. A pain that devours hope, and leaches pleasure, ambition, and
simple ease. One doctor said there is only one worse illness, rabies.2
Whether he was right or not, few maladies match depression's super
power: to drain life of value, to turn what was golden into mud. It is
also a pain with a history. The history lies in its morphing of form and
expression, and in the countless efforts to grasp its origin, meaning,
and essence -- efforts that are necessary and useful, and yet always
fall short. And it lies in the changing ways healers have tried, with
incomplete success, to provide relief. I stress several themes. One is
that depression is shaped by history and culture, but that comparisons
across time and space are possible, and essential. A second is that we
do not have to choose between understandings of depression as
biological, psychological, or social. This false choice is a product of
recent history. We call depression a "mental illness." Critics of
psychiatry sometimes complain that the problems named by that term are
not really illnesses. I am more concerned about the other half of the
phrase -- they are never just mental. Depression always involves the
body. A third is that there is a politics to depression, a politics of
inequality. This is another area where some have posed what I think is a
false choice, between a "medical" model and a social model. Health,
illness, and healing are always set in a social context, and showing
that they are does not make them less medical. As I am completing this
book, the COVID-19 pandemic is unfolding. In addition to its ravages on
human health, it is shining a light on many social problems, including
class and race inequality, the inadequacy of the public health and
medical insurance systems in many societies, and the bigoted blaming of
peoples for illness, a scapegoating that medical historians see
resurfacing with dismal predictability. Depression also puts a spotlight
on many social problems. It does not cease being a medical problem
because of that any more than a virus does. A fourth is the classic
historian's caution against scorning the past. Much of the history of
depression is made of efforts by smart and concerned people, doing their
best with the knowledge available, to

understand and treat it. As in other areas of medicine, some zealots
have pushed their favored approach too far. Many others have sounded
cautions, seeing the incomplete state of psychiatric knowledge.3 Many
books on the history of psychiatry are scathing catalogues of its harms.
Psychiatry has harmed a lot of people, through imprisonment,
stigmatization, invasive physical treatments, or misguided over-reliance
on drugs. Even talk therapy, often assumed to be inherently more humane,
can be abusive or harmful. Saying this is not to be against psychiatry.
It's a matter of empirical fact, amply shown by historians of
psychiatry. We should not whitewash this history, but we also have to
reckon with how psychiatry has helped people. The vast majority of
depression patients are voluntary. They return to their doctors because
treatment helps them to feel better and live their lives closer to the
way they wish. Many people without access to treatment would dearly like
it. I have written with occasional levity. An entirely somber book about
depression might be hard to read, or even depressing. There should be no
mistaking, though, the seriousness of the subject. Severe depressions
can be ruinous, a threat to livelihood, the most precious relationships,
and physical health. They can also be directly life-threatening if they
lead to suicidal thinking or suicide. Less severe forms can also be
painful indeed, and are too often trivialized. Many historians have
recently stressed the newness of the modern concept of depression. The
last 120 years have seen vast changes in its meaning and treatment.
Whether what we now call "depression" has existed in all times and
places in human history is a hard question, and I give it a lot of
attention. One part of the question is whether the illness once called
"melancholia," a term that was used from classical antiquity with waning
use in the twentieth century, was the same as modern depression. I look
at this problem in chapter 2, but to sum up here: no, melancholia and
modern depression are not identical. They could not possibly be, because
neither has had a fixed, stable meaning. A historical relationship does
exist between the two concepts, though. A history of depression that
excluded the history of melancholia would be badly incomplete.
Throughout the history of depressive illness, some have noticed, in some
cases, a relationship to manic states. Current psychiatry uses the
diagnosis

of bipolar disorder, formerly known as Manic Depression, to indicate an
illness of fluctuating moods, with manic phases alternating with
depression. At other times, this has been considered simply one form of
melancholia or depression, and sometimes it has been used as the blanket
term for all depression. It would be ahistorical to omit any mention of
mania or bipolar disorder here, but it will also not be a major focus.
Unipolar and bipolar depression overlap, both in symptoms and treatment.
Some now believe they are two different kinds of the same illness,
others do not. Some even speculate that all the mood disorders and
psychoses are related on a spectrum, which could turn out to be hundreds
or even thousands of discrete illnesses.4 Some focus is necessary. I am
focusing on unipolar depression. Through history, and also now, many
different diagnostic labels have referred to depressed mood. Even within
those categories, presentation and experience vary. We might speak of
"depressions," just as some claim schizophrenia is not a unitary
condition and prefer the term "the schizophrenias." I prefer to state
the diversity here, and treat it as a given from here on. The unity of
these diverse illness descriptions does not come from a core feature one
can find in all of them. It comes from their shared inclusion in the
centuries of debate about their meaning.5 I look at the history of many
treatments. Treatments for depression are often divided into two main
types: (1) the physical, or somatic treatments, and (2) the
psychological treatments, most of which are talk therapies.6 Both
physical and psychological treatments for illnesses of mood have been
around for centuries. Current physical treatment is dominated by
antidepressant drugs developed in the last 70 years or so. In the middle
of twentieth century, the first drugs called antidepressants came into
use, most importantly a class of drugs called the tricyclics, and
another called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). A bit later the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as Prozac, fully
ushered in the antidepressant era. Also important is electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT), invented in Italy in the 1930s. ECT is used on a far
smaller number of people, mostly people for whom other treatments have
failed. I look at physical treatments, those used widely now, those
discarded, and some that may have a promising future, in chapter 5. The
talk therapies are now dominated by two major strands. One is a
tradition of depth psychology, also called "dynamic," or psychology of
the

unconscious. Depth psychology is based on insight into, and "working
through," inner conflict. A majority of depth psychologists are loosely
or strictly Freudian, but some follow other strands, such as the
Jungian. Many people are unaware of how much psychoanalytic thought has
changed since Freud's time. I will show these changes in chapter 3.
Another major talk therapy is Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT), which
works to correct logical errors in the thoughts of the depressed person,
and encourages changes in behavior. Treatments addressed to the thoughts
and behaviors of people with depressive illness have been practiced
since antiquity (see chapter 2), but they were vigorously thought out
and applied in the second half of the twentieth century (see chapter 4).
Some talk therapists -- possibly most -- in practice combine insight,
cognitive work, and behavioral advice. None of these treatments,
physical or psychological, lack vigorous critics. I examine the
treatments and their critics, and have opinions about them. My job as a
historian includes placing developments in context, and weighing
evidence carefully; it does not include neutrality or objectivity, if
they were possible, which they are not. One opinion I will get to now:
sweeping attacks on either physical or psychological treatments are
unpersuasive to me. Specific criticisms, of specific physical or talk
therapies, can have value. But I am wary of arguments that physical
treatment is inherently bad, toxic, or abusive, or that talk therapy is
unscientific because it is not biological.7 These judgments are usually
driven by unfounded philosophical dogma. Or worse, by turf wars between
psychotherapeutic and pharmaceutical clinicians. Many treatments for
depression are effective for many people, even though none are effective
for all people, and some people struggle to find a solution that works
for them. I am not shy about assessing how well treatments work, or
about noting their drawbacks -- and they do all have drawbacks.
Depression is a monster, and we need an array of weapons to fire on it.
Depression has an "empire" in two senses. First, in Western psychiatry
and societies, it became a dominant way of interpreting mental distress,
upending other language, in a gradual process that gained powerful
momentum starting in the later twentieth century, though it began before
then. Second, this linguistic shift then began to spread globally. Older
names and conceptions of distress are increasingly competing with the
label depression. We will see, however, both that illnesses of great
sorrow may

not be new to many areas adopting this turn in language, and that older
cultural and medical models do not simply give way to new ones, but
interact with them in complex ways. One thing this book is not is a long
lament on the over-diagnosis of depression, and the turning of life's
normal suffering into a medical problem. Lots of books make this
complaint now, and most of them make valid points. The danger of
over-diagnosis is real. I give the issue attention, but also some
pushback and alternative views. Increasing diagnosis rates of depression
in recent decades is a fact, but its cause and meaning are not obvious.
There are three possible reasons for it. There could really be more
depression. Or, we could be having about as much depression as before,
but catching more of it -- better detection. A third possibility is
diagnostic drift -- the relabeling of states that were considered
different illness, or not considered illness at all. Two or all three of
these possibilities could be at work. Many laments about the
over-diagnosis of depression, and the medicalization of ordinary
suffering, are data-poor. They look at widening criteria for diagnosis,
or the sheer numbers in treatment, and assume too many people are being
diagnosed. They rarely show directly that a lot of people with
depression diagnoses do not meet a threshold for real illness --
whatever that threshold may be. Greatly increased rates of diagnosis
over a short time is grounds to wonder about over-diagnosis, but not, by
itself, proof of over-diagnosis. Psychiatric diagnosis draws a lot of
valid criticism. It can stigmatize people and behaviors. It increasingly
calls any problem in life a disease. Depression has an unusual status in
these debates. With the exception of a few people on the antipsychiatric
fringe, most people agree that certain mental disorders, such as severe
psychoses, count as illnesses. And many, including many psychiatrists,
also believe that we have gone too far in taking normal problems of
living and calling them illnesses. In the case of depression, it is a
matter of degree. Most people think serious and moderate cases of
depression warrant medical treatment. Many also question whether
everyone in treatment reaches that threshold. Where should we draw the
line? I do not answer this question, but I do hope to show how hard it
is, and that it is not as new a question as it might seem. The history
of depression is in part a history of the tug-of-war over where the line
should fall.

Some argue that depression, or other mental illnesses, are not true
medical conditions. They will often point to the lack of a clear
physical lesion, or the shifting and imprecise definitions. Fewer say
why there needs to be a physical lesion, or a precise and unchanging
definition, for something to count as a medical problem. Instead, they
treat these measures as selfevident. They are not. Others stress that
depression is a social and cultural problem. This is correct, but does
not mean depression is not also a medical problem. Sometimes I look at a
major problem or controversy in the science of depression and say the
truth is unknown. One job of the humanities is to nurture tolerance of
uncertainty. Granting uncertainty is not the same as a cynical nihilism
which declares all knowledge bankrupt. Where I think the knowledge about
depression is sound, I say so. The social and cultural aspects of
depression may yield more certain knowledge than the physical ones,
despite progress in understanding the biology over the past century or
so. I have taught a course on depression for years, and I have found
that many people who take it are people who have a depression diagnosis,
or are wondering if they should have one. Many people who have picked up
this book may be in the same situation. The course, I tell students, is
not, should not, and cannot be therapeutic, and neither can the book. It
will cover debates over whether depression is "really" an illness, and
about whether treatments for it are effective. But before we get into
the nuances of these debates, I want to say that I think "yes" is the
most convincing answer to both questions, as well as the safest. If you
feel like you may need help, you should try to get it. Doubting whether
you have an illness or not is unlikely to help you feel better. And yes,
we have effective treatments for depression, and there is a good chance
that one of them can help. Depression touches a problem all people
face.8 We all know sadness, and we all can feel the loss of interest in
things, the disturbed sleep, and appetite changes sorrow can cause. Yet
most people think that the misery sometimes seems -- because of its
severity, longevity, or apparent disconnect from reality -- like an
illness. But when? Other illnesses, probably all, vary in their meaning
and appearance across time and cultures. Susan Sontag vividly showed,
for example, that tuberculosis and HIV, both caused by known infectious
agents, have been shadowed by culture, by metaphors and

image associations that influence how they are understood and
experienced.9 These associations have a power beyond what science can
tell us about the physical effects of disease. Illnesses are always
embedded in society and culture, and subject to change according to time
and place. Still, few are as changeable as depression. The plasticity
reflects a hard problem: deciding what is a proper reaction to life's
inevitable distress. Most of the world's religion and philosophy -- our
accumulated wisdom -- assume human life is filled with anguish. As Paul
Simon sang in "The Coast," sorrow is everywhere you turn. But when is
sorrow sickness?

Notes 1. Virginia Heffernan, "A Delicious Placebo," in Nell Casey,
Unholy Ghost: Writers on Depression (New York: HarperCollins, 2001). 2.
John Scott Price, "If I Had ... Chronic Depressive Illness," British
Medical Journal 1 (1978) 1200--1. Thanks to Alex Riley for the
reference. 3. I have tried to write as though this could be the only
book on depression or mental illness, the only work of medical history,
or even the only work of history -- the reader has ever picked up. I ask
for patience from experts in the field when they see things they already
know. The book contains some original research, and I certainly hope
original interpretation and ideas. But it is also a work of synthesis.
My debts to other scholars in the field are clear in the footnotes and
bibliography. 4. Stephen M. Stahl, Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology:
Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications (4th edn, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2013), 245. 5. Medical anthropology
sometimes distinguishes between "disease," defined as a state diagnosed
by a clinician, and "illness," defined as the subjective state of
feeling ill.Â This distinction is useful for some purposes, but because
the use of the term illness is so widespread in the clinical science and
diagnosis of depression, it would bring more confusion than clarity to
my discussion. A classic text on the distinction

is Arthur Kleinman, The Illness Narratives (New York: Basic Books,
1989). 6. I have elsewhere argued that the division between "physical"
and "psychological treatments" is fundamentally flawed. But because it
has been so widely believed in, it is hard to write the history without
using it. See Jonathan Sadowsky, "Somatic Treatments," in Greg Eghigian,
The Routledge History of Madness and Mental Health (New York: Routledge,
2017). 7. Sadowsky, "Somatic Treatments." 8. This paragraph was inspired
by an exchange I had with Sloan Mahone at the conference "Global
Histories of Psychiatry," in Groningen, the Netherlands, in November
2018. 9. Susan Sontag, Illness as Metaphor and AIDS and Its Metaphors
(New York: Picador, 2001).

Acknowledgments Thanks to my family above all. My father, for 57 years
of support, encouragement, and wisdom. It's common to think your father
is the best man in the world when you are a child, but I still think it
now. River Sadowsky, Julia Sadowsky, Nina Sadowsky, and Richard Sadowsky
all cheered me on, and cheered me up. My wife, Laura Steinberg, a
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst by profession, and a skilled copy editor
as well, is my greatest support and best reader. Three people at Case
Western Reserve remain especially vital. Alan Rocke, now retired,
continues his unbroken streak of reading everything I write, on this
project from the embryonic proposal to the full draft manuscript. Eileen
Anderson-Fye, always there for me, helps me in too many ways to list.
And no one could ask for a better friend and intellectual partner than
Ted Steinberg has been to me. Two colleagues elsewhere also deserve
special mention. David William Cohen, my mentor in graduate school, has
left a lasting imprint even as my research focus has diverged from his.
My intellectual north star, I still seek him out during his retirement
when I need advice on a knotty problem. My interests have grown to
overlap with those of my other main inspiration, Liz Lunbeck, a crucial
support to me at so many times, and so many ways, over the course of my
career. Thanks to other Case Western Reserve colleagues who helped with
the project in various ways: Mark Aulisio, Francesca Brittan, Nese
Devenot, Kimberly Emmons, Sue Hinze, Tina Howe, Peter Knox, Andrea
Rager, Maddalena Rumor, Catherine Scallen, RenÃ©e Sentilles, Maggie
Vinter, Ann Warren, and Gillian Weiss. Also thanks to the many
colleagues elsewhere who helped in concrete or less tangible ways: Ana
Antic, Hubertus BÃ¼schel, Stephen Casper, Carolyn Eastman, Marta Elliott,
Jeremy Greene, Matthew Heaton, Vanessa Hildebrand, Nancy Rose Hunt,
Sanjeev Jain, Richard Keller, Barron Lerner, Beth Linker, Amy Lutz,
Sloan Mahone, Sarah Marks, Elizabeth Mellyn, Emily Mendenhall, Randy
Nathenson, Daniel Pine, Hans Pols, Sharon

Schwartz, Trysa Shulman-Shy, Nina Studer, and Catherine Sullivan.
Elizabeth Durham and Katie Kilroy-Marac get special mention for helpful
reading at unconscionably short notice. I had the help of a number of
research assistants at various stages, helping me identify and get
sources, and reading drafts. Thanks to Beth Salem, Matthew Yoder, Sufia
Bakshi, Riley Simko, Kat Retting, and Sherri Bolcevic. Maia Delegal was
especially invaluable down the final stretch of writing. Two anonymous
reviewers read the initial proposal for the book and the book itself,
and I owe them a lot. One was more sympathetic to my overall approach
than the other, but they were both constructive and thoughtful, and
their comments made the book better. Parts of this book were presented
at various conferences and seminars, at: the Department of the History
and Sociology of Science at the University of Pennsylvania; the
conference "Global Histories of Psychiatry," Groningen University, The
Netherlands, November 2018; the conference "Decolonising Madness,"
Birkbeck, University of London, April 2019; a joint meeting of the Carl
Jung Institute of Cleveland and the Cleveland Psychoanalytic Center, May
2019; the conference, "Psychiatry as Social Medicine," The Johns Hopkins
University, November 2019; and the Bioethics Work-in-Progress group at
CWRU. Thanks to those who commented and inspired in those venues. Thanks
to Meghan Gallagher and Katie Nabors for keeping everything running
smoothly, and especially to the amazing Bess Weiss who always goes above
and beyond. Thanks to Bill Claspy, Jen Starkey, and Erin Smith at Kelvin
Smith Library, who always made sure I got what I needed. Thanks to
Pascal Porcheron at Polity for his interest, encouragement, and
suggestions, and to Ellen MacDonald-Kramer for her help with logistics.
I've so enjoyed working with this team. Students in my class on social
and cultural aspects of depression have helped me think through many of
the issues over the years, but thanks especially to Carolyn Slebodnik,
and Tarun Jella. Students in Foundations

of Medicine, Society and Culture did the same, but especially, Disha
Bhargava, Dami Oshin, Karthik Ravichandran, and Sarah Siddiqui.

"Depression is a thing in which one seems to be dead in life."1

Notes 1. These are words of a depression patient quoted in Janis Hunter
Jenkins and Norma Cofresi, "The Sociomatic Course of Depression and
Trauma: A Cultural Analysis of Suffering and Resilience in the Life of a
Puerto Rican Woman," Psychosomatic Medicine 60 (1998) 439--47.

1 Depression is a Thing "People who don't have depression have a lot of
difficulty understanding it, but people who have it are also often
befuddled by it." -- Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie1 Imagine a young woman in
Philadelphia, a foreign student attending college and far from home for
the first time. She is in a phase of sadness, close to despair. She
feels isolated, but rebuffs people who invite her to social events. She
lacks motivation, letting her room get messier by the day. Is this a
case of clinical depression? Imagine further that the student herself
says no, rejects the label of depression when it is suggested by her
aunt, a Nigerian doctor who is also a recent immigrant to the United
States. She tells her aunt to stop using this American way of naming her
distress. She does not have an illness at all, she says. Ifemelu, the
main character in Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's novel Americanah, believes
she is having a normal reaction to her situation. She is poor, her
undocumented status has made it hard to find a job, and she is far from
loved ones. Who wouldn't have sadness, maybe some lethargy and social
withdrawal? Uju, her aunt, believes she has a real disease, though one
not talked about much in Nigeria. Americans, Ifemelu responds, have a
disease for everything. Ifemelu's "symptoms" melt away without much
comment once she finds a good job and makes friends.2 The conflict
between Ifemelu and Uju might seem to be a new one, peculiar to modern
America's impulse to give medical names to life's problems. Yet the
troubled distinction between depression and normal sadness runs through
the history of the ailment. Can the border between the two be drawn
sharply? Do they have the same sources, or distinctly different ones?
According to the World Health Organization, depression is now -- newly
-- the single biggest contributor to the global health burden.3 They
estimate that there are more than 300 million people worldwide living
with

depression, with an 18 percent increase between 2005 and 2015. Between
2011 and 2014, about one in nine Americans said they took an
antidepressant.4 Many of them took drugs named "antidepressants" for
other problems, such as insomnia and pain management, but the diagnosis
of depression has swollen massively. The meaning of the swelling is not
obvious, though. Are more people getting depression? If so, what is
causing this epidemic? Doctors, though, may simply be diagnosing
depression more. If so, are they catching more of the cases that were
always there, or changing the norms for diagnosis? Or is the rising
currency of the label "depression" influencing how people interpret
their mental distress, whether it is profound psychic pain, or moderate
unhappiness? How much does the mere presence of antidepressants
influence the rates of diagnosis? Counting depression is a vexed
project. The different explanations for rising rates of diagnosis all
have smart advocates. Those who think we are having more depression
point to alienating or distressing aspects of contemporary life, from
wealth inequality and violence, to social isolation brought on by social
media.5 Whether the world is any more depressing or alienating than it
was 75 to 125 years ago, when the diagnosis was less common, is not
obvious, though. We had lower rates of depression diagnosis during the
First and Second World Wars, Western imperialism, Jim Crow, and the
Holocaust. Early twentieth-century sociology is rife with laments about
the alienation of modern, urban societies. The era's philosophy gave us
elaborate arguments that life was absurd and without ultimate purpose.
So perhaps we are not living through an epidemic of depression but of
calling things depression. This view usually goes with criticism of the
pharmaceutical industry -- which certainly does have a financial
interest in a broad definition of the illness. As inviting as this
argument is, though, consider that before the era of rising diagnosis
rates, mental health advocates sought better detection of depression, an
illness they thought was under-diagnosed, and a terrible and needless
contributor to human misery.6 From their point of view, we are only now
finding all the depression they believed was there all along. They were
urging more diagnosis before drug companies were making money on
blockbuster antidepressants.

Put more systematically: whenever any illness is diagnosed more than
before, there are three possibilities. The first is what epidemiologists
call "rising true prevalence" -- an actual increase in the number of
sick people. The second is better detection. If, for example, you use
hospital admissions to count the number of people with a sickness, you
only count the people who come in to the hospital. You might get a
better count if you go door to door in a community. Better detection can
also come if doctors and the public grow more aware of the condition, so
more patients come into treatment. But what if what you are counting is
itself changing? This is the third explanation, diagnostic drift. A
diagnosis may be naming distress that before would have been covered by
a different illness label, or perhaps not be an illness at all. In
debates about mental health, these possibilities are often treated as
competitors but two of them, or even all three, could be working in
tandem. Knowing the prevalence of a disease is challenging when its
definition is stable and has a clear sign, such as a blood test. With an
illness like depression it is even harder. Counting depressions is a
vexed project, partly because depression is hard to define. Depression,
in a clinical sense, is a diagnostic term. The prefix "dia" means apart
and "gnosis" is knowledge. To diagnose means "to know apart," to
distinguish from something else. Doing this for depression has not
proven easy.

What Is Depression? Many have a loose sense of what clinical depression
is -- an illness of unusually low mood. That simple definition hides a
lot of complexity and change. Let's look at Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD) in the current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5). MDD is the central diagnosis for depressive illness
in the current manual, though other illnesses include depressive
symptoms. The DSM-5 will not be the last word on what depression is. If
the past is any guide, the category of depression will continue to
transform. Discontent with MDD has already emerged. Some clinicians and
researchers think MDD embraces too many subtypes of

depression.7 According to one recent textbook, "no clinician or
researcher believes that MDD is a single 'illness.'"8 More precision
might lead to better treatment plans. For now, though, we lack a
widely-agreed upon subdivision.9 DSM-5 calls for MDD if five of nine
symptoms have been present for a twoweek period. The nine symptoms
are: 1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day. 2. Markedly
diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most
of the day, nearly every day. 3. Significant weight loss when not
dieting or weight gain, or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. 4. Change in sleep -- sleeping too little or too much 5. A slowing
down of thought and a reduction of physical movement (observable by
others, not merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed
down). 6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day. 7. Feelings of
worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt nearly every day. 8.
Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly
every day. 9. Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation
without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for
committing suicide. One of either of the first two listed symptoms must
be present, but none of the rest are required, as long as four others
are present. The manual also says that the symptoms must cause
significant distress or impairment, and must not be caused by substance
abuse, or by another illness. Time is key. Symptoms have to be lasting
for a diagnosis. But the time given is arbitrary. I am not saying that
the authors of the manual erred when they set the duration. They had to
pick something, or else people could get a diagnosis after being in a
bad mood and losing appetite for a few hours because of something the
President tweeted. (This happens to me

sometimes.) The right length of time, though, cannot be settled
scientifically. Future research may refine our knowledge of depression
to a point where the amount of time could be settled objectively. I
doubt it. We also frequently ask if the symptoms seem justified by
events. Although not a factor in current DSM diagnosis, in much of
Western history many definitions of depressive illness have insisted
that the distress must be out of proportion to the life situation.10 As
early as the time of Hippocrates in Greek antiquity, some said
melancholia was present only if the symptoms were not normal reactions
to life events. A few centuries later, the physician Aretaeus wrote of
melancholic patients being "dull and stern, dejected or unreasonably
torpid, without any manifest cause."11 Freud's classic work on the
subject started with the premise of the difference between normal grief
and melancholia without cause. One psychiatrist wrote in 1976 that
depression differs from normal sorrow if it "seems exaggerated in
relation to the supposed precipitating event."12 This proportionality
criterion -- the mood must be out of proportion to the life situation to
be called sickness -- has had a deep mark on Western concepts of
depressive illness, and continues to influence debate, even though it is
not now an official part of diagnosis. It also likely influences paths
to treatment -- people undergoing clearly stressful losses may be slower
to conclude they have an illness and need medical attention than people
having the same feelings in the absence of those events. Ifemelu
reminded Uju that if she was sad, she had reason to be. Ifemelu did not
add that such sadness might be depression if her life situation were
sunnier. That would, though, seem to save the label from the charge of
making every bad feeling an illness. The proportionality criterion often
poses challenges in practice, though. The fifth edition of the DSM
removed the "bereavement exclusion" from the diagnosis of major
depression. In previous editions, the symptoms didn't count toward a
diagnosis if they came during mourning. Some psychiatrists worried that
this change to the manual took a normal, if painful, part of life and
turned it into an illness.13 Consider heartbreak. Say you were deeply in
love with someone who dumped you. You might have five of the nine
symptoms above. Both medical and lay opinion usually say that we should
not medicate heartbreak. But what if the symptoms last a long time, or
become especially severe? If the heartache lasts for years on end, is it
then an illness? At what

moment does it become so? What if the heartbroken person becomes
suicidal? We then might want to intervene medically. But exactly how far
short from suicidality is normal enough to be out of the range of
medical attention? The questions lack objective answers. Both the time
and proportionality criteria shift with cultural norms, historical
moments, and even from person to person.

What Makes Something an Illness, Anyway? The tacit question in the
conversations between Ifemelu and Uju is, what makes anything an
illness? How do we decide? One option, often favored by people who
dislike psychiatry, or want to reject a "medical model" is to say a
physical lesion must be present. This is appealing. We like to have
something we can see. But this is not how most societies have decided on
illness states through human history, and it's arbitrary. Many lesions
now known for illnesses were once unknown -- was Alzheimer's Disease not
an illness before Alzheimer identified the brain pathology? If we
someday do find a clearer biological measurement of depression, would
depression magically transform into an illness then, after being not an
illness now? Another option is to use illness to refer to atypical
states or conditions, but atypical states are not always bad. We would
not want to say that someone with unusually high ethical standards has
"Excessive Morality Syndrome." We might, though, if it was causing undue
suffering. So perhaps we should add that the condition must cause pain
or limitations in daily life. But this could include everything from
being left-handed in a world built for righthanded people, or being gay
in a society that persecutes gay people. Psychiatry tried labeling being
gay as an illness, partly with the hope it would diminish the stigma.
The results were terrible.14 Psychiatrist Nancy Andreasen has argued
that no one has developed "successful, logical, and non-tautological
definitions of ... disease, health, physical illness, or mental
illness."15 She's right.

Attempts to separate "real" from made-up illnesses open a bottomless pit
of philosophical debate. Some conditions are easily agreed upon --
cancer (an illness), and left-handedness (not an illness), for example.
More ambiguous cases can be tough. With agreement, the suffering person
gets "the sick role," with the associated exemptions (such as missing
work) and obligations (such as trying to get better). Medical care is
appropriate.16 But the agreement is the outcome of a social process.
Even when a known physical marker is present, a social process decides
whether it is a sign of illness. People sometimes try to change the
social agreements by adding or subtracting illnesses. In an effort at
subtraction, libertarian antipsychiatrist Thomas Szasz -- a fan of the
"physical lesion" yardstick -- excluded all of mental illness, and
sought to take psychiatry out of medicine. Given how much of human
history, all over the world, has seen things like psychotic symptoms, or
disabling distress, as signs of illness, Szasz had a lot of success. But
just as Szasz was free to question the medical status of mental illness,
others were free to re-assert it. They had even more success. A more
complete success in subtracting an illness came when gay activists
challenged the label of homosexuality as an illness. They were not, they
said, suffering from their same-sex attraction. They may have been
suffering from lack of social acceptance, but calling their sexuality
"illness" was not helping. It did a lot of documented harm. As for
addition, new illness states are being named all the time. I'm surly
when I first wake up in the morning. Not an illness, right? But if I
want to say I have "Morning Surliness Syndrome (MSS)," I can, and if a
lot of people start to agree, then its status as an illness will be a
social fact. Others can object, by saying we didn't always have this
newfangled MSS, or asking where is the physical lesion. Ifemelu might
say, how American this is, to call something an illness because the
culture values morning perkiness. What would matter is how many people I
convince, especially if they include doctors and insurers. If a drug
could make you more perky in the morning, my success is more likely.
This sounds like a fanciful scenario. But it is close to what happened
with Erectile Dysfunction.17 If you think social agreement is a bad way
to decide on what an illness is, you are free to propose objective
criteria. But you will have to get everyone to agree to them. Best of
luck!

Psychiatric diagnosis causes more division than those in most areas of
medicine. Labels change their meaning, drop out of use entirely, are
occasionally revived. The history of psychiatry is strewn with labels
with no real clinical purpose, and others that were well-meaning, but
failed, attempts to dispel stigma. It is child's play to show that a DSM
diagnosis is a "social construction." You can teach a class of college
freshmen how in under ten minutes. And, psychiatric diagnoses are always
to some extent a reduction. Using them can hide context, complexity, and
subjective experience. The potential for harm, especially stigma, is
always present. These drawbacks are not unique to psychiatry, though.
Any diagnosis in medicine can stigmatize, even if stigma is greater for
some than others. And any diagnosis is reductive if it draws attention
from the larger context. Saying someone has tuberculosis does not reveal
the social roots of the medical problem, in poverty or occupation, for
example.18 It can also miss cultural context; tuberculosis has had
changing meanings and associations.19 As I write, we are vividly seeing
the dreadful effects of COVID-19. The virus is exploiting existing
social inequalities and inflaming existing stigmas. These social
dimensions are not captured by diagnosis alone. They also do not make
the illness less real. Psychiatric diagnosis is fraught, but that does
not make it useless. Diagnosis provides a pathway to practical things
like treatment and insurance coverage, and can also be comforting.20 A
vague sense that something feels bad can be a burden. Naming the feeling
as an illness helps people make sense of pain, and can be a first step
toward seeing it as a solvable problem. People may feel less alone, to
know that their distress is something others know and recognize. Many
people write critiques of the DSM. These critiques often -- and I mean
really often -- call the book psychiatry's "bible." By calling it a
sacred text, these critics show their irreverence. The analogy is bad,
though. Few psychiatrists regard the DSM as sacred, and most recognize
its weaknesses.21 Psychiatrists know the DSM fails to capture all the
nuances of mental illness.22 Criticism of the DSM is necessary, but not
all that contrarian. Perhaps instead of using a manual we should let
clinicians use their judgment, based on experience, to make
individualized treatment plans. This is what many do anyway, whatever
they write on the insurance submission. Much would be lost without some
standard manual, though.

Clinicians would find it hard to communicate about patients, and
research comparing patients would be hard to design. Many patients are
dependent on third-party payment, and insurers want a classification
system. Critics of psychiatric diagnosis point to discredited diagnoses
to claim the whole enterprise is flawed. Homosexuality is one example,
but there are lots of others. In the nineteenth century, a racist White
doctor said that escaped slaves in the American south suffered from
"drapetomania," an illness whose symptom was the desire to be free.23
Hysteria was a diagnosis that stigmatized women and was used to control
them. Psychiatric labels often do have political and cultural bias. But
these examples do not show that psychiatric labels have no possible
value. To say they do is as dogmatic and uncritical as saying that they
have perfect validity.

So, What About Depression? Is It an Illness? The word "depression"
refers to a sickness, but also to a mood everyone experiences. The mood
ordinarily passes, and is often driven away with simple changes like
going for a run, cleaning up your room, or taking a shower. Even when it
lasts longer, it may pass in time, and fade as life gets better.
Ifemelu's mood changed as she got a job and made friends. This does not
mean she never had a clinical depression, and the novel never says for
sure either way. But people who have not had the illness often struggle
to see that it cannot be easily shaken off, and may require medical
treatment. Deciding whether depression is an illness would be easier if
it were a less amorphous category. The number of symptoms that have been
called symptoms of depression is huge. I began keeping a list of every
symptom I found, in any context past or present, to be a symptom of
depression (see figure 1). I have grouped them into three domains: (1)
affective/behavioral -- having to do with mood and actions, (2)
psychotic -- having a break with reality, and (3) somatic, or physical.
Almost all depression diagnoses include affective and somatic items.
Psychotic symptoms belong, in most twentieth-century psychiatry, to
particular subtypes, though they were more dominant in descriptions of
melancholia.

Figure 1 A (futile) attempt at a comprehensive list of depression
symptoms in all contexts, past and present, sorted into domains With all
the variability shown in figure 1, are we really talking about the same
illness in all times and places? And yet, there are human universals: of
body (brains, hearts, hormones, genitals, for example) and experience
(hunger, pleasure, intimacy, grief, awe, and so on). They vary in form
by culture, but even with immense variation, translation across cultural
frontiers can be possible.24 Virtually all human societies have a
concept of mental sickness, or madness.25 Does that include depression?
Depression seems to fail the "physical lesion" test. In the absence of
the clear physical lesion, the possible universality of depression as an
illness might seem to do the same work: if it is an illness everywhere
and at all times, then it must really be an illness -- and if not, it
might seem to be less real. But before getting into the question of
depression's universality in detail, a caution: this criterion is no
more definitive than a physical lesion. If an illness exists only in
particular places and times, we can only conclude exactly that. We
cannot conclude it is a fake illness. Illnesses particular to cultures
are as real as any other.

Do They Have Depression Everywhere? If the debate between Ifemelu and
Uju was tacitly about what makes something an illness, it was explicitly
a debate about the role of culture in deciding. Mental health research
has had much the same debate for at least a century now. Depressed mood
happens everywhere. Whether depression as an illness is also everywhere
is less clear. Depression has been called the single most fraught
psychiatric diagnosis for cross-cultural study.26 This is a strong
statement, since they are all fraught. Two main questions have animated
this fraught inquiry. The first is whether depression is a
"culture-bound" syndrome of the West.27 A "culture-bound syndrome" is an
illness only found in certain cultures. Examples include koro, found
especially in parts of Asia; people believe their sex organs are
retracting and will disappear; and ataque de nervios, common in some
Latin American contexts, often showing uncontrollable shouting, and a
sensation

of heat rising in the chest, among other symptoms.28 Depression, Ifemelu
argued, was a North American culture-bound syndrome. If depression is
not a culture-bound syndrome, it may vary in form. This raises the
second question is: Do some cultures express depression in a more
physical way, and less in terms of mood -- and if so, what is the ground
for calling it "depression"? My own view is, first, that depression is
probably not confined to the West, though it does seem that Western
medical culture may have been historically more preoccupied with it than
some others. Second, it may not be so much Western culture in general
that is distinctive, but psychiatry itself. Psychiatry is a cultural
system, with a set of beliefs about depressive illness that are not
universal, but growing more global in their influence every day. Looking
at how views of depression in Africa have changed shows how knotty these
questions are. In the early twentieth century, in colonial Africa,
Western psychiatrists said that depression was rare to non-existent. In
the 1960s and 1970s, the early independence period, more cases were
found, and some began to say rates were as high as in the West, or
higher.29 Rise in prevalence, better detection, or diagnostic drift?
Better detection played some role. Early reports came from asylums, who
admitted people upsetting social order, not people with the social
withdrawal or lethargy often found in depression. Colonial asylums were
not for therapy. They were more like prisons for the mad. The numbers
probably changed during independence because people started looking at
suffering people in other contexts, out of asylums. But racism also had
a role in the low numbers found in the early reports. Claims that
depression is uniquely Western are tied to the history of Western
imperialism. During the Atlantic slave trade, European slavers created
stereotypes of carefree Black people, immune from melancholy and mental
illness.30 These images co-existed with, and soothed, an awareness by
slave owners and slave traders that slavery could cause severe
melancholy. On slave ships, slave traders saw that among captives even
in this horrific setting, extreme cases of melancholy stood out. The
captors sometimes took some modest medical measures to address it.31 The
image of Africans as immune to depression remained sturdy, though. It
served a

purpose. It allowed a denial of the inhumanity of slavery by diminishing
the full humanity of the enslaved. The image influenced later colonial
observers, biasing them against finding depression in Africa.32
Depression, these observers thought, was not just an illness, but a
capacity held by more civilized people. Mental illness was not alone in
this prejudice. White physicians once thought cancer was rare among
Black people because it was a disease of more advanced races.33 The idea
that depression was rare in Black people survived into racist North
American science well into the twentieth century. In 1914, a doctor at
the Georgia State Sanatorium claimed that "The Negro mind does not dwell
upon unpleasant subjects; he is irresponsible, unthinking ... Depression
is rarely encountered even under circumstances in which a White person
would be overwhelmed."34 A 1962 account of American Black people and
depression shows the mental contortions racist science makes to avoid
rethinking its assumptions. The report granted that there was no
evidence of less depression in Black than White people. The authors then
offered possible reasons why rates might be low among Black people
anyway. Then, they used these speculations to confirm that the rates
were indeed low!35 While Western racism influenced the perception of
depression, the question of its prevalence in Africa puzzled African
observers, too. Nigerian T. A. Lambo, one of the first African
psychiatrists, changed his mind, first thinking depression was rare,
then wondering if it was being under-counted, and finally deciding it
was being misdiagnosed.36 Depressed patients, he decided, had been given
a wrong label: neurasthenia. Neurasthenia was an illness made famous by
American neurologist George Beard in the nineteenth century. Like
depression, it had many symptoms, including depressed mood, mania,
anxiety, irritability, impaired intellect, indigestion, malnourishment,
insomnia, weakness, nerve pain, loss of faith, and fear of poverty.37
Most of these symptoms could be a part of a depression diagnosis in
current Western medicine. Depression, though, is classed as a mental
illness that can have physical effects. Neurasthenia was the opposite:
Beard thought it was a physical illness that could have mental effects.
He thought it was a loss of nervous energy, and urged physical cures.38
Neurasthenia started to decline as a diagnosis in the West in the early

twentieth century, but went on to be used in African and Asian
countries, and still is in some. In the early 1960s, Lambo worked with
an international team to compare concepts of mental illness among the
Yoruba of Nigeria with those in Western contexts. No Yoruba word
translated exactly as depression.39 Many symptoms of depression, though,
came up in Yoruba accounts of distress. They included "sapped vitality
... crying continuously, extreme worry, loss of appetite," and lost
interest in life.40 The research team didn't decide whether depression
was a defined illness for the Yoruba, though they found depressive
symptoms just as common as in the Western context. Many Nigerians
continue to believe their country has no depression, that depression is
a Western thing. Many are also challenging this view, though (see figure
2).41 The changing African figures show that debates about the rates of
mental illness are never only about numbers. They are also about how
definition, culture, and politics shape the collection of the numbers.42
Many languages, like Yoruba, lack a medical word for depression.43 As
Kenyan writer Ted Malanda wrote after actor Robin Williams's suicide, "I
can't wrap my mind around the fact that depression is an illness. We are
stressed and depressed all the time! In fact, it is such a non-issue
that African languages never bothered to create a word for it. Anybody
who knows what they call depression in their mother tongue, please step
forward."44 Does this settle the case? Maybe not. If a society lacked a
specific word for malaria, and only had a word for fever, we would say
they had malaria if we could find the microbe in them, even if they did
not have the specific word. But depression has no specific microbe, and
in the case of malaria, the person is considered sick. Do depressive
symptoms only become an illness state if the society groups them into a
diagnosis? Ifemelu might say that this grouping happens because of the
Western expectation of happiness. Societies that expect suffering from
life might have depressive mood, but not the illness. This might, for
example, include Buddhist societies. In Buddhism, the first of the four
noble truths is that existence is suffering. Perhaps it makes no sense,
in such a context, to call depression an illness.45 If so, however, I do
not see how any state of distress, whether mental illness, infectious
disease, or chronic physical

disease, could be an illness. Buddhist societies certainly have illness.
Some Buddhist societies have also had long histories of seeing extreme
sorrow, or loss of interest in life, as signs of illness.46 So do other
societies without a special expectation of happiness. In Iran, sadness
is a mark of seriousness and maturity, but is separate from depression,
the illness.47

Figure 2 This image was brought in to a class on depression by a
Nigerian student. It's not clear that the artist meant to depict
depression; the student said it represented depression to her Source:
Peju Alatise, "The Unconscious Struggle."

Sorrow and loss of interest are emotional signs. Depression has physical
signs, too, and cross-cultural debate has also asked whether any
apparent lack of depression in a place only means that depression's
physical aspects are the focus. This is called "somatization," to make
something physical, related to the body. 48 The idea of somatized
depression is not new. Western psychiatry has known it as "masked
depression," depression without obvious sadness, since the early
twentieth century.49 It's important to stress -- people often miss this
point -- that no one is saying that a person has depression just because
they have a backache or an upset tummy. Both

psychiatrists and anthropologists usually say that if depression is
suspected because of body problems, it is only confirmed if depressed
mood or related emotional signs are found after a closer look.
Anthropologists have found depression somatized in Asian, African, and
Latin American societies.50 But in the United States, rural people,
nonWhite people, and lower-class people often also somatize
depression.51 People come to primary care physicians with physical
complaints and leave with a diagnosis of depression if other depressive
symptoms are found in the exam.52 Urban, White, affluent people are a
minority in the United States, let alone globally. If so many places
somatize depression, perhaps somatizing is the norm. The term itself may
be misguided. It assumes that the primary state of depression is
emotional, and the physical aspects secondary. Can pain ever be purely
physical or purely psychic? Do we ever feel physical pain without it
affecting our minds? Do we ever feel psychic pain without some sensation
in our bodies? After many years of reading accounts of depression, I
recall none where the depression lacked any physical aspects. DSM 5,
with its requirement of five out of nine symptoms, requires at least one
somatic symptom for a depression diagnosis. Emotional ones alone won't
tally to the threshold of five. Western psychiatry, then, insists on a
physical dimension. Depression is always a bodily experience.53 The
harder problem is not whether depression has physical symptoms, but the
opposite: can a diagnosis of depression be made without signs of
sadness? Without sadness, a depression diagnosis may stretch the term
until it becomes incoherent.54 Perhaps later evidence could confirm
depression. One psychiatrist gave the example of a woman who complained
only of headaches, and then hung herself.55 The psychiatrist inferred
depression from the suicide. Another psychiatrist had patients with
symptoms including anorexia, insomnia, impotence, and menstrual
irregularity, but little evidence of sadness.56 Some of the patients
improved after electroconvulsive therapy. If a patient with no apparent
sadness improves after a treatment for depression, is a diagnosis of
depression warranted? Treatment gives the cross-cultural questions
practical urgency. It seems wrong to deny a suffering person a treatment
that works because their

culture expresses or names the suffering differently. Concerns about the
spread of Western psychiatry as a form of cultural imperialism are also
valid, though. Using labels from one culture in another one always risks
veiling local experience.57 One possible solution is to use local
categories, or "idioms of distress," that are used by particular
cultures, instead of supposedly universal diagnoses. The hope is to
capture nuances of meaning in different settings.58 For example, a
Punjabi idiom called "sinking heart" has some overlap with the English
word "depression," including weakness and unhappiness.59 Physically,
"sinking heart" manifests in the chest. In the words of afflicted
people: When I have sinking heart my heart goes fast. One minute it goes
up and the next minute it goes down. It is as if my heart is shrinking
and my whole body is going wrong. I used to get this in my heart all the
time and it felt like shaking ... or shrinking ... in my heart. This
feeling made me walk up and down. I could not sit still and I felt great
agitation.60 Other expressions of sinking heart include dry mouth,
faintness, headache, and trouble breathing. Some of this picture is
suggestive of depression, but some of it less so. If you simply call it
depression, you lose aspects of how Punjabis see the problem. Their
medical model revolves around the heart. The heart distributes food,
breath, and blood, and is a reservoir for emotions and drives. Western
psychiatry roots emotion more in the brain. Loss of control of the heart
is loss of control of the self for Punjabis. This loss of control can
happen when people pay too much attention to their emotions.61 By
contrast, many Americans might say you "lose yourself" when you pay too
little attention to your emotions. When symptoms in local idioms overlap
a lot with those of depression, it's possible that the idioms capture
local ways of thinking about depressive illness more than they show
absence of depression. One idiom of distress found in numerous places
translates as "thinking too much."62 In some contexts, this idiom does
not look much like depression, but in many others it does. Perhaps many
of the languages without a word for depression are calling it "thinking
too much."

Referring to depression as a "Western" illness raises other problems.
What even is "Western culture"? American society has numerous
sub-cultures, and depression patients do not share the same concepts of
sickness, even if they are evaluated using the same manual. Europe is a
multicultural continent, with differences in how low affect and distress
are seen.63 And what are the boundaries of "the West"? Much of the
tradition regarding melancholia during classical antiquity was adopted
by Islamic writers during the Middle Ages. The great Persian scholar
Avicenna had a section on melancholia in the Canon of Medicine
(completed in the eleventh century). Like much of classical antiquity,
this tradition was transmitted to Europe during the Renaissance. One
thing not at stake, to me, in the depression and culture debates is the
realness of depression. Culture-bound illnesses are as real as any
other. We often treat things that are (in the tired academic phrase)
"socially constructed" as less real. But our houses, tax codes, and the
internet are "socially constructed." They are not found in nature before
human action, but they are real.64 Arguments for the absence of
depression, anywhere, pose the question of whether one was looking in
the right way. Arguments that depression is universal pose the question
of whether the suffering could be better captured in local terms. One
thing is certain, though: depression is fast becoming a universally-used
label. As the reach of Western psychiatry grows -- to the point where it
might be better called "cosmopolitan psychiatry" -- people all over the
world are using its language to understand distress. Cultural
differences concern more than the existence of or rates of depression.
Western psychiatry often treats anxiety and depression as separate
things that often occur together.65 In many places, though, anxiety and
depression are seen as part of one thing.66 Cultures also differ in how
they explain depression. In the West depression has recently been
treated as an illness with physical causes, such as genes or
neurochemistry. Critics point out that this can cover up psychological
and social aspects. Most cultures do not do this, though. Globally, it
is more common to consider depression to be at once psychological,
social, and physical.

The model of depression in Western psychiatry is not best seen as a norm
from which others depart, but as a set of cultural assumptions of its
own. Western psychiatric views of depression stick out in four ways.
First, Western psychiatry emphasizes emotional over physical symptoms.
Second, it separates anxiety and depression.67 Even in the West, the
separation of anxiety and depression is new.68 Third, Western medical
tradition has stressed the proportionality criterion. Most cultures
consider hardship in life an obvious cause of depression. Fourth, even
though Western psychiatry highlights mood over physical symptoms, it
ironically puts unusual stress on physical causes, at least in recent
decades.69 The Western stress on individual biology treats suffering
individuals apart from their social context. Globally, depressive
illness is usually considered something that happens because of social
conditions, not something caused mainly by biology. As Western
psychiatry's assumptions and practices spread globally, we may see
important gains and losses. One gain may be the spread of effective
treatments outside their culture of origin. To the extent, though, that
the conception of depression is biological and individualistic, socially
sensitive views may be lost. The question of the newness of depression
poses similar challenges. Some believe clinical depression has been
around for all of human history. One Assyriologist, struggling with
depression herself, sees evidence for her ailment in texts from the
ancient Middle East that are thousands of years old.70 Perhaps the
guilt-ridden despair that disabled King Saul in the Hebrew bible was
clinical depression.71 Many historians in recent years stress instead
the ways depression is a new illness category. 72 The argument for
newness can also sow doubt about the reality of the illness. It
shouldn't. Depression can be new and culture-bound and still be an
illness.

Is It a Gift? When aunt Uju pushed the illness label, she did not think
she was describing a gift. Some though, believe that for all the
wretchedness of depression, it confers certain assets. Lots of creative
people in history seem to have had depressive symptoms. Abraham
Lincoln's melancholy may

have added to his political gifts, by helping him to understand other
people better.73 Three questions caution against making a grand
conclusion about this. One, how many other illnesses have a lot of
gifted people had? If any illness is common, a lot of the people who get
it are going to be gifted. Second, how many people with depressive
symptoms were not especially creative, and we have never heard of them,
because they had no special gift? Third, how many creative people were
lost to history because depressive illness kept them from using their
talents?74 Depression may shape the kind of creativity a person has, but
I doubt that it gives more creativity. Creativity aside, some say that
people with depression have a better grasp of reality.75 In research
this is called "depressive realism." As Susanna Kaysen, the author of
Girl, Interrupted puts it, "My main objection to optimism is that it's
incorrect. Things are somewhat more likely to turn out badly."76 Some
depressed people do say they value the insight the illness yielded. If
this is a gift, it comes with a curse.

Mind and Body Repeat as Necessary: Biological and Psychological Models
Are Complementary, Not Incompatible. Far too many people have tried to
argue that depression is purely biological, or purely psychological.
Biological understandings of depression do not prove that psychological
or sociological understandings are wrong. Psychological and sociological
understandings do not undermine biological understandings. The media
will often report new research showing that genes, or inflammation, or
gut bacteria, or some other biological factor causes depression. However
good this research is, it is not inconsistent with psychological
approaches. The inflammation might be caused by stress. Or, genes may
create a vulnerability that is pricked by personal history. When put
that way, doesn't it seem obvious? Yet many say, in response to new
research on biological factors, "well, there goes Freud!" This is a
logical fallacy. Put another way, it is wrong. Biological and
psychological models are complementary, not incompatible.

Apart from cause, depression always has psychological content --
problems in families, or work, obsessive thoughts, etc. Psychology can
have insight into these problems, no matter how much biology may have
caused the illness. Biological and psychological models are
complementary, not incompatible. A biological treatment can work, even
if the cause of illness isn't biological. Efficacy of electroconvulsive
therapy, antidepressants, or other physical treatment does not allow
firm conclusions about cause. A treatment of the brain can work for a
problem with a psychological origin. Biological and psychological models
are complementary, not incompatible. People can benefit from physical
and psychological treatments at the same time. Antidepressants and
psychotherapy have greater efficacy when combined, for example.77 They
may act on different aspects of the problem, but that may be exactly why
they are most effective together -- different aspects of the problem
require different work. Biological and psychological models are
complementary, not incompatible. Let's look at two memoirists of mental
illness, Kay Redfield Jamison and Elyn Saks.78 Jamison suffers from
bipolar disorder, Saks from schizophrenia. Jamison and Saks both came to
appreciate that their illnesses were both psychological and physical.
Jamison began having extreme mood swings as a young adult. She was
hesitant about medication -- the illness had elevated states she did not
want to give up. After facing the wreckage of excessive spending and
selfdestructive behavior several times, she came to see that the
medicine was essential, life-saving. As a scientific researcher on
bipolar disorder herself, Jamison is steeped in the genetic science of
the illness. Neither this, nor her reliance on medication, stopped her
from finding insight-oriented psychotherapy helpful for her recoveries.
As a law student, Saks began to have scary psychotic episodes. She
sought the help of psychoanalysis, which she found helpful in decoding
the source and meaning of her delusions. She was resistant to drugs,
however, fearing they would suggest that she was really ill in a way
that she did not want to be. The psychoanalysis did not do enough. Like
Jamison, she accepted drug therapy, with some resignation. The
combination of treatments, together with strong social supports, enabled
her to become a law professor. The

efficacy of the psychoanalysis was not enough to keep her from trying
drugs. The efficacy of the drugs did not lead her to abandon her support
for psychoanalysis, and she became a psychoanalyst herself. The
importance of the social supports did not lead her to discount or
discard her need for medical treatment. The evidence that depression has
both biological and psychological dimensions is so vast it is beyond
questioning. For all the enigmas that surround the ailment, one proven
thing is that it is not entirely mental or physical. The only thing
strange about this is how people struggle to see it. Efficacy of
physical treatments for depression never seems to sway people skeptical
of them, who continue to insist that psychotherapy or social reform is
the only way forward. Nor does the efficacy of psychotherapy, or our
knowledge of the social causes of depression, seem to sway many who
reduce depression to biology. Reductionists of various kinds have had
their day, especially over the last century. Depression is a complex
problem. It has multiple causes -- which makes it unlikely only one kind
of response will do. This is a way depression does differ from
melancholia. The medical ideas underpinning the idea of melancholia were
never just mental or just physical. They assumed mind and body
constantly influence one another. How did we lose that?

Notes 1.
http://bookslive.co.za/blog/2015/03/13/i-felt-violated-chimamandangozi-adichie-reveals-her-anger-at-the-guardian-over-article-ondepression/,
accessed October 25, 2019. 2. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Americanah
(London: HarperCollins, 2014). See especially pages 150--8. 3.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/world-healthday/en/,
accessed July 7, 2017. See also Alice Walton, "The Strategies that
Science Actually Shows are Effective for Depression," Forbes, June 15,
2017, https://www.forbes.com/sites/alicegwalton/2017/06/15/the-

strategies-that-science-actually-shows-are-effective-fordepression/#547748b75117,
accessed July 8, 2017. 4.
https://psychnews.psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.pn.2017.pp9b2,
accessed August 20, 2019. 5. See, for example, Dan G. Blazer, The Age of
Melancholy: Major Depression and Its Social Origins (New York:
Routledge, 2005). 6. Christopher M. Callahan and German E. Berrios,
Reinventing Depression: A History of the Treatment of Depression in
Primary Care, 1940--2004 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005),
116--17. 7. Terri Airov, "Is the Definition of Depression Deficient?
Examining the Validity of a Common Diagnosis," Psych Congress Network,
Fall/Winter 2017, 28--9. 8. Douglas F. Levinson and Walter E. Nichols,
"Genetics of Depression," in Dennis S. Charney, Joseph D. Buxbaum,
Pamela Sklar, and Eric J. Nestler, Charney and Nestler's Neurobiology of
Mental Illness (5th edn, New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 301.
9. Ibid. 10. Scott Monroe and Richard A. Depue, "Life Stress and
Depression," in Joseph Becker and Arthur Kleinman, eds., Psychosocial
Aspects of Depression (New York: Routledge, 1991), 102. 11. Quoted in
Tim Lott, The Scent of Dried Roses (London: Penguin, 1996), 70. My
emphasis. 12. Silvano Arieti and Jules Bemporad, Severe and Mild
Depression: The Psychotherapeutic Approach (New York: Basic Books,
1978), 3. 13. The examples in this paragraph are detailed and documented
in later chapters: classical antiquity in chapter 2, Freud in chapter 3,
and the bereavement exclusion in chapter 4. 14. Jonathan Sadowsky,
Electroconvulsive Therapy in America (New York: Routledge, 2006), 83--6.

15. Nancy C. Andreasen, The Broken Brain: The Biological Revolution in
Psychiatry (New York: Harper and Row, 1984), 34. 16. The concept of the
sick role was classically expressed in Talcott Parsons, "Social
Structure and Dynamic Process: The Case of Modern Medical Practice," in
The Social System (Glencoe: The Free Press, 1951), 428--79. It has lost
some status in sociology, but I still find it useful; see John C.
Burnham, "Why Sociologists Abandoned the Sick Role Concept," History of
the Human Sciences 27, 1 (2014) 70--87. I thank Disha Bhargava for
helpful comments on a previous draft of this paragraph. 17. On the
process of transforming conditions into illnesses, see Peter Conrad, The
Medicalization of Society: On the Transformation of Human Conditions
into Treatable Diseases (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
2007). 18. Randall M. Packard, White Plague, Black Labor: Tuberculosis
and the Political Economy of Health and Disease in South Africa
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989); Georgina D. Feldberg,
Disease and Class: Tuberculosis and the Shaping of North American
Society (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1995). 19. Sontag's
Illness as Metaphor gives a classic account of this. 20. On the pros and
cons of psychiatric diagnosis, see also Felicity Callard, "Psychiatric
Diagnosis: The Indispensability of Ambivalence," Journal of Medical
Ethics 40 (2014) 526--30; and George Szmukler, "When Psychiatric
Diagnosis Becomes an Overworked Tool," Journal of Medical Ethics 40, 8
(August 2014), 517--20. 21. I obviously cannot prove that there are
literally no psychiatrists who do not recognize limitations of the DSM.
I read and meet a lot of psychiatrists, though. I know of none who do
not recognize that the manual has flaws. 22. Gary Greenberg, The Book of
Woe: The DSM and the Unmaking of Psychiatry (New York: Plume, 2013) is
one of the scathing critiques of the DSM books, and uses the "bible"
comparison. But Greenberg himself recognizes throughout that
psychiatrists see the DSM as, at best,

a rough guide with modest claims to scientific rigor. Historian Anne
Harrington notes that unease about the DSM has been growing since the
1990s. This is likely true, but as we will see in chapter 4, there has
been a substantial amount of unease with the DSM at least since the
1970s. Anne Harrington, Mind Fixers: Psychiatry's Troubled Search for
the Biology of Mental Illness (New York: W. W. Norton and Sons, 2019),
267. 23. Wendy Gonaver has recently argued that the diagnosis was even
more ideological than it is usually taken to be, since no one seems to
have actually used it in medical practice. Wendy Gonaver, The Peculiar
Institution and the Making of Modern Psychiatry, 1840--1880 (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2018), 6--7. 24. Chiara
Thumiger offers a smart set of four premises for thinking about this:
(1) the human mind is biological, so there is going to be some measure
of universality, (2) the mind and mental life are not confined to the
brain, but involve other parts of the body, (3) the mind is
acculturated, and (4) there is further an irreducible individual
quality, a private-ness to every person. Chiara Thumiger, A History of
the Mind and Mental Health in Classical Greek Medical Thought
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017), 27--9. I only question
the implied notion here that brain and biology are universal, and mind
cultural. Mind can only be subject to culture if brain is, and since we
know mind is, we also know brain is. This does not mean that the brain
is infinitely plastic to culture. 25. In my work on the history of
mental illness in colonial Nigeria, I found that in relatively early
contacts between Europeans and West Africans, "madness" was a category
that was recognized across cultural divides. Jonathan Sadowsky, Imperial
Bedlam: Institutions of Madness and Colonialism in Southwest Nigeria
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), ch.Â 1. 26. Sushrut
Jadhav, "The Cultural Construction of Western Depression," in Vieda
Skultans and John Cox, eds., Anthropological Approaches to Psychological
Medicine (Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2000).

27. See, for example, Christopher Dorwick, "Depression as a CultureBound
Syndrome: Implications for Primary Care," British Journal of General
Practice 63, 610 (2013) 229--30. Matthew Bell, Melancholia, The Western
Malady (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014) argues at length
that depression is uniquely Western, but the argument is not strong
because it is not deeply-steeped in the cross-cultural literature. 28.
The term "Culture-Bound Syndrome" was coined in the 1960s by
psychiatrist P. M. Yap. See P. M. Yap, "Koro: A Culture-bound
Depersonalization Syndrome," British Journal of Psychiatry 111 (1965)
43--50. There have been many subsequent discussions. See, for example,
Peter Guarnaccia and L. H. Rogler, "Research on Culture-Bound
Syndromes," American Journal of Psychiatry 156 (1999), 1322--7. 29.
Raymond Prince, "The Changing Picture of Depressive Syndromes in Africa:
Is It Fact or Diagnostic Fashion?" Canadian Journal of African Studies
1, 2 (November 1967) 177--92; John Orley and John K. Wing, "Psychiatric
Disorders in Two African Villages," Archives of General Psychiatry 36
(May 1979) 513--20; Melanie A. Abas and Jeremy C. Broadhead, "Depression
and Anxiety among Women in an Urban Setting in Zimbabwe," Psychological
Medicine 27 (1997) 59--71. 30. Leonard Smith, Insanity, Race, and
Colonialism: Managing Mental Disorder in The Post-Emancipation
Caribbean, 1838--1914 (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), 2, 34. 31.
Sowande' M. Mustakeem, Slavery at Sea: Terror, Sex, and Sickness in the
Middle Passage (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2016), 115--17.
32. See T. Duncan Greenlees, "Insanity among the Natives of South
Africa," Journal of Mental Science 41 (1895) 71--82; C. G. F. Smartt,
"Mental Maladjustment in the East African," Journal of Mental Science
428 (July 1956) 441--66. 33. Keith Wailoo, How Cancer Crossed the Color
Line (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011). 34. Quoted in Herb
Kutchins and Stuart A. Kirk, Making Us Crazy: DSM: The Psychiatric Bible
and the Creation of Mental Disorders (New York: The Free Press, 1997),
219.

35. Arthur J. Prange and M. M. Vitols, "Cultural Aspects of The
Relatively Low Incidence of Depression in Southern Negroes,"
International Journal of Social Psychiatry 8, 2 (February 1962) 104--12.
The circular logic of this article is an example of what Barbara Fields
and Karen Fields have called "Racecraft," the way racist thinking can so
deeply inflect baseline assumptions that it can defy evidence and logic.
Barbara Fields and Karen Fields, Racecraft: The Soul of Inequality on
American Life (London: Verso, 2014). 36. T. Adeoye Lambo,
"Neuropsychiatric Observations in the Western Region of Nigeria,"
British Medical Journal (December 15, 1956), 1388--94. Alexander H.
Leighton, T. Adeoye Lambo, Charles C. Hughes, Dorothea C. Leighton, Jane
M. Murphy, and David B. Macklin, Psychiatric Disorder Among the Yoruba
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1963). 37. David G. Schuster,
Neurasthenic Nation: America's Search for Health, Happiness, and
Comfort, 1869--1920 (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2011), 11.
38. Ibid., 145. 39. Similarly, no Navajo word translates exactly as
depression, but many depressive symptoms are considered as signs of
illness, warranting treatment. Michael Storck, Thomas J. Csordas, and
Milton Strauss, "Depressive Illness and Navajo Healing," Medical
Anthropology Quarterly 14, 4 (2000) 571--97. 40. Leighton et al.,
Psychiatric Disorder Among the Yoruba, 112. See also M. O. Olatuwara,
"The Problem of Diagnosing Depression in Nigeria," Psychopathologie
Africaine 9 (1973) 389--403. 41. See, for example, Chude Jideonwo,
"Nigeria Is Finally Paying Attention to Depression, And Not A Moment Too
Soon,"
https://www.thriveglobal.com/stories/35629-nigeria-is-finally-payingattention-to-depression,
accessed October 19, 2018; "There's a Culture of Silence around the
Mental Health of Young Nigerian Men," Pulse.ng,
https://www.pulse.ng/gist/pop-culture/depression-theres-a-culture-of-

silence-around-the-mental-health-of-young-nigerian-menid7822498.html,
accessed October 25, 2018. 42. As Megan Vaughan has put it, writing
about the history of suicide in Africa, "The history of suicide is in
part a history of subjectivity, and no history of that sort is ever
going to be straightforward." Megan Vaughan, "Suicide in Late Colonial
Africa: The Evidence of Inquests from Nyasaland," The American
Historical Review 115, 2 (April 2010) 385-- 404. 43. Anthony J.
Marsella, "Depressive Experience and Disorder across Cultures," in H.
Triandis and J. Draguns, eds., Handbook of CrossCultural Psychiatry
(Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1980). 44.
https://www.sde.co.ke/article/2000131772/how-depression-has-neverbeen-an-african-disease,
accessed October 31, 2019. Thanks to Njambe Kimani for this reference.
45. A classic statement of this is Gananath Obeyesekere, "Depression,
Buddhism and the Work of Culture in Sri Lanka," in Arthur Kleinman and
Byron Good, eds., Culture and Depression: Studies in the Anthropology
and Cross-Cultural Psychiatry of Affect and Disorder (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1985). For an important commentary on
Obeyesekere, see Alain BottÃ©ro, "Consumption by Semen Loss in India and
Elsewhere," Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 15 (1991), 303--20. See
also Catherine Lutz, "Depression and the Translation of Emotional
Worlds," in Kleinman and Good, Culture and Depression. 46. See Junko
Kitanaka, Depression in Japan: Psychiatric Cures for a Society in
Distress (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012), 15--36. I look
at this case more in chapter 5. In a 1930s colonial-era glossary
translating Vietnamese medical terms into French, one Vietnamese term
translated literally as "no interest in anything." The French called
this a form of mÃ©lancolie that carried risk of suicide. See Claire E.
Edgington, Beyond the Asylum: Mental Illness in French Colonial Vietnam
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2019), 160--2.

47. Byron J. Good, Mary-Jo DelVecchio Good, and Robert Moradi, "The
Interpretation of Iranian Depressive Illness and Dysphoric Affect," in
Kleinman and Good, Culture and Depression. 48. The concept has been
fertile for cross-cultural study, especially since medical
anthropologist Arthur Kleinman introduced a thoughtful treatment in a
1986 book about distress in China. Arthur Kleinman, Social Origins of
Distress and Disease: Depression, Neurasthenia, and Pain in Modern China
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986). 49. Prince, "The Changing
Picture of Depressive Syndromes in Africa." Prince says the concept of
masked depression in Western psychiatry can be traced back to 1912.
According to Wikipedia, prominent German psychiatrist Kurt Schneider
used the concept in the 1920s, calling it "depression without
depression," https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masked_depression, accessed
October 10, 2018. 50. See, for example, B. B. Sethi, S. S. Nathawat, and
S. C. Gupta, "Depression in India," The Journal of Social Psychology 91
(1973) 3-- 13; John Racy, "Somatization in Saudi Women: A Therapeutic
Challenge," British Journal of Psychiatry 137 (1980) 212--16; Fanny M.
Cheung, "Psychological Symptoms among Chinese in Urban Hong Kong,"
Social Science and Medicine 16 (1982) 1339--44. 51. Kleinman, Social
Origins, 52. 52. Daniel R. Wilson, Reuben B. Widmer, Remi J. Cadoret,
and Kenneth Judiesch, "Somatic Symptoms: A Major Feature of Depression
in a Family Practice," Journal of Affective Disorders 5 (1983) 199--207.
53. Dividing the world into somatizing and non-somatizing cultures risks
stereotyping both. This is argued, for example, in Brandon A. Kohrt,
Emily Mendenhall, and Peter J. Brown, "Historical Background: Medical
Anthropology and Global Mental Health," in Brandon A. Kohrt and Emily
Mendenhall, eds., Global Mental Health: Anthropological Perspectives
(New York: Routledge, 2016). 54. Philosopher of psychiatry Jennifer
Radden reaches this conclusion. Jennifer Radden, "Is This Dame
Melancholy? Equating Today's

Depression and Past Melancholia," Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology
10, 1 (2003) 37--52. 55. J. J. LÃ³pez Ibor, "Masked Depressions," British
Journal of Psychiatry 120 (1972) 245--58. 56. V. A. Kral, "Masked
Depression in Middle Aged Men," Canadian Medical Association Journal 79,
1 (July 1, 1958) 1--5. 57. These concerns are explored, for example, in
Ethan Watters, Crazy Like Us: The Globalization of the American Psyche
(New York: The Free Press, 2010). For an even more critical view, see
China Mills, Decolonizing Global Mental Health: The Psychiatrization of
the Majority World (London: Routledge, 2014). For another discussion,
see Doerte Bemme, "Global Health and its Discontents," Somatosphere,
July 23, 2012. 58. See, for example, Mark Nichter, "Idioms of Distress:
Alternatives in the Expression of Psychosocial Distress: A Case Study
from South India," Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 5 (1981) 379--408.
In this article "idioms of distress" refers to what might seem at first
to be symptoms of illness but might instead be healthy adaptations to
stress. In many usages, though, "idioms of distress" is used more to
refer to ways of feeling bad. See also Bonnie N. Kaiser and Lesley Jo
Weaver, "CultureBound Syndromes, Idioms of Distress, and Cultural
Concepts of Distress: New Directions in Psychological Anthropology,"
Transcultural Psychiatry 56, 2 (2019) 589--98. 59. Inga-Britt Krause,
"Sinking Heart: A Punjabi Communication of Distress," Social Science and
Medicine 29, 4 (1989) 563--75. Krause, I should stress, is not insisting
on exclusive focus on emic categories, and on the contrary argues for
the inadequacy of a rigid opposition of universalist and relativist
approaches. 60. Ibid., 566. 61. Ibid., 571. 62. Bonnie N. Kaiser, Emily
E. Haroz, Brandon A. Kohrt, Paul Bolton, Judith K. Bass, and Devon E.
Hinton, "'Thinking Too Much': A

Systematic Review of a Common Idiom of Distress," Social Science and
Medicine 147 (2015) 170--83; Inga-Britt Krause, "Sinking Heart: A
Punjabi Communication of Distress"; Kristin Elizabeth Yarris, "The Pain
of 'Thinking Too Much': Dolor de Cerebro and the Embodiment of Social
Hardship among Nicaraguan Women," Ethos 39, 2 (2011) 226-- 48; Kristen
Elizabeth Yarris, "'Pensando Mucho' ('Thinking Too Much'): Embodied
Distress Among Grandmothers in Nicaraguan Transnational Families,"
Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 38 (2014) 473--98; V. Patel, E.
Simyunu, and F. Gwanzura, "Kufungisisa (Thinking Too Much): A Shona
Idiom for Non-Psychotic Mental Illness," Central African Journal of
Medicine 41, 7 (1995) 209--15; Bonnie N. Kaiser, Kristen E. McLean,
Brandon A. Kohrt, Ashley K. Hagaman, Bradley H. Wagenaar, Nayla M.
Khoury, and Hunter M. Keys, "Reflechi twÃ²p -- Thinking Too Much:
Description of a Cultural Syndrome in Haiti's Central Plateau," Culture,
Medicine, and Psychiatry 38 (2014) 448--72, quote on 448--9. See also
Devon E. Hinton, Ria Reis, and Joop de Jong, "The 'Thinking a Lot' Idiom
of Distress and PTSD: An Examination of Their Relationship among
Traumatized Cambodian Refugees Using the 'Thinking a Lot'
Questionnaire," Medical Anthropology Quarterly 29, 3 (2015), 357--80; T.
N. den Hertog, M. de Jong, A. J. van der Ham, D. Hinton, and R. Reis,
"'Thinking a Lot Among the Khwe of South Africa: A Key Idiom of Personal
and Interpersonal Distress," Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 40 (2016)
383--403; Emily Mendenhall, Rebecca Rinehart, Christine Musyimi, Edne
Bosire, David Ndetei, and Victorio Mutiso, "An Ethnopsychology of Idioms
of Distress in Urban Kenya," Transcultural Psychiatry 56, 4 (2019)
620--42. 63. See, for example, Atwood D. Gaines and Paul E. Farmer,
"Visible Saints: Social Cynosures and Dysphoria in the Mediterranean
Tradition," Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 10, 4 (December 1986)
295--330; Vieda Skultans, "From Damaged Nerves to Masked Depression:
Inevitability and Hope in Latvian Psychiatric Narratives," Social
Science and Medicine 56 (2003) 2421--31. 64. Colin McClarty and Jay
Kaufman, separately, helped me articulate this point, in conversations
many years ago.

65. The precise relationship between anxiety and depression has an
unsettled status in psychiatry. See Lee Anna Clark and David Watson,
"Theoretical and Empirical Issues in Differentiating Depression from
Anxiety," in Kleinman and Becker, Psychosocial Aspects of Depression.
66. Lutz, "Depression and the Translation of Emotional Worlds," 90. Lutz
is drawing here on the work of Julian Leff, another important figure in
the cross-cultural study of mental illness. 67. Ibid.: "the greater the
geographical or sociohistorical distance from London, the more deficient
people are in the ability to tell depression from anxiety." 68. Radden
dates it to Emil Kraepelin in the early twentieth century. Jennifer
Radden, Moody Minds Distempered: Essays in Melancholy and Depression
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 7. 69. Arthur Kleinman also
points out that psychiatry privileges biology by seeing it as the
underlying substrate of mental illness, relegating culture to a force
that shapes the presumably less essential "content," such as the subject
of delusions, for example. Arthur Kleinman, Rethinking Psychiatry: From
Cultural Category to Personal Experience (New York: The Free Press,
1991), 24--6. 70. Moudhy Al-Rahid, "How My Journey with Depression Goes
Back Thousands of Years," Papyrus Stories,
https://papyrusstories.com/2018/10/10/i-am-dying-of-a-broken-heart,
accessed February 25, 2019. 71. Andreasen, The Broken Brain, 36. 72.
Callahan and Berrios, Reinventing Depression: A History of the Treatment
of Depression in Primary Care, 1940--2004 (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2005), viii. 73. Joshua Shenk, Lincoln's Melancholy: How
Depression Challenged a President and Fueled His Greatness (New York:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2005).

74. On this point, see Elizabeth Wurtzel, Prozac Nation: Young and
Depressed in America (New York: Riverhead Books, 1994), 295. 75. Shelley
Taylor and Jonathan Brown, "Illusion and Well Being: A Social
Psychological Perspective on Mental Health," Psychological Bulletin 103
(1988) 193--210. 76. Susanna Kaysen, "One Cheer for Melancholy," in Nell
Casey, Unholy Ghost: Writers on Depression (New York: HarperCollins,
2001), 39. 77. See chapter 4. 78. Kay Redfield Jamison, An Unquiet Mind:
A Memoir of Moods and Madness (New York: Vintage Books, 2011, originally
published 1995); Elyn R. Saks, The Center Cannot Hold: My Journey
Through Madness (New York: Hachette Books, 2007).

2 Too Dry and too Cold "How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable, Seem to
me all the uses of this world." -- Hamlet

Melancholy: An Early Modern Epidemic In staging melancholy, Shakespeare
presented his audience with something it knew well. Melancholy gripped
the attention of much of Renaissance Europe. It posed many of the same
puzzles that depression poses now. For example, where is the line
between sickness and normal sadness? Is Hamlet's melancholy
proportionate to events? Is Ophelia's? Their mental anguish expresses
itself in such different ways. Hamlet does not have delusions. His
melancholy, though, is severe, causing a general disgust with life. He
gives "suicidal ideation" its most famous language. Hamlet has real
problems. He is mourning his father, and is upset about his mother's
scanty grieving. The instructions the ghost of his father give him
plunge him into hard dilemmas about what to do. He is a haunted man. He
is well enough to feign madness, yet he has struck many audiences as not
just a man with problems, but a man with a sickness. Some have seen
sickness as the only way to make sense of his lethargy.1 Ophelia also
has real problems -- she feels spurned by Hamlet, and later she also has
a father to grieve. Ophelia, though, shows not only sadness, but
disordered thought -- her disjointed speech and odd behavior are more
clearly "mad." The play is unsettled about the ultimate cause.2 Macbeth
seems at least as melancholy as either of them, at least by the end of
his drama. His weariness, despair, and inability to find anything of
value in life sound like the words of deep melancholy:

Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day
to day, To the last syllable of recorded time ... Life's ... a tale Told
by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing. Macbeth,
though, has committed terrible acts. A life drained of meaning seems
fitting. In her searing account of life on Prozac, Elizabeth Wurtzel
wrote, "I can't escape the icky feeling I get every time I'm sitting in
a full car and everyone but the driver is on Prozac."3 Since she wrote,
the perception that depression is everywhere has only grown. Yet when
English writer Robert Burton published his epic volume on melancholic
sickness in 1621, he thought much the same, and so did many people in
his time.4 One sixteenthcentury writer said that melancholics were too
numerous to count. Another said few people did not have the malady.5 The
perception was not limited to England, but was widely held across
Europe.6 Then as now, perception may not have matched reality.
Renaissance obsession with melancholy was a cultural trend, apart from
the real incidence of sickness, which we have no way of knowing. Some
blamed the social upheavals of the Protestant Reformation, or a rise in
witchcraft and demonic possession. Others worried about the loosening of
morals.7 (People always worry about the loosening of morals.) No one
blamed the drug companies for disease mongering, because there were no
drug companies yet. Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy sought to explore all
sides of the illness -- causes, experience, and treatments. His
framework was the humoral theory of the body which had dominated
European medical thought since antiquity, and continued to well after
Burton's time. Most European thought about melancholia, from the ancient
Greeks into early modernity, was stamped by humoralism. Health was
maintained by the balance of four bodily humors: blood, phlegm, yellow
bile, and black bile.8 The word "melancholy" comes from humoralism. The
Greek melankholia means an excess of black bile. Medical writers
differed on the reasons why some people had the excess.

They also differed about what should be done. But the premise, that
melancholia was caused by humoral imbalance, held for most. As one
historian of humoralism says, "A human being who was not constituted of
humours would have been unthinkable, just as someone who is not
constituted of cells is inconceivable today."9 Humoral theory declined
starting in the eighteenth century. More mechanistic conceptions of the
body challenged it in the Renaissance, and the rise of the germ theory
of disease in the nineteenth century dealt a decisive blow. Modern
conceptions of the body, its nature, and what makes it sick are
fundamentally different from the ones shared by Burton and his peers.

Melancholia and Depression Melancholia was an illness marked by
dejection, fear without cause, and sometimes a delusional break with
reality. Was it what we now call depression?10 The question itself is
new, though, dating roughly to the coming of Prozac. Before the 1990s,
almost every author on the subject, whether psychiatrist or historian,
assumed that depression was a new name for melancholia.11 If melancholia
and depression have no relationship, then depression is a new thing that
emerged around the turn of the twentieth century, and this chapter has
no business being in this book. Please keep reading. I hope to persuade
you otherwise. But melancholia and depression cannot be identical,
because neither has had a perfectly stable meaning. For all the
fuzziness and flux of the modern depression diagnosis, melancholia may
have had more. Sometimes melancholia included delusional states, with a
radical break from reality, not just a gloomy assessment of it. In
modern psychiatry, delusions can be symptoms of some depressive
disorders, such as psychotic depression.12 Melancholia had many -- very
many -- symptoms grouped in it. But fear and sorrow run through most
descriptions.13 Melancholia was associated with men, modern depression
with women (see figure 3).14 Men may not have really suffered from
melancholia more. We do not have anything close to reliable numbers for
any century before the

twentieth, but in rare instances where some figures for melancholia
exist, they show about even division by sex.15 Tallies of depression in
recent decades show higher numbers of women, though the meaning of these
numbers is disputed. The cultural image of the melancholic, though, was
male, that of the depressed person female. The melancholic man was a
heroic, romanticized figure, a figure of genius. The less exalted term
"depression" came into favor just as women dominated in the cultural
imagery of the ailment.16 We cannot say that melancholics "really" had
depression. We can look, though, at family resemblances between the
descriptions of the two. Some portrayals of melancholia contrast starkly
with modern depression. Others look similar. Comparisons do not require
the two to be identical. Some continuity between melancholia and
depression may be found, even if they lack perfect overlap. Seeing that
historical eras differ is a beginning of historical wisdom. It is not
the only end. We know the two terms are related historically, because
doctors began to use "depression" on purpose to replace melancholia.
Psychiatrist Adolf Meyer urged the change in 1904 because melancholia
implied a known cause for a sickness with uncertain causes. His
suggestion was gradually adopted by more people in the profession in the
decades after. Also, the debates about melancholia, its cause, meaning,
and cure, are similar to those about depression. Many of them relate to
Western mind-body dualism -- the idea that the mental is not physical,
the mind is a separate thing from the body.17 In this dualism, mind and
body can interact with each other, though exactly how can get murky.
Social and humanistic studies of the body, sickness, and healing have
shown how this dualism is a cultural artifact, far from a human
universal.18 In any context, mental activity is embodied, and in my view
the mind is better thought of as something the body does, rather than as
something separate from the body.

Figure 3 This image is usually considered the most iconic representation
of melancholia. Note that the illness entity is gendered female, but
that for most of Western history, the illness sufferer was gendered male
Source: Albrecht DÃ¼rer, "Melancholia", 1514, via Wikimedia Commons

But the separation is deeply ingrained and shows itself in science,
clinical settings, and popular imagination. For most of European
history, "melancholia" and "melancholy" were used interchangeably, to
refer to an illness.19 Depression came into use in the eighteenth
century, but originally referred to a mood. Then, around the turn of the
twentieth century, "melancholy" and "depression" began to trade places.
Depression could still refer to mood, but often meant illness.
Melancholy came more often to refer to mood. "Melancholia" was sometimes
used by psychiatrists for a specific kind of depression -- severe, often
involving psychosis, and of apparent biological origin. In this chapter,
I use melancholia to refer to the ailment, unless discussing a context
where the term melancholy was used for it.20

A Substance Too Gross Even for Flies: Black Bile in Antiquity If you
have been alive any time starting in the 1980s, you have likely heard
that depression is caused by a "chemical imbalance."21 This phrase was
not a nuanced rendering of what the science showed, but it was
widespread in popular press and TV commercials for drugs. The substances
have changed, but this was the idea behind the humoral theory of
medicine. Sickness was caused by imbalance. In the case of melancholia,
the imbalance was too much black bile, the humor associated with dryness
and cold. Purging, in hope of expelling the excess substance, was a
common treatment. Not all premodern observers of melancholy were
humoralists, but it was the most influential paradigm for centuries,
particularly from the time of Galen in the second century onwards.22
Each of the humors had a natural purpose in the body. Ill-health was
caused when they were out of their correct proportion.23 Each of the
four humors corresponded to a temperament: yellow bile with the
choleric, blood with

the sanguine, phlegm with the phlegmatic, and black bile with the
melancholic.24 Each was also associated with one of the four seasons,
one of the four elements, and one of the four stages of life. In each
person, a humor could be dominant because of inborn constitution, or
acquired because of habits and environment. The physician's job was to
put the humors back in balance. Galen devoted a whole book to proving
the existence of black bile. He thought it came into the bowel and
intestines through the liver. Appearing in vomit and feces, causing
anthrax and cancer, it was so vile that "No fly or other creature would
wish to have a taste of it ..."25 For much of antiquity, all of madness
was divided into three parts.26 "Phrenitis," a delirium with fever, was
caused by inflammation of the brain. Mania was delirium without fever.
Melancholia was the third. The term had the same ambiguity depression
does now, referring both to a mood or temperament in the normal range of
life, but also a sickness under certain conditions, such as when it was
severe, or lacking apparent cause.27 In early Greek literature,
melancholia was often an illness of anger. Later antiquity put more
stress on dejection.28 The Hippocratics developed the humoral approach
about 400 BCE. Too much black bile caused several symptoms now
associated with depression, such as low mood, low appetite, insomnia,
and a feeling of being tired of living.29 Anything that dried out or
cooled the body could cause the imbalance. Maintaining balance was not
easy. Aging would cool the body and lead to melancholia. The arrival of
autumn, and eating certain foods, could do the same.30 From the time of
Hippocrates onwards, many writers on melancholia stressed the
proportionality criterion -- the emotions must seem unwarranted by the
outer context.31 The Problemata, a work written by Aristotle or one of
his students, described black bile as a mixture of hot and cold, the hot
corresponding to a manic phase of the illness.32 The symptoms listed in
the Problemata were many, including despair, sluggishness, social
withdrawal, mania, and suicidality, but also epilepsy, skin sores,
varicose veins, inexplicable cheeriness, and overconfidence. The
Problemata's lasting influence was linking melancholia with genius.
According to the Problemata, ALL great men were prone to the ailment.

The less-famous Rufus of Ephesus left a deep mark on ancient thought
about melancholia. Through his influence on Galen, he was important for
European thought as long as humoral theory had status.33 Rufus also used
melancholia to refer to a temperament, a mood, and an illness.34 Some
people were prone to it by innate nature.35 Anything that cooled or
dried the body contributed.36 Heating of bile, though, could also lead
to illness, because it would be followed by its blackening. The physical
basis could explain the content of delusions. A person who imagined
himself to be a ceramic urn was expressing bodily dryness.37 Another
"risk factor" for melancholia was important to later writers: too much
study, too much time with books.38 This belief echoed through the
Renaissance.39 Melancholia caused social withdrawal, or even hostility
to company.40 It caused physical sensations, such as a feeling of
heaviness in the body.41 Sleeplessness, decreased appetite, and memory
disturbance were also symptoms. But two symptoms feature frequently in
melancholia, despite other shifts in emphasis, and they are moods:
dejection and fear.42 Since melancholia was both a sickness of the body
and of the mind, ancient doctors had both physical and mental
treatments.43 Some ancient psychological treatments were what we call
"cognitive," pointing out errors in thought, such as gently suggesting
to the melancholic that the sorrow was without cause.44 Others we would
now call "behavioral" -- Galen suggested exercise, and avoidance of dark
wine and aged cheeses.45 Physical treatments included herbal remedies
and massage. Rufus recommended wine in moderation; it would warm the
body and cook raw humors.46 Sex was also good. Coitus was a remedy for
several ancient writers; one said that it was "evacuative and
calming."47 As is the case with depression now, those who stressed
psychological causes favored treatments involving talk and behavior, and
those who thought of melancholia more as a physical ailment favored
physical treatments.48 But discussion of the mental aspect did not
stress introspection. A deep look into the afflicted person's psyche was
not a feature of diagnosis or treatment.

Sickness and Sin: The "Most Oppressive of Demons" in the Middle Ages
Melancholia was a matter of the mind and body, but was it also a matter
of morality? In the Christian Middle Ages, melancholic symptoms were
called "acedia," and were associated with sloth. Sloth, of course, is a
sin, and a deadly one. Melancholy also violated the Christian command to
be cheerful,49 though St.Â Paul thought some sadness was good if it led
to penance.50 The humoral and physical basis of the sickness was still
assumed. Observers began to wonder more, though, about what blame the
sick had for their suffering. That question has survived, often in
subtle ways, into the modern era of depression. Acedia was a temptation,
according to a father of Egyptian monasticism named Evagrius Ponticus.
Late in the third century of the common era, he settled in deserts
southwest of Alexandria, and spent the next 17 years with hermit
colonies.51 Acedia, he said, was a demon, the most oppressive demon of
all. It would attack a monk's soul between the fourth and eighth hours,
and would make the sun "appear sluggish and immobile, as if the day had
fifty hours."52 The demon's force could be strong enough to drive him
away from the monk's life. One influential monk, John Cassian, connected
acedia especially to sloth.53 Despondency was also a feature, though.
Cassian described acedia as a "weariness or distress of the heart," and
"akin to dejection."54 In the Middle Ages, lists of sins proliferated,
and they included acedia. The sin was also considered an affliction.
Confession was a form of healing, and penance a medicine for the soul.
The term melancholia did not disappear. The Jewish philosopher
Maimonides wrote about melancholia, influenced by Rufus. He saw a link
between melancholia and digestion, and thought the illness was related
to dry stools.55 He also noticed that melancholia could turn into mania.
St.Â Hildegard of Bingen, a visionary of the eleventh century, wrote a
lot about medical matters, and provided a theory about how sin and the
humors were related. The bile was changed by the sins in Eden, which
turned it to darkness. The "black bile ... first originated from Adam's
semen through

the breath of the serpent, since Adam heeded its counsel in taking
food."56 Black bile is in everyone, and a reason for humanity's sorrow
and wickedness, our inability to find joy in this life, or even hope for
the next one.57 As a humoralist, Hildegard did not think everyone had
the same problem with this forlorn substance. Some were innately
melancholy, men whose brains are fatty. Both the membranes encasing the
brain and their blood vessels are turbid. The color of their faces is
dark, even their eyes are firelike and viperlike. They have hard, strong
blood vessels containing black, dense blood.58 Her descriptions of such
men were filled with animal imagery: "With women they are without
restraint like asses," their embrace of women is "hateful, and deadly,
like that of ravaging wolves." Others shun the female sex "but in their
hearts they are as violent as lions and they behave in the manner of
bears." The melancholic were lustful and sex could relieve the malady.59
The reciprocal effects of mind and body, and the combining of
supernatural and natural understanding, continued in the later Middle
Ages. The Flemish painter Hugo van der Goes experienced madness
featuring dejection and suicidality before entering a religious house
near Brussels in 1477.60 A colleague thought the madness may have been a
natural result of eating foods that caused melancholia, and perhaps also
what we would now call "stress." But he also thought that it may have
been a divine punishment for his pride in his fame and achievement.
These were not opposed, since "illness was ... a two-way traffic between
soul and body."61 In the later Middle Ages, commentators put growing
emphasis on the body and declining stress on sin.62 In language,
melancholia began to displace acedia. Acedia was rarely mentioned during
the Renaissance. Melancholia, however, became big.

An Epidemic of Early Modernity

"For if the heart is troubled and sad, physical weakness follows too ...
Diseases of the soul are real diseases." -- Martin Luther63 The early
modern period, between the Middle Ages and the modern industrial era,
saw many social changes -- the growth of mercantile capitalism, the
renewed interest in writers of antiquity in the Renaissance, the
Protestant Reformation, and a new willingness to question authoritative
texts. The treatment of madness, though, did not change much between the
Middle Ages and the early modern period.64 Most early modern writers
fused their spiritual or psychological explorations of melancholia with
humoral assumptions about the workings of the human body. By the end of
the sixteenth century, melancholia was becoming a signature sickness of
the time, prompting several learned books, the most famous by Burton. 65
In England, Elizabethan and early Stuart literature was filled with
melancholy characters.66 Many writers on both melancholia and depression
have been people with the illnesses. Marsilio Ficino, a Catholic priest
of the fifteenth century who was an important figure in the Italian
Renaissance, was an example. He thought melancholia was a condition of
the soul, seated in the body, with astrological influences creating a
temperament that life habits could ease or worsen.67 Ficino was a
humoralist, but his work shows that humoralism was a flexible set of
ideas. Those (like him) born under Saturn, were born prone to
melancholia. But scholars were especially prone. Saturn and Mercury were
cold and dry, and pulled people toward scholarship. But coldness and
dryness were also brought on by the scholar's lifestyle. Philosophers
were at special risk.68 Food was a problem. Anyone frustrated by the
long list of foods modern nutritional science tells us to avoid will
also want to avoid Ficino's dietary advice for melancholics. Black bile,
he said, was worsened by rich, dry, or hard foods that cooled the blood,
as well as by too much food and wine. Melancholics should avoid salted
food, bitter or stale food, burned food, roasted or fried food, rabbit,
beef, old cheese, pickled fish, beans, lentils, cabbage, mustard,
radishes, garlic, onions, leeks, blackberries, and

carrots.69 Fortunately, some foods could relieve melancholy, such as
fruits and other sweets.70 Food and scholarship were not the only
dangers. Ficino warned against anything else that cools or tires a
person. But things that warmed were also a problem, because they could
dry you out. He warned against dark emotions: anger, fear, misery, and
sorrow. Also, literal darkness. And anything that dries the body,
including lack of sleep, worry, purging, urinating, physical exertion,
fasting, cold dry air, and frequent sex.71 You may begin to wonder how
anyone kept from becoming melancholic, but wait until we get to Burton.
Sixteenth-century German views of madness, including melancholia, can be
seen through comparison of two famous figures, Martin Luther and
Paracelsus.72 Luther was fascinated with madness. He used charges of
madness against theological opponents (who returned the favor) and had a
lot to say about melancholia. Luther thought melancholia caused
inattentiveness. This helped make sense of strange stories in the Hebrew
bible. Lot absent-mindedly had sex with his own daughters. Isaac
bestowed his birthright blessing on the smooth-skinned Jacob instead of
the hairier Esau, while Jacob was wearing some lambskin in order to
deceive their father. How could these things happen? For Luther, Isaac's
poor eyesight did not explain enough. He thought both Lot and Isaac must
have been melancholic. For Luther, melancholia mingled the physical and
the spiritual. He called it an "essentially physical disorder."73 But
physical problems could have spiritual causes, and their cures a
spiritual basis. Luther did not think melancholia was entirely bad,
though. He mistrusted the spiritually content. Inner conflict was a mark
of mental vitality and wisdom. Low spirits showed that one knew the
deeply wrong state of the world and humanity, and sadness showed
conscience. Perhaps he felt consolation in this, as he often felt
attacks of doubt and deep sorrow. Paracelsus was a Renaissance physician
and philosopher who was proud to have broken with Galenic humoralism.74
In his early work, he emphasized reason and materialism, but he turned
to a more Christian, biblical outlook later in life. He grouped madness
into five principal kinds, including melancholia. Like the humoralists,
he thought that melancholia came from

both inborn temperament and life changes. His sensibility differed from
Luther's, but they shared certain beliefs about melancholia. Both
believed, for example, that it could be the result of demonic
possession. They also shared an ambiguous view of the moral aspects.
They thought sin was a disease, but they also thought that disease could
be a punishment for sin. And they both thought that mind and body were
meshed. Neither could be changed without changing the other. Intending
to comfort a friend, clergyman and physician Timothy Bright published a
popular book about melancholy in 1586. Bright wanted to sever any
connection between melancholy and sin. Melancholia had physical,
psychological, or even Satanic sources, but was not the result of divine
judgment.75 He recommended good diet, exercise, grooming, rest, and
sleep as antidotes. Burton was motivated to write by his own melancholy,
and found writing therapeutic.76 The Anatomy of Melancholy was a popular
book, going through six editions in Burton's lifetime.77 The Anatomy was
a bookish book. Burton read everything he could find on the subject.
Symptoms of melancholy for Burton included anxiety, fearfulness,
sadness, gloom, restlessness, dissatisfaction, emotional instability,
suspicion, weeping, complaining, aggressive behavior, social withdrawal,
lethargy, an inability to experience pleasure, insomnia, suicidal
tendencies, delusions, and hallucinations.78 When looking at Burton's
views of the causes of melancholy, his mimicry of earlier writers needs
to be kept in mind. He lists a lot of causes, because he probably listed
every one anyone had ever proposed. Modern medical students can get
"Medical Students' Disease," where learning so much about sickness and
its causes can lead to hypochondria. Many of Burton's readers may have
had similar experiences, knowing how many things caused melancholy. I
will name many of them, but not all. My book contract has a word limit.
Like Hildegard, Burton rooted human misery, including melancholy, in the
sins of Eden and saw some melancholy as a part of being human that no
one could avoid.79 Causes also included God's intervention, or the
supernatural acts of other beings, such as angels, saints, witches, and
magicians.80 But Burton was a humoralist, too. Lots of things caused the
imbalance -- the

planets, the climate, other illnesses, too much study, social isolation,
old age, and autumn, for example. Burton thought that men more often got
melancholy, but that women would be more deeply affected -- think of the
contrast between Hamlet and Ophelia.81 Then, the foods. Burton had a
long list of dangerous ones: beef, pork, goat, venison, hare, and
polecat. Peacocks, pigeons, ducks, geese, swan, herons, cranes, "all
those ... fowls that come hither in winter out of Scandia, Muscovy,
Greenland, Friesland, which half the year are covered all over with snow
and frozen up ..." Possibly all fish, but perhaps only some, such as
eel, lamprey, crawfish, and any bred in muddy and standing waters. Milk,
and all that comes from it -- butter, cheese, curds. But not whey, or
ass's milk, for some reason. One did not want to be cool, as a cucumber,
which was disallowed along with gourds, melons, and "especially
cabbage." Roots: onions, garlic, scallions, turnips, carrots, radishes,
parsnips. Fruits: pears, apples, plums, cherries, strawberries. Beans
and peas were a problem, because they bred thick, black blood. Spices
caused heat in the head, pepper, ginger, cinnamon, cloves, and mace.
Also honey and sugar. Though, perhaps not honey. Black wines, and strong
thick drinks. Also cider, and hot, spiced, strong drinks. Beer was ok,
but only if it was not too new or too stale, smelling of the cask,
sharp, or sour.82 One might be left asking what, exactly, was ok to eat.
A few items, such as lettuce, were safe.83 Diet was not made easier by
Burton's further caution that eating too much, or too little, could also
cause melancholy.84 With food, Burton was only getting started on
causes. Bad air, cold air, thick air, foggy air, misty air, air from
fens.85 In an anticipation of our modern Seasonal Affective Disorder,
too much darkness: cloudy days, night, underground vaults.86 Exercise
was good, but only if moderate.87 Burton said that the label of
melancholic sickness should be restricted to cases where it seemed
unwarranted by life circumstances.88 Yet he was paradoxically mindful of
life situations that could lead to the malady: Idleness and solitude.
Insults and slanders. Loss of liberty, servitude, imprisonment. Poverty.
Loss of friends. Bad marriage. Disgraces. Infirmities.89 Burton asserted
the proportionality criterion, but followed it without discipline.

Activities and lifestyle mattered. Life should not be too hedonistic or
too ascetic. Extreme love of gaming and too much sensual pleasure were
worrisome.90 He followed Ficino in warning against too much study.91 He
knew from experience. Remedies were plentiful too. They included prayer,
changes in diet, changes in air, exercise, music, and cheerful
company.92 But Burton did not think melancholy could be cured. He
thought it could be relieved, but relapses were likely. He urged
melancholics to constant vigilance over their health.93 He also
believed, as so many modern therapists have said, that the patient must
want to improve.94 For Burton, melancholy was definitely a physical
condition. But it caused, and was caused by, emotions. The responsible
emotions included sorrow, naturally, which cools the heart, inhibits
sleep, and thickens the blood. Sorrow could make people "weary of their
lives, cry out, howl and roar for the very anguish of their souls."95
But other emotions, too: shame, anger, worry, covetousness, pride, and
self-love.96 Burton explained that as the body works upon the mind by
his bad humours, troubling the spirits, sending gross fumes into the
brain ... disturbing the soul ... with fear, sorrow, etc.... so on the
other side, the mind ... works on the body, producing ... melancholy,
despair, cruel diseases, and sometimes death itself.97 The Anatomy of
Melancholy was the fullest flowering of the humoral view of melancholy.
Soon after, humoralism slowly lost ground. William Harvey's discovery of
the circulation of the blood (seven years after the first edition of The
Anatomy), and growing conceptions of the universe and the body as
governed by mathematical and mechanical laws undercut much of humoral
theory.98 For mental illness, the brain attracted growing focus.99 New
medical models yielded big gains for human health -- most dramatically,
from the second half of the nineteenth century, the success of germ
theory in accounting for, preventing, and treating infectious disease.
Many hoped for similar success in mental illness, but the path to such
success may be different.

Trading Places: From Melancholia to Depression in Modernity The slow
transition from melancholia to depression started in the eighteenth
century. The famous British writer Samuel Johnson, one of the afflicted,
used both terms in the eighteenth century, referring to his "vile
melancholy."100 By the nineteenth century, "depression" referred to a
general decline in functioning. By the middle of that century, "mental
depression" was used for mental illness. The modifier "mental" gradually
fell away. As humoral theories of melancholia declined, the symptom
profile changed little: dejection and fear without cause, and no
accompanying fever.101 An important nineteenth-century British textbook
named melancholia as one of the major forms of mental illness, and
listed disinterest, listlessness, idleness, social isolation, suicidal
inclinations, fearfulness, gloominess, tearfulness, sleeplessness,
disturbed dreams, disordered "uterine function" in women, and lack of
interest in sex for men as the symptoms.102 When you look at this list,
it is hard not to see similarity with modern depression. The French
physician Philippe Pinel saw melancholics as quiet, suspicious, and
loving solitude.103 The proportionality criterion held.104 Pinel's
student, Jean-Ãtienne Esquirol, stressed that the fear lacked apparent
cause, but also that patients had insight -- they knew that their fears
might not be wellgrounded.105 Some grew uneasy with the term melancholia
before Adolf Meyer. Esquirol objected to the term for two reasons. The
first was its etymology; Esquirol was a posthumoralist. The other was
that the term melancholia was also used loosely to refer to melancholy
mood, and thus lacked precision -- though the same would later be said
of the term depression. George Beard did not think neurasthenia was a
new term for melancholia, but a new ailment, caused by modernity. As we
saw, neurasthenia often included typical symptoms of depression.106 Many
clinicians saw the overlap at the time.107 Freud, before he founded
psychoanalysis, considered neurasthenia to be a type of depression.
Already alert to the role of sex, he

thought that lowered sexual energy caused by too much masturbation
caused neurasthenia.108 The influential German Emil Kraepelin, working
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, provided the
foundations of modern psychiatric diagnosis. For all the changes since
Kraepelin, much of current diagnosis is based on his distinction between
manic-depressive disorder (now known as bipolar disorder) and dementia
praecox (now known as schizophrenia). Kraepelin described symptoms and
course of illnesses in detail, without speculation about the causes. He
used manic-depression as an encompassing category for mental illness
involving problems of mood.109 He also coined the term "involutional
depression," referring to depressions that came later in life, often
with paranoid features.110 He separated anxiety states from depression,
as well.111 Whether this was a gain for diagnosis is questionable, given
how often anxious and depressive moods occur together. After about two
centuries of decline in humoral theory came the address by Kraepelin's
younger contemporary Meyer in 1904. Meyer thought both "melancholia" and
"depression" were large categories, and suggested speaking of
"depressions," instead of depression. He preferred the term depression
to melancholia, because he thought that depression was more
"unassuming."112 Like Esquirol, he thought that the term melancholia
carried too much cultural baggage. The term "melancholia" did not die
out right away in clinical description. It was used interchangeably with
depression well into the middle of the twentieth century, though
depression gradually became more common. Some psychiatrists drew on the
older term's associations with delusions, and used melancholia, or
sometimes "melancholic depression," to refer specifically to psychotic
depression.113 By the 1950s, melancholy and depression had largely
switched places. Melancholy had been a clinical syndrome and depression
a mood. Depression became a word for a clinical syndrome, and melancholy
became a word for a mood. An Ngram showing the change of frequency in
the use of the terms "melancholia" and "depression" is presented in
figure 4.

Figure 4 This Ngram shows the change of frequency in the use of the
terms "melancholia" and "depression" Source: Google Ngrams

The diagnostic shuffle -- ditching or re-defining old labels, garnering
support for newly-coined terms -- used to be a process that took decades
or even centuries. Now it seems to happen every few years.

Does Stealing Office Supplies Make You an Evil Person? A Note on Guilt
Taking some office supplies home from work without permission is
naughty. Few would say it makes a person evil. If that person is
depressed, though, they may be hard to convince. This example comes from
a sketch of clinical depression in a psychiatry book for lay people. A
secretary had an injury that made it hard to do her job well. Soon, she
had weight loss, insomnia, loss of interest in the activities she used
to like, anxiety and restlessness, and a sense of worthlessness. One
symptom puzzled her husband: guilt. She used to take home office
supplies for her personal use, and felt deep remorse. Her husband
figured her boss wouldn't think it was a big deal, and he was right --
when she confessed, the boss said he knew employees sometimes took
supplies home, and he didn't care. Even after this, she obsessed over
her great sin.114

While the husband may have found this puzzling, people familiar with
depression would not. Relentless self-accusation, out of scale to what
others think is fitting, is a common symptom of depression. Was it for
melancholia? Is it a symptom of depression in all contexts where
depression is found? We saw that some think depression is a modern and
Western malady, while others think it is more universal. A similar
question arises with this symptom -- is it a part of Western
modernity?115 By Freud's early twentiethcentury writing on melancholia,
guilt was a defining feature. As with the presence of depression,
though, the presence of guilt as a symptom may depend on how you look
for it, and what you call it when you see the signs. If guilt in
depressive illness is particular to Western modernity, why? One culprit
could be a "guilt culture," a culture where people's moral orientation
is guided by internal sanctions more than by fears about public
reputation.116 Some have proposed that a "guilt culture" arose in modern
Western society in the early modern period.117 With a broader culture
filled with guilty thought to begin with, it might be pronounced in
mental illness. Anyone suffering from depressive illness might amplify
the guilt, and engage in severe self-accusation over something as small
as lifting some office supplies. Guilty feeling in melancholics may not
really be so modern, though. In the Middle Ages, penance was considered
one possible remedy for acedia.118 Hildegard associated guilt and
melancholia.119 Hugo van der Goes' dejection and suicidality were
accompanied by the conviction that he was eternally damned.120 If this
is not guilty thinking, what is? Somewhat later, but still fairly early,
Timothy Bright's purpose in writing about melancholia was to distinguish
the guilty conscience of a melancholic from that of a well person, and
the Dutch physician Johannes Weyer wrote in 1598 of melancholics
tormented by conscience.121 What about guilt as a symptom peculiar to
Western depression? This is a fraught question, the same way the
question of depression as Western illness is. Just as some colonial
psychiatrists in Africa thought that depression was rare on the
continent, some thought that guilt was rare as a symptom. Here again,
the claim was folded into racist images of the untroubled native mind.
Other observers -- the same who found more

prevalence of depression in Africa -- did find guilty thoughts as
symptom.122 Margaret Field, an anthropologist and psychiatrist who did
fieldwork in a healing shrine in Ghana, found depression common, with
guilty obsessions in most of the cases. These thoughts appeared with
other depressive symptoms: frequent weeping, insomnia, lethargy.123 The
patients were self-accused witches. They were at fault, they said, for
the death of all their deceased kin, blight on crops, and traffic
accidents, for example. Field thought this was similar to patients she
had seen in London hospitals, who were also convinced, without good
reason, that they were guilty of terrible crimes. Field's idea was not
new. In early modern England, some people thought that self-accused
witches were really melancholics.124 Researchers in India in the 1970s
expressed surprise at the low level of guilt as a symptom, because
Indian cultures had many cultural inclinations to guilt.125 But guilty
thoughts might not emerge in an impersonal medical interview, and only
come out in a deeper therapy.126 Other scholars did find guilty
obsessions in Indian depressives, often attributed to bad acts in past
lives.127 Guilty feelings in depression seem not so rare outside the
West, but the content of the guilt varies culturally.128 Perhaps we
should speak of "idioms of guilt" as we do of "idioms of distress." The
"guilt culture" concept is Western self-congratulation. Like depression
itself, excessive guilt was oddly touted in colonial thought -- seen as
a crippling symptom of sickness, but also a sign of cultural
accomplishment. Anticolonial theorist and psychiatrist Frantz Fanon
observed that his French colleagues thought that Algerians were not
capable of true melancholia, but only a "pseudo-melancholia."129 The
psychiatrists thought that Algerians did not feel guilt as a symptom,
because they turned all their aggression outward. Saying that Algerians
were capable of only a "pseudomelancholia" was an indirect way of
saying: these are not civilized people.

False Choices and Their History Doctors, therapists, patient advocates,
and others continue to argue over physical versus mental, genes versus
trauma, drugs versus therapy. These debates often pose false choices.
Both psychological and physical treatments can be helpful. Genetic
inheritance and events in life can both

play a role in causation. Dogmatic claims on either side of these three
debates keep appearing. We should not allow them. Treating depression as
a physical state might seem now -- at least to its ardent advocates --
as an enlightened departure from moralistic or psychological views of
earlier eras. But discussions of melancholia usually assumed both
physical and mental aspects. An arch moralist like Luther saw the
physicality of madness. Earlier eras had a wisdom we now fight to keep
in view -- that physical does not have to mean just physical any more
than mental has to mean only mental. The humoralists can seem quaint and
unscientific. Their insight and observation can be underestimated. One
powerful tool of science is reductionism, as in the search for a single
cause for diseases. This tool yielded much progress in the case of
infectious disease once germ theory was verified. But this doctrine of
single cause was a sharp tool that cut too neatly. It never accounted
for the social sources of sicknesses -- and they all do have social
sources -- including infectious diseases. The doctrine of single cause
never captured the complex interplay of the physical and the
psychological, an interplay with a role in all sickness, including those
illnesses we call "mental."130 The humoralists did not know all we know
now. They did not know of neurotransmitters. They did not know of double
helixes and genomes. They had not imagined the rigor of randomized
trials. Despite these handicaps, they observed that some people seemed
to have an inborn tendency to melancholy, but also that life and
lifestyle mattered. They saw that lifestyle changes, such as increased
physical activity, could help. Some saw the role of social factors.
Without sophisticated social analysis of class, Burton could see that
poverty was a factor in depression. Psychoanalysts and other explorers
of the unconscious mind have had an ambiguous role in the struggle over
the primacy of mind or body. A few have taken a rigidly psychological
approach. More, though, believed that psychology and physiology
interacted. When Freud and his followers turned their attention to
depressive illness, they paid close attention to guilt as a symptom. For
Freud, guilt was not just any symptom, but the core symptom. His
starting point was the distinction between melancholia (an illness) and
grief (a normal response to events).

He asked if we could use grief to understand melancholia. Perhaps the
outward similarities might be a clue to deeper ones. Those deeper ones
would only be found by probing the unconscious mind.

Notes 1. A. C. Bradley, Shakespearean Tragedy (Greenwich: Fawcett
Publications, 1904), 104--9, 134. Bradley calls Hamlet's illness
alternately melancholy or melancholia, while warning readers against
reducing analysis of the play to medical diagnosis. 2. Duncan Salkeld,
Madness and Drama in the Age of Shakespeare (Manchester, Manchester
University Press, 1993), 94--6. 3. Elizabeth Wurtzel, Prozac Nation:
Young and Depressed in America (New York: Riverhead Books, 1994), 341.
4. Angus Gowland, The Worlds of Renaissance Melancholy: Robert Burton in
Context (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 1; Bell,
Melancholia, 100--6. 5. Angus Gowland, "The Problem of Early Modern
Melancholy," Past and Present 191 (May 2006) 79. 6. Ibid., 80. 7. On
Renaissance explanations for a supposed increase in melancholy, see
Gowland, The Worlds of Renaissance Melancholy, 1--2, 18. 8. Noga Arikha,
Passions and Tempers: A History of the Humours (New York: Harper
Perennial, 2007). 9. Ibid., 121. 10. In 1986, a year before Prozac was
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Stanley Jackson
published the first important history of depression. Jackson stressed
continuity between melancholia and depression, showing core symptoms
described over the centuries and common to both diagnoses. Stanley W.
Jackson, Melancholia and Depression: From Hippocratic Times to Modern
Times (New Haven:

Yale University Press, 1986). Jean Starobinski, History of the Treatment
of Melancholy from the Earliest Times to 1900 (Geneva: J. R. Geigy,
1962) is a similar but less thorough account. Arguments for continuity
between melancholia and depression also include Peter Toohey,
Melancholy, Love, and Time: Boundaries of the Self in Ancient Literature
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2004). An argument for
discontinuity is in German E. Berrios, The History of Mental Symptoms:
Descriptive Psychopathology Since the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996). Berrios notes that for melancholia,
sadness of spirit was sometimes counted as a symptom, but not a
necessary or sufficient one (p.Â 291). But DSM-5 diagnosis of Major
Depressive Disorder is not that different: depressed mood is one of nine
symptoms, of which there must be five to make the diagnosis, though it
is one of two necessary ones. Jennifer Radden debates the issue with
others in a series of articles in Philosophy, Psychiatry, and
Psychology: Jennifer Radden, "Is This Dame Melancholy? Equating Today's
Depression and Past Melancholia," Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology
10, 1 (2003) 37--52; David H. Brendel, "A Pragmatic Consideration of the
Relation Between Depression and Melancholia," Philosophy, Psychiatry,
and Psychology 10, 1 (2003) 53--5; Jennifer Hanson, "Listening to People
or Listening to Prozac? Another Consideration of Causal
Classifications," Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 10, 1 (2003)
57--62; Jennifer Radden, "The Pragmatics of Psychiatry and the
Psychiatry of Cross-Cultural Suffering," Philosophy, Psychiatry, and
Psychology 10, 1 (2003) 63--6. 11. See, for example, Aubrey Lewis,
"Melancholia: A Historical Review," Journal of Mental Science 80
(January, 1934) 1--42; J. J. LÃ³pez Ibor, "Masked Depressions," British
Journal of Psychiatry 120 (1972) 245-- 58. 12. Depressed mood with
psychotic delusion can, in contemporary nosology, also be a sign of
schizoaffective disorder, which differs from psychotic depression in
that it needs to be treated as a psychosis, rather than as an affective
disorder that can be treated primarily by addressing the mood.

13. See also Lawrence Babb, The Elizabethan Malady: A Study of
Melancholia in English Literature from 1580 to 1642 (East Lansing:
Michigan State College Press, 1951), 30. 14. This has been shown by a
number of people, and argued most closely in Juliana Schiesari, The
Gendering of Melancholia: Feminism, Psychoanalysis, and the Symbolics of
Loss in Renaissance Literature (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992).
See also Jennifer Radden, Moody Minds Distempered: Essays in Melancholy
and Depression (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 47--62, and
Bell, Melancholia, ch.Â 3. 15. H. C. Erik Midelfort, A History of Madness
in Sixteenth-Century Germany (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1999), 6--7; Michael MacDonald, Mystical Bedlam: Madness, Anxiety, and
Healing in Seventeenth-Century England (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981), 150. 16. Schiesari, The Gendering of Melancholia, 93--5.
17. See Jadhav, "The Cultural Construction of Western Depression," 44.
The separation is often called "Cartesian." While the philosopher RenÃ©
Descartes voiced an influential version of it, it has a longer history
and can be found in philosophers of antiquity and the Middle Ages. 18.
One classic treatment is Nancy Scheper-Hughes and Margaret Lock, "'The
Mindful Body: A Prolegomenon to Future Work in Medical Anthropology,"
Medical Anthropology Quarterly New Series 1, 1 (March 1987), 6--41. 19.
See Radden, "Is This Dame Melancholy?". 20. I do not attempt here to
survey every writer on melancholia, not only because of space
limitations, but also because accounts like that start to read like a
catalogue, and get dull. Many of the works I reference here contain more
comprehensive surveys. 21. See chapter 5.

22. Before Galen, humoralism was one paradigm of medicine and the body,
but did not have the dominance it came to have with his influence. 23.
Babb, The Elizabethan Malady, 6. 24. Clark Lawlor, From Melancholia to
Prozac: A History of Depression (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012),
29. 25. Vivian Nutton, "Galenic Madness," in W. V. Harris, ed., Mental
Disorders in the Classical World (London: Brill, 2013), 122; Mark Grant,
Galen on Food and Diet (London: Routledge, 2000), 21--4. The quote from
Galen appears on p.Â 22. 26. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression; Chiara
Thumiger, "The Early Greek Medical Vocabulary of Insanity," in Harris,
Mental Disorders in the Classical World, 65. 27. Raymond Klibansky,
Erwin Panofsky, and Fritz Saxl, Saturn and Melancholy: Studies in the
History of Natural Philosophy, Religions, and Art (London: Thomas
Nelson, 1964), 1. 28. Peter Toohey, Melancholy, Love, and Time:
Boundaries of the Self in Ancient Literature (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 2004). 29. Stanley W. Jackson, "Acedia the Sin and Its
Relationship to Sorrow and Melancholia," in Arthur Kleinman and Byron
Good, eds., Culture and Depression: Studies in the Anthropology and
Cross-cultural Psychiatry of Affect and Disorder (Berkeley: University
of California Press), 43--4. 30. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression,
31--6. 31. Radden, Moody Minds Distempered, 5; Jacques Joanna, "The
Terminology and Aetiology of Madness in Ancient Greek Medical and
Philosophical Writing," in Harris, Mental Disorders in the Classical
World, 99. 32. Toohey, Melancholy, Love, and Time, 28. 33. Rufus's work
survives only in fragments, and much of it is known from the authors who
cited him. Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy (Peter E. Pormann, ed.,
TÃ¼bingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2008).

34. Peter Pormann, introduction to Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 3.
35. Ibid., 3. 36. Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 47. 37. Peter
Pormann, introduction to Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 6. 38. Peter
Toohey, "Rufus of Ephesus and the Tradition of the Melancholy Thinker"
in Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 221. 39. Peter Pormann, introduction
to Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 9. 40. Jackson, Melancholia and
Depression, 34; George Rosen, Madness in Society: Chapters in the
Historical Sociology of Mental Illness (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1968), 98. 41. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 51. 42.
Lawlor, From Melancholia to Prozac, 25. 43. Jackson, Melancholia and
Depression, 39--40; Rosen, Madness in Society, 132. 44. Thumiger,
"Ancient Greek and Roman Traditions," 51; Jackson, Melancholia and
Depression, 33. 45. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 41--5. 46.
Rufus of Ephesus, On Melancholy, 63. 47. This was Constantinus
Africanus. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 61. Also see p.Â 51 on
Oribasius of Pergamon, and p.Â 56 on Paul of Aegina. 48. Jackson,
Melancholia and Depression, 53. 49. Radden, Moody Minds Distempered, 6;
Peter Pormann, "Melancholy in the Medieval World," in Rufus of Ephesus,
On Melancholy, 179. 50. Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 48. 51. Toohey,
Melancholy, Love, and Time, 137.

52. Quoted in Pormann, "Melancholy in the Medieval World," 181. See also
Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 44. 53. Toohey, Melancholy, Love, and Time,
139. 54. Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 44--5. 55. Pormann, "Melancholy in
the Medieval World," 185--8. 56. Hildegard of Bingen, On Natural
Philosophy and Medicine: Selections from Cause et cure (Margret Berger,
trans., Suffolk: Athenaeum Press, 1999). 57. Pormann, "Melancholy in the
Medieval World," 183--5. 58. Hildegard of Bingen, On Natural Philosophy
and Medicine, 61. 59. Ibid., 60. 60. Claire Trenery and Peregrine
Horden, "Madness in the Middle Ages," in Greg Eghigian, ed., The
Routledge History of Madness and Mental Health (New York: Routledge,
2017). 61. Ibid., 63; see also in the same volume Elizabeth Mellyn,
"Healers and Healing in the Early Modern Health Care Market," 86. 62.
Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 71; Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 54.
63. Quoted in H. C. Erik Midelfort, A History of Madness in
SixteenthCentury Germany (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999),
104. 64. Mellyn, "Healers and Healing in the Early Modern Health Care
Market." 65. Midelfort, A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century
Germany, 37. See also Jean Delameau, Sin and Fear: The Emergence of a
Western Guilt Culture in the 13th--18th Centuries (Eric Nicholson,
trans., New York: St.Â Martin's Press, 1990, originally published 1983),
168--9. 66. Babb, The Elizabethan Malady; Delameau, Sin and Fear, 176.

67. Marsilio Ficino, The Book of Life (Charles Boer, trans., Dallas:
Spring Publications, 1980), iii, vii, xiii, xv. 68. Ibid., 6--7. 69.
Ibid., 18--19. 70. Ibid., 25--6. 71. Ibid., 18--19. 72. My discussion is
based on Midelfort, A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century Germany,
ch.Â 2. 73. Ibid., 86--9. 74. Ibid., 81. 75. Babb, The Elizabethan
Malady, 51; MacDonald, Mystical Bedlam, 150. 76. Gowland, Worlds of
Renaissance Melancholy, 2. 77. Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy
(New York: New York Review Books, 2001), introduction by William H.
Gass, xiv. 78. Diane E. Dreher, "Abnormal Psychology in the
Renaissance," in Thomas G. Plante, ed.Â Abnormal Psychology Across the
Ages: Volume One, History and Conceptualizations (Santa Barbara:
Praeger, 2013), 41. 79. Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, first
partition, 143--4. 80. Ibid., 178--202. 81. Ibid., 172. 82. Ibid.,
217--25. 83. In my readings of Burton, I found no prohibition against
eating chicken, but I might have missed it. 84. Burton, The Anatomy of
Melancholy, first partition, 225. 85. Ibid., 237--9.

86. Ibid., 240--1. 87. Ibid., 241. 88. Dreher, "Abnormal Psychology in
the Renaissance." 89. Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, first
partition, 339--70. 90. Ibid., 287. 91. Ibid., 300. 92. Burton, The
Anatomy of Melancholy, second partition, 11, 21, 61, 69, 115. 93.
Gowland, Worlds of Renaissance Melancholy, 76. 94. Jackson, Melancholia
and Depression, 97. 95. Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy, first
partition, 259--60. 96. Ibid., 262, 269, 271, 282, 292. 97. Ibid., 250.
98. Andrew Wear, "Early Modern Medicine," in Lawrence I. Conrad, Michael
Neve, Vivian Nutton, Roy Porter, and Andrew Wear, The Western Medical
Tradition 800 B.C. to AD 1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1995). 99. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 112. 100. Ibid., 142--5.
101. Ibid., 130. 102. Ibid., 166--7. 103. Lawlor, From Melancholia to
Prozac, 111; Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 147. 104. As, for
example, in the work of Swiss psychiatrist Richard von KrafftEbing. See
Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 174.

105. Jackson, Melancholia and Depression, 153. 106. David G. Schuster,
Neurasthenic Nation: America's Search for Health, Happiness, and
Comfort, 1869--1920 (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2011), 11.
107. Lawlor, From Melancholia to Prozac, 131. 108. Ulrike May,
"Abraham's Discovery of the 'Bad Mother': A Contribution to the History
of the Theory of Depression," International Journal of Psychoanalysis
82, 263 (2001) 284. 109. Lawlor, From Melancholia to Prozac, 136--42.
110. Ibid., 138. 111. Radden, Moody Minds Distempered, 7. 112. Eunice
Winters, ed., The Collected Papers of Adolph Meyer: Volume II,
Psychiatry (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1951), 566--9; Jackson,
Melancholia and Depression, 198. 113. See, for example, G. A. Foulds, T.
M. Caine, and M. A. Creasy, "Aspects of Extra- and Intropunitive
Expression in Mental Illness," Journal of Mental Science 106, 443 (April
1960) 599--610. Edward Shorter has lamented the erasure of the concept
of the melancholic depression: "The original concept of two depressions,
melancholia and nonmelancholia, as different from each other as chalk
and cheese, became clouded ..." Edward Shorter, Before Prozac: The
Troubled History of Mood Disorders in Psychiatry (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009), 10. I do not think the distinction was
traditionally so neat. 114. Andreasen, The Broken Brain, 38. 115.
Jackson says that guilty feelings appear in accounts of melancholia
starting in the sixteenth century. Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 44. 116.
The classic account is Ruth Benedict, The Chrysanthemum and the Sword:
Patterns in Japanese Culture (New York: Mariner Books, 2005, originally
published 1946), which contrasts the United States as a "guilt culture"
and Japan as a "shame culture." Benedict's detractors have

accused her of exaggerating the differences between cultures, and also
of writing about the Japanese in a way that was implicitly negative. Her
defenders have said she was speaking about tendencies, not totalities,
of the cultures, and intended no value judgments in the distinction. See
Millie R. Creighton, "Revisiting Shame and Guilt Cultures: A FortyYear
Pilgrimage," Ethos 18, 3 (September 1990) 279--307 and Judith Modell,
"The Wall of Shame: Ruth Benedict's Accomplishment in The Chrysanthemum
and the Sword," Dialectical Anthropology 24 (1999) 193--215. Many who
read her at the time thought she was making a value judgment, and many
other Western authors of the twentieth century -- including Freud --
valorized guilt as an emotion of cultivation and civilization. 117.
Delameau, Sin and Fear. Delameau, a historian of the Catholic Church,
places special blame on the Protestant Reformation, a view that may
surprise many Catholics. 118. Jackson, "Acedia the Sin," 49. 119.
Jadhav, "The Cultural Construction of Western Depression," 48. 120.
Trenery and Horden, "Madness in the Middle Ages," 62. 121. H. B. M.
Murphy, "The Advent of Guilt Feelings as a Common Depressive Symptom: A
Historical Comparison on Two Continents," Psychiatry 41, 3 (1978)
229--42. 122. See John Orley and John K. Wing, "Psychiatric Disorders in
Two African Villages," Archives of General Psychiatry 36 (May 1979)
513-- 20, for an explicit refutation of Carothers on the point. 123.
Margaret Field, Search for Security: An Ethno-Psychiatric Study of Rural
Ghana (London: Northwestern University Press, 1960) 149--200. S. Kirson
Weinberg argued, in "Cultural Aspects of Manic-Depression in West
Africa," Journal of Health and Human Behavior 6, 4 (Winter 1965)
247--53, that self-accusation was more common in Ghanaian culture than
other West African cultures, but gave no explanation or evidence. Ghana
is, like all of West Africa, multicultural and religiously plural. Ayo
Binitie, "A Factor Analysis of Depression Across Cultures

(African and European)," British Journal of Psychiatry 127 (1975) 559--
63, also found little guilt in African depression. 124. MacDonald,
Mystical Bedlam, 155. A report from a hospital in Tanganyika around the
same time as Field's work stated that guilty feelings were rare in the
patients there -- but then went on to say that the depressives in the
hospital believed that the bewitchment that caused their illness had
been brought on by themselves; see C. G. F. Smartt, "Mental
Maladjustment in the African." 125. B. B. Sethi, S. S. Nathawat, and S.
C. Gupta, "Depression in India," The Journal of Social Psychology 91
(1973) 3--13. 126. Ibid., 11. 127. J. S. Teja, R. L. Narang, and A. K.
Aggarwal, "Depression Across Cultures," British Journal of Psychiatry
119 (1971) 253--60. 128. This was observed in K. Singer, "Depressive
Disorders from a Transcultural Perspective," Social Science and Medicine
9 (1975) 296. 129. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (New York:
Grove Press, 1963), 296--310. See also Schiesari, The Gendering of
Melancholy, 236. 130. Much recent clinical science of depression
accommodates multicausal analysis; see chapter 5. In a recent book on
Burton, Radden points out that he anticipated this, in his different
idiom. She also notes that the search for a single cause of depression
remains powerful in contemporary science. Jennifer Radden, Melancholy
Habits: Burton's Anatomy and the Mind Sciences (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2017), 39, 102.

3 Turned Inward How many psychiatrists does it take to change a
lightbulb? Only one, but the lightbulb must want to change. Yes, it is
an old one, but why is it funny? It spoofs a clichÃ© about therapy, but
it also speaks to something counter-intuitive about therapy: why
wouldn't people want to change? People go to psychotherapy voluntarily,
in order to change. Depressed people are in a lot of pain. Surely, they
want it gone? Surely, they want to change -- or at least they think they
do. The nub here is that they "think they do." Yes, someone who seeks a
therapist consciously wants to change. But not everything is conscious.
Every therapist has known patients who say they want to change but seem
devoted to staying the same. The unconscious mind explains this. The
tradition of dynamic or depth psychology provides a way of probing it.
For Freud, the unconscious solved the puzzle of guilty feelings -- why
do depressed people consider themselves evil for taking home office
supplies? Freud had a startling take on guilt in depressive illness. He
believed the self-accusations were, in a way, true -- though perhaps not
in the way the depressive person thought. He and other psychoanalysts
thought that the self-accusations came from angry or accusing feelings
felt toward other people, which became directed at the self. Depression,
then, reflected "anger turned inward." This became a catchphrase of
depression in the first half of the twentieth century, just as "chemical
imbalance" was in the second. Guilt is then not one symptom among many,
but the key that unlocks depression's enigmas. Psychoanalysis was not
alone in underscoring guilt in depressive illness. Guilt is central to
descriptions in the work of the pioneering French psychologist Pierre
Janet.1 Kraepelin thought guilt mattered for outcome -- depressive
illness would be more chronic in patients who had guilt as a symptom.
Guilt figured in psychoanalytic thought in particular, though, as a clue
to the cause of the illness.

Psychoanalysis began in the late nineteenth century, originally a fringe
movement advanced by Freud and a circle of followers. The movement
revolutionized how people think about the mind on a global scale, but it
came from a small group, meeting weekly in Freud's house in Vienna. Many
psychiatrists of the time were skeptical, though many were also curious
about the unconscious and the potentials of talk therapy. By the middle
of the century, psychoanalysis had vast influence over not only
psychiatry and mental health work, but also other medical specialties,
such as pediatrics. It also changed popular thinking about the mind, in
lasting ways. Every time we say someone is "projecting," or "in denial,"
for example, we are using psychoanalytic ideas of the unconscious mind.
In some ways, psychoanalysis became too successful for its own good.
While many psychoanalysts were open-minded about other approaches to
illness, and to challenges to Freud, others believed that psychoanalysis
as Freud conceived it was the only path to mental health. This rigidity
cost the movement when serious challenges -- medical, scientific, and
political -- gathered force in the second half of the twentieth century.
By the 1970s, the influence of psychoanalysis was waning. Some
questioned its claim to be scientific. Some second-wave feminists called
psychoanalysis a bulwark of patriarchy, and though psychoanalysis also
had feminist currents, charges of sexism were fair. Changing structures
in medical insurance made psychoanalysis, which was already expensive,
even more inaccessible. Statistical measures, drawn from randomized
trials, became the standard of proof for medical treatments, and they
were hard to apply to psychoanalysis. Drug treatments had flaws of their
own, but they were cheaper and easier to use than psychoanalysis.2
Drugs, as well as some new forms of talk therapy, were also easier to
study in trials. When some of the more extravagant claims of
psychoanalysis fell short, disillusionment set in, especially with more
alternatives available. The disillusionment led some to the extreme
conclusion that psychoanalysis was worthless. A similar dynamic is
happening now with antidepressants. Excessive hope was placed on them,
and some now say they are worthless. Neither psychoanalysis nor
antidepressants are worthless. Being on the defensive has had some
healthy effects for psychoanalysis, though. The field has grown more
open to other approaches, and less dogmatic.

The death of psychoanalysis has been announced numerous times, but it
never really happened. Freudian approaches lost status in the
psychiatric profession, and in academic psychology. "Full-blown"
psychoanalysis -- multiple sessions per week, on the couch -- is not so
common now. It is costly and time-consuming, though its unavailability
is a loss for people with deeply-lodged psychological problems, that
take intensive work to "rewire." But psychodynamic therapy -- less
intensive work, based on the same ideas as psychoanalysis -- continues,
and those ideas remain influential wherever talk therapy is used. They
still inform much of clinical social work, for example. The thinkers I
look at in this chapter are diverse, and not all were loyal to Freud's
ideas. All practiced depth psychology, which is defined by inquiry into
the unconscious. Depth psychologists believe that the unconscious deeply
influences us, and its ways can be mysterious; it can become known to us
partially and indirectly -- through dreams, or slips of the tongue for
example. Depth psychology stresses inner conflict as a source of
psychological problems. It also works with transference, the tendency to
relate to other people according to unconscious wishes or fears of what
they might be, and less by the reality of who those people are. In
therapy, this usually means relating to the analyst in patterns set by
the patients' orientation to their parents. Interpreting and working
through transference can be a crucial path to the unconscious. Learning
about the unconscious allows some control over it, reducing unnecessary
suffering. Carl Jung, a follower of Freud who broke from the
psychoanalytic movement but remained a depth psychologist, put it this
way: "Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life
and you will call it fate." Most people do recognize an unconscious
mind, at least in small things like waking up in the morning suddenly
knowing the solution to a problem from the day before. Psychoanalyst
Julia Segal gives another example: when we read Jane Austen's novel
Pride and Prejudice, we realize Elizabeth Bennet is in love with
Mr.Â Darcy before she herself does.3 We see that people can fail to be
conscious of their own minds, in ways evident to outsiders. "Freud is
dead" headlines have run in popular media many times since his literal
obituaries appeared in 1939.4 Many people think that all of Freud's
ideas have been disproven and his psychology is obsolete. Freud did get
many things wrong. So did Isaac Newton and many other pivotal
scientists.

Freud's takes on female psychology are famously, and often painfully,
bad, for example. The movement might have avoided justified criticism
from feminists if it had been more open to the revisions concerning
gender roles that psychoanalyst Karen Horney advocated for, starting in
the 1920s.5 But this relates to another problem: Freud often led the
movement in a cult-like fashion. Big departures were treated as heresy
and their advocates driven out of the movement.6 Psychoanalysis is a
vast field, however, with many insights into personal psychology. People
can be weird about Freud and psychoanalysis. Once I was talking about
psychoanalysis with an academic psychologist. She said she used
psychoanalytic ideas in her work, but did not use their psychoanalytic
names, because she would not be able to publish her work in psychology
journals if she did. Think about what this says about academic
psychology: the ideas in the work can pass peer review, but only if they
are disguised to hide the use of an unfashionable theory -- which comes
from the most famous explorer of psychology in history.7 Another time I
assigned to a class Freud's "Mourning and Melancholia," his main work on
depression, and my class found the ideas strange. Some began to ask why
Freud was so "obsessed with mothers." I asked if it was unreasonable to
think that people's mental lives were deeply shaped by their
relationship with the person who most met their needs in the first years
of life, who is most frequently the mother. Then the reading began to
make sense to them. One important question about Freud's legacy is the
simple one of whether insight into the unconscious can promote mental
health and even treat illnesses. Evidence shows that psychotherapy
works, but not all of the many forms of it seek insight into the
unconscious. Isolating what is most helpful in the various
psychotherapies has proven challenging. Dynamic therapy in the Freudian
tradition is at least as effective as other talk therapies, though, and
some research has shown longer-lasting benefits.8 People who say dynamic
therapy has been proven ineffective are misinformed. Psychoanalytic
thinking on depression did not really begin with Freud, though. It began
with his colleague, Karl Abraham.

The "Abrahamic Tradition" in Depression Studies "I have often heard it
said that depression is anger turned inward. I don't know how true this
is, but there is no denying that the events of my childhood played a
major role in fostering my vulnerability to depression." -- Meri
Nana-Ama Danquah9 The key idea in most psychoanalytic thought about
depression has been anger toward others, redirected against the self.
Freud created many aspects of psychoanalytic thought -- the basics of
the theory of dreams, the famous developmental theories involving oral,
anal, and phallic stages and the Oedipus conflict, the three-part model
of a mind divided into id, ego, and super ego -- all of these first came
from Freud. Many of them grew out of his work with "hysteria" patients,
a term used commonly in Freud's day, as depression is now. The idea of
anger turned inward was given its first broad elaboration by Freud's
colleague, Karl Abraham, a Berlin-based psychiatrist.10 Abraham's ideas
about depression were based on more clinical experience than Freud's.11
They may also have more empirical support now.12 At first, Freud thought
depression was physical in origin.13 His colleague Wilhelm Stekel did
early work about depression, moving the inquiry in a more psychological
direction. Stekel thought that guilt in depression came from death
wishes toward others. They were turned inward because conscience forbade
directing them to the original target.14 Abraham built on this
foundation. Abraham was the leading figure in psychoanalysis in Berlin,
which surpassed Freud's Vienna as the center of psychoanalysis by the
1920s. He analyzed many influential analysts, including Karen Horney and
Melanie Klein, two pioneers who were among the earliest analysts to make
big breaks with Freud.15 Horney was among the first to see that Freud's
ideas about gender would not do, and is widely credited with founding a
feminist tradition in psychoanalysis. Klein was a founder of child
analysis and a

major and influential innovator in theory and clinical technique.
Abraham himself showed some independence of mind from Freud. Abraham was
trained in psychiatry, unlike Freud, who trained as a neurologist. When
Abraham was a small boy, his mother suffered some hard blows. Her sister
Rosa died in her twenties when Abraham was one year old, and Rosa's
husband died the following year. Around the same time, Abraham's mother
fell down some stairs and had a miscarriage, a loss she mourned deeply
and often for the rest of her life. Abraham's childhood was marked by
his mother's grief. His work on depression was haunted by the problems
children face when their mothers are unable to focus on them. He may
have suffered from depression himself. When he sent Freud his first
writing on the subject -- a psychoanalytic study of nineteenth-century
artist Giovanni Segantini -- he warned Freud that the work had "some
personal complexes behind it."16 Abraham looked at Segantini's
paintings, and related them to the painter's life.17 When Segantini was
six months old, his brother died, and his mother became bed-ridden. By
the time Segantini was five, both of his parents were dead, and he went
to live with a stepsister who treated him badly. He ended up in a
reformatory. Abraham said that Segantini suffered lifelong depression.18
This may not be surprising given Segantini's hard beginning. But Abraham
thought more than loss and grief were at work. Abraham thought Segantini
was also angry at his abandonment. The anger was turned inward on the
self, resulting in the depression. But why? Many of Segantini's
paintings were of mothers and children, but they came in two types. Some
of the paintings showed loving, nurturing mothers. Others showed eerie
and detached women. One painting in particular, "The Bad Mothers,"
struck Abraham (see figure 5). A woman is floating by a tree in a
desolate and wintry landscape. An infant is trying to suck at her
breast, but her attention is diverted, her head facing away, her eyes
closed. She could be dreaming, sleeping, or even dead. She is not
holding the child -- one arm seems to be reaching to the tree, the other
she holds at her waist. Despite the winter setting, she is wearing
little, just willowy shreds in the shape of a dress, with nothing
covering her arms or breasts. The child seems to be straining to get the
mother's milk -- certainly not getting maternal warmth.

Figure 5 Karl Abraham contrasted this painting with others that showed
nurturing mothers. The contrast defended against the pain of aggression
toward the artist's mother which, if turned toward the self, could cause
depression Source: Giovanni Segantini, "The Bad Mothers", 1894, via
Wikimedia Commons

Why, Abraham wondered, did Segantini paint such different images of
mothers, dividing them rigidly into two types? Abraham thought they were
two attitudes toward Segantini's own mother, attitudes that needed to be
kept separate. The stark difference between the visual images he painted
made that separation. Psychoanalysts call psychic division of the mother
figure (and anything else) into good and bad splitting. Strong
ambivalence causes anxiety. Feelings of rage toward someone you also
deeply love are hard to tolerate. Splitting manages the anxiety by
dividing things into the all-good and the all-bad. You might make a new
friend who thinks you are the best person ever, who later gets
disappointed, turns on you, and sees you as the worst. This is splitting
in everyday life. Another example is people who thought psychoanalysis
itself was the best way of understanding the mind, who later saw it as
having no merit at all. In reality, most things and people -- parents,
children, co-workers, political leaders, political parties, religions,
intellectual movements -- are not all good or all bad, but complex
mixtures. Splitting prevents us from seeing the complexity of the whole.

Segantini's paintings reminded Abraham of something he often saw in his
depressed patients. Their childhoods were marked by mothers whose
attention was compromised by grief or illness. (In seventeenth-century
England, Robert Burton also thought that a childhood with too little
affection could lead to depression. But then, Burton thought a lot of
things could lead to depression.) For Abraham, a mother's inattention
placed the children in a tough spot. They love and need the mother, but
the mother is also the main person who can withhold needed things. When
those things are withheld, a desire for revenge emerges, but such
feelings toward such a loved and needed person are hard to bear, and
lead to remorse. Abraham thought that all children are born with
aggressive tendencies that could be intensified by vengeful feelings
caused by neglect. The vengeful feelings are turned inward, causing
depressed affect. This did not, by itself, lead to clinical illness, in
Abraham's view. If people later suffer similar letdowns, such as lost
loves, they may react in the same way, by turning their rage against
themselves. This is why depressed people feel not only unhappy, but
unworthy of happiness. They feel guilt out of balance with any real
crimes. In the lightbulb joke, patients do not want to change. Abraham's
theory explains why. If patients' suffering is caused by unconscious
remorse, they may consciously want to end their misery, but
unconsciously they think it is what they deserve. Abraham also believed
in an inborn factor to depression, what we now call a "genetic
predisposition."19 Some have accused psychoanalysts of ignoring the
physical, but many of them have seen complex interactions between mind
and body -- often more so than some biological psychiatrists who try to
banish psychology from consideration. The aggression of the child,
Abraham thought, was shown in biting at the mother's breast, an impulse
he called "cannibalistic."20 In adult depression, Abraham thought,
remorse over this impulse explained the reduced appetite of people with
depression. This is one of those psychoanalytic interpretations that may
strike skeptics as far-fetched. Darian Leader notes that the apparent
weirdness of speaking about cannibalistic drives toward people we love
seems less bizarre when we consider how often people who love someone
say they could "just eat you up".21

Abraham observed patterns in his depressed patients and built them into
a general theory of depression. He did not consider multiple paths to
depressed states. Abraham also used a small sample to claim that
psychoanalytic treatment had high efficacy, at a time when few effective
treatments were available.22 Abraham was a trained psychiatrist, who had
observed depression and its treatment outside of his private practice
too, so his claim may not have been baseless. Using small numbers of
patients to make large claims was common in medicine in the early
twentieth century. The people who developed early somatic psychiatric
treatments, including ECT, also based their claims of success on small
numbers of patients. Freud used the old word, melancholia, unlike
Abraham, who used depression -- though the clinical pictures they
described were similar. Freud also frequently took subjects first
explored by his followers or dissenters, and then wrote his own account,
stamped with the authority he had as founder and leader of the movement.
If he intended "Mourning and Melancholia" to replace Abraham's work as
definitive, he had some success. Many psychoanalysts consider "Mourning
and Melancholia" a masterpiece, and it became a touchstone for later
exploration of depression.23 Freud's melancholia looked much like what
we now call depression.24 Melancholics, he said, suffered sadness beyond
what we expect in the normal course of life, and a withdrawal of
interest from life and the world. Sources of pleasure and satisfaction
seemed empty or futile -- "weary, stale, flat and unprofitable," in
Hamlet's words. Appetite and sleep were disturbed.25 Freud started by
observing the similarity to mourning. Freud was not the first to notice
these similarities. Nor was he the first to note an obvious difference:
we consider the sadness of grief normal. It is hard to go through, but
it is not sickness, and may be healthy. Freud used the proportionality
criterion. The symptoms showed sickness when they did not match external
reality. He also observed that the low self-esteem common in melancholia
is usually absent in mourning. Freud wondered if the sadness we consider
normal, mourning, could provide insights into the one we consider
sickness, melancholia. Might the difference between mourning and
melancholia conceal a similarity in their origin? If so, the cause of
melancholia might not be truly absent, but

hidden. Many of Freud's ideas came from his work with patients and
developed from there to his famous theories about dreams, slips of the
tongue, and other aspects of general psychology. He often sought insight
into healthy minds from mental illness. In "Mourning and Melancholia,"
however, he sought the reverse. He looked at a normal state, grieving,
to understand an illness. Mourning, Freud said, is an adjustment to the
reality of loss. Memories of the lost person are held in the mind, often
painfully, but gradually lose some emotional force. Interest in the
world is withdrawn. Perhaps melancholia was also caused by loss, but
unconscious loss. But of what? Freud wondered if guilt provided the
answer. Freud said it was pointless to refute the guilty thoughts. He
thought the selfaccusations were valid, though not in the way the person
consciously thought. If we listen with care, he said, we will often find
that the accusations apply to someone the person loves or loved, but has
lost. The loss did not have to be an actual death or departure of the
person, but could be a disappointment in the relationship. Freud then
took a step Abraham had not. He thought one reaction towards the loss
could be to absorb the lost person into the self. This is introjection,
unconsciously taking an object, such as a loved one, into oneself.26
Introjection is the opposite of the more familiar term projection.
Projection is an unconscious process of denying an unwanted part of our
self, by seeing it in others. We might feel badly about our greed,
aggression, or other unsavory traits. In order to banish the guilt, we
imagine it is others who are greedy or aggressive. In introjection, we
are taking on other people and making them a part of ourselves.
Introjection is another idea in psychoanalysis that can seem strange,
but it resembles what we mean when we say of a departed person, "a part
of her will always live inside me." Freud shared Abraham's view that
loved objects were also targets of aggression: the people we feel the
strongest emotions toward create ambivalence. After all, the people we
love most have the most power to disappoint us. If we think a loved one
has taken from us, in introjection we might see ourselves as thieves.
This is why stealing office supplies could become a source of deep
remorse. The act might seem trivial to others, but the depressed
person's feelings come from feeling that something they needed badly was
taken from them. Taking office supplies is only a

symbolic marker for the truly valuable thing felt as stolen. The
original target for punitive feelings, the real thief as it were, has
been introjected, a part of the self now. As long as this remains
unconscious, it is not a matter for rational debate, which is why Freud
thought it was pointless to refute it. The extent of alleged
anti-biological dogma in psychoanalysis has been exaggerated, sometimes
wildly.27 Freud said on the first page of "Mourning and Melancholia"
that many cases of depressive illness likely had biological origins.28
He was trying to explain the psychological origin of those that did not.
Though some psychoanalysts wished to ignore biology, the majority did
not. Freud, and most of his followers, thought mind and body had complex
interactions, but they often focused on the psychological because of the
limits of biological knowledge when they were working. The strongest
departure Freud made from Abraham's views was the stress on
introjection. Freud told Abraham that eventually he would come to share
the views of the master.29 This prediction came true. A few years after
"Mourning and Melancholia," Abraham returned to the subject, adopting
the concept of introjection. Abraham's new work was dripping with
deference to Freud, despite a dig at his mentor for having grasped
melancholia intuitively, not through deep clinical work.30 Abraham now
credited Freud with seeing that depression was not just anger turned
inward, but turned inward at the introjected object. Melanie Klein, who
was analyzed by Abraham, was the most important psychoanalytic innovator
on depressive illness to follow. Klein pushed Freud's ideas in
directions so new that some questioned whether they could be called
Freudian. Klein insisted that they were, and managed -- unlike some
other radical innovators -- to preserve her place within the
psychoanalytic fold. Klein was born in 1882 in Vienna, and suffered a
lot of personal griefs. She had a brother and a sister die during her
childhood, and she married a man who had affairs soon after the wedding.
She spent much of her twenties in a depression of her own. Interested in
medicine and the intellectual life from an early age, she was first
analyzed by Freud's close associate Sandor Ferenczi in Budapest. She
moved to Berlin and worked with Abraham, before leaving because of the
growing anti-Semitism in Germany. She then moved to Britain, where she
became perhaps the most important figure in

the history of British psychoanalysis, and founder of the school of
psychoanalysis called object relations. She was a pioneer in the
analysis of children, and famed for the development of the play
technique, where children play in the presence of the analyst, as an
alternative to free association on the couch, which is hard for
children. Abraham had put more emphasis than many other analysts on the
role of the mother in development, as opposed to that of the father.
Klein, who was one of the first psychoanalysts who was a mother, took
this further. Klein shared Abraham's interest in the infant's
aggressiveness. She thought ambivalence toward the mother was the model
for other splitting the person might engage in later in life.
Ambivalence toward the mother was both inevitable and intense, because
the mother was at once the main provider and depriver of the most needed
things, both physical and emotional. This, she thought, was a problem
for all of us, but when not resolved successfully, could result in
mental illnesses. Klein developed a theory of psychological positions,
called the paranoidschizoid position and the depressive position. The
positions are originally phases in infant development, but unlike the
stages in many psychological theories, Klein thought that people do not
pass through them in a linear way, but cycle through them continually
over the course of life. The paranoid-schizoid position is dominant in
the first months of life. It is "paranoid" because infants project their
destructive impulses onto the mother and other figures, and thus imagine
persecution. Projection of aggression onto the outside world explains
things like childhood night fears, such as monsters under the bed.31 The
"schizoid" part is the splitting. The need to manage ambivalence toward
caregivers leads, in fantasy, to the splitting of them into all good and
all bad versions, an inability to see them as whole and complex people.
In the depressive position, children achieve the ability to see the
mother as whole. This causes remorse over the destructive fantasies,
because of the awareness that they were directed at a loved object. With
remorse comes the wish to provide reparation. The paranoid-schizoid and
depressive positions have different main anxieties. In the
paranoid-schizoid position, anxiety is persecutory, fear of
annihilation. In the depressive position, anxiety becomes concern for
preservation of the loved object.32

The depressive position is depressive in affect, but the depressive
position is not clinical depression. The depressive position is a normal
and healthy part of growth. The aggressiveness, and the remorse that
follows, are universal. Depressive affect surrounds weaning especially,
experienced as a loss.33 The mother's breast symbolizes love and
security, everything good. If the aggressive impulses are excessive,
though, depressive illness can result, if the conflicts are not resolved
adequately. Working through the depressive position means tolerating
fear and guilt. A mother who can bear the child's occasional hostility
and sadness can help with this.34 She serves as proof to the baby that
fantasies of destruction do not cause actual injury.35 The growth of
skills, the flourishing of creative abilities, and an ability to control
hostile impulses, all increase children's sense of their constructive
capacities, countering the depressive feelings.36 Not only is the
depressive position not a mental illness, it is a potential path to
mental health. It can lead the person to see whole objects (avoid
splitting) and engage in creative work. If this development fails,
though, clinical illness may result, showing itself in desperate
submission to remorse, or frantic efforts to deny guilt. A wish to
triumph over the parents can reactivate the guilt from the early
aggression.37 This is why depression can set in at unexpected times,
when the person is experiencing success, not setbacks. Stekel, Abraham,
Freud, and Klein each had their own ideas and emphases. Taken together,
they form the basis of the theory that depression is anger turned
inward. Several later analysts elaborated. One was Otto Fenichel, a
follower of Freud's in Vienna who emigrated to the United States.
Fenichel accepted the role of aggression turned inward.38 He thought
three other things contributed to depression: (1) childhood loss, (2) a
loss in later life, which sparks the depression by its repetition of the
early one, and (3) a constitutional factor -- that is, some inborn
tendency.39 Psychoanalysts at this time were working in an era when
little was known about genetics, but like the humoralists, they observed
that illnesses ran in families. Fenichel lacked Abraham's optimism about
psychoanalytic treatment for depression. Writing in the 1940s, a decade
before the first drugs called antidepressants came, he defended
psychoanalytic treatment only by saying little better was available,
given the risks of the shock therapies -- whose

value he saw for some patients. Some of those who would not be deeply
helped, he thought, would at least feel a little better after
psychoanalysis because they had a place to unburden themselves of their
thoughts. In the later decades of the twentieth century, French
psychoanalyst AndrÃ© Green took Abraham's legacy in a different
direction. Green shared Abraham's interest in the effects of mothers who
were emotionally unavailable to their children. He referred to them as
"dead" -- not literally, but in the sense that the children feel the
mother's unavailability as a kind of deadness. These are mothers who had
terrible losses of their own when their children were small. The
mother's sorrow would deny the children the fulfillment in being able to
please their mother that other kids might have. As adults, these
patients do not always seem depressed when they seek treatment, though
depressive tendencies may emerge later in treatment. Green thought the
maternal depression caused a "blankness" in the child.40 The blankness
comes from anxiety the children feel at the loss of the mother's
affection. The loss leads the children to withdraw their own. The child
will then be vulnerable to the "sinister black of depression."41 The
children may then try compensations. Attachment to the father may be
one, though often the father may be no more available. Meaningful
activities that are normally healthy may have an overly-driven quality
to them. Playing is felt not as freedom to play but compulsion to
imagine, and intellectual growth is a severe drive for achievement, not
an enjoyable use of creativity. Surface success may come, as jobs are
taken and performed, marriages made, and children raised, but all with a
certain deadness inside. That is why they end up in the psychoanalyst's
office. The best-selling book The Drama of the Gifted Child, published
by Swiss analyst Alice Miller in the late 1970s, also has affinities
with Abraham's work, though more because of the theme of
emotionallyremote parents than through anger turned inward.42 Miller saw
many depressed patients whose parents gave them a lot of attention, and
even praise and admiration. This made their depression puzzling, but
Miller found that the attention often flowed more from a wish to use the
child to make up for the parents' own insecurities than from the needs
of the child. Like Abraham and Green, she found the parents often had
depression themselves. The children became sensitive to the insecurities
of the parents, and performed the roles the parents needed them to,
serving as living counter-depressants. This

alienation from their own needs causes the depression in the children,
which might alternate with grandiosity as a defense against the
depression. As we will see in the memoir literature on depression later,
this picture resonates with many depressed adults. As one memoirist
wrote, when she read The Drama of the Gifted Child, "like other
middle-class, overachieving readers I've talked to since, I felt that
Miller was writing about me."43

Alternatives Not all explorers of the unconscious workings of depressive
illness followed Abraham and Freud's ideas. One of Abraham's analysands,
Sandor RadÃ³, thought depressives were people who were too dependent on
supplies of love from others. Children will desire love from their
parents, but inevitably misbehave, and the penalties they face will be
felt as a withdrawal of love. They may learn to fend off punishment with
remorse, pre-emptive self-punishment. This may begin consciously, but in
time become an unconscious habit. Depression, in RadÃ³'s theory, is a way
of saying to the world, go easy on me, see how much I am suffering
already.44 Edward Bibring, another member of Freud's Vienna analytic
society who emigrated to the United States, thought that many
depressions did not involve self-aggression, and cases of
self-aggression did not always cause depression. Instead, Bibring
stressed helplessness -- the feeling that comes when wishes cannot be
fulfilled. This could be anything from failing to woo a love interest to
powerlessness in the face of political events. Helplessness was a
feeling likely felt deeply by a Jewish psychoanalyst like Bibring, who
lived through Hitler's annexation of Austria in 1938. But for Bibring,
helplessness leading to depression was not simply a reaction to current
events. Depressive feelings acquired power by inflaming infantile
frustrations at being denied food -- a common experience, since human
infants cannot obtain their own food, and often are not, or cannot, be
provided with it whenever they want.45 The theme of helplessness is
poignant because Bibring had Parkinson's disease as he was writing. He
died from it in 1959, at the age of 64. A few years later, American
psychologist Martin Seligman applied electric shocks to dogs, and found
that dogs who had no predictable way to avoid

the shocks seemed to display affect and behavior that looked like human
depression. He went on to propose, as Bibring did, that depressive
illness was a response to a person's powerlessness to control adverse
events. He also proposed, as Bibring did, that experiences of
helplessness in childhood could predispose adults to depression.46 He
called his theory "learned helplessness," and it became famous in
depression studies. Despite its deep similarity to Bibring's, Seligman
presented his model of depression as an act of intellectual daring, a
radical break from the psychoanalytic orthodoxy of the time.47 Edith
Jacobson also thought earlier analytic thought had made too much of
guilt and attacks on the self. She thought Bibring went too far in
dismissing its importance entirely, though -- and that Bibring put too
much emphasis on helplessness. Jacobson was a Jew born in Germany in the
1890s, as the field of psychoanalysis was starting to take shape, and
became a physician at a time when few women were able to do so. She
trained in psychoanalysis in the 1920s and was analyzed by Fenichel. By
the 1930s, she was a respected analyst and an active leftist. The Nazis
pressured her to reveal the identities of communists she was treating in
therapy. She resisted the pressure and they imprisoned her. She managed
to escape and emigrated to the United States, where she treated many
depressed patients over several decades. Her writings on depression were
based on rich clinical experience.48 When setting depression apart from
sadness, Jacobson saw that many depressed patients wish for sadness, as
a path to fully feeling emotion again, a relief from the "deadness" of
depression. She stressed a failure of the mother to understand and
accept the child. She also believed many depressions, particularly
psychotic ones, likely had biological roots.49 In Washington DC in the
1950s, a group led by psychoanalyst Frieda Fromm-Reichmann proposed that
envy, and the fear of envy, was central to depression. Referring to the
biblical figure, they wrote of a "Joseph Syndrome," in which a parent's
favored child might, oddly, be prone to depression. Such children fear
the aggressive envy of siblings. Underselling oneself, hiding one's
talents, becomes a deep-seated part of their personality. They cannot
use their greatest assets, and may even come to believe that they do not
have any. Such people will become depressed at counter-intuitive times,
such as when they get a promotion at work.50

Carl Jung: Depression as an Opportunity Depression, most agree, is a bad
thing. Is there anything good about it? Abraham thought it gratified a
need for self-punishment. This is a sad form of "good." Swiss
psychiatrist Carl Jung was more generous toward depression. He believed
it could spawn growth and creativity. While working in an asylum --
where he was for a time a colleague of Abraham's -- Jung developed ideas
about the unconscious mind parallel to Freud's in many ways. After the
two met, they had an intense personal and intellectual partnership.
Partly because Freud feared that the high proportion of Jews in the
movement risked making psychoanalysis seem a Jewish psychology, he
hand-picked the non-Jewish Jung as his successor to lead the movement.51
That did not work out. Jung promoted ideas that Freud considered too
different to be psychoanalysis. Jung grew doubtful about the centrality
of sexuality in Freud's thought. Libido, which for Freud was a sexual
force in people, Jung defined more broadly, as any psychic energy, or
emotional investment. It could include sexuality, but also other
motivations. Jung was also more open to thinking of a spiritual nature,
which to Freud verged on mysticism. While Freud tolerated minor dissent,
Jung's departures went too far. Jung went on to develop his own depth
psychology, which recognized a debt to Freud, but which found Freud's
ideas limited. Jung started with the ambiguity of depression as both a
mood and an illness.52 When it is a mood, people will want to move past
it. It becomes illness, and marked by devaluing of the self, when the
motivation to change is lost because of low "psychic energy." He
believed people had a finite amount of psychic energy, distributed
between the unconscious and conscious minds. In depression, this energy
was turned away from the world, and turned inward to the unconscious.
"Psychic energy" may seem intangible -- can it be seen and measured
like, say, electrical energy, and if not, how do we know it is real? As
anyone with personal or clinical experience with depression will tell
you, though, depressed people do feel a shrinking of energy that seems
poorly explained by physical factors such as calories consumed, physical
fitness, or amount of sleep. No matter how much depressed people sleep,
they feel they need more, and waking hours are always spent feeling
tired.

But why is all this energy being consumed by the unconscious? The
depression, Jung thought, is a sign that the person needs to pay
attention to the unconscious, as though it were waving and saying, "Hey,
stop fussing over all those external things, pay attention to me, I have
things to tell you." Jung stressed the creativity of the unconscious and
saw in depression a chance at personal transformation. The person needs
to look within, to see what attracted the psychic energy, which will
appear as a fantasy or image. Depression, then, for all its pain, could
lead to growth. Drawn to mythology, Jung compared depression to the
hero's journey to the underworld to fight a monster, leading to the
symbolic death of the hero. What is dying in reality, Jung thought, are
attitudes of the depressive state. Tendencies to always consider oneself
a victim, for example, will fall away -- but only if one reckons with
the darkness in the unconscious. Depressives might be so identified with
the ways they act and think that they will be unable to use the
opportunity the depression offers. The lightbulb must want to change.
Was Jung right to see depression as an opportunity? For a book about
people taking antidepressants, sociologist David Karp asked them if they
saw anything positive about their illness. Nearly all respondents said
it made them more aware, more sensitive, more insightful.53 For Jung,
though, depression by itself was a dead end. It was an avenue to growth
and creativity only if overcome. Jung, like Freud, said little about why
depression happened to some people and not others. Like Abraham, he
thought an inborn tendency was likely. He thought therapy should not
focus on the cause, but address the imbalance in the psychic energy.
Looking squarely at fantasies associated with the depression would
liberate the patient from the consuming attention of the unconscious,
freeing up psychic energy for use in the external world.

Psychoanalysis in the Time of The Broken Brain If Prozac had been around
for Freud, would he have tried it for his patients? In the 1970s, a
doctor named Rafael Osheroff was treated for severe depression solely
with psychoanalytic talk therapy, in an era when

antidepressants were available. He successfully sued the hospital,
arguing that he was not getting the standard of care. Psychoanalytic
resistance to physical treatments became a hot topic. It's likely,
though, that Freud would have been not only open, but eager to try new
physical treatments. He began his career as a neurologist, and was
hopeful about the therapeutic powers of drugs.54 He insisted to the end
of his life that science would eventually reveal the biology behind
mental illness.55 It is possible he might have thought, as many of his
later followers did, that biology was only a first step, and that deeper
change would require dynamic therapy. Psychoanalysis did, though, face a
steep challenge in the 1970s, as the field of mental health shifted to a
new emphasis on biology. Psychotherapy, much of it psychoanalytic,
continued, of course. But psychiatrists, and later the lay public,
increasingly thought that depression was a brain disorder. This will be
detailed in the following two chapters, but for now note three major
reasons. One was the antidepressants. Their apparent efficacy led many
to think the causes of depression must be physical -- though physical
treatments for depression had been used for centuries without banishing
psychology in earlier eras. A second change was genetics. Some
heritability of unipolar depression got more scientific backing. A third
factor was the revision of the DSM, to DSM-III. The new manual avoided
mention about the causes of depression and most other mental illnesses,
focusing instead on description. It stripped psychoanalytic language
from the diagnoses, though, and its descriptive nature probably
encouraged biological psychiatry. Biological approaches were not new.
Strident claims that they were the only relevant approaches were,
though. Psychoanalysts had to respond. Some converted and became
biological psychiatrists. Some went the opposite way, focusing
exclusively on psychological causes and treatments. But most of the
major writing by psychoanalysts on depression from the 1970s onwards
took a third path, granting and welcoming the power of biological
approaches. They did not think that the new biological approaches
disproved psychoanalysis approaches or made it obsolete, but saw the two
as complementary. Silvano Arieti and Jules Bemporad, who co-authored a
psychoanalytic textbook on depression in the 1970s, reported good
results with

antidepressant drugs, though they thought most patients would also need
psychotherapy.56 Psychologist Nancy McWilliams wrote a textbook on
psychoanalytic diagnosis which also supported the use of drugs.
McWilliams wrote that the most disturbed depressed patients included
"delusional and ruthlessly self-hating mental patients who, until the
discovery of antidepressive medicines, could absorb years of a devoted
therapist's efforts and still believe uncritically that the best way to
save the world was to destroy the self."57 McWilliams also recognized
genetic vulnerability to depression. Psychoanalysts held, though, that
the meaning of symptoms still mattered, and they faulted purely
biological approaches for not grappling with subjective experience. The
presence of biological processes in depression also did not mean that
the causes were purely biological. John Bowlby, a British psychoanalyst
who had been influential for decades, published the last volume in a
famous trilogy on attachment and loss in 1980. Chemical changes in the
brain during depression, Bowlby thought, need not imply that the causal
sequence was chemical first, mood second.58 He found that people with
depressive illness often had unstable relationships with parents, may
have been repeatedly told they were unlovable or incompetent, or were
likely to have suffered an actual loss of a parent during childhood.59
In their 1978 textbook, Arieti and Bemporad pointed out that studies of
genetics and neurochemistry were not at that time conclusive -- an
argument that looks smart in retrospect, since they are still not.60
They also argued that the efficacy of drugs does not prove that
psychology doesn't matter, but instead that physical changes in
depression can be addressed independently.61 A 2004 psychoanalytic
textbook touted the value of short-term therapy, cognitive therapy, and
medication, but said that treatment of depression remains challenging
(it does). It then argued that psychodynamic treatment can help in mild
or moderate cases, and that patients with bipolar disorder and severe
major depression can also benefit, if their symptoms are reduced by
medication.62 Julia Kristeva, a philosopher and psychoanalyst from
Bulgaria who has been working in France since the 1960s, applied a
psychoanalytic lens to the gender ratio in depression.63 Mental health
workers have been puzzling over the gender ratio in depression for
decades. Why do women get diagnosed with depression more than men? Are
they really more prone to

depression, or simply diagnosed more? If women are more prone, why? If
more diagnosed, why?64 Some feminist psychoanalysts, drawing on the idea
of introjection, have proposed that depression in women might be related
to identification: boys are less vulnerable to the introjection of the
mother because their sex is different.65 Girls identify with the mother,
take her more deeply inside the self, and direct anger toward the
introjected object. The central dilemma for young children, Kristeva
said, is achieving autonomy.66 In Kristeva's view, this requires a
psychic "matricide." But this is harder for girls because of their
identification with the mother. The melancholic girl, having not killed
the mother, must kill herself. Put another way, the lost object, the
mother, is not lost enough. Kristeva sees psychoanalysis -- the chance
to render experience into language and have it interpreted -- as a
counter-depressant. This may sound like a purely psychological theory,
but Kristeva, whose book on depression came out the same year Prozac was
approved, also advocated for the use of medications for mood
disorders.67 The most ambitious attempt to integrate psychoanalysis and
biology is the new and innovative field of neuropsychoanalysis. The
leading figure has been South African neuropsychologist and
psychoanalyst Mark Solms. The core of Solms's thinking is that
psychoanalysis and neurology are two ways of looking at the same thing:
mental activity. Neurology looks at the objective, physical processes,
and psychoanalysis at the subjectivity.68 In this way of thinking, mind
and brain are not exactly different things with a relationship to one
another, but different ways of looking at and thinking about the same
thing. Neuropsychoanalysis of depression presumes that emotions have
functions. Solms and his colleagues argue that the brain has a "seeking"
mechanism, pushing animals to look for food, sex, and other pleasures.
The emotions that spark the seeking are necessary to get animals to
engage with the world. Specific pleasures associated with social
connection are highly developed in mammals. Drawing on Bowlby, they
argue that with lack of attachment, or social loss, a "protest" behavior
will ensue. The animal will seek reunion with the lost object. But if
the reunion fails, the animal will give up, causing a muting of the
seeking system in the brain, leading to

feelings of emptiness, deadness, and hopelessness. Antidepressants might
not fix the social losses, but they work because they address what is
happening in the brain. The reason some people respond to loss with
healthy grieving and others with depression may be that the loss repeats
unresolved early ones, leading to a sense of hopelessness. Many of these
ideas echo those of early analysts like Abraham and Bibring, who lived
before the antidepressant era.69 Otto Kernberg also applied
neuropsychoanalysis to depression. Kernberg, one of the most prominent
psychoanalysts in America, is another whose family fled Vienna because
of Nazism. Kernberg considered depression in evolutionary terms, and
also drew on Bowlby. Depression evolved to end separation distress. Such
distress, if prolonged, would be dangerous for infant mammals. Like most
psychoanalysts, Kernberg saw early experience as formative. Prolonged
separation of the infant from the mother causes rage first, and despair
later. These emotions cause higher levels of cortisol in the blood,
which has been shown to accompany depression. Genetic factors, Kernberg
thinks, dominate in severe depression, and life situation is more
relevant to the milder forms. Kernberg thinks that medication and ECT
are best for treating severe depressions, and psychotherapy, perhaps
combined with medication, for the milder ones. Psychoanalysis, Kernberg
says, offers for neurobiology a way of looking at "higher symbolic
functions that cannot be reduced to neocortical circuitry," and
neurobiology offers psychoanalysis a way of grounding its theories in
biology.70

A Painful Case: The Lessons of Osheroff Rafael Osheroff was a successful
doctor. In 1978, he became severely depressed. He was first treated with
a tricyclic antidepressant. The prescription was from Nathan Kline, a
key figure in the development of antidepressant medication. Accounts
differ on whether the tricyclic helped.71 Osheroff decided to change the
dose on his own, and then had some worsening of his condition. In early
January of 1979, he was admitted to Chestnut Lodge, a respected mental
health facility in Rockville, Maryland, near Washington, DC. Chestnut
Lodge had an exclusively psychoanalytic orientation. Two famous
psychoanalysts, Fromm-Reichmann and Harry Stack Sullivan, had worked

there. Both took the unusual view that psychodynamic methods could
succeed for severely ill patients, even those with psychosis. Freud
himself had doubted this. Chestnut Lodge did not use shock therapies
when they became available. Drugs were regarded as a form of coercion,
chemical straitjackets that would only mask the psychic conflict causing
the illness.72 The doctors at Chestnut Lodge thought Osheroff's symptoms
came from an underlying narcissistic personality disorder.73 They
treated him with dynamic talk therapy only, for months. His condition
worsened. Meanwhile, his hospitalization kept him from a lucrative
medical practice. Osheroff had a contract that would be void if he did
not return to work in six months. A doctor at Chestnut Lodge dismissed
Osheroff's concern about the contract, saying it symbolized "a giant
breast that was going to restore the scenes of adoration that he had
with his mother."74 Osheroff asked for medications at Chestnut Lodge,
but was denied them. After a while, Osheroff lost patience with Chestnut
Lodge, and his mother arranged a transfer to Silver Hill, a facility in
Connecticut that provided antidepressants.75 He improved rapidly, but
his life had been wounded. During his hospitalization, he had been
declared legally incompetent. His privileges at the hospital he worked
at had been suspended, and his children forbidden to see him. In 1982,
he sued. He won the case on appeal and received an out-of-court
settlement. In a symbol of the changing times, Chestnut Lodge eventually
closed and was converted into condos, and finally razed.76 Ghosts,
however, outlive the buildings that spawn them. The Osheroff case
haunted psychiatry long after the legal proceedings. A divided
profession had to decide, what were the lessons of the case? Gerald
Klerman, a prominent psychiatrist who advocated for Osheroff, thought
the case was about evidence -- specifically, what counted as evidence
for what works. Klerman was not opposed to talk therapy, and was a key
figure in creating a new psychotherapy called Interpersonal. But, he
said, the standard for judging a treatment had to be a randomized
controlled trial, as it was for the rest of medicine. Chestnut Lodge was
guilty of malpractice, he thought, because its treatment was not
evidence-based, and therefore was below the standard of care.77

Another possible lesson from the Osheroff case was that biological
psychiatry is right, and psychoanalysis wrong. Certainly, many
psychoanalysts were worried about this conclusion.78 The better lesson,
though, may be that dogmatism is wrong. The big mistake at Chestnut
Lodge may have been less the decision to treat Osheroff
psychoanalytically than to treat him solely that way -- particularly
since he had the kind of severe depression many psychoanalysts have
always been wary of treating with talk therapy alone. Chestnut Lodge's
failure to consider a physical aspect of his illness ran against the
major psychoanalytic theories of depression. Klerman was right that the
decision to treat Osheroff with psychoanalysis alone was below the
standard of care for general psychiatry. But it was also below the
standard of care within psychoanalysis. The interpretation of Osheroff's
career as a fantasied breast seems wildly misguided. Money and success
do have symbolic meaning, in addition to their practical ones.
Understanding these meanings might be therapeutic. In this case, the
analyst seems to have used the interpretation to dismiss the patient's
concerns, not to understand them. What about Osheroff's path to Chestnut
Lodge in the first place? He decided to change his dosage of the
tricyclic against Kline's advice for a reason. Was he having trouble
tolerating adverse effects? Patients often feel ambivalent toward
antidepressants -- partly because of adverse effects, but also because
they can fail to help the patient make sense of the illness. Osheroff
decided to go to Chestnut Lodge for a reason. Perhaps he was seeking
more insight into the reasons for his illness and his symptoms? Much of
this might well have been explored psychoanalytically. That exploration
might be more effective with physical treatments giving relief from the
symptoms. The Osheroff case yields yet another lesson. The diagnosis of
depression has exploded since the 1970s. Many critics are alarmed,
seeing an epidemic of over-diagnosis. The Osheroff case shows another
side of the issue, though. Chestnut Lodge saw depressive symptoms, but
insisted that a personality disorder -- universally regarded as hard to
treat by any method -- was the main diagnosis. Whether Osheroff had a
personality disorder or not, naming his suffering as depression was key
to effective treatment.

Whatever strengths biological approaches have, and whatever weaknesses
the psychoanalytic tradition has shown, some loss occurs when it is
abandoned. The felt experience of depression, the exploration of trauma
and loss and the sources of guilty obsessions, all get pushed to the
background. Psychoanalysis provided a method and a space for these
explorations. These explorations do not matter if the psychological
content of depression does not matter. But it does matter, to people
with depression. Some may be uninterested in working through their inner
conflict and simply want medications or ECT. Many do not share that
disinterest. Psychoanalysis continues because the subjective world of
the patient continues to matter. Depression was not a major concern of
early psychoanalysis. In Freud's vast writings, depression forms a small
part. The attention paid to depression by later analysts like Green,
Jacobson, and Kristeva is a sign of the growing attention paid to the
diagnosis. In the century following "Mourning and Melancholia,"
depression gradually became a major preoccupation of mental health work
-- and for the lay public. The task of defining depression, setting its
boundaries, building a consensus about what it was and was not, became
more pressing. A related challenge was finding ways to measure
depression, in both individuals and populations, even as the definition
of the illness was in flux. At the same time, medicine was growing
reliant on randomized trials to measure how well a therapy worked.
Klerman's complaint that Chestnut Lodge's treatment was not
evidence-based came when he, and others, were creating new
psychotherapies that were less open-ended than traditional
psychoanalysis, and thus more easily studied in trials. Medical
knowledge was becoming less about case histories and more about numbers,
and efforts to carefully define and carefully measure depression became
urgent. The results were mixed.

Notes 1. Pierre Janet, "Fear of Action as an Essential Element in the
Sentiment of Melancholia," in Martin L. Reymert, ed., Feelings and
Emotions: The Wittenberg Symposium by Thirty-Four Psychologists
(Worcester: Clark University Press, 1928).

2. On the critique that psychoanalysis was not scientific, see Adolf
GrÃ¼nbaum, The Foundations of Psychoanalysis (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1984). On the role of managed care, see T. M.
Luhrmann, Of Two Minds: An Anthropologist Looks at American Psychiatry
(New York: Random House, 2001). On the role of drugs, see David Healy,
The Antidepressant Era (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997),
ch.Â 7. Jonathan Metzl has argued that sexist assumptions and practices
that characterized psychoanalysis survived into drug treatment; see
Jonathan Metzl, Prozac on the Couch: Prescribing Gender in the Era of
Wonder Drugs (Durham: Duke University Press, 2003). 3. Julia Segal,
Melanie Klein (London: Sage Publications, 1992), 117. 4. See George
Makari, Revolution in Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis (New York:
HarperCollins, 2008), ch.Â 3. 5. Karen Horney, Feminine Psychology (New
York: W. W. Norton, 1993). 6. This can be seen in many histories of the
psychoanalytic movement, but Makari, Revolution in Mind, is especially
strong on this point. 7. Similarly, sociologist Stanley Cohen has shown
that while cognitive science often claims to have dislodged, if not
eviscerated, psychoanalysis, it will at times use the same concepts
while giving them different names. Stanley Cohen, States of Denial:
Knowing about Atrocities and Suffering (Cambridge: Polity Books, 2001),
43--5. 8. Mark Solms, "The Scientific Standing of Psychoanalysis,"
BJPsych International 15, 1 (February 2018), 5--8; Jonathan Shedler,
"The Efficacy of Psychodynamic Therapy," American Psychologist 65, 2
(February/March 2010), 98--109. More empirical research on the efficacy
of psychodynamic treatment is cited in chapter 4. 9. Meri Nana-Ama
Danquah, Willow, Weep for Me: A Black Woman's Journey Through Depression
(New York: Ballantine Publishing Group, 1998), 34--5. 10. This has been
shown in compelling detail in Anna Bentick van Schoonheten's Karl
Abraham; Life and Work, a Biography (Liz Waters,

trans., London: Karnac Books, 2016, originally published 2013). This
book is a principal source on Abraham's life, and his contributions on
depression. Also important (and used by Bentick van Schoonheten) is May,
"Abraham's Discovery of the 'Bad Mother.'" 11. Bentick van Schoonheten,
Karl Abraham, 255. 12. Abraham's idea, discussed below, that parental
absence, neglect, or lack of warmth is important in the genesis of
depression, has empirical support. See Bentick van Schoonheten, Karl
Abraham, 327; Fredric N. Busch, Marie Rudden, and Theodore Shapiro,
Psychodynamic Treatment of Depression (Arlington: American Psychiatric
Publishing, 2004), 24. To the extent this idea appears in Freud's work
on depression, it is vague and undeveloped. 13. May, "Abraham's
Discovery of the 'Bad Mother'", 284. 14. On Stekel, see ibid., 286. 15.
Abraham's analysands also included two other prominent early women
analysts, Ella Sharpe and Helene Deutsch, as well as Edward and James
Glover, and Sandor RadÃ³, all of whom were important in the spread of
psychoanalysis. See James Lieberman, Acts of Will: The Life and Work of
Otto Rank (New York: The Free Press, 1985), 166. 16. May, "Abraham's
Discovery of the 'Bad Mother,'" 287. 17. Bentick van Schoonheten, Karl
Abraham, 82. 18. Ibid., 82--3; Karl Abraham, "Giovanni Segantini: A
Psychoanalytic Study" (1911) in Clinical Papers and Essays on
Psychoanalysis (London: Maresfield Reprints, 1955). My discussion of
Abraham also draws directly on Karl Abraham, "Notes on the
Psycho-Analytic Investigation and Treatment of Manic-Depressive Insanity
and Allied Conditions," in Ernest Jones, ed., Selected Papers of Karl
Abraham, M.D.Â (London: Hogarth Press, 1927). Despite the title, the
paper was also about unipolar depression. Abraham considered
manic-depressive and unipolar depressive illness to be two types of the
same illness. 19. Bentick van Schoonheten, Karl Abraham, 353.

20. Ulrike May, "In Conversation: Freud, Abraham and Ferenczi on
'Mourning and Melancholia' (1915--1918)," The International Journal of
Psychoanalysis 100, 1 (2019) 77--98. 21. Darian Leader, The New Black:
Mourning, Melancholia and Depression (Minneapolis: Graywolf Press,
2008), 61. 22. Karl Abraham, "A Short Study of the Development of the
Libido," in Ernest Jones, ed., Selected Papers of Karl Abraham,
M.D.Â (London: Hogarth Press, 1927), 479. 23. "Mourning and Melancholia"
is frequently cited by psychoanalysts as one of Freud's greatest
achievements; see, for example, Priscilla Roth, "Melancholia, Mourning,
and the Countertransference," in Leticia Fiorini, Thierry Bokanowski,
and Sergio Lewkowicz, eds., On Freud's "Mourning and Melancholia"
(London: Karnac Books, 2009, originally published 2007). 24. Sigmund
Freud, "Mourning and Melancholia," in Sigmund Freud, On Murder,
Mourning, and Melancholia (Shaun Whiteside, ed., London: Penguin Books,
2005). 25. Freud, "Mourning and Melancholia," 206. 26. May, "In
Conversation," 79. 27. See Sadowsky, Electroconvulsive Therapy in
America, ch.Â 4. 28. Freud, "Mourning and Melancholia," 203; Jackson,
Melancholia and Depression, 226. 29. May, "Abraham's Discovery of the
'Bad Mother,'" 297. May notes that Freud had also told Stekel and Victor
Tausk that they would eventually come around to his views. He made this
prediction with Jung as well; it proved inaccurate. 30. Abraham, "A
Short Study of the Development of the Libido," 433. 31. As Klein put it,
"These anxiety contents and defence mechanisms form the basis of
paranoia. In the infantile dread of magicians, witches, evil beasts,
etc., we detect something of this anxiety ..." Melanie Klein, "A

Contribution to The Psychogenesis of Manic-Depressive States," in Juliet
Mitchell, ed., The Selected Melanie Klein (New York: The Free Press,
1986), 117. 32. Dina Rosenbluth, "The Kleinian Theory of Depression,"
Journal of Child Psychotherapy 1, 3 (1965) 20--5. 33. Melanie Klein,
"Mourning and Its Relation to Manic-Depressive States," in Mitchell, ed,
The Selected Melanie Klein, 147--8. 34. Rosenbluth, "The Kleinian Theory
of Depression," 22. 35. Klein, "Mourning and Its Relation to
Manic-Depressive States," 149. 36. Ibid., 155. 37. Herbert Rosenfeld,
"An Investigation into the Psychoanalytic Theory of Depression,"
International Journal of Psychoanalysis 40 (1959), 105-- 29. 38. Otto
Fenichel, The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis (New York: W. W. Norton
& Company, 1945). 39. Ibid., 403. Fenichel thought the likelihood of a
hereditary factor was particularly likely in manic depression. 40. AndrÃ©
Green, On Private Madness (London: H. Karnak Books, 1997, originally
published 1986). See also Gregorio Kohon, ed., The Dead Mother: The Work
of AndrÃ© Green (London: Routledge, 1999). 41. Green, On Private Madness,
146. 42. Alice Miller, The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the
True Self (Ruth Ward, trans., New York: Basic Books, 2007, originally
published 1979). 43. Sharon O'Brien, The Family Silver: A Memoir of
Depression and Inheritance (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004),
32. 44. Sandor RadÃ³, "The Problem of Melancholia," The International
Journal of Psychoanalysis 9 (1928) 420--38. RadÃ³'s ideas found a place
in

Fenichel's outline of depression in The Psychoanalytic Theory of the
Neuroses. 45. Edward Bibring, "The Mechanism of Depression," in Phyllis
Greenacre, ed., Affective Disorders: Psychoanalytic Contributions to
Their Study (New York: International Universities Press, 1953); David
Rapaport, "Edward Bibring's Theory of Depression," in James C. Coyne,
ed., Essential Papers on Depression (New York: New York University
Press, 1986). 46. Martin Seligman, "A Learned Helplessness Model of
Depression," in Jennifer Radden, ed., The Nature of Melancholy (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 311--16. 47. See his memoir, Martin Seligman,
The Hope Circuit: A Psychologist's Journey from Helplessness to Optimism
(New York: Public Affairs, 2018), ch.Â 7. 48. Biography of Jacobson is
drawn from Brenda Maddox, Freud's Wizard: Ernest Jones and the
Transformation of Psychoanalysis (Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 2007,
originally published 2006), 224--5. On the increasing depth of clinical
experience with depression in Jacobson's generation and after, see
Arieti and Bemporad, Severe and Mild Depression, 54--5. 49. Edith
Jacobson, Depression: Comparative Studies of Normal, Neurotic, and
Psychotic Conditions (Madison: International Universities Press, 1971).
50. Rosenfeld, "An Investigation into the Psychoanalytic Theory of
Depression," 114. 51. There are numerous accounts of the Freud/Jung
relationship. One of the best recent discussions is in George Makari's
Revolution in Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis. 52. There is no book
or essay by Jung devoted exclusively to depression. References to it are
scattered in his writings. My summary relies heavily on W. Steinberg,
"Depression: A Discussion of Jung's Ideas," Journal of Analytical
Psychology 34 (1989) 339--52.

53. David Karp, Is It Me or My Meds?: Living with Antidepressants
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2006), 196. 54. Gary Greenberg,
Manufacturing Depression: The Secret History of a Modern Disease (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 2010), 149--50. 55. Elliot S. Valenstein,
Blaming the Brain: The Truth About Drugs and Mental Health (New York:
The Free Press, 1998), 11. 56. Silvano Arieti and Jules Bemporad, "The
Psychological Organization of Depression," American Journal of
Psychiatry 137, 11 (November 1980) 1360--5. 57. Nancy McWilliams,
Psychoanalytic Diagnosis: Understanding Personality Structure in the
Clinical Process (New York: The Guilford Press, 1994), 229; also see
240. Her book meant to supplement DSM-III, whose atheoretical nature she
welcomed because it allowed for standardization across psychiatry.
Historians have sometimes written as though psychoanalysts all reviled
DSM-III; McWilliams' endorsement of it is on p.Â vii. For another example
of psychoanalytic recognition of the value of medication, see Busch et
al., Psychodynamic Treatment of Depression. 58. John Bowlby, Attachment
and Loss, Volume III: Loss (New York: Basic Books, 1980), 261. 59.
Ibid., 247--8. 60. Silvano Arieti and Jules Bemporad, Severe and Mild
Depression: The Psychotherapeutic Approach (New York: Basic Books,
1978), 4--5. 61. Ibid., 128. 62. Busch et al., Psychodynamic Treatment
of Depression, 3--5. 63. Julia Kristeva, Black Sun: Depression and
Melancholia (New York: Leon S. Roudiez, trans., Columbia University
Press, 1989, originally published 1987), 3--94. 64. I will look at these
problems in detail in chapter 4.

65. McWilliams, Psychoanalytic Diagnosis, 239. 66. Kristeva has been
accused of being a spy for the Bulgarian Communist government, a charge
she denies. I have not looked at the evidence carefully or
comprehensively, but what I have seen is short of conclusive. 67.
Schiesari provides a critical exposition of Kristeva's theory of
depression in The Gendering of Melancholia, 77--93. Schiesari sees
Kristeva's work as mother-blaming and therefore anti-feminist, a reading
I do not share. Schiesari also considers Kristeva's advocacy of lithium
"disturbing," but does not say why (The Gendering of Melancholia, 78).
68. Mark Solms, The Brain and the Inner World: An Introduction to the
Neuroscience of the Subjective Experience (New York: Other Press, 2003).
69. Margaret R. Zellner, Douglas F. Watt, Mark Solms, and Jaak Panskepp,
"Affective Neuroscientific and Neuropsychoanalytic Approaches to Two
Intractable Problems: Why Depression Feels So Bad and What Addicts
Really Want," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 35 (2011) 2000--8.
70. Otto F. Kernberg, "An Integrated Theory of Depression,"
Neuropsychoanalysis 11 (2009) 76--80. 71. Anne Harrington says the
tricyclics helped, Gail Hornstein claims the medication had little
effect. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 197; Gail A. Hornstein, To Redeem One
Person is to Redeem the World: The Life of Frieda Fromm-Reichmann (New
York: The Free Press, 2000), 384. 72. Sandra G. Boodman, "A Horrible
Place, A Wonderful Place," The Washington Post,October 8, 1989,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/magazine/1989/10/08
/a-horrible-place-a-wonderful-place/ee4d7572-7ac0-4159-baf8e8112a983e50/,
accessed October 9, 2019. 73. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 197.

74. Peter D. Kramer, Ordinarily Well: The Case for Antidepressants (New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2016), 44--5. 75. According to
Hornstein, the overall atmosphere of treatment was more humane at Silver
Hill. Hornstein, To Redeem One Person is to Redeem the World, 384--5.
76. Daniel Barron, "The Rise of Evidence-Based Psychiatry," Scientific
American on-line, February 28, 2017,
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/the-rise-of-evidencebased-psychiatry/,
accessed May 8, 2019. 77. Hornstein, To Redeem One Person is to Redeem
the World, 386; Healy, The Antidepressant Era, 246--8. 78. Hornstein, To
Redeem One Person is to Redeem the World, 385--6.

4 A Diagnosis in Ascent "There is no more bloated category than
'depression,' threatening to all but expunge the nuances of language
denoted by 'distress,' 'sadness,' 'despair,' 'gloominess,' 'pessimism,'
etc." -- Derek Summerfield1 "Psychiatrists do not always agree with one
another on how and where the line demarcating depression from
unhappiness should be drawn." -- Nancy Andreasen2

Blurry Borders In 1961, the painter Mark Rothko was a star. An obscure
artist of modest means for much of his adult life, that year he had his
own show at the Museum of Modern Art (MOMA) -- days before he was an
invited guest at the inauguration of President John F. Kennedy, where he
was seated next to the economist Walt Rostow. (The seating was
alphabetical. Tragically, no record exists of the conversation between
Rothko and Rostow.) Rothko had developed a signature style of stacked,
rectangular color fields with blurry borders, and his paintings had
become instantly familiar as "Rothkos." After years of working at
insecure teaching jobs, he was now selling individual paintings for
thousands of dollars and getting commissions from the likes of the Tate
Gallery and Harvard University. At the opening to the MOMA show, he
seemed pleased and expansive. But at 5:00 the next morning, he showed up
at a friend's house in a state of despair. He was convinced the show had
exposed him as worthless and empty.3 Impostor syndrome is common.
Success can be as stressful as failure and loss. And Rothko always had a
gloomy side, whether because of his childhood as a Jewish refugee from
eastern Europe in an era of pogroms, his outsider status as an
immigrant, or his innate temperament. While he

always had friends and could be outgoing, he often felt lonely. People
close to him said he fell easily into states of despair. He could be a
hypochondriac. He had a sharp temper and was prone to gloomy
ruminations. He thought he was an artistic genius, but had grim doubts
about his work anyway. A close friend spoke of a "great vacuum at the
center of his being."4 In the 1960s, people close to him started
referring to his "depressions." In the weeks before the MOMA show, he
had been drinking heavily, gaining weight, and his blood pressure grew
alarmingly high. Exactly when Rothko and others began to see a clinical
problem, rather than bad moods, is hard to know. In this enigma, he
mirrored the trend in the wider society: we were seeing more clinical
depression, but were we having more, or simply learning how to see it?
In these late years, his paintings, which had dazzled viewers with their
lustrous use of color, began to darken. Some of the last ones used
mostly black and grey (see figure 6). Some people saw this as an
expression of depression. Rothko denied that his paintings expressed his
inner state. He hated easy interpretations of his work -- maybe all
interpretations of his work. One woman who wanted to purchase a painting
was upset when Rothko offered her one with dark tones. She wanted happy
colors, like red, yellow, and orange. Rothko replied: "Red, yellow,
orange -- aren't those the colors of an inferno?"5 The late paintings,
he said, were not windows into his darkening psyche. By the late 1960s,
Rothko faced several new stressors. The new movement of Pop Art was
drawing attention away from Rothko and painters of his generation.
Rothko did not think much of these new artists, but he knew they were
the next big thing. In 1968 he was found to have an aneurysm, probably
related to hypertension. His physician advised him to stop smoking and
drinking, and to watch his diet. These were hard changes for Rothko, who
had a large appetite and was a heavy smoker and drinker. He grew
sexually impotent, and later that year, separated from his second wife.
By early 1970, a psychiatrist named Bernard Schoenberg thought Rothko
was seriously depressed and urged psychotherapy. Rothko refused.

Figure 6 Mark Rothko's later paintings avoided lush colors. Many
wondered if these late paintings expressed depression, a speculation
that shows the growing awareness of depression in the second half of the
twentieth century Source: Untitled, 1969 (acrylic on canvas), Rothko,
Mark (1903--70)/Saint Louis Art Museum/Gift of the Mark Rothko
Foundation/Bridgeman Images

At the height of his fame, Rothko's midtown Manhattan studio was two
blocks away from the office of psychiatrist Nathan Kline. Kline was not
as famous as Rothko, but he was also doing well professionally. Born in
New Jersey to a family that owned a chain of grocery stores, and to a
mother who was a physician at a time when few women were, Kline studied
psychology at Harvard before getting his own medical degree in 1943.
Where Rothko was dour, Kline's temperament was upbeat. One historian has
said that "in the often gray world of academic psychiatry, Kline cut an
unusually colorful figure." He stood out like an early Rothko, then, in
a world of late ones. One of Kline's colleagues said that his private
practice seemed "like something from a Hollywood movie."6 His high
energy level was matched by a therapeutic optimism, spurring him to key
roles in the rise of both antipsychotic drugs and antidepressants.
Seeking alternatives to both the dismal state of large mental hospitals
and lengthy psychoanalysis, Kline was hopeful about the power of drugs.
He became one of the towering figures in the history of
psychopharmacology. Kline -- like Carl Jung -- thought that depression
stemmed from a depletion of "psychic energy." Jung thought this depleted
state was an opportunity for people to turn inward and confront their
demons. Kline had no objection to therapy or introspection, but he
wanted easier paths to health. When he heard that a tuberculosis drug
was causing euphoria in patients, leading to dancing in the wards, Kline
thought this might be the remedy. He contributed to the creation of one
of the first classes of antidepressants drugs, the monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOIs). Kline treated many depression patients with these,
and with the other newly developed class of antidepressants called
tricyclics. By 1974, Kline had treated 5,000 depression patients,
claiming a success rate of 85 percent.7 The MAOIs did not become
cultural sensations like Prozac, but awareness of depression was
growing. Clinicians and lay people learned to see its

signs. Depression came to be as recognizable as a Rothko, and as
marketable. Psychiatry had to undergo some introspection of its own. The
question of who exactly was clinically depressed grew more pressing,
without yielding easy answers. The borders between sick and normal were
as blurry as those surrounding a classic Rothko rectangle. If a person
feels overtaken in his professional life, and then suffers an aneurysm,
is a gloomy mood simply the sadness one expects? If medications help
people feel better, does that prove that they "really" had depression
all along? The MAOIs and tricyclics have some serious adverse effects
but they did help people feel better. Some experts think they work as
well, and possibly better than, Prozac and the other SSRIs that came
later.8 Rothko was not one of the success stories, though. Multiple
doctors urged him into psychiatric treatment, and one prescribed a
tricyclic, which Rothko stopped using. One February morning in 1970, he
was found dead by suicide in his studio. He cut his arteries after
taking a massive dose of the tricyclic. It was prescribed by Nathan
Kline.9

A Weak Word Conquers the World In his memoir Darkness Visible, novelist
William Styron complained about the weakness of "depression," a word he
found unequal to the monster it names.10 However lackluster it may seem,
though, it has become over the past century one of the most commonly
used in medicine. The word Styron thought was weak became an unstoppable
global force. Adolf Meyer was not a native English speaker. A Swiss
psychiatrist and an immigrant to the United States, as the head of
psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University he became one of the most
influential psychiatrists in the country. He advocated a
multi-dimensional approach to patients. Their biology, personal
psychology, and social milieu all needed attention. When he urged
clinicians to stop using melancholia, and start using depression, Meyer
sparked a momentous, though gradual, change in clinical language. By the
late twentieth century, melancholia was a marginal term.11 After its
success rooting out "melancholia" in Western discourse, "depression"
burrowed its way into clinical and lay language in contexts as diverse
as

Iran and Japan, inflecting (or infecting?) medical, moral, and religious
idioms globally. Many started comparing depression to the common cold,
to stress how widespread it is.12 This was a bad comparison. For one
thing, depression -- by definition -- lasts more than a few days. And
while it can have mild forms, it causes immense suffering and debility
in its severe forms. Anyone who uses the comparison hoping to raise
awareness of depression may have worsened the confusion between mood and
illness that troubles the word in the first place. The rising rates of
depression are, as we have seen, subject to differing interpretations.
With an illness subject to frequent and contested criteria for
diagnosis, the task becomes harder. This chapter traces some of the
processes that accompanied the rising diagnosis rates and the increased
attention to depression. The invention of new physical treatments for
depression, in particular the rise of the antidepressants, was connected
to these changes, but that story is mostly left to the next chapter.
Here, I look at a diverse group of practices connected to manualization.
They included the creation of numerical rating scales for depression,
new psychotherapies that were more easily studied with statistics, and
research on what populations have greater risk for depression and why.
All of these were efforts to contain this hazy sickness, whether within
the confines of diagnostic manuals, assessment tests, or statistical
measures -- as if taking a permanent marker to the blurry borders of
Rothko rectangles and trying to make the separations strict.

After Meyer: Depression in Ascent Despite the rise in depression
diagnoses since the middle of the twentieth century, depression was a
known, and increasingly used, category in the decades before. Abraham
used it in his psychoanalytic work. The wider profession of psychiatry
gradually followed Meyer's lead in starting to adopt it. This may be
partly why Abraham did. Freud, who was not a psychiatrist, used
melancholia to discuss the same symptom cluster. In some usage
melancholia was reserved for particular types of depression -- usually,
severe and of apparent physical origin -- but some doctors

continued to use it interchangeably with depression well into the
twentieth century. In 1925, John MacCurdy, a doctor trained at Johns
Hopkins, described depression much as we do now: sadness, sluggishness,
feelings of personal inadequacy, and intense guilty feelings that seem
baseless to others.13 "The sun does not shine as it used to, the woods
are not so green, even bodily functions have lost their acuity, their
legs and arms are wooden ..."14 MacCurdy saw a spectrum between ordinary
low spirits and a medical problem. Clinical depression, he thought, had
more hopelessness, and a lack of will to change. MacCurdy also
distinguished between psychotic depression, with delusions, and neurotic
depression, where the grasp of factual reality is intact but clouded by
gloomy interpretations. He complained that depression did not get enough
research attention. He died in 1947. The decades after would see
precisely the attention he hoped for. Kraepelin, and most others in the
early twentieth century, focused on severe forms. He developed several
different ways of grouping severe mood disorders.15 He also coined an
influential term, "involutional melancholia," which meant serious
depressive illness acquired later in life, not inborn.16 Styron may have
lamented the drabness of "depression," but here is a tip for people who
want their coinages to become juggernauts adopted in numerous cultures
around the world, and well known in lay culture: do not use a term like
"involutional melancholia." Plainer language works better.17 With
increased interest in depression came new attempts to classify subtypes.
One common distinction made in the middle of the twentieth century was
between "endogenous" depression -- biologically based, probably genetic
-- and "reactive" depression -- a response to external events.18
Suicidal thoughts and insomnia were often thought to be features of
endogenous depression.19 The distinction lives on, but without the
status it had 70 years ago. I doubt it was ever easy to know how much
any particular case of depression was endogenous or reactive.20 Even in
its heyday, the distinction was questioned within psychiatry.21 Abraham
Myerson, a prominent psychiatrist in Boston, wrote a book about the mild
form. He called it neither depression nor melancholia, but "anhedonia,"
a lost ability to enjoy life. The word anhedonia now sometimes refers to
this loss as a symptom of depression. By twenty-first-

century measures, though, Myerson's anhedonia would be depression. The
symptoms included loss of interest in activities, loss of appetite,
insomnia, poor concentration, and a feeling of lack of purpose.22 He
omitted sadness, though.23 He thought that anhedonia was caused by the
strain of modern life but his remedies were as old as Hippocrates: more
exercise, better rest, and better diet. Myerson said he was not talking
about a "disease," requiring medical treatment, though he also warned
that severe forms were true medical conditions, needing a doctor's
attention.24 He tried using amphetamines to treat it, and was also one
of the first American psychiatrists to use ECT. When the increased
interest in depression began is hard to pinpoint. In 1980, the third
edition of the DSM came out, and seven years later, Prozac was approved
for sale. As important as these were, depression was a subject of
growing interest in the decades before. In the 1950s, the MAOIs and the
tricyclics were the first drugs to be called "antidepressants." Perhaps
psychiatry started to find a lot of nails once it had a hammer. In 1954,
though, before any antidepressants were in wide use, two prominent
psychiatrists named anxiety and depression as the era's major
psychiatric challenges.25 One likely factor was the rise of private
office practice. When psychiatric work was mainly in asylums, most of
the patients doctors saw had severe disorders, including disabling
depressions with psychotic delusions or catatonia. Many patients were
involuntary, brought to the asylums by their families or law
enforcement. Out-patient psychotherapy became common, a voluntary and
popular consumer good, over the course of the twentieth century. The
success of psychoanalysis played a big part in this, although
psychoanalysis was never the only talk therapy. Psychiatrists were
seeing more people who had symptoms of depression, but were too well to
commit to asylum care. These changes are too easily dismissed as
treating the "worried well." Certainly with more demand for therapy,
some of the people seeking it might not have been considered ill before.
Some of them may not have been sick at all, even by broad definitions,
but seeking help working on serious life problems. Some may simply have
been seeking personal growth, what psychologist Abraham Maslow called
"self-actualization." There is nothing

wrong with that, of course, if people are being helped. But many others
were suffering from severe symptoms. The cases presented by Karl Abraham
or Edith Jacobson, for example, were patients in a lot of pain. It is
good they did not have to choose between an asylum and no care at all.

Rating Scales and Therapies: Depression Quantified In the late 1950s, as
antidepressants were coming into use, British psychiatrist Max Hamilton
developed the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression.26 A patient would
give a numerical score for the severity of various symptoms. The numbers
were used for comparisons of the patients before and after treatments,
as well as statistical analysis. Hamilton had served in the Royal Air
Force, where he knew men who had suffered breakdowns during combat and
were thought to have "lowered moral fibre."27 This stigma may have
motivated his search for precise measurement. Hamilton meant the scale
to be a measure of severity only, but it came to be used for diagnosis
as well.28 Other scales followed, but the Hamilton scale remains widely
used. Hamilton conceded some flaws in his scale.29 He wanted it to focus
on the clearest, easily identified symptoms.30 Severity measured by the
scale may not match severity measured in a global clinical judgment.
With large-scale comparisons among patients becoming more important for
medical research, though, measurement became more necessary. New
psychotherapies also had to adapt to the reshaping of what counted as
clinical evidence. Many new forms of psychotherapy were developed from
the 1960s on, many of them as alternatives to psychoanalysis.
Psychoanalysis is open-ended -- it does not target a completion date in
advance, and the criteria for completion are not always clear. This can
be a strength in some ways, allowing deep exploration of conflicts after
some symptom relief is achieved. It can also be daunting, though, and it
did not fit well in a medical culture driven by statistical measures, or
a third-party insurance payment system that sought limits on the number
of sessions. These changes helped spur new therapies, including
humanistic therapy, which focused on the person's needs to
self-actualize, and Gestalt therapy,

which sought to focus on the person's situation in the moment, rather
than as a result of long-buried inner conflicts. The psychotherapies are
too numerous to cover all of them. Two that were important for
depression were Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy or CBT, and Interpersonal
Therapy, or ITP. A snappy acronym is always a plus. Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy merged two approaches, one focused on changing patterns of
thought, and one on changing patterns of behavior. CBT's promoters often
emphasized its newness.31 Modifications of thought and behavior to treat
depressive illness go back to antiquity, though. CBT gave it newly
systematic study. Aaron Beck, a psychiatrist who had trained as a
psychoanalyst, created cognitive therapy.32 In the late 1950s and early
1960s, he began to think depression stemmed from faulty reasoning,
logical errors. Typical examples include all-or-nothing thinking, where
the patient thinks they must be perfect or else they are worthless;
over-generalization, where they conclude that a single episode of
failure defines them; mind-reader error, where they assume people are
thinking poorly of them; and disqualifying the positive, where they
overlook good that they have, or have done. A student might fail a test
and say to the therapist "I'm a failure, and my teacher must have lost
all respect for me." The therapist could then point out that a single
test does not make one a failure, and that they did not yet know
anything about the level of the teacher's respect. Why the depressed
person made these errors in logic may interest the cognitive therapist,
but the focus of therapy is to help patients learn to correct their
errors.33 Beck wanted defined measures of depression, clear evidence
that a therapy worked, and testable theories. He created his own scale
for severity, the Beck Depression Inventory, which is still used today.
He disliked how psychoanalysts often turned to the authority of founding
figures in the field, rather than using experiment and observation to
settle questions. He tried to put the main psychoanalytic theory of
depression -- anger turned inward -- to an empirical test and, with a
colleague, studied the content of depressed patients' dreams.34 They
found that the dreams were filled more with loss and rejection than with
anger, and they called the dreams "masochistic." This was supposed to
refute psychoanalysis, but from a psychoanalytic

point of view, that is what masochism is: anger or aggression turned
inwards. Psychoanalysts opposed Beck's tests, which they thought left
out complexity and individuality. He was denied admission into the
American Psychoanalytic Association. He resented this, but he never gave
up on Freudian theory entirely. American psychiatry departments were
drifting from psychoanalysis, though. At a time of upheaval in his
personal and professional life, he worked on cognitive therapy by using
it on himself -- much as Freud developed early psychoanalysis by
analyzing his own dreams. By the 1970s, Beck had refined his ideas and
was promoting them. At the same time, a number of behaviorists were
finding the strict stimulus-- response model of behaviorism wanting, but
disliked psychoanalysis. They found Beck's approach attractive, and the
merger produced CBT. CBT came at a time primed for it. The prestige of
psychoanalysis was fading, and so was patience for its length and
expense. The entire culture of medicine was changing, too. After World
War II, medical research came to rely on randomized controlled trials
(RCTs), where large numbers of patients get a treatment and are compared
to a group given a different one, or no treatment at all. RCTs have
flaws, and exclusive reliance on them has downsides. The appeal of these
large comparisons is easy to see, though. They have a particular
attraction for depression, which can get better over time without any
treatment at all. The case for a treatment seems stronger if the number
of people who get better with treatment is much larger than the number
who get better without it. RCTs became the standard for clinical
evidence. CBT fit this changing culture, because it was a talk therapy
that could be standardized, though Beck also insisted that CBT was a
learned skill and "You can't do cognitive therapy from a manual any more
than you can do surgery from a manual."35 CBT also fit the culture of
randomized trials because it had clear goals, and a scale to measure
success by. CBT also had a pragmatic optimism, very American, unlike
Freud's bleaker vision. Freud thought all people were plagued by inner
conflicts. The work of psychoanalysis was not to purge demons, but to
get some control over them. The suffering caused by the conflicts could
be reduced. CBT had a sunnier outlook: correct thinking will lead to
happier feeling.

Beck understood the appeal of this, and used it to convert people to his
view. He privately continued to work with psychoanalytic ideas, trying
to understand why people had negative thoughts, and retaining some
Freudian pessimism about how completely they could be overcome.36 In
canny marketing, though, Beck kept lingering ties to psychoanalysis to
himself. Some critics of antidepressant medications have called them a
quick fix that does not address underlying psychological or social
causes of depression. Some add that these medications fit well in
contemporary capitalism -- antidepressants are a commodity you can buy,
and improvement in mood will lead to improved workplace performance and
less absenteeism. Society gets a better worker and a better consumer. No
confrontation with alienation or social inequalities needed! If you
think this might apply to CBT as well, consider that this is what some
of its proponents say. In 2014, the UK government announced that people
on disability would lose their benefits if they refused to attend CBT
sessions.37 But while CBT can be seen as a form of managerial control,
we should not reduce it to that. All forms of psychiatric treatment have
an element of social control, but they can also have true therapeutic
value.38 CBT may fit our current cultural, political, and economic
moment. It can still be helpful therapy. It has been over-hyped, though,
and may not be more effective than other psychotherapies.39 CBT may seem
harmless at worst, though some have alleged adverse effects, such as
increased anxiety and deteriorating relationships.40 CBT's promise of
quick action is attractive in a culture of quick fixes and costconscious
corporate insurance. But depression can be a stubborn problem, often
needing more than a quick fix. Correcting logic may help many people,
but what about those whose illness creates a resistance to logic? Freud
thought that rational persuasion would have limited power if the
negative thoughts were caused by unconscious conflict. Whether he was
right about the reason or not, rational persuasion will not always
prevail with a depressed person. In a memoir of her depression, author
Tracy Thompson wrote that doctors' attempts to reason with depressed
patients might be futile: "This is one of the least understood aspects
of depression, this tenacity with which severely depressed people cling
to the very

perceptions that are most distorted."41 To psychoanalysts, this is one
of the most understood aspects of depression. Interpersonal
Psychotherapy developed in the late 1960s and 1970s. Like CBT, it is
meant to be time-limited. Rather than focusing on illogical thoughts, it
stresses interpersonal relationships.42 Depressive symptoms, according
to ITP, come when relationships are damaged or threatened. This was a
part of Abraham's theory -- he thought that frayed relationships in the
present re-activated older feelings of loss. ITP aims to help patients
develop better communication and social support, in order to have better
relationships. Gerald Klerman started ITP at Yale University in 1969.
Klerman had earlier contributed to research showing the efficacy of a
tricyclic antidepressant, and would later work on a large study that
seemed to show that the incidence of depression was rising.43 He was
Raphael Osheroff's champion, arguing that the treatment provided at
Chestnut Lodge was not evidencebased. In the late 1960s, Klerman was
working with colleagues to see how well tricyclic antidepressants worked
alone, compared with their performance when combined with
psychotherapy.44 At the time, clinical trials for psychotherapy were
rare. Klerman and his colleagues wanted a time-limited psychotherapy
with clear goals. They used CBT as a model, though they had different
views of the causes and treatment of depression. ITP was thus not
invented because clinicians had a theory about what would work, which
they then tested to see if it was true. ITP was, rather, created for the
purpose of being studied in a clinical trial. Only after that goal was
set did its creators start to think about what would work. Klerman was a
psychopharmacologist and assumed depression had a biological basis. He
did not, though, think that meant that only physical treatments like ECT
or drugs could be effective. He thought, for example, that drugs could
help restore normal sleep patterns, but that psychotherapy might help
more with frayed relationships. Though ITP was time-limited, and worked
with the present more than early life, ITP's proponents were open about
their debt to psychoanalysis. The psychoanalysts valued most in ITP were
those who emphasized relationships, like Harry Stack Sullivan -- one of
the most famous doctors to

work at Chestnut Lodge -- and John Bowlby. ITP was also influenced by
Meyer's interest in placing the patient in social context.45 Another new
therapy had its roots in Martin Seligman's ideas. After shocking dogs
led him to the theory of learned helplessness, Seligman became
interested in exploring the brighter side of mental life. Instead of
asking what makes people depressed, he started asking what makes them
happy. In therapy, this shift in emphasis might mean, for example,
giving less emphasis to problems than to promoting positive emotions
such as hope and gratitude. But positive psychology has probably had
more impact on "normal" psychology than as a treatment for illness. It
is the cornerstone of what social critic William Davies has named the
"happiness industry," a push for positivity, often monetized with
commercial products, which Davies sees as a way of avoiding fraught
social problems.46 In close kinship with the happiness industry is the
gratitude industry. In recent years, for example, we have seen frequent
encouragement to keep a gratitude journal, in order to promote our
happiness. If you do not feel grateful because your life presents
hardship, perhaps you can try to be grateful anyway -- exercise it like
a muscle. So argued Arthur Brooks in a New York Times column in 2015.47
First, he said, express gratitude privately, then publicly, and finally
learn to be grateful for trivial things -- he gave the example of the
spots on a trout. This sounds nice. And yes, we would all be happier
with more appreciation of the wonder of everyday life. That may be more
challenging, though, if you are struggling with poverty, for example.
Brooks was the president of the American Enterprise Institute for nine
years. The Institute is a right-wing think tank, generally opposed to
government programs that help the poor. This seems relevant. Let them
eat gratitude.

The Measure of Efficacy Psychotherapy works; this is well documented.48
In the middle of the twentieth century, some famously claimed that the
number of people who get better from psychotherapy was no larger than
the number whose symptoms disappear without any treatment. This claim,
though, was based on a few studies that were not rigorously selected.
With better methods of meta-analysis -- the aggregation of multiple
studies -- psychotherapy

received more support.49 CBT and ITP are well-studied psychotherapies;
both have efficacy rates at least as high as antidepressants in the
acute stage.50 The therapeutic effects of psychotherapy may last longer
than that of drugs after treatment is stopped, and patients seem to be
less likely to drop out of psychotherapy treatment than antidepressant
treatment.51 This is not surprising because although psychotherapy can
be done poorly, you hear little about unwanted side effects from
therapy. Psychotherapy and medication also work more powerfully together
than either does alone.52 Whether any form of psychotherapy is more
effective than the others is less clear. Some studies have found modest
differences among different kinds, and other studies have not. CBT and
IPT could be tested in the clinical trials. Having done so, they could
say that they were, unlike psychoanalysis, evidence-based. Psychodynamic
therapy is now being studied in trials, though, and seems as effective
as others.53 One recent meta-analysis even found that it did not matter
if therapy was conducted face-to-face, on the phone, or over the
internet. The case for the efficacy of psychotherapy for depression was
so strong, the authors said, that denying people psychotherapy by using
them as controls in trials was unethical.54 The similar efficacy of
psychotherapies makes it hard to know exactly why they work -- although
the same can be said for antidepressants or ECT. Maybe just having a
trained professional to listen to your problems, in a space where you
can say anything you need to, is enough. The similar efficacy may also
reflect a tendency of therapists to be eclectic in practice. Few
psychodynamic practitioners are likely to ignore fallacious thoughts or
interpersonal relationships. One guide to psychoanalytic therapy for
depression, for example, suggests showing patients with guilty thoughts
that thoughts show faulty reasoning.55 Few cognitive therapists and
interpersonal therapists are likely to avoid insight, and they may even
make interpretations of unconscious conflict. Different psychotherapies
may just work better for different patients, just as different
antidepressants do. Psychotherapy, like depression itself, is rife with
intangibles. Like depression, an essence of it eludes easy definition,
and there are lots of different types. The new therapies that came in
the era of quantification added to the repertoire of clinicians,
allowing a pluralism of approaches. Efforts at measuring and
standardizing, though, would always face inherent

limits. The measures to assess how a patient feels before and after are
imperfect to begin with, and you generally cannot observe what goes on
in therapy because privacy and confidentiality are foundations of its
success.

Who Gets Depression? One reason to measure depression in society is that
it does not hit populations equally. Depression has a politics, a
politics of inequality. The jazz bassist Charles Mingus brimmed with
vitality and creativity. But in addition to a notorious temper, he
frequently thought of wanting to die. He even had episodes where he
tried to will himself to die. While living in New York, he saw a
psychotherapist named Edmund Pollock. In 1958, at a time of acute
stress, he checked himself into the Bellevue Mental Hospital in New York
City, hoping for a place of rest and respite. A doctor diagnosed him
with paranoid schizophrenia, a label Mingus thought came from racist
bias. He had good reason to; historian Jonathan Metzl has shown how
disproportionately Black men got this diagnosis at that time,
particularly if they voiced social grievances, which Mingus certainly
did.56 One doctor, Mingus reported, thought Black people in general were
"paranoid" and proposed a lobotomy for Mingus, a fate fortunately
avoided.57 The jazz critic Nat Hentoff, who was a close of friend of
Mingus's, thought instead that Mingus suffered from "classical clinical
depression."58 After the hospitalization, Mingus asked Pollock to write
the liner notes for his next album "The Black Saint and the Lady
Sinner." Pollock wrote that the album "presents a brooding, moaning
intensity about prejudice, hate and persecution ... The suffering is
terrible to hear."59 Pollock said that the music is a call for
revolution against any society that limits freedom and human rights.
Aside from any possible mood disorder, Mingus's talent, creativity, and
fame were shadowed by a hard life. In his autobiography, he describes
living in fear of bullying by racist gangs when he was young, for
example. He told Pollock his fame was a phony prize in life: "They make
us famous and give us names -- the King of this, the Count of that, the
Duke of what! We die broke anyhow -- and sometimes I think I dig death
more than I dig facing this white world."60

Neither Mingus nor Pollock, it seems, drew a line where persecution and
injustice ends and sickness begins. Nor should we. The politics of
Mingus's moods are relevant to illness, but cannot be reduced to them.
Also, the reverse: illness is relevant to moods, but should not obscure
politics. Sylvia Plath also had a robust appetite for life. One of her
many biographers says that she had a rare "capacity for exultation ... a
gift for rapture."61 She was, though, also prone to dejection. Plath,
like Mingus, was a voluntary depression patient, receiving two courses
of ECT, one of which she found dreadful, and another which she found
therapeutic.62 Years later, finding herself lonely in a foreign country,
in a disintegrating marriage with a man who had left her for another
woman, she ultimately took her own life, in one of the most scrutinized
suicides in history. After her death, she became iconic, not just for
the searing precision of language in her writing, but also as a symbol
of feminist protest. For good reason -- Plath was not politically
active, but her writing is filled with biting commentary on the
obstacles women face, particularly ambitious women like herself. Plath
thought a lot about why she might have depression. Brain chemistry
models were brewing in clinical science, but not yet among the wider
public. Plath pointed, in loosely Freudian ways, to troubles in her
childhood. Whatever her childhood or brain chemistry may have wrought,
though, her writing makes clear that sexist society was a part of her
unhappiness. Again, the politics and the sickness can be neither
separated, nor reduced one to the other. The stories of Mingus and Plath
raise wider points about adversity, inequality, and depression. Counting
depressions may be hard, but it is a necessary effort. As with any
illness, we need to know who is at greatest risk for it, and why. This
is one reason why the efforts to manualize depression matter, as fraught
as they have been. Biological causes of depression are a shiny object in
research. And inquiry into biological causes is important. But how much
we know about social factors is often overlooked, and may be more
certain than biological research right now. That adversity in life
increases risk of depression is not controversial among experts.63
Gender has received a lot of attention controversy. More women are
diagnosed with depression than men. 64 This is true cross-culturally.
One

study showed this by comparing rates across 15 countries, spanning every
continent with permanent human settlements.65 The reasons for the gender
difference are less clear. The range of explanations is dizzying.66 One
has been innate biology. Does anything in the physiology of sex
differences, such as hormonal differences, make women more prone to
depressive illness? Given the long and dismal history of medicine making
a pathology out of having a female body, such accounts deserve
skepticism. Caution, though, is not the same as treating all inquiry on
the subject taboo, and research in this area continues.67 Some life
events that have been associated with depression can only happen with
female anatomy, including childbirth and menopause. But if biology does
have a role, it is not likely to be the only factor. Sexist society may
be more at fault. Disadvantages and adverse events women face may cause
more depression. It's complicated because the stressors men and women
face often differ. Men, for example, have more non-sexual assaults,
injuries, car accidents, muggings, property crimes, and hospitalizing
illnesses. Women experience more sexual assault and domestic violence,
tend to have lower earnings, and less choice over when to do household
tasks that have to be done repeatedly.68 Divorce increases mental health
problems for both sexes, but for different reasons. For men, divorce is
often felt as a loss of social support, whereas for women it often means
financial hardship. Some question whether women really do get depressed
more. Are clinicians simply more inclined to see depression in women
than in men?69 Or are different help-seeking patterns at work? Are women
just more inclined to get help, because admitting to depressive affect
is more acceptable for women? Or perhaps men's depression looks
different -- more apt to be combined with alcohol use, or more marked by
irritability, for example. This would lead to an under-counting of male
depression. This raises the same question the cross-cultural study of
depression does -- how much can the presentation of illness differ
before you conclude you are seeing a different ailment? Japan is one of
the few countries where depressed men outnumber women. The difference is
slight, but the illness is also regarded culturally as a male one.
Similar puzzles appear -- some Japanese psychiatrists think the

difference is caused by men's higher level of social stress, while
others believe women's lower status has led to an under-counting of
female depression.70 Women outweigh in accounts of depression, and men
in accounts of melancholia.71 This reflects a change in cultural
imagery, but may not reflect a real change in illness. In the eras of
melancholia, women may also have been under-counted because their work
was not valued enough for their sadness to warrant the sick role. The
glamour of the melancholic male, the association with genius, has not
been granted to the depressive woman.72 Biological explanations
dominated psychiatry in the early twentieth century, when the profession
was mostly men. Doctors sought the answer in hormones. The search for
more social explanations followed the rise of second-wave feminism and
focused on the hardships women face. A definitive explanation for the
gender ratio may not exist, at least now, and a search for a single one
may be misguided. And social identities -- such as class, sex, and race
-- are not in isolation from each other.73 Let's look at some of the
other social categories, and then return to gender. Stressful events
increase risk of depression, and disadvantaged groups are more prone to
depression.74 Numerous examples show both points. Abuse in childhood
leads to likelihood of depression later in life.75 Children of deployed
soldiers experience more depression.76 Following terrorist attacks,
risks of major depression rise, and they rise higher among direct
victims than in the general population of the area attacked.77
Depression is a high risk for children who suffer disability and
physical illness.78 Political exiles, refugees, and civilian victims of
war-time sexual violence all face increased risk for depression.79 A
history of depression in adolescence increases vulnerability to
stressful events in early adulthood.80 A link between adversity and
depression may seem intuitively obvious. But in the age of biological
psychiatry, many have said depression was mainly a neurochemical
process, or the result of genes. The biology matters, but excluding
social forces is factually wrong.

Consider class.81 Burton thought that lower social class caused
depression in seventeenth-century England. He did not give evidence, but
we have it now. Poverty and other adversity in lower social classes lead
to higher rates of depression. This is true for several other mental
illnesses, including schizophrenia. Again, this also might seem an
intuitive point -- why wouldn't economic hardship lead to depression?
Oddly, though, it is also counter-intuitive. In a talk on depression,
Andrew Solomon recalled telling his editor at the New Yorker about how
much depression he had found among poor people. His editor was
skeptical, because he had never heard this before, to which Solomon
replied, yes, that is what makes it news.82 I wonder if his editor's
surprise showed more than lack of knowledge, though. The proportionality
criterion disqualifies large numbers of people from being easily seen as
clinically depressed. After all, poor people have reason for depressed
mood; should this really be called illness? This is the trouble with the
proportionality criterion. Not all people facing adversity, even extreme
adversity, get clinical depression. The opposite is true. Only a small
fraction of people in severe adversity do.83 We know this logic of
causation from other examples: smoking makes you more likely to get lung
cancer, but does not guarantee that you will, nor does refraining from
smoking guarantee that you will not. But the logic gets murky in
depression because of the blurry border between illness state and normal
human emotion. Lung cancer is not part of the universal range of human
experience. You either have it or you do not. You do not get it for a
few days before it passes on its own. Solomon's editor may have been
surprised, but the case for a link between lower social class and
depression has been building at least since the 1970s. People have
debated the direction of the causation -- is the lower social class
causing the depression, or is depression the reason for the social
class? While both may contribute, a lot of evidence shows that lower
social class is a factor in causing depression.84 People of lower social
class often have more severely stressful life events. They also have
more vulnerabilities, such as social isolation, that worsen the impact
of the stressful events.85 The prognosis for people of lower social
class with depression is also poorer.86 Higher education level offers
some protection against depression, and even every additional year of
education lowers the risk.87 Poorer people have less chance to extend
their education.

Race and ethnicity also matter, though the research results vary. Early
research on Black Americans found lower rates of depression than in
White Americans.88 But clinician bias has under-diagnosed depression and
overdiagnosed schizophrenia in Black people,89 who seem less likely to
get a "quiet" diagnosis like depression. Recent work has found that
depression rates may be higher for Black people.90 Reasons included
presence of lifethreatening diseases, absence of health coverage,
lifestyle (smoking and exercise), and higher rates of unemployment. The
bias in diagnosis can lead to bias in treatment, too. Blacks are less
likely to get antidepressants when the severity of depression is equal
to that of White patients. Some have also found more depression in
Latinos than in Black people. Immigrant Latinos have lower rates of
depression than native born ones, but are less likely to seek treatment
when they have it.91 Latinos are also less likely, due to diagnostic
discrimination, to get a diagnosis and treatment than White people.92
Depression rates are also high in Native American communities.93 Studies
of Asian Americans have found varying rates, some studies finding lower
rates than among White people, and some finding higher.94 This may be
another area where help-seeking behavior determines the numbers more
than true prevalence. None of these are homogeneous groups, including
White Americans, but research on variations in depressive illness within
these groups are only starting. LGBT people are at higher risk for
depression than straight and cis-sexual (non-transgender) people. LGBT
people are twice as likely to report suicidal ideation, and have higher
rates of actual attempts.95 Stressors include discrimination and
persecution, higher levels of child abuse, unstable housing,
internalized stigma, and the strain of concealing one's identity.96 LGB
people who faced rejecting behavior from their families had eight times
higher risk of suicide attempts.97 (I have omitted the "T" from LGBT
when the research does not reference transgender people.) Bisexual
people have especially high levels of anxiety and depressive symptoms.98
LGBT people of color face more jeopardy from depression than White
counterparts.99 Victimization of LGBT people is greatest for young
people, who have less choice over their social context and peers.
Support provided by high schools can reduce symptoms of mental illness
in sexual minorities.100 Transgender people are also at high risk for
depression and suicidality, though the literature on transgender people
and depression is not

as well-developed as that on LGB people.101 Transgender people do face
alarming risk of victimization, including employment discrimination and
violence. The trauma of rejection by their own families is a cause of
depression.102 Peer victimization is high among transgender adolescents,
across all ethnic groups, and often precedes suicidal ideation.103
Transgender people also have to encounter the bigotry that says that
their gender identity is not one among many variants, but is itself a
mental illness.104 Depression is also linked with other chronic
diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, and heart disease.105 As early as
1684, physician Thomas Willis proposed that diabetes came from "sadness
or long sorrow."106 In all three of these cases, the connection appears
bi-directional. A severe chronic illness is a major source of stress.
Depression also leads to physical inactivity, smoking, failure to take
medications, and other behaviors that cause or worsen other chronic
illnesses. Depression may also lead to chronic illnesses in more direct
ways -- by an effect on particular hormones, for example -- but this is
less clear. In the case of diabetes, class is also a factor, with
poverty making co-morbidity more likely.107 The co-morbidity between
depression and the other chronic diseases is high, but not total. Not
everyone who has a heart attack, for example, is going to develop
symptoms of depression. To return to gender: many experts say that the
reason for the gender ratio is not fully clear.108 Yet the evidence that
adversity is a major risk factor for depression is overwhelming. So is
the evidence that women face greater adversity. People who face poverty,
marginality, abuse, persecution, discrimination -- because of their
class, ethnicity or race, nationality, refugee status -- are all more
likely to suffer from depression. This is well documented and not
controversial. Comparative gender studies also show that women are more
likely to face poverty, marginality, abuse, persecution, and
discrimination. Marriage offers protection against stress more for men
than for women.109 To say that adversity is a major cause of the gender
ratio in depression hardly seems a stretch. Adversity also helps to make
sense of the consistency of the gender imbalance cross-culturally.110
The precise makeup of gender roles varies widely, but women's greater
adversity is common, globally. The gap between men and women in
depression rates

seems to be lessening as some progress toward gender equality is
achieved.111 But depression in women has been studied more than in men,
and underestimating male depression has its own risks.112 Regarding
depression as a "women's illness" can discourage men from seeking
treatment.113 Depression diagnoses in men are, in any event, rising.114
Depression is sometimes called an equal opportunity offender. It is not.
No social status is an absolute protection against depression, and the
socially privileged can get depression. Nor does social adversity
automatically cause depression. The social sources of ill-health are
rarely that simple for any sickness, but social position usually matters
for ill-health. If you do an internet search on social origins of any
sickness, you will likely find good research showing the role of social
status. For many illnesses, being from an oppressed, marginalized, or
persecuted group increases your chances of getting the illness. AIDS and
tuberculosis thrive on poverty, though of course rich people can get
them too. There are also diseases of affluence, such as gout. The idea
that depression would be different, and have purely biological causes
seems wrong, even bizarre. The critic Ann Cvetkovich uses the phrase
"political depression" to refer to feelings of despair caused by
oppression and inequality, or the thwarting of efforts to end them. The
concept of political depression highlights the limits of medical models
of depression. Political depression is not identical with clinical
depression, nor the sole cause of clinical depression, but it cannot be
left out of any full reckoning with clinical depression. The power of
the concept is in foregrounding the role of social inequalities and
persecutions, which can be hidden in a biochemical approach.115 But the
concept of political depression can complement a medical model, rather
than oppose it. Purely medical models may not capture the social and
political in depression -- they do not for any illness. Seeing this does
not banish depression from the medical domain. To return to the example
of the current COVID-19 pandemic: the impact of the virus would
unquestionably be blunted if we had less unequal societies, better
social supports. But would we want to remove COVID-19 from the realm of
medicine because it lays bare problems in our social systems? We do not
have to choose between a political understanding and a medical
understanding, any more than we have to choose between the physical and
the psychological.

Looking at depression among Native Americans in Flathead, Montana,
anthropologist Theresa DeLeane O'Nell also found a purely medical model
wanting. O'Nell said that the DSM concept of depression could not
capture the long-term effects of oppression, or local understandings of
the roots of suffering.116 The force of this argument raises a wider
question though. How well does the DSM capture anyone's depression? When
Andreasen said that psychiatrists themselves do not always agree, we may
credit her for understatement.

Manualization and its Discontents: The DSM Wars If new rating scales and
new therapies were partly efforts to manualize depression, that effort
reached full expression with revisions to the DSM beginning in the
1970s. A growing sense that psychiatric diagnosis was flawed haunted the
mental health field. Some psychoanalysts avoided diagnoses, seeing them
as rigid categories that miss the individuality of the person in
pain.117 Outside of psychoanalysis, Meyer, even as he promoted the term
"depression," worried that all psychiatric diagnoses risked narrowing
clinical vision of the totality of the patient's personality and
environment.118 But what is medical practice without reliable diagnosis?
And did psychiatry have any? British and American psychiatrists gave
different diagnoses when seeing the same cases on tape.119 Within
America, psychiatrists agreed on diagnosis of the same patient only
about 30 percent of the time.120 Most infamously, psychologist David
Rosenhan and his research team pretended to be insane and easily got
schizophrenia diagnoses and mental hospital admissions.121 Could
psychiatrists not even tell the difference between someone with
psychosis and someone pretending? Rosenhan's study was methodologically
weak, perhaps outright fraudulent.122 Fraud aside, all Rosenhan showed
is that you can feign illness.123 Students with unfinished homework have
always known this. But Rosenhan struck at a time when psychiatry was
already vulnerable. An influential antipsychiatry movement, led by
people like Thomas Szasz, claimed that the whole field of psychiatry was
a crock, and not properly a part of medicine.

The crisis of diagnosis shadowed the creation of the third edition of
the DSM. The DSM has gone through several revisions, but the change
between DSM-II and DSM-III was the biggest and had a huge impact on
depression diagnosis. The key figure was Robert Spitzer, a psychiatrist
with psychoanalytic training. Spitzer grew disillusioned with his own
psychoanalyst, who was a follower of Wilhelm Reich.124 Reich had written
insightful books about character formation and the psychology of
politics early in his career, but later had some flaky ideas, and was a
fringe figure in psychoanalysis by the time Spitzer was in analysis.
Spitzer would later seek to purge the DSM of psychoanalytic assumptions.
But more, he wanted a manual with no speculation about the causes of
mental disorders, one that stuck to symptoms everyone could observe. The
creation of the DSM-III has been widely criticized.125 The authors hoped
to find what psychiatrists could agree upon, or at least to avoid
controversial moves that would alienate many. The meetings, though, were
chaotic affairs where often the loudest voices won out, not necessarily
the ones with the most scientific merit.126 The chaos and politics of
the process are unfortunate. A more orderly process might not have
yielded a better manual, though, because available knowledge was not
conclusive enough. Psychoanalysts and Meyerians may have been less
driven to fit each patient to a label, preferring attention to unique
constellations of suffering. But insurance companies were less
interested in unique constellations of suffering. The use of insurance
to cover out-patient psychiatric treatment was growing in the 1970s.127
To provide payment, the companies wanted a specific diagnosis. Spitzer
was there to help. He hoped to make diagnosis uniform, by highlighting
what clinicians agreed on. In earlier work, Spitzer had already expanded
the criteria for depression.128 As he and his co-workers revised the
DSM, they took the many types of depressive illness then in use, and put
many of them in a single category. They wanted a category big enough to
catch relapses, but did not want every slump in life to be called
depression.129 The result was Major Depressive Disorder. DSM-III also
used the term "dysthymia" (more recently renamed "Persistent Depressive
Disorder") for milder depression of long duration. According to DSM-III,
if you had dysthymia, and then

went through an acute episode of major depression, you had "double
depression." In 1987, DSM-III was updated to DSM-IIIR, with new changes
for depression. In DSM-IIIR, for the first time, depressed mood was not
a required symptom. A patient would need a number of symptoms, over a
certain duration, but depressed mood was not a necessary one. If it were
absent, "loss of interest" would have to be present.130 This may seem
like an odd move -- what is "depression" without depressed mood? Whether
the change was warranted or not, it had precedent in the old idea of
masked depression. DSM-III's architects hoped to purge the manual of
"theory," which mostly meant omitting causal claims about illnesses when
none were proven. Intended neutrality, though, often ends up favoring
one side in practice. Psychiatrist Allen Frances, who supervised the
revisions for DSM-IV and is no opponent of biological psychiatry,
believes that DSM-III's emphasis on surface symptoms elevated the status
of biological approaches.131 The manual was in for still more
controversy with DSM-5, and it was not about the switch from Roman to
Arabic numbers in the title. Published in 2013 after a decade of work,
DSM-5 removed the "bereavement exclusion" from depression diagnosis. The
bereavement exclusion meant that if you had recently lost a loved one,
you would not get a depression diagnosis, even if you met the diagnostic
criteria. In DSM-5, a grieving person would not be excluded from the
diagnosis on the grounds that their reaction was normal. The "normal"
mourning period given in DSM-IV was already just two months.132 Even
before the DSM-5 came out, many worried about ending the bereavement
exclusion.133 Frances warned of medicalizing a normal part of life,
uprooting "the sacred mourning rites that have survived for
millenniums."134 But others thought that the similarities between
bereavement and other stressors were good reasons to get rid of the
exclusion -- depression was depression, even if a clear life event
caused it.135 The change in DSM-5, in any event, did not allow a
depression diagnosis just because a person was grieving and sad. All
other criteria for Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) had to be met.136

How much weight life events should have, and what makes a response to
them normal or sick, is not a dilemma that springs from the DSM or even
modern psychiatry. It has been an enduring question about depressive
illness. When someone has suicidality, or severe lethargy and despair
for years on end, it seems an easy call to say the person should get a
diagnosis and a treatment, even if a clear event caused it. But an
objective measure for how far short of these extremes disqualifies an
illness label does not exist.137 The length of proper mourning varies
culturally and within cultures.138 In earlier times, this might have
been decided on an individual basis, in the encounter between physician
and patient. Individual judgment, though, cannot be manualized. Could
depressions without a clear cause in life events be separately
manualized? A diverse and impressive group of experts, including
historians and psychiatrists -- Spitzer among them -- said yes, and
wrote an article calling for its inclusion in DSM-5 as a separate
disorder, by the name ... melancholia.139 They argued that this was a
disease known since antiquity, branded by despondency, guilt, and not
caused by a known life event. Melancholia, they said, also had known and
measurable biological features, including reduced deep sleep and REM
time; increased presence of cortisol, a stress hormone; and more
responsiveness to ECT and tricyclics, and less responsiveness to
placebos, SSRIs, and CBT. The hope was to make at least one form of
depression in DSM-V a diagnosis with a biological basis. The effort was
unsuccessful. In DSM-5, specifiers can be added to MDD, so you can
diagnose, for example, depression with anxious distress, or depression
with psychotic features. Depression with melancholic features is one of
the specifiers. But melancholia is not listed as a distinct disorder.
The champions of including melancholia separately may well have
identified a distinct illness. But their appeal to its long history
treated "melancholia" as a stable category, unchanged over the
centuries. It was not. Many older descriptions of melancholia featured
delusion far more than the description they advocated. More importantly,
melancholia had not been used at all times exclusively to refer either
to severe or endogenous depression. Some critiques of the DSM are
antipsychiatric screeds by people who would prefer not to have any
diagnostic labels at all -- or, for that matter,

any psychiatry. Others have a lot of merit. The DSM is fraught and
imperfect. The problem, though, is not that the DSM comes from social
processes. Scientific documents always have a social context, and
scientific truth is always what is closest to a consensus among experts.
DSM-III, though, did not represent a true consensus, but the leanings of
a subset of the authors. Some good did come out of Spitzer's revolution.
For example, he insisted that "subjective distress" should be required
before calling anything an illness. This helped to remove gay sexuality
from psychiatric diagnosis.140 Andreasen, who advocated for biological
psychiatry, was an early, though not uncritical, proponent of
DSM-III.141 About a quarter of a century later, she lamented one result
of it -- lack of attention to the whole patient. Detailed portrayal of
the whole clinical picture, she said, was replaced by labels, having a
dehumanizing effect on psychiatry.142 This result was exactly what
Meyer, and many psychoanalysts, would have predicted. They were afraid
that over-emphasis on diagnostic labels would hide the depth and
complexity of the individual patient. Surely psychiatry can find a
middle ground between aversion to diagnosis and reducing patients to
labels from symptom checklists. Some look at the shifting criteria in
the various editions of DSM and conclude that psychiatric diagnosis,
including of depression, has no meaning. A cognitive therapist could
point out the errors in this reasoning: all-or-nothing thinking,
filtering out the positive, magnification. The DSM, and its process of
creation, have been flawed. Mental health professionals work with
imprecise knowledge. Psychiatric diagnoses often lack the precision
doctors can produce for other areas of medicine. This does not mean that
psychiatric diagnosis has no meaning or value at all.

So, Why So Much Depression? Explaining rising diagnosis rates of
depression, I have stressed, is a fraught project. I am going to hazard
what I think is a plausible model anyway. It envisions an upward spiral,
in which better detection and diagnostic drift reinforce one another,
powered by wider political and cultural changes.

True prevalence is unlikely to be the main culprit, at least in a
straightforward way. Some who argue for a rise in true prevalence point
to depressing conditions in the world, rapid changes in social roles or
expectations, or increased social isolation (due, say, to the internet),
or even a worsening human diet.143 It's important to draw attention to
social factors contributing to ill-health, but these theories call to
mind how much early twentieth-century social science also attributed
apparent rising rates of mental illness to rapid social change and
alienation. The illness labels used were neurasthenia, or hysteria, or
simply "nerves."144 While the world we live in is upsetting, it is not
obviously more fertile for mental illness than the world of the first
half of the twentieth century. The upward spiral I envision works like
this: over the course of the early twentieth century, the growth of
out-patient psychiatry led to an increase in the number of people being
treated for depressive illness. No longer was treatment reserved for the
most severe depressive cases. The growing interest in depression led
more people, both professional and lay, to learn to label problems as
depression, which was a growing idiom of distress before the advent of
antidepressants. That is part of the reason why some medications came to
be called antidepressants at all. The medications, though, provided new
incentives for multiple actors -- pharmaceutical companies, doctors,
patients, and patients' families -- to identify cases of depression. The
doctors, the patients, and their families had a new hope for effective
and relatively safe treatment. People would not have to contemplate ECT,
a treatment that scared many, both because of sensationalist media
representations, but also because of realistic appraisals of its risks.
Drug companies stood to make a lot of money, which they did. A puzzle
remains. The antidepressants came around the same time drugs for anxiety
such as Miltown were becoming popular, more popular than
antidepressants. Miltown and related drugs were also used for
depression, but they primarily addressed anxiety. The earlier post-World
War II society was named an age of anxiety.145 Why first an age of
anxiety, and why did it give way to an age of depression? Sociologist
Allan Horwitz cites growing concerns about the addictiveness of the
tranquilizers by the 1970s.146 Horwitz argues, though, that the
increased demand for specific diagnoses was the main driver of the rise
of

depression, anxiety being more a state of being than a specific illness.
But Major Depressive Disorder is not a highly specific diagnosis. As
Horwitz points out, MDD captured so much stress-related affliction
because it covered a large range of symptoms and experiences. A stronger
explanation might draw not only on changes in psychiatry, or the
pharmaceutical industry, but also on larger cultural shifts. We need to
ask two questions. First, how do the intimately-related emotions of
anxiety and depression differ? Anxiety is an expectation of danger to
come. Depression is a sense of loss already felt. The second question
is, what was changing in the 1970s? The 1970s are often noted as a time
marked by two large shifts. They bear names I use with reluctance. Both
are too often used without precise definition, or used too casually. I
think they may have usefulness here, however. They are neo-liberalism,
and postmodernity. Neo-liberalism is the end of the political and
economic order of the postWorld War II welfare state. The shifts include
reduction of public services and social benefits in favor of government
austerity, reduced taxes on the economic elite, and attacks on organized
labor unions that weakened them. Neo-liberalism is
hyper-individualistic, as expressed in Margaret Thatcher's slogan that
society does not exist, only individuals and families. In practice, it
has caused widening inequality, prosperity steadily shifting up to the
already-wealthy. Geographer David Harvey points out that this upward
shift in wealth distribution is widely documented, but that it is less
often asked whether that was the purpose of the policies from the
start.147 Post-modernity has meant a lot of things, across different
domains. In knowledge production, it refers to weakened faith in
scientific certainties, declining belief in the power of rationality to
improve governance, a growing belief that knowledge claims reflect power
and narrative structures more than objective truths, and attention to
ways the instability of language undermines coherence.148 Progress was
easier to believe in during the immediate postwar period. Wealth was
distributed unevenly, but the growth of the middle class in
industrialized countries, ambitious social welfare projects, and the
Civil Rights movement held some promise for future shared prosperity.
Much of the underdeveloped world was newly independent and holding great

expectations for rapid development. Science and technology were in high
regard, even idealized, and seemed to promise a better world. The state,
with all its flaws, was seen as an agent of possible positive change,
even to people of vastly different ideological views. Anxiety, though,
was understandable. The Cold War and its weaponry threatened all of
human life. Knowledge of the environmental costs of economic development
was growing. And the contrast between the promise of prosperity for all
and the reality of deep social divisions spawned serious and often
violent conflict. Neo-liberalism, post-modernity, and clinical
depression share something: a lack of hope. While the worst fears of the
age of anxiety were not realized, by the 1970s, faith in social progress
had declined. Disillusionment with the state was growing. In the
hyper-individualism of neo-liberalism, the only good was the economic
good of the individual household -- even as workers' wages entered a
long period of stagnation. Nations in the developing world were
pressured into Structural Adjustment Programs, where they had to shrink
the public sector to receive foreign aid. This was guided by the
ideology that a large public sector hindered economic growth. The result
of these programs was reduced social services, such as health care. The
promised economic growth was harder to find. Projects for collective
betterment came increasingly to draw collective sighs of resignation.
The post-modern critique of "grand narratives" was inches from a
skepticism toward grand social aspirations. As a historian of
psychiatry, I have found Michel Foucault's explorations of the relations
of power and knowledge insightful, even though many have found empirical
flaws in his work. But I doubt Foucault, or any other thinker considered
post-modern, has filled many with soaring hope for collective
betterment. Meanwhile, neo-liberalism held out no collective good at
all, only private. And depression is an illness of private despair and
frayed social ties. In neoliberal culture, according to one analysis,
people don't see themselves as members of opposing classes -- which, for
exploited classes, at least has the virtue of fostering solidarity.
Instead, everyone is an entrepreneur of the self, and for the self.
Relentless internal pressure for self-improvement ensues, combined with
constant calls to think positively, and root out negative thoughts. We
attend "Countless self-management workshops, motivational retreats and
seminars on personality or mental training \[that\] promise boundless
self-optimization and heightened efficiency ..."149

Under this "auto-exploitation," rather than addressing their
frustrations toward the social system, people "are turning their
aggression against themselves."150 Anger turned inward. Whether these
aspects of the wider social context directly cause mental illness is
hard to show. Little evidence shows that the total amount of mental
illness at any time in history is greater than at other times. But
cultural trends and moods influence how people interpret the mental
distress they feel. While we have seen many definitions of depression,
one hallmark that recurs is the conviction that things are not only bad,
but will not get better -- and indeed, cannot get better. Post-modernism
and neoliberalism told us much the same. Speculation about the moods of
entire eras and their relation to individual emotional states is risky.
Like many historians, I prefer claims that can be plainly documented.
But perhaps this reluctance to make large claims is also part of our
current malaise -- to use Jimmy Carter's word. Frances, who led the
creation of DSM-IV, and many others, believe it is too easy to get a
depression diagnosis now. Horwitz and Jerome Wakefield believe we are
jeopardized by a "loss of sadness," that normal human sorrow has been
transformed into a medical condition.151 Frances concedes that as many
as one third of the people with severe depression get no treatment at
all, but worries that the DSM allows the depression label to be passed
out like chewing gum to anyone who feels bad for two weeks after
something bad has happened. For people with mild and passing symptoms,
he says, SSRIs are expensive and possible harmful placebos.152 Like
Ifemelu in Adichie's Americanah, critics like this worry we are too
quick to medicalize distress. They have a point. But Adichie's scenario
has power in part because her aunt Uju also has a point. Ifemelu was
facing real adversity, and she did get better without doctors. She, or
others, might not have. Plath was also facing real adversity. She might
have fared better with more psychiatric treatment. When we worry about
the medicalization of sadness, we also have to remember that the full
spectrum of emotions is felt by people who get successful treatment for
depression, whether the treatment is psychotherapy, drugs, or ECT. The
common and glib nickname for antidepressants as "happy pills" is
inaccurate, and demeaning to those with depression.

Treatments can free people from needless suffering, but by themselves
they can't make anyone happy. If you have lost your job or someone you
loved, you will still feel sad. If you are not also in clinical
depression, the sadness may not be so desperate. Most accounts of the
rise of depression diagnosis are laments. The upside -- more people
getting treatment -- deserves as much attention. Perhaps people who
might earlier have identified their problems as "nerves," or
"neurasthenia," or simply low spirits and lethargy, now call it
depression. If they are now calling it depression and getting a
treatment that helps, is that such a problem? But this essay on
depression's expansion has so far touched only lightly on a major
factor. It concerns a certain pill.

The Drug That Named an Era By the 1980s, the cultural power of
biological psychiatry was ascending. The scientific advances were modest
in comparison. Fluoxetine -- Prozac -- was rolled out with fanfare, but
the older antidepressants, the MAOIs and tricyclics, had been around
since the 1950s, and had not brought an "antidepressant era." The SSRIs
were not more effective than earlier drugs. Many hoped the SSRIs would
have fewer or milder adverse effects, but they certainly turned out to
have bad effects of their own. The promotion of the SSRIs was
well-timed, though. It followed decades of growing clinical attention to
depression, somewhat fewer decades of other antidepressants, a flurry of
research interest in depression in the 1970s, and the DSM-III's deletion
of psychoanalytic influence. People who take antidepressants, we began
to hear, were no different from people with diabetes, who need to take
insulin every day. The laudable goal was to show that depression was not
a failure of will or a character flaw. At least since Timothy Bright in
the Renaissance, people have thought that treating depressive illness as
physical might lessen stigma. And in modernity, probably more than in
the Renaissance, "physical" illness equated with "real" disease. The
SSRIs changed not just psychiatric treatment, but popular conceptions of
illness, and even of the self and the nature of the body. These changes

wrought by the SSRIs outstripped any claim they had to clinical advance.
The cultural impact was deep, dramatic, and global. Fluoxetine, and the
serotonin it acts on, were unknown to Hippocrates, Rufus of Ephesus,
Galen, Hildegard of Bingen, Marsilio Ficino, Martin Luther, Paracelsus,
Robert Burton, Philippe Pinel, Emil Kraepelin, Karl Abraham, Sigmund
Freud, Melanie Klein, Adolf Meyer, Abraham Myerson, and Edith Jacobson.
Now millions of people swallow it worldwide, every day. An era of
history received a commercial brand name: Prozac.

Notes 1. Derek Summerfield, "Afterword: Against 'Global Mental Health,'"
Transcultural Psychiatry 49, 3--4 (2012) 519--30. 2. Andreasen, The
Broken Brain, 41. 3. Biographical information on Rothko is from James E.
B. Breslin, Mark Rothko: A Biography (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993). 4. The friend was the poet Stanley Kunitz. Breslin, Mark
Rothko, 267. 5. Hilarie M. Sheets, "Mark Rothko's Dark Palette
Illuminated," The New York Times, November 2, 2016. I am grateful to
Carolyn Slebodnik for this reference, and for educating me about Rothko
more generally. 6. Edward Shorter, A Historical Dictionary of Psychiatry
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 155. 7. Breslin, Mark Rothko,
533. 8. See, for example, J. Alexander Bodkin and Jessica L. Green, "Not
Obsolete: Continuing Roles for TCAs and MAOIs," Psychiatric Times 10, 24
(September 15, 2007). 9. Kline prescribed the tricyclic Sinequan without
consulting Rothko's other doctors. At least one of them thought it was
an ill-advised choice in Rothko's case, because it could cause changes
in heart rhythm, and seemed to actually worsen Rothko's mood. Breslin,
Mark Rothko, 534.

10. William Styron, Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness (New York:
Vintage Books, 1990), 7, 37. 11. As late as the 1950s, though, some
clinicians were still using melancholia to refer to what we now call
depression. See Theodore T. Stone, "Melancholia: Clinical Study of Fifty
Selected Cases," Journal of the American Medical Association 142, 3
(1950) 165--8. 12. Laura D. Hirshbein, American Melancholy:
Constructions of Depression in the Twentieth Century (New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press, 2014), 68. 13. John T. MacCurdy, The
Psychology of the Emotions: Morbid and Normal (New York: Harcourt, Brace
& Company, 1925), 337--79. Texts like this make me wonder why it has
become so common among historians to insist that current medical usage
of the term depression is so new. 14. MacCurdy, The Psychology of the
Emotions, 342. 15. On Kraepelin's changing classification systems, see
Berrios, The History of Mental Symptoms, 300--13. Kraepelin's
classification system is sometimes hailed as a major -- perhaps the
major -- contribution to modern psychiatry. His classifications kept
changing, though, and many of them are no longer in use. As Berrios
says, he may have created as many problems as he solved. Kraepelin's
reputation for being the pivotal creator of modern psychiatry also seems
to leave out something: he made no major contribution to therapeutics.
16. Shorter, A Historical Dictionary, 82. 17. Kraepelin himself
abandoned involutional melancholia and switched to "depression."
Shorter, A Historical Dictionary, 175. 18. Shorter argues that
endogenous depression is basically what was once called melancholia.
Edward Shorter, Before Prozac, 14--15. 19. Teja et al., "Depression
Across Cultures." 20. See, for example, V. A. Kral, "Masked Depression
in Middle Aged Men," Canadian Medical Association Journal 79, 1 (July 1,
1958) 1--5;

Arieti and Bemporad, Severe and Mild Depression, 58. The
endogenous/reactive distinction was held on to longer in Britain than in
the United States, and according to at least one American psychiatrist's
critique in the 1960s, never had an empirical basis; see Hirshbein,
American Melancholy, 35. Some psychiatrists still use the distinction.
An ECT provider once told me that ECT should not be used for people with
reactive depressions. 21. Radden, Melancholy Habits, 104. 22. Abraham
Myerson, When Life Loses its Zest (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company,
1925), 1--5. 23. Ibid., 6. 24. Ibid., 162. 25. Paul H. Hoch and Joseph
Zubin, eds., Depression (New York: Grune and Stratton, 1954). 26. Per
Bach and Alec Coppen, eds., The Hamilton Scales (Berlin: Springer
Verlag, 1990). 27. M. Roth, "Max Hamilton: A Life Devoted to Science,"
in Bach and Coppen, eds., The Hamilton Scales, 2. 28. Callahan and
Berrios, Reinventing Depression, 130. 29. C.B. Pull, "French Experience
with the Hamilton Scales," in Bach and Coppen, eds., The Hamilton
Scales, 36. 30. Roth, "Max Hamilton," 4. 31. Take, for example, the
subtitle of a popular introduction to cognitive therapy by a student of
Beck's: David D. Burns, Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy (New York:
Signet, 1980). 32. Rachael I. Rosner, "Manualizing Psychotherapy: Aaron
T. Beck and the Origins of Cognitive Therapy of Depression," European
Journal of Psychotherapy and Counseling 20, 1 (2018) 25--47. 33. Burns,
Feeling Good details how cognitive therapy works in practice.

34. Rachael I. Rosner, "The 'Splendid Isolation' of Aaron T. Beck," Isis
105 (2014) 734--58. 35. Rosner, "Manualizing Psychotherapy." The Beck
quote is from Barry L. Duncan and Scott Miller, "Treatment Manuals Do
Not Improve Outcomes,"
https://www.scottdmiller.com/wpcontent/uploads/Treatment_Manuals.pdf,
accessed February 17, 2020. 36. Rosner, "The 'Splendid Isolation' of
Aaron T. Beck." 37. William Davies, The Happiness Industry: How the
Government and Big Business Sold Us Well-Being (London: Verso, 2015),
111. 38. I am drawing here on the concept of "therapeutic discipline"
which was given thoughtful expression in Joel Braslow's Mental Ills and
Bodily Cures: Psychiatric Treatment in the First Half of the Twentieth
Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997); I elaborated
on Braslow's idea in ch.Â 3 of Electroconvulsive Therapy in America. 39.
Kramer, Ordinarily Well, 120. 40. Marie-Luise Schermuly-Haupt, Michael
Linden, and A. John Rush, "Unwanted Events and Side Effects in Cognitive
Behavior Therapy," Cognitive Therapy and Research 42, 3 (June 2018)
219--29. 41. Tracy Thompson, The Beast: A Journey Through Depression
(New York: Penguin Books, 1996), 145--6. 42. Scott Stuart,
"Interpersonal Psychotherapy: A Guide to the Basics," Psychiatric Annals
36, 8 (2006) 542--50. 43. Shorter, A Historical Dictionary, 154. 44.
Myrna Weissman,"A Brief History of Interpersonal Psychotherapy,"
Psychiatric Annals 36, 8 (2006) 553--7. 45. Ibid. 46. Davies, The
Happiness Industry. 47. Arthur Brooks, "Choose to be Grateful. It Will
Make You Happier," New York Times, November 21, 2015.

48. Myrna M. Weissman, "The Psychological Treatment of Depression:
Evidence for the Efficacy of Psychotherapy Alone, in Comparison with,
and in Combination with Pharmacotherapy," Archives of General Psychiatry
36 (1979) 1261--9; JÃ¼rgen Barth, Thomas Munder, Heike Gerger, Eveline
NÃ¼esch, Sven Trelle, HansjÃ¶rg Znoj, Peter JÃ¼ni, and Pim Cuijpers,
"Comparative Efficacy of Seven Psychotherapeutic Interventions for
Patients with Depression: A Network Meta-Analysis," PLoS Med 10, 5 (May
2010) e1001454; Irving Kirsch, The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the
Antidepressant Myth (New York: Basic Books, 2010), 158--63. 49. Mary Lee
Smith, Gene V. Glass, and Thomas I. Miller, The Benefits of
Psychotherapy (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980). 50.
Lotte H. J. M. Lemans, Suzanne C. van Brunswick, Frenk Peeters, Arnoud
Arntz, Steven D. Hollon, and Marcus J. H. Huibers, "Long-term Outcomes
of Acute Treatment with Cognitive Therapy v. Interpersonal Psychotherapy
for Adult Depression: Follow-up of a Randomized Controlled Trial,"
Psychological Medicine 49 (May 24, 2018) 465--73. 51. Pim Cuijpers,
Steven D. Hollon, Annemieke van Straten, Claudi Bockting, Matthias
Berking, and Gerhard Andersson, "Does Cognitive Behaviour Therapy Have
an Enduring Effect that is Superior to Keeping Patients on Continuation
Pharmacotherapy? A Meta-Analysis," BMJ Open 3 (2013) e002542; Kirsch,
The Emperor's New Drugs, 161. 52. Kirsch, The Emperor's New Drugs,
162--3. 53. Christiane Steinert, Thomas Munder, Sven Rabung, JÃ¼rgen
Hoyer, and Falk Leichsenring, "Psychodynamic Therapy: As Efficacious as
Other Empirically Supported Treatments? A Meta-Analysis Testing
Equivalence of Outcomes," American Journal of Psychiatry (May, 2017);
Barth et al., "Comparative Efficacy of Seven Psychotherapeutic
Interventions for Patients with Depression." See also studies cited in
Busch et al., Psychodynamic Treatment of Depression, 4. Smith et al.'s
1980 overview The Benefits of Psychotherapy also included psychodynamic
therapy among those found to work.

54. Barth et al., "Comparative Efficacy of Seven Psychotherapeutic
Interventions for Patients with Depression." 55. Busch et al.,
Psychodynamic Treatment of Depression, 100. 56. Jonathan Metzl, The
Protest Psychosis: How Schizophrenia Became a Black Disease (Boston:
Beacon Press, 2009). 57. Charles Mingus, Beneath the Underdog (New York:
Vintage Books, 1971), 328--9. 58. Gene Santoro, Myself When I Am Real:
The Life and Music of Charles Mingus (New York: Oxford University Press,
2000), 268. 59. http://aln2.albumlinernotes.com/The_Black_Saint.html,
accessed May 1, 2020. 60. Mingus, Beneath the Underdog, 6. 61. Anne
Stevenson, Bitter Fame: A Life of Sylvia Plath (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1989), 15. 62. See my discussions of Plath in Sadowsky,
Electroconvulsive Therapy in America. 63. Levinson and Nichols,
"Genetics of Depression," 303. 64. While women predominate in depression
diagnoses, they do not seem to suffer from more mental illness overall.
Dena T. Smith, Dawne M. Mouzon, and Marta Elliott, "Reviewing the
Assumptions about Men's Mental Health: An Exploration of the Gender
Binary," American Journal of Men's Health 12, 1 (2018) 78--89. 65. S.
Seedat, K. M. Scott, M. C. Angermeyer et al., "Cross-National
Associations between Gender and Mental Disorders in the WHO World Mental
Health Surveys," Archives of General Psychiatry 66, 7 (July 2009)
785--95. Research on class, race, and gender in Bahia, Brazil, found
that gender was the strongest predictor of depression. Naomar
Almeida-Filho, Ines Lessa, LucÃ©lia MagalhÃ£es, Maria Jenny Araujo, Estela
Aquino, Sherman A. James, and Ichiro Kawachi, "Social Inequality and
Depressive Disorders in Bahia, Brazil: Interactions of

Gender, Ethnicity, and Social Class," Social Science and Medicine 59
(2004) 1339--53. 66. Some of the possibilities outlined below are
assessed in Marta Elliott, "Gender Differences in the Determinants of
Distress, Alcohol Misuse, and Related Psychiatric Disorders," Sociology
and Mental Health 3, 2 (2013) 96--113. 67. Jill M. Goldstein, L. Holsen,
S. Cherkerzian, M. Misra, and R. J. Handra, "Neuroendocrine Mechanisms
of Depression," in Charney et al., Charney and Nestler's Neurobiology of
Mental Illness. 68. Sarah Rosenfield and Dawne Mouzon, "Gender and
Mental Health," in Carol S. Aneshensel, Jo C. Phelan, and Alex Bierman,
eds., Handbook of the Sociology of Mental Health (2nd edn, Dordrecht:
Springer, 2013), 282--3. 69. Hirshbein has developed this argument
extensively. She argues that the gender ratio is an artifact of a
circularity: mental health workers -- often with the best intentions of
helping women -- defined depression as a women's problem, which then
inclined them to see depression in women. She also points out that many
studies of depression were done with exclusively female patients, but
were used to generalize about the illness. Hirshbein, American
Melancholy, ch.Â 4. 70. Junko Kitanaka, Depression in Japan: Psychiatric
Cures for a Society in Distress (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2012), 129--30. 71. Radden, Moody Minds, 47. 72. Schiesari, The
Gendering of Melancholia. 73. This is intersectionality, which also
stresses that identities are mutually constitutive. Intersectionality is
only beginning to get a lot of attention in the study of illness, but
see Olena Hankivsky, "Women's Health, Men's Health, and Gender and
Health: Implications of Intersectionality," Social Science and Medicine
74 (2012) 1712--20. 74. G. E. Kraus, J. O'Loughlin, I. Karp, N. C. Low,
"High Depressive Symptoms during Adolescence Increases the Effect of
Stressful Life

Events on Depression in a Population-based Sample of Young Adults,"
Comprehensive Psychiatry 54, 8 (2013) e25. 75. Jutta Lindert, Ondine von
Ehrenstein, and Marc Weisskopf, "Long Term Effects of Abuse in Early
Life on Depression and Anxiety over the Life Course," Comprehensive
Psychiatry 54, 8 (2013) e28. 76. Walter Forrest, Ben Edwards, and Galina
Daraganova, "The Intergenerational Consequences of War: Anxiety,
Depression, Suicidality, and Mental Health among the Children of War
Veterans," International Journal of Epidemiology 47, 4 (2018) 1060--7.
77. JosÃ© M. Salguero, Pablo FernÃ¡ndez-Berrocal, Itiar Iruarrizaga,
Antonio Cano-Vindel, and Sandro Galea, "Major Depressive Disorder
following Terrorist Attacks: A Systematic Review of Prevalence, Course,
and Correlates," BMC Psychiatry 11, 96 (2011) 1--16. 78. Andrew Solomon,
The Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression (2nd edn, New York: Scribner,
2015, originally published 2001), 187. 79. Janis H. Jenkins, Arthur
Kleinman, and Byron Good, "Cross-cultural Studies of Depression," in
Becker and Kleinman, Psychosocial Studies of Depression, 81; I. Ba and
R. S. Bhopal, "Physical, Mental and Social Consequences in Civilians Who
Have Experienced War-Related Sexual Violence: A Systematic Review
(1981--2014)," Public Health 142 (2017) 121--35. This study found
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder to be even more likely than major
depression. 80. Kraus et al.Â "High Depressive Symptoms during
Adolescence." 81. I am using class in a loose sense, to refer to
position in an economic hierarchy. Most sociology of mental illness uses
the term "socioeconomic status" (SES) which refers to a cluster of
things that include income, prestige, and educational level. Tamar
Wohlfarth has suggested that class, understood in a more Marxist sense
as relationship to the means of production, has particular effects on
the distribution of several mental disorders, including depression, and
that these effects are distinct from those of SES. She further argues
that one reason may be that class used in this precise sense is a
stronger predictor of the amount of control one feels in life, which
could be quite different from one's

prestige or income. But the literature on mental illness and class
defined this way remains undeveloped. Tamar Wohlfarth, "Socioeconomic
Inequality and Psychopathology: Are Socioeconomic Status and Social
Class Interchangeable?," Social Science and Medicine 45, 3 (1997) 399--
410. 82. Andrew Solomon, "Depression, The Secret We Share,"
https://www.ted.com/talks/andrew_solomon_depression_the_secret_we\_
share?language=en, accessed May 16, 2019. 83. Becker and Kleinman,
Psychosocial Aspects of Depression, xi. 84. A 2005 meta-analysis, for
example, concluded (for mental illness generally) that there was "a
remarkably strong and consistent negative correlation between
socioeconomic conditions and mental illness, one that cannot be
accounted for by geographic or economic downward mobility." Gregory G.
Hudson, "Socioeconomic Status and Mental Illness: Tests of the Social
Causation and Selection Hypothesis," American Journal of Orthopsychiatry
75, 1 (2005) 3--18, quote is on p. 16. 85. George W. Brown and Tirril
Harris, Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric Disorder in
Women (New York: The Free Press, 1978), 276--7. 86. V. Lorant. D.
DeliÃ¨ge, W. Eaton, A. Robert, P. Philippot, and M. Ansseau,
"Socioeconomic Inequalities in Depression: A Meta-Analysis," American
Journal of Epidemiology 157, 2 (2003) 98--112. 87. Aislinne Freeman,
Stefanos Tyrovolas, Ai Koyanagi et al., "The Role of Socio-Economic
Status in Depression: Results from the COURAGE (aging survey in
Europe)," BMC Public Health 16 (2016) 1098. 88. Stephanie A. Riolo, Tuan
Anh Nguyen, John F. Greden, and Cheryl A. King, "Prevalence of
Depression by Race/Ethnicity: Findings from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey III," American Journal of Public Health 95,
6 (June 2005) 998--1000. 89. Marti Loring and Brian Powell, "Gender,
Race, and DSM-III: A Study of the Objectivity of Psychiatric Behavior,"
Journal of Health and Social

Behavior 29, 1 (March 1988) 1--22; Sarah Rosenfield, "Race Differences
in Involuntary Hospitalization: Psychiatric vs.Â Labeling Perspectives,"
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 25 (March 1984) 14--23; Metzl, The
Protest Psychosis. 90. David B. Williams, Hector M. Gonzales, Harold
Neighbors et al., "Prevalence and Distribution of Major Depressive
Disorder in African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and Non-Hispanic
Whites: Results from the National Survey of American Life," Archives of
General Psychiatry 64 (March 2007) 305--15; Dorothy D. Dunlop, Jing
Song, John S. Lyons, Larry Manheim, and Rowland W. Chang, "Racial/Ethnic
Differences in Depression Among Preretirement Adults," American Journal
of Public Health 93, 11 (November 2003) 1945--52. This last was a
community study that did not depend on treatment rates. 91. Igda E.
Martinez Pincay and Peter J. Guarnaccia, "'It's Like Going Through an
Earthquake': Anthropological Perspectives on Depression among Latino
Immigrants," Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 9, 17 (2007)
17--28. 92. Leopoldo J. Cabassa, Rebecca Lester, and Luis H. Zayas,
"'It's Like Being in a Labyrinth': Hispanic Immigrants' Perceptions of
Depression and Attitudes Toward Treatments," Journal of Immigrant and
Minority Health 9, 1 (January 2007) 1--16. 93. Theresa DeLeane O'Nell,
Disciplined Hearts: History, Identity, and Depression in an American
Indian Community (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 4.
94. Zornitsa Kalibatseva and Frederick T. L. Leiong, "Depression among
Asian Americans: Review and Recommendations," Depression Research and
Treatment July 2011, Article ID 320902. 95. Megan Sutter and Paul B.
Perrin, "Discrimination, Mental Health, and Suicidal Ideation Among LGBT
People of Color," Journal of Counseling Psychology 63, 1 (2016) 98--105.
96. Brian Mustanski, Rebecca Andrews, and Jae Puckett, "The Effects of
Cumulative Victimization on Mental Health among Lesbian, Gay,

Bisexual, and Transgender Adolescents and Young Adults," American
Journal of Public Health 106, 3 (March 2016), 527--33. 97. Sutter and
Perrin, "Discrimination, Mental Health, and Suicidal Ideation Among LGBT
People of Color," 98. 98. Dianne L. Kerr, Laura Santurri, and Patricia
Peters, "A Comparison of Lesbian, Bisexual, and Heterosexual College
Undergraduate Women on Selected Mental Health Issues," Journal of
American College Health 61, 4 (2013) 185--94; Meg John Barker,
"Depression and/or Oppression? Bisexuality and Mental Health," Journal
of Bisexuality 15 (2015) 369-- 84. 99. Sutter and Perrin,
"Discrimination, Mental Health, and Suicidal Ideation Among LGBT People
of Color," 102. 100. Simon Denny, Mathijs F. G. Lucassen, Jaimee Stuart
et al., "The Association between Supportive High School Environments and
Depressive Symptoms and Suicidality Among Sexual Minority Students,"
Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 45, 3 (2016)
248--61. 101. Carmen H. Logie, Ashley Lacombe-Duncan, Tonia Poteat, and
Anne C. Wagner, "Syndemic Factors Mediate the Relationship between
Sexual Stigma and Depression among Sexual Minority Women and Gender
Minorities," Women's Health Issues 217, 5 (2017) 592--9. 102. M.
Yadegarfard, Mallika E. Meinhold-Bergmann, and Robert Ho, "Family
Rejection, Social Isolation, and Loneliness as Predictors of Negative
Health Outcomes (Depression, Suicidal Ideation, and Sexual Risk
Behavior) among Thai Male-to-Female Transgender Adolescents," Journal of
LGBT Youth 11, 4 (2014) 347--63. 103. Tyler Hatchel, Alberto Valido,
Kris T. De Pedro, Yuanhong Huang, and Dorothy L. Espelage, "Minority
Stress among Transgender Adolescents: The Role of Peer Victimization,
School Belonging, and Ethnicity," Journal of Child and Family Studies 28
(2019) 2467--76. 104. Charles P. HoyâEllis, and Karen I.
FredriksenâGoldsen, "Depression among Transgender Older Adults: General
and Minority Stress,"

American Journal of Community Psychology 59, 3--4 (2017) 295--305. 105.
Tiziana Leone, Ernestina Coast, Shilpa Narayanan, and Ama de Graft
Aikins, "Diabetes and Depression Comorbidity and Socioeconomic Status in
Low and Middle Income Countries (LMICs): A Mapping of the Evidence,"
Globalization and Health 8, 39 (2012) 1--10; Emily Mendenhall, Syndemic
Suffering: Social Distress, Depression, and Diabetes among Mexican
Immigrant Women (London: Routledge, 2012); David W. Kissane, Mario Maj,
and Norman Sartorius, eds., Depression and Cancer (Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2011); Alexander Glassman, Mario Maj, and Norman
Sartorius, eds., Depression and Heart Disease (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2011). 106. Leone et al.Â "Diabetes and Depression Comorbidity and
Socioeconomic Status in Low and Middle Income Countries," 1. 107. Ibid.,
6--8. 108. Marco Piccinelli and Greg Wilkinson, "Gender Differences in
Depression," British Journal of Psychiatry 177 (2000) 486--92.
Piccinelli and Wilkinson support adversity as a cause of the gender
disparity -- in part, because they find the evidence favoring some of
the other explanations to be even weaker. 109. This has been found in
studies going back at least to the 1970s; for a recent source, see
Elliott, "Gender Differences in the Determinants of Distress." The
protective effect of marriage for men shows some variation across
cultures; see Almeida-Filho et al., "Social Inequality and Depressive
Disorders in Bahia, Brazil," 1350. 110. Jenkins et al., "Cross-cultural
Studies of Depression," 79. 111. S. Seedat et al., "Cross-National
Associations between Gender and Mental Disorders in the WHO World Mental
Health Surveys." 112. Elliott, "Gender Differences in the Determinants
of Distress." 113. Carol Emslie, Damien Ridge, Sue Ziebland, and Kate
Hunt, "Men's Accounts of Depression: Reconstructing or Resisting
Hegemonic Masculinity?" Social Science & Medicine 62 (2006) 2246--57.

114. Smith, Mouzon, and Elliott, "Reviewing the Assumptions about Men's
Mental Health." 115. Ann Cvetkovich, Depression: A Public Feeling
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2012). 116. O'Nell, Disciplined Hearts.
117. This included the influential Karl Menninger. Hannah S. Decker, The
Making of DSM-III: A Diagnostic Manual's Conquest of American Psychiatry
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013). 118. Harrington, Mind Fixers,
43. 119. Allen Frances, Saving Normal: An Insider's Revolt Against
Out-ofControl Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-V, Big Pharma, and the
Medicalization of Ordinary Life (New York: William Morrow, 2013), 61--2.
120. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 127. 121. D. L. Rosenhan, "On Being Sane
in Insane Places," Science 179, 70 (January 1973), 250--8. 122. Susannah
Cahalan, The Great Pretender: The Undercover Mission That Changed Our
Understanding of Madness (New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2019);
Alison Abbott, "On the Troubling Trail of Psychiatry's Pseudopatients
Stunt," Nature, October 29, 2019. 123. Mark Ruffalo, "The Rosenhan Study
Never Proved Anything Anyway,"
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/freudfluoxetine/201911/the-rosenhan-study-never-proved-anything-anyway,
accessed March 6, 2020. 124. Decker, The Making of DSM-III, 91--2.
Reich's fringe ideas included most infamously the "orgone," a sexual
life-force. These ideas may have been symptoms of his own worsening
mental health, as he descended into psychosis. Spitzer tested Reich's
theories and concluded orgone did not exist. 125. Greenberg, The Book of
Woe; Kutchins and Kirk, Making Us Crazy.

126. Farhad Dalal, CBT: The Cognitive Behavioural Tsunami (London:
Routledge, 2018), 54; Frances, Saving Normal, 64; Greenberg, The Book of
Woe, 44--5. 127. Kutchins and Kirk, Making Us Crazy, 42. 128. I am
referring to Spitzer's work on the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC);
see Hirshbein, American Melancholy, 40--1. 129. Ibid., 43. 130. Ibid.,
44--5. 131. Frances, Saving Normal, 65. 132. Arthur Kleinman, "Culture,
Bereavement, and Psychiatry," The Lancet, February 18, 2012. 133.
Frances, Saving Normal, 186. 134. Quoted in Greenberg, The Book of Woe,
155. 135. Ibid., 161--3. 136. Ronald W. Pies, "The Bereavement Exclusion
and DSM-5: An Update and Commentary," Innovations in Clinical
Neuroscience 11, 7--8 (July-- August 2014) 19--22. 137. As Frances
acknowledged, "There is no clear line separating those who are
experiencing loss in their own necessary and particular way from those
who will stay stuck in a depression unless they receive specialized
psychiatric help." Frances, Saving Normal, 187. 138. Kleinman, "Culture,
Bereavement, and Psychiatry." 139. Gordon Parker, Max Fink, Edward
Shorter et al., "Issues for DSM-V: Whither Melancholia? The Case for its
Classification as a Distinct Mood Disorder," American Journal of
Psychiatry 167, 7 (July 2010) 745--7; Radden, Melancholy Habits, 143--9.
Also see Greenberg, The Book of Woe, 335--6. Greenberg thinks that the
effort failed because having a disorder with a known biology in the DSM
would call embarrassing attention to the absence elsewhere, but he's
just speculating. It could as

easily be because there was no consensus in psychiatry that melancholia
constituted a distinct form of depression. 140. Homosexuality had
already been removed from DSM-II, but its status as an illness remained
controversial in psychiatry. Decker, The Making of DSM-III, 154--61.
141. Andreasen, The Broken Brain, 156--61. Andreasen criticized DSM-II
for not specifying how many symptoms were needed to make a diagnosis,
and for its unreliability -- that is, the way different doctors could
use the same manual and come up with divergent diagnoses. But she
acknowledged that the increased reliability of DSM-III may have come at
a cost of validity -- that is, the degree to which the diagnoses capture
precise illness conditions. 142. Nancy Andreasen, "DSM and the Death of
Phenomenology in America: An Example of Unintended Consequences,"
Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, 1 (2007) 108--12. 143. An alienating society
is cited in Blazer, The Age of Melancholy. Changing social roles is put
forth as an explanation in Alain Ehrenberg, The Weariness of the Self:
Diagnosing the History of Depression in the Contemporary Age (Enrico
Caouette, Jacob Homel, David Homel, and Don Winkler, trans., Montreal
and Kingston: McGill Queen's University Press, 2010, originally
published 1998). 144. Researchers in Britain as late as the 1970s found
that women they diagnosed with clinical depression were more likely to
refer to their problems as "nerves." Brown and Harris, Social Origins of
Depression, 22. 145. Andrea Tone, The Age of Anxiety: America's
Turbulent Affair with Tranquilizers (New York: Basic Books, 2008). 146.
Allan V. Horwitz, "How an Age of Anxiety Became an Age of Depression,"
The Milbank Quarterly 88, 1 (2010) 112--38. 147. David Harvey, A Brief
History of Neo-Liberalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), 119.

148. Jean-FranÃ§ois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on
Knowledge (University of Minnesota Press, 1984). 149. Byung-Chul Han,
Psychopolitics: Neoliberalism and the New Technologies of Power (Erik
Butler, trans., London: Verso, 2017), 29. 150. Ibid., 6--7, emphasis in
original. 151. Allan Horwitz and Jerome Wakefield, The Loss of Sadness:
How Psychiatry Transformed Normal Sorrow into Depressive Disorder (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2007). 152. Frances, Saving Normal,
155--7.

5 "Just Chemical" "The very murkiness surrounding depression --
involving as it does both a biological and a psychological component --
has made it a ... whipping boy of the ongoing nature/nurture debate ...
It has become a magnet for the worst projections of both our Puritan
heritage and our pill-happy contemporary moment, with the unfortunate
result being that it is both underdiagnosed and overmedicalized." --
Daphne Merkin1 "Nor do I deny that sometimes such afflictions are helped
by the remedies of physicians or even cured. But those who attribute
such mental afflictions to natural causes since they are cured by
medicine, do not know the power of Satan and that God is more powerful
than demons." -- Martin Luther2

Imbalance Virginia Woolf famously wrote that "On or about December 1910,
human character changed."3 No doubt she was exaggerating for literary
effect. Or maybe she just had the date wrong. Maybe human character
changed on or about December 1987, when the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) allowed Eli Lilly to put Prozac on the American
market. In the decades since, millions of people, all over the planet,
began taking drugs unimaginable 80 years ago. Suddenly, the phrase
"chemical imbalance" flooded talk about depression. Drug companies were
allowed direct-to-consumer advertising in the United States in 1985, two
years before Prozac hit the market. The drug company Pfizer soon
promoted Zoloft as correcting a "chemical imbalance."4 Companies liked
this approach, as a way to cast depression as a "real" illness --
meaning, one requiring medicine. Doctors sometimes found it a

handy way to convince their patients to take a medicine. Patients
adopted it as well -- it became an "idiom of distress."5 "Chemical
imbalance" was not a phrase that appeared in psychopharmacology
textbooks, and it was not a phrase used by most people closely involved
with the scientific research. Like Prozac, though, it became a widely
swallowed capsule (see figure 7). When Prozac became a cultural
sensation, some started saying that depression was only a physical
thing. Some doctors told patients: you have a disease, no different from
diabetes, you can take a medicine to fix it. The diabetes analogy is a
nice one for the drug companies, because it makes the drugs less like
antibiotics or aspirin, taken as needed, but something you will need
every day, for life. Patients adopted the trope, saying, "I have
depression, but it is just chemical," as if to say, do not trouble
yourself about my childhood, or get the idea that I have a lot of other
problems. Writer Andrew Solomon interviewed many patients with
depression, and many of them said their depression was "just chemical."
As Solomon countered, though, "Everything about a person is just
chemical if one wants to think in those terms."6 Pointing out the
physical is useful when it is not readily seen. For example,
psychotherapy is not called a physical treatment, but it definitely
changes the brain.7 (Why wouldn't it?) Describing depression as
"chemical" now conceals as much as it reveals. It conceals how limited
our knowledge of the chemistry of depression is, and it conceals how
much we know about what is not strictly chemical. Sometimes an inexact
comparison helps. Imagine you are a college student in a literature
course, asked to do an analysis of Woolf's masterpiece, To the
Lighthouse. You take a week or so and report that the book, composed of
ink and paper, is therefore made up of carbon, mixed with some organic
and inorganic compounds. You would be technically right. Something would
be missing.

Figure 7 Prozac: a medicine that named an era. Actress Carrie Fisher,
who wrote with wit and courage about mental illness, was buried in an
urn fashioned after one of these pills Source: Christian Hopewell/Alamy

Many professionals questioned the "chemical imbalance" trope. They
raised concerns about psychological and social factors left out, about
how strong the evidence for "imbalance" was, and about the dangers of
over-reliance on drugs. And despite the popularity of the trope,
patients held to other explanations of depression. Many continue to
favor social and psychological explanations, in populations as diverse
as MexicanAmericans in the United States and White Britons in London.8
The appeal is easy to see, though. Parents would not be blamed. The sick
would be released from stigma. People with depression would get the
chance at a real illness, because many people think real illnesses need
a physical basis. Doctors who had been on the side of biological
psychiatry all along were having their moment of cultural triumph.
Melancholia was inherently physical, though few humoralists thought it
was purely physical, without psychological or social aspects.

Psychoanalysts believed in inborn tendencies toward depression, though
they insisted on a psychological aspect, too. The antidepressant era was
not an end to centuries of psychological readings of a biological
process. What was new were voices calling the psychological and the
social unimportant. The antidepressant era did not arrive because a
physical treatment suddenly showed up and made psychological approaches
obsolete. Most of the key innovation in biological psychiatry came when
psychoanalysis dominated, not after.9 Prozac was a late addition to a
repertoire of physical treatments for mental illness that had been
growing since the 1920s.

Before Antidepressants The century from roughly 1850 to 1950 was an
exciting time for medicine. The germ theory of infectious disease was
scientifically proven and popularly accepted. Dramatic improvements in
public health, disease prevention, and disease cure followed.
Psychiatrists hoped for similar gains, grounded in knowledge of the
brain. A flurry of experimentation with physical methods to treat mental
illnesses started in the early twentieth century. Growth in knowledge of
the brain contributed little to these new treatments. Some were
discovered through accident, some were based on faulty premises, and
most had serious adverse effects. They were also tested on small samples
of patients, without informed consent, in a research culture far removed
from ours. But they had the combined effect of raising confidence that
mental illnesses could be treated with physical means.10 Largely
forgotten by the lay public, Malaria Fever Therapy to treat
neurosyphilis was pivotal in raising this confidence. In the 1880s,
Austrian doctor Julius Wagner-Jauregg had a mentally ill patient who
developed a high fever from an infectious disease. When the fever
lifted, the symptoms of her mental illness seemed to lift, too.
Wagner-Jauregg began to use infectious agents to cause fevers, hoping to
find a cure for mental illnesses. In 1917, he succeeded with "general
paralysis of the insane," now known to be neurosyphilis. The treatment
worked in a significant number of patients. Many who were stuck in
asylums could now be cured and released, in an early wave of
deinstitutionalization. Wagner-Jauregg was the first psychiatrist to win
a Nobel Prize.11

More vivid in public memory, though not used much now, was lobotomy.12
In 1927, Egas Moniz, a Portuguese neurologist, attended a scientific
session about monkeys who became subdued after parts of the frontal lobe
of their brains had been removed. Moniz wondered if surgery could be
used in a similar way to treat symptoms such as agitation in mental
illness. Moniz also won a Nobel, but the figure who did the most to
promote lobotomy was American neurologist Walter Freeman. Lobotomy was
widely used in the mid-twentieth century on thousands of patients. Its
abysmal public image is partly deserved. It did serious long-term damage
to cognitive abilities. Doctors, as well as patients and their families,
often valued it though, because it did relieve symptoms, often in
patients who had been struggling with them for years. The damage
lobotomy did to cognition was not fully apparent at first. Adverse
effects of many psychiatric treatments were often not seen or conceded
by the profession when the treatments were new. One antidepressant drug
came well before the modern antidepressant era. Amphetamine was
developed by a chemist looking for an allergy medication, in an august
tradition of psychiatric treatments created by people who were looking
for something else. The stimulant effects of amphetamine were known by
the early twentieth century. Myerson, the psychiatrist who wrote about
anhedonia, tried amphetamine himself, and found lecturing more
enjoyable. During the 1930s he started giving it to depressed patients
and thought it worked. Wider clinical opinion held that amphetamine was
not useful for severe depression and psychoses, but might help for mild
depression. Attention to the adverse effects of amphetamine also took
longer to emerge. 13 A number of new treatments for psychosis were
invented in the 1920s and 1930s. Swiss psychiatrist Jacob Klaesi
developed prolonged sleep therapy. Drugs would keep patients asleep for
days at a time, and they would have some remission of symptoms when
finally awake. Shortly after, several treatments grouped as "shock
therapies" were also developed for psychosis, though why they all were
grouped together, and why they were all "shock" treatments, was a little
fuzzy. One was Insulin Coma Therapy, perhaps best known now because of
its depiction in the film A Beautiful Mind, as a treatment for the
schizophrenia of mathematician John Nash. The treatment was the
invention of Manfred Sakel, a Viennese psychiatrist. Sakel used insulin
to cause comas in psychotic patients, and found their symptoms

dispelled on their revival. Whether Insulin Coma Therapy was effective,
and if so how, have both been controversial, but it did became widely
used. Around the same time, some thought that schizophrenia and epilepsy
were antagonistic -- if you had one, you would be unlikely to have the
other. Hungarian psychiatrist Ladislas Meduna wondered, then, if
inducing seizures could reverse schizophrenia. This was the idea behind
convulsive therapy. In its early years, the seizures were caused by a
chemical the patient would drink. Schizophrenia and epilepsy are no
longer considered antagonistic, but remarkably, the treatment worked
anyway. Perhaps as strange, convulsive therapy came not to be used
mainly for psychosis at all, but for mood disorders. Chemical Convulsive
Therapy also became widely used. Doctors treating chronic mental
patients were eager to try new treatments that seemed to work,
especially as mental hospitals became ever more over-crowded. Insulin
Coma Therapy and Chemical Convulsive Therapy both had serious drawbacks,
though. Chemical Convulsive Therapy was detested by patients, who often
felt extreme dread in the time between taking the dose and the onset of
the seizure. Electroconvulsive therapy, ECT, came as an alternative.
This much-feared therapy, one of the most dreaded in medicine, came from
the search for a less frightening way to cause convulsions.14 ECT is the
main physical treatment for mental illness from the first half of the
twentieth century that is still widely used. Many psychiatrists think it
is not only the most powerful treatment for depression, but the most
effective treatment in all of psychiatry. It causes convulsions in the
patient by running electricity through the brain. Why the convulsions
work on mood disorders remains mysterious. In the early years, doctors
gave a form of ECT (now called "unmodified"), without anesthesia for the
pain of the electricity, or muscle relaxants, which keep the body from
going into a full convulsion. Unmodified ECT was horrible. The
modifications were added soon after ECT was invented, but took time to
become the standard of care, as they are now. The meaning of the history
of ECT is hotly contested because the treatment itself is. Critics of
ECT often refer darkly to its origins in fascist Italy, and how one of
its creators, Lucio Bini, got the idea for it while watching pigs being
stunned with electricity in a slaughterhouse. ECT's history has grim
aspects, and reasonable concerns about its adverse effects continue, but

these arguments about its origins are misleading. The Italian
psychiatrists who invented ECT, Ugo Cerletti and Bini, were not
fascists. Lothar Kalinowsky, the member of their team who did the most
to promote ECT's spread to other countries, was a Jew who fled fascism.
The slaughterhouse is a sensational image, but the use of electricity
was motivated not by the desire to slaughter anyone, but to find a more
tolerable way to cause the seizures. Nearly every aspect of ECT's
history has had vastly different readings. When Cerletti and his team
tried it on the first patient, a vagrant person with psychosis who was
brought to them by the police in Rome, he cried out something like "Not
another one! It's murder!" after the first jolt of electricity. Some ECT
advocates have considered Cerletti's decision to go ahead with another
jolt a sign of his bravery, while ECT critics have seen it as a cruel
example of doctors not listening to patients. The aftermath was also
ambiguous. The patient's symptoms cleared up after the treatment, but he
relapsed soon after. This is not surprising from our current
perspective. ECT rarely brings a permanent cure of any mental illness,
and a short course of it is less effective in reducing symptoms than one
that goes on for several weeks. ECT use followed a curve of rise,
decline, and rise again. It spread rapidly in the industrialized world
during the 1940s and 1950s, and into parts of the non-industrialized
world. Because the reason it works was unknown, it was tried on many
mental illnesses. It was also used on at least one thing we no longer
consider an illness, homosexuality. Not surprisingly, from our current
perspective, it did not change anyone's sexuality, and gay people
subjected to it were traumatized, contributing to ECT's poor public
image. ECT was also used in many mental hospitals to discipline patients
-- a stereotype of ECT that has origins in reality. ECT use declined in
the 1960s and 1970s. The first antipsychotics and antidepressants
provided alternatives. Distrust of psychiatry was growing, partly
because of terrible conditions in mental hospitals. The distrust reached
its strongest form in the antipsychiatry movement, which saw the whole
profession as oppressive. ECT's abuses became the movement's prime
exhibit. The fear of ECT as a tool of social control was made vivid in
the novel and film One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. A lively,
nonconformist individual ends up in a mental hospital, seeking to avoid
prison.

ECT is used to discipline the inmates, including him. He gets unmodified
ECT; the audience sees him strapped unwillingly to a table, screaming
and writhing. At the end of the story he gets a punitive lobotomy.
Perhaps no other fictional story in history has such a powerful
association with a medical treatment. I teach a history unit for
psychiatry residents at University Hospitals of Cleveland. Each year, I
ask if their patients react with panicked associations to Cuckoo's Nest
when ECT is offered to them. Every year, most of the residents say yes,
even their younger patients, though the film was released 45 years ago.
ECT was widely used to discipline patients in mental hospitals. Even
when used for more purely therapeutic purposes, in its early decades,
many hospitals gave unmodified ECT. The depiction in the film was not
pure fantasy for the time it is set, in the early 1960s. The grim
aspects of ECT's history should not be whitewashed. By the late 1970s,
psychiatrists saw that many people, especially with severe depression,
might not be helped by antidepressants and psychotherapy. By this time,
ECT was mostly used for mood disorders, and it got another look. Its use
has grown since the early 1980s, though it is still mainly used for a
minority, when other treatments have failed. Early psychoanalytic
response to ECT was mixed. Few analysts doubted its efficacy. The
clinical results were too dramatic. Some worried about brain damage, and
some even thought ECT use showed an unconscious sadism toward the
patient. But a number of analysts used ECT, and some valued it as a way
to get the patient well enough for dynamic therapy to be viable.
Analysts tried to find a psychological reason why it worked. Many
thought the mentally ill suffered because of unconscious attacks from a
punitive conscience -- anger turned inward -- and that the punishment of
the ECT served as a substitute. This theory filtered down to some
patients. Sylvia Plath, one of the most famous ECT patients, wrote in
her journals after an ECT treatment, "Why, after the 'amazingly short'
three or so shock treatments did I rocket uphill? Why did I feel I
needed to be punished, to punish myself."15 In her novel The Bell Jar,
the narrator, Esther Greenwood comments after an ECT treatment: "I
wondered what terrible thing it was that I had done."16 In the late
1950s, researchers showed the current had to be strong enough to cause
convulsions for ECT to work. This probably undercut the theory that the
therapy worked because it was punitive because

it was hard to see why shocks would not seem punitive if they did not
cause convulsions. Clinicians and patients have both seen ECT's powerful
therapeutic efficacy throughout its 60-year history. Most of the
treatment's many critics concede it. In recent decades a growing number
of people -- both clinicians and patients -- have written about its
therapeutic and even life-saving power. Controversy remains, however,
about adverse effects, especially memory loss. ECT usually causes some
short-term loss of memories of events near the treatment, which are
often recovered. Some patients, though, have longterm and permanent
memory loss, which can be traumatic. Memoirs of ECT by patients, even
many who valued the treatment, are filled with mourning of memory loss.
The scientific literature on ECT and memory loss is mountainous, but
inconclusive. The extent of the risk of permanent memory loss remains
unsettled. It would be good to know this if you were considering having
this treatment. ECT's proponents complain about the treatment being
unfairly demonized. Many critics have indeed made unfair arguments, and
have refused to concede the therapeutic benefits. But, many proponents
have also idealized ECT, downplaying both sordid aspects of its history
and the chance of serious side effects. The physical treatments for
mental illness from the 1920s and 1930s formed a precedent, but most of
them did not last. More durable treatments came in the decades that
followed. In 1949, Australian doctor John Cade showed the efficacy of
lithium to treat bipolar disorder, though it did not become widely used
until the 1970s. In the 1950s, the first of the drugs now called
antipsychotics and antidepressants were invented. Antidepressant
medication's origins lie partly in the antipsychotic drugs. But the
antipsychotic drugs themselves came from a quest to treat other medical
problems. Henri Laborit, a French surgeon, wanted to reduce postsurgical
shock. He thought the shock resembled symptoms of allergic reactions and
hoped allergy drugs could help. The company RhÃ´ne-Poulenc had been
developing a group of antihistamines and gave some to Laborit. The drugs
made the patients less anxious about the surgery. This led to the
creation of chlorpromazine, the first drug called an antipsychotic,
though non-Western medical traditions had long made use of plants with
similar chemical makeup to treat mental distress. Nathan Kline thought
chlorpromazine

worked by reducing "psychic energy" and reduced need for "defense
against unacceptable urges and impulses."17 The minor tranquilizers,
which were cultural sensations the way Prozac would be decades later,
came about in a similar way. No one was looking for one. A physician
named Frank Berger wanted a muscle relaxant, and developed meprobomate,
and found it was more calming than sedating. It was sold as Miltown.18
These treatments, and their histories, have several things in common
that were repeated with the antidepressants developed since the 1950s.
They rarely cured any mental illness, though they relieved symptoms.19
The psychiatric profession greeted them with excitement, because of the
hope to treat terrible chronic illnesses, but it was often excessive. In
several cases, the treatments were valued at first because they seemed
safer than earlier treatments. In most cases, serious adverse effects
became known only after years passed. Chlorpromazine, for example,
causes a permanent movement disorder called Tardive Dyskinesia, an
effect psychiatry was slow to concede.20 Adverse effects are common in
medicine. Deciding whether the effects are worth it requires complex
weighing of risks and benefits. The severity of the adverse effects,
their likelihood, the severity of the illness, and the likely efficacy
of the treatment all come in to play. The severity of an illness or an
adverse effect in an individual can sometimes be hard to judge.
Likelihood of an adverse effect and likelihood of improvement from the
treatment are matters for the study of populations, and the data are
often less conclusive than we would like.

Enter the Antidepressants A new model of depression emerged starting in
the 1950s. Depression was related to the available supply of certain
neurotransmitters -- chemicals that convey messages between neurons,
including neurons in the brain. The summary of this story is as follows:
New drugs, meant originally for other problems, seemed to influence
mood. People groping for treatments for other illnesses found what they
called antidepressants in their hands instead. These chance observations
of mood changes, from a tuberculosis

medication and one for schizophrenia, set much of the direction of
research on depression for decades. The new drugs seemed to increase the
availability of particular neurotransmitters in the brain. Perhaps, the
new theory held, the cause of the depression was a low supply of the
neurotransmitters.21 Some of the neurotransmitters belong to a group
called catecholamines, and these got a lot of attention in the early
science -- in a "catecholamine hypothesis" of depression. The sequence
matters -- observations that the drugs influenced mood came before a
grasp of what they did in the body.22 The most relevant
neurotransmitters in the treatment of depression are norepinephrine,
dopamine, and serotonin, all part of a group called monoamines.
(Histamine and melatonin are also monoamines.) Monoamines, and other
neurotransmitters, are released from the sending neuron into a space
called the synaptic cleft. There, they send their signal by interacting
with receptors on the receiving neuron. Once the signaling is done, the
neurotransmitters are removed from the synaptic cleft (see figure 8).
One way they are removed is through reuptake, in which neurotransmitters
are re-absorbed into the receiving neuron. The more reuptake, the less
neurotransmitter is left on the synaptic cleft. Once monoamines are
re-absorbed, they can be used again, or they can be broken down by an
enzyme called monoamine oxidase, the second way they can be removed. The
action of monoamine oxidase and the reuptake both influence the level of
the neurotransmitters. The action of the enzyme to break down the
neurotransmitters, and the reuptake of them, are both normal, natural
processes in healthy brains. But, the emerging theory held, if those
processes could be inhibited in people with depression, perhaps the
depression would lift. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) deter the
enzyme. Most other antidepressants, including the tricyclics and the
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), inhibit reuptake. The
MAOIs grew out of tuberculosis treatment. TB patients on iproniazid, a
medication from the company Hoffmann-LaRoche, felt upbeat, even
euphoric. Some were dancing in the wards, and the drug did not even work
all that well for TB. Iproniazid was the first MAOI. Hoffmann-LaRoche
was not looking for a mood drug and did not pay much attention.23 A
number of psychiatric researchers did, though. Nathan Kline, who went on

to treat Rafael Osheroff, Mark Rothko, and many other patients, was one
of them.24

Figure 8 This schematic gives an idea of how neurotransmitters convey
messages between the brain's neurons Source: Adapted from "Schematic of
a Synapse" by Thomas Splettstoesser:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SynapseSchematic_en.svg

Kline was sympathetic to both psychoanalytic and physical approaches,
and was working with a psychoanalyst to find a "psychic energizer."
Kline took iproniazid himself and was excited to see that he needed only
three hours of sleep per night. Kline took the idea of "psychic energy"
from the psychodynamic tradition of Freud and Jung, so this innovation
in drug treatment was partly the offspring of depth psychology.25 Some
credit may be due to Abraham Myerson, too. Amphetamine is an MAOI,
though a weak one.26 The MAOIs were and are effective. They were also
risky, which is why they are not used much. Effects include
constipation, dizziness, problems urinating, jaundice, and most scary,
fatal reactions from cheese and chocolate.27 They are not as risky to
use now, but it was natural to look for alternatives then.28

The tricyclics came from observation of patients with psychoses. The
antipsychotics were becoming lucrative, and mental hospitals were
overfilled with chronic patients. The Swiss company Geigy hoped one of
its compounds might work for schizophrenia. A student of Klaesi's,
Ronald Kuhn, was working in Switzerland in the early 1950s, looking for
a new drug to induce prolonged sleep therapy.29 His hospital could not
afford enough chlorpromazine. He had worked with Geigy on certain
antihistamines, and thought they had psychiatric promise. Eventually,
Kuhn tried one called imipramine, the first tricyclic. It did not help
all patients with psychoses. Patients with psychoses and depressed mood,
however, had improved mood. He then gave tricyclics to patients who only
had depression, and the results were good.30 Kuhn treated hundreds of
patients and found that they had more vitality, renewed interest in
formerly enjoyed activities, and were more socially engaged.31 An early
clinical trial of imipramine was conducted by Hilda Abraham, Karl's
granddaughter, herself a psychoanalyst.32 A number of other tricyclics
followed, and some were better tolerated by patients than imipramine.33
Tricyclics also had safety risks. Above all, they can be lethal in
overdose, so it is unwise to give large amounts to suicidal patients.34
Next came the task of figuring out why the MAOIs and tricyclics worked.
Knowledge of the brain might flow from the action of the drugs, and in
turn might lead to better drugs. A major advance came from rabbits on
reserpine, a drug used to treat high blood pressure and schizophrenia.
The rabbits had a period of excitement, followed by a period of
inactivity, hunched posture, and immobility. The second period looked
like depression. Reserpine caused monoamine transmitters to leak into
synapses, causing the excitement in the rabbits in the first phase.
Monoamine oxidase broke down the neurotransmitters, causing the
"depression" of the second phase. The second phase was absent, though,
when the rabbits were given iproniazid before the reserpine --
presumably because the breakdown of the monoamines was hampered. A
theory of depression was born: reduced level of the neurotransmitters
caused the depression.35 Tricyclics, however, do not inhibit monoamine
oxidase, which meant the level of the neurotransmitters could be raised
in other ways. In the early

1960s, American biochemist Julius Axelrod discovered that tricyclics
blocked the reuptake of neurotransmitters into nerve cell bodies. This
seemed to confirm that low levels of neurotransmitters might be causing
the depression. Norepinephrine became the leading contender for the most
important neurotransmitter involved, though the tricyclics also inhibit
reuptake of serotonin.36 The MAOIs increase levels of norepinephrine,
serotonin, and also dopamine.37 The emerging theory got the pithy name,
the "catecholamine hypothesis." Dopamine and norepinephrine (but not
serotonin) are catecholamines. Psychiatrist Joseph Schildkraut published
a famous paper on this in 1965.38 Schildkraut trained in psychiatry at
Harvard, hoping to become a psychoanalyst. When he started his
residency, though, he was captivated by the therapeutic power of the
MAOIs and tricyclics. Working with Gerald Klerman, he looked at the
effects of an MAOI on norepinephrine. Klerman and Schildkraut examined
the patients' urine. The urine showed that the MAOIs and tricyclics both
increased levels of catecholamines.39 Schildkraut concluded that some
depressions, and maybe all, were associated with lowered catecholamines.
He hoped that these tentative ideas about cause would produce ideas for
new drugs. Schildkraut stressed the role of norepinephrine. Swedish
pharmacologist Arvid Carlsson found, though, that tricyclics blocked
reuptake of serotonin more effectively than they did norepinephrine.40
Might lowered serotonin be the cause of depression? Researchers began to
pursue drugs that only blocked serotonin uptake. A drug with more
specific action might avoid the unwanted effects of other drugs. Unlike
many physical treatments for depression that were based on chance
observations of mood, the SSRIs came from a prior theory of the cause of
depression. Carlsson patented zimelidine, the first SSRI, but it caused
a possibly-fatal neurological condition.41 Eli Lilly pursued serotonin
research, and developed fluoxetine -- Prozac -- as early as 1972.
Approved for sale a full fifteen years later, it quickly overtook the
tricyclic nortriptyline (Pamelor), as the most prescribed
antidepressant. A few years later, another SSRI, Zoloft, began to
outsell Prozac. Related drugs followed -- serotonin antagonist and
reuptake inhibitors (SARIs) and serotonin-- norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRIs). Bupropion (Wellbutrin), which

inhibits dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake but not serotonin, was
invented in 1969, but not approved for sale until 1985. Wellbutrin came
into wider use because it does not have the sexual side effects often
caused by SSRIs. Chemical theories of depression were not wild guesses.
They were smart ones, based on what was known, and they sparked
excitement for good reasons. There was, though, a major irony. The
catecholamine hypothesis was the defining scientific theory of the
antidepressant era. The culturallydefining drugs of that era, like
Prozac and Zoloft, work on serotonin. But serotonin is not a
catecholamine. No chemical theory had to imply that depression was just
chemical. When Prozac became a cultural marvel in the 1990s, many
claimed that Freud, literally dead since 1939, was now really dead.
After all, the reasoning went, if we could fix depression with a pill,
how important could unconscious conflict be? This was never good
reasoning. Whatever you think about the psychoanalysis of depression, or
of drugs, the dearth of neurotransmitters could logically be caused by
inner conflict, and remedied with a pill. Little was known about what
might be causing lowered levels of catecholamines anyway. Reduced levels
of certain neurotransmitters could be what anger turned inward, or
object loss, looks like at the chemical level. After all, they would
have to look like something. Any mental event is an event in the brain.
If you get pleasure from reading To the Lighthouse, it can only be
because the pattern of ink on the page, after taken in by the eye, sends
a message to the brain. As John Bowlby pointed out in his classic work
on loss, chemical changes in the brain in depression do not have to mean
the chemical changes are the cause of the depression. Freud knew and
welcomed the power of substances to change mood. If effective physical
treatments were logically opposed to his ideas, he could have been
discredited in the 1930s with the use of amphetamines, in the 1940s by
convulsive therapy, in the 1950s by the first antidepressants, or in the
1960s and 1970s by the growing use of minor tranquilizers. The either/or
reasoning that caused Freud's belated public funeral was a sign of a
cultural shift, not a scientific find. We also know now that childhood
trauma and neglect can cause changes in the brain that make stress in
adulthood more likely to lead to depression.42 This is exactly what the

theories of Karl Abraham and his followers, who did not have the brain
research available to them, would have predicted. The psychoanalytic
ancestry of Kline's idea that antidepressants recharge "psychic energy"
seemed like a vestigial organ stuck to the body of psychiatry after the
field evolved to where it was no longer needed. It could as logically
have been seen as the link between dynamic and biological psychiatry
that Kline thought it was. But the catecholamine theory became central
just before DSM-III de-emphasized psychological causes, and just before
a decline in the prestige of psychoanalysis. Chemical theories also
flourished when genetic inquiry was confirming what many had long
suspected -- heritability of depression. The degree of heritability for
unipolar depression is lower than that for schizophrenia or bipolar
disorder, but significant.43 Twin studies of depression showed that the
greater the genetic similarity, the more likely depression was to occur
in both siblings. The co-occurrence of depression is far from total even
in identical twins, though, so while some degree of heritability could
be inferred, other causes were also likely. Knowledge about the
specifics of the genetics remained limited.44 Specific links between
genetic makeups and neurochemical pictures were hard to find. Still,
depression seemed ever more bodily in nature. A lot of hope sprang from
this change. Sometimes the hope spilled over into hype.

Books of the Times Two books by psychiatrists written for lay audiences
show the mood of the late twentieth-century boom in biopsychiatry. Nancy
Andreasen's The Broken Brain: The Biological Revolution in Psychiatry
came out in 1984, sandwiched between the arrivals of DSM-III (1980) and
Prozac (1987). Peter Kramer's Listening to Prozac came out in 1993, as
SSRIs were becoming widespread. Both, in different ways, promoted
enthusiasm for biopsychiatry. Both expressed reasonable concerns and
cautions. Andreasen became linked to the slogan "a disease like any
other." Mental illnesses were physical illnesses, she said, with the
brain the afflicted organ. She hoped that mental illnesses would no
longer be separate from the rest of disease in medical and public
imagination. Stigma might be reduced,

because people would not be blamed for their illness. Depression would
shed the taint of poor character. Psychiatry would no longer be a
disfavored stepchild in medicine, lacking the prestige of the favored
siblings who successfully treated real diseases. Biology would be
psychiatry's fairy godmother, and medications the glass slipper that
proved the fit. What does it mean, though, to say a depression (or other
mental illness) is a "disease like any other"? Does it mean that
depression is "just chemical"? Only if other diseases are just chemical,
with no psychological or social causes, no cultural setting. This is not
the case. Does it mean we can banish inquiry into psychological meaning?
This is also not true of all diseases, and certainly not of depression.
Does it mean free from moral stigma? Kline hoped that depression stigma
would be reduced, because once you have a medication for something, he
thought, people will think it is a real disease.45 Biological models may
have decreased some stigma for depression, more so than for
schizophrenia.46 Biological models of mental illness have seeped into
popular understanding, and they have also probably helped get people
into medical treatments. But stigma is a dogged and shape-shifting
beast, not easily slayed by biological fact. As for getting depression
the status of real disease, the border separating those who need
medication from those who do not remains disputed. Efforts to end moral
judgments about people with diseases are worthy, but making the diseases
biological is not the way. Ask anyone who has felt blamed -- because of
their "lifestyle" for example -- for chronic illnesses such as cancer
and heart disease. This digression on the meaning of "a disease like any
other," though, is not meant as a criticism of Andreasen. A growing
cultural mood of the time may have inclined toward "just chemical," but
Andreasen was cautious. She said the antidepressants were useful, but
granted that they were slow to act. She also did not think mental states
could be reduced to the inborn brain. The brain was not a static organ,
but one that changed in response to experience over a lifetime. Patients
would still need psychotherapy for insight into their minds and lives.
While seeing mental illness as brain disease could make psychiatry more
like other specialties, she hoped its continuing attention to the
patient's wider world would continue to humanize the rest of medicine,
which could be too narrowly biological. Psychiatry's special window into
personal and social experience would

endure, partly because people drawn to the specialty would care about
those things. Andreasen outlined the catecholamine hypothesis, which
was, still in 1984, only a hypothesis. It never achieved the status of
settled scientific knowledge. But it was not the only physical
explanation around. The catecholamine hypothesis, she said, had been
joined by another: the "serotonin hypothesis." About a decade later, the
serotonin hypothesis was hotcakes. So was Kramer's Listening to Prozac.
Kramer himself said that the hype for brain explanations of human
affairs (including mental illnesses, but other things too) was a
cultural spectacle out of proportion to advances in scientific
knowledge.47 Listening to Prozac has been blamed both for causing an
over-hyping of antidepressants, and for a later backlash.48 Kramer
described patients with dramatic recoveries. Some said they finally felt
like their true selves, which must have made a deep impact on readers --
many of whom likely bought the book wondering if this newly-famous drug
might help them. Kramer was not the only person, patient or doctor, who
was observing these effects. The book likely did increase demand for
antidepressants. But it is an ambivalent book. Later critique of SSRIs
would focus on the calculus of benefit versus harm. Kramer did not focus
much on adverse effects -- not many of them had yet been observed
widely. Kramer's doubts revolved around the meaning of the self. What
even was the self if it could be so altered by a chemical? Many patients
wondered the same thing. Listening to Prozac promoted a controversial
term: "cosmetic pharmacology." Like cosmetic surgery, it was not
medically necessary, but could make your life better. A key phrase was
"better than well." Was Prozac giving people an edge in the workplace,
beyond its effects on illness? Was it making people more charismatic and
outgoing? If so, should Prozac be used as an enhancement for people who
were not really sick, or really only a little depressed? Ethicists and
journalists gave a lot of attention to these questions when Prozac was
new. The debate took the shape of all debates over enhancements -- on
the one hand, if it makes people's lives better, then why not? On the
other hand, does it give some people an unfair

advantage -- those who have more money for the drugs, for example? And
what are the costs? Listening to Prozac reached a large audience, as did
The Anatomy of Melancholy centuries earlier, and as did Freud and Jung's
books in the decades before. It may have had a similar effect on demand
for the treatment that psychoanalytic writing did. People often sought
out depth psychology as a means to work through common life problems,
more than a cure for actual disease. People may have also heard about
cosmetic psychopharmacology and sought Prozac. Who would not want to be
better than well, if possible? Psychoanalysis required a long and
painful encounter with thoughts and impulses people would rather ignore.
Prozac was easily washed down with orange juice at breakfast. The debate
over cosmetic psychopharmacology evaporated more than it was resolved.
No one worries much anymore about whether Prozac or any other
antidepressant is an enhancement. Kramer himself has turned to writing
defenses of depression as an illness category, and antidepressants as a
way to treat it. The cosmetic pharmacology debate died partly because
Prozac's costs became clearer. The debate makes sense only if the costs
of the drug are modest. But now most agree that antidepressants can have
effects worth avoiding, if possible. And taking an antidepressant will
not elevate the mood of a healthy person.49 Some critics of Prozac
feared that it was sapping emotional strength. SSRIs were part of a
decline of character, a loss of resolve against life's inevitable arrows
and slings.50 One ethicist, while granting the need for treatment of the
severely depressed, saw Prozac as part of a childish culture where
people wear sneakers and casual clothes to work, instead of formal
suits.51 (Not caring so much what people wear to work may be a better
gauge of maturity than wearing a suit, though.) According to this line
of criticism of antidepressants, we now run crying to the psychiatrist
for every emotional skinned knee, unlike our stoic ancestors. Like many
claims about the sinister cultural effects of antidepressants, this is
more often asserted than shown. Prozac and the other SSRIs caused a lot
of bewilderment about the nature of the self. Who, or what, am I if my
mood and orientation to the world can be altered with a pill? Yet other
physical treatments for affective illness did not

cause so much philosophical reflection, including the older
antidepressants. That could be because they were not so widely used. I
have not seen memoirs with titles like "Me and My Marsilid" or "Pamelor
Nation." Nor have I seen any memoirs about the life-changing effects of
CBT. The only treatment for depression that has inspired as much memoir
writing as the SSRIs is ECT. In this era where Freud was being declared
dead because drugs work, no one said CBT was dead. The same reasoning
could have applied -- why fix illogical thoughts if the disease is
chemical? Why bother with therapy at all when you can take a pill? CBT
and Prozac were of a piece, however. They fit the changing culture
because they require no deep self-examination, they are readily
reimbursable, and they are well-suited to clinical trials. The trials,
we would learn, had problems of their own.

Backlash: Clinical Trials and Other Tribulations The appeal of
biopsychiatry of depression was not just scientific, but also
psychological. Many people like thinking depression is purely physical.
The shine is off a bit now, though. The adverse effects of drugs are
better known. The drugs sometimes have a "poop-out" effect, in which the
efficacy wanes after a while. They can be hard to stop taking. Scathing
exposÃ©s of the pharmaceutical industry have led to justified mistrust.
Brain science has not advanced at the rate many had hoped. Drugs are not
making people "better than well." The large numbers of people on the
drugs may itself also be causing disillusionment -- if the drugs are so
great, and so many people are taking them, why do we have so much
depression, not to mention ordinary sadness? We should not, though, have
contempt for the hopefulness of biopsychiatry in the late twentieth
century. Real advances in both knowledge and treatment led to some
incautious claims. Some authors who were credited with incautious claims
were more cautious than many readers realized. Scientific and political
critiques have made telling points. The critiques have looked at
continued mysteries about the biological bases of

depression, concerns about adverse effects, and challenges to the
results and integrity of the clinical trials in support of drug
treatment. Describing activity in the brain and knowing what the
activity means for mood are different things.52 Precise links between
chemical changes and mood have not been easy to find. Many depressed
people do not show high monoamine oxidase levels, for example, and many
nondepressed people do. Many patients might have welcomed the idea of
"chemical imbalance" but later found it one-dimensional, missing
important aspects of their experience.53 Scorn is now sometimes cast on
the phrase "chemical imbalance." Scorn is rarely a good historical
attitude, though. In the history of science, scorn is justified mostly
for instances of pseudo-science, in which results are deliberately
faked, not for reasonable ideas that do not hold up well over time.
"Chemical imbalance," was, in any event -- like the earlier catchphrase
"anger turned inward" -- a shorthand for complex ideas. The phrase
"chemical imbalance" was attractive to critics of drug treatment in
psychiatry. For people hostile to biological psychiatry, the debunking
of "chemical imbalance" was a windfall. If "chemical imbalance" as the
cause of depression was based on weak science, doesn't the whole
rationale for drug treatment of depression collapse? Not really. This is
why the sequence of the science matters. Doctors began using
antidepressants because of their observed effects on mood, not because
of a well-understood physical process. Observations about the brain
chemistry came after. If a treatment for an illness works, it makes
sense to reason back from its action to the cause of the illness. If
that effort fails, the treatment does not stop working. Scientific
progress comes in unplanned ways, and fails to unravel all mysteries.
Expecting otherwise is a warm invitation to disillusionment. If
antidepressants do not work, millions of people are spending a lot of
money on drugs that are not doing good. Critics have examined the
clinical trials and found serious problems. Many of them pertain most to
the results of SSRI trials. One problem in antidepressant trials is
publication bias toward positive results.54 Worse, the pharmaceutical
industry has suppressed negative

results.55 FDA rules permit hiding negative results of trials, provided
they produce two positive ones.56 Studies have to show that the drug
does better than placebo, in which the anticipation of remedy creates
the improvement, not something inherent in the treatment. A majority of
published trials show antidepressants perform better than placebo, but
not by a lot, in some cases not at all, and in some the drugs did
worse.57 Non-therapeutic actions of the drugs -- side effects -- can
allow patients in trials to know whether they are on a placebo or not.
The trial is not really blind, then. The placebo effect will not work if
you know you are on placebo, so people on the real drug may have an
"amplified placebo effect."58 The placebo effect for antidepressants
(and for other psychiatric drugs) in trials has also been rising in
recent years. No one is certain why. Maybe as antidepressants have
become well known, the expectation that they will work is greater. The
attention patients get in trials is greater than they might get if
taking a medicine outside of a trial, so they may be getting benefits
and support that come with a therapeutic relationship.59 The length of
the studies has also increased, and the placebo effect is greater in
longer studies.60 Daniel Pine, a major figure in antidepressant trial
research, believes poorer studies are being done, and that placebo
response is greater in poorly-designed studies.61 Taking a drug always
has costs -- physiological and financial. Why incur them if you are only
getting a placebo effect, or its equivalent? If the trials cannot show
that the drugs are meaningfully better, in what sense can we say that
the drugs work?62 Remember, though, that the mood effects of MAOIs and
tricyclics were first seen by people who were not looking for mood drugs
at all, and taken by patients who were not expecting mood changes, so
the effects were not likely due to placebo. Also, psychiatrists cannot
easily predict who will respond to which antidepressant. They try to
match the treatment plan to the patient, but some guesswork is involved.
A given patient will respond well to some antidepressants and not
others. This is called the tailoring effect. The placebo effect does not
explain it well. If the expectation that drugs work is what makes them
work, why would some work better than others in the same patient? The
tailoring effect may help explain the gap between the

weakness of the data from trials and the experience of doctors and
patients that medicines work.63 Millions of people are taking
antidepressants and finding them helpful. All over the world, clinicians
prescribe them and see improvements in their patients. This is another
measure of efficacy. We have clinical trials because the everyday
experience of clinicians and patients is subjective, and could be caused
by placebo. The problem is acute for an illness like depression, for
which the causes are not definitively known, and the ways the treatments
work are unclear. Using trials as the only way to measure a treatment
also has risks, though. Might the drugs work better than the data from
trials suggest? The centers doing the studies need a supportive
atmosphere, or they lose subjects. This support may improve outcomes in
the placebo group. Recovery is often measured by the Hamilton scale or
similar instrument. On these scales, some symptoms can add more points
to a score than others, which may drag down recovery rates. Many
patients in recent trials may also be people who failed to respond to
one antidepressant already, so they may be the more treatment-resistant
patients. The average scores in the studies may also obscure the extent
of benefit for patients who do benefit. The flaws in antidepressant
trials may not all run in one direction.64 Much of medical practice is
not backed up by dramatic positive clinical trials. Clinical experience
matters too.65 No serious student of the subject thinks the data from
antidepressant trials are impressive. Concluding that antidepressants
are worthless, when so many doctors and patients say they work, proposes
a rather grand illusion. Another critique of antidepressant culture is
that reliance on pills, even if they do work, is a poor substitute for
making the social changes we need to prevent depression in the first
place. A less unequal, less isolating, less precarious, less ruthless
social system might well reduce the incidence. But people with
depression should not have to suffer while waiting for social progress.
It can be true that big pharma pushed profit more than health, and that
we have over-medicated societies, and also true that medications help
suffering people. You do not have to like big pharma to vaccinate your
kids. The cases are different, because the data supporting vaccination
are so strong,

and because most vaccines are for diseases with a clear definition and
known physical basis. Still, the profits the companies make do not
automatically show the product is bad. Critique of antidepressants is
also too often close to pill-shaming of depressed people, who have
enough problems. Many critics of antidepressants are careful and
sensitive. Many are not. In a few minutes on the internet, it is easy to
find people with big platforms (such as a large Twitter following) who
say antidepressants are a "crutch," or even a poison. This is often tied
to an implied judgment that depression is not an illness. We do not tell
people who use antibiotics for an ear infection to suck it up and bear
their pain, or that they are poisoning themselves. People take
antibiotics for infections to reduce suffering. Call me oldfashioned,
but I think reducing suffering is good. Antibiotic use is bad for you in
some ways, and its overuse is also a real problem. You should not take
antibiotics when you are healthy, or even when you're sick with
something other than a bacterial infection. We should similarly guard
against overuse of antidepressants. They have known drawbacks, and for
many people psychotherapy may be a better option. But different things
work for different people. One of Kramer's patients said of being
without antidepressants: "It's like being forced to move to a country
with no electricity. It's not that humans never lived like that, but in
our world, it's deprivation ..."66 That world increasingly means
literally the whole world.

Antidepressants Go Global "Psychiatric language in Latvia has been
invaded by the diagnosis of depression." -- Vieda Skultans67 The hype
about antidepressants may be more restrained now, but their use
continues to rise. And whether or not depression is an illness of great
antiquity all over the world, antidepressant use is becoming as global
as cigarettes, Coca-Cola, and Oprah. Antidepressants are commodities
that cross cultural frontiers. You can sell them with a body concept
("depression is a chemical imbalance in the brain") or fit the
antidepressants into a local

body concept -- or some combination of the two. Medical anthropologists
have shown how antidepressant use has been made to fit, sometimes
awkwardly, into new cultural spaces. A quarter of a century ago, it was
possible to say that the antidepressant era was "confined to the Western
world."68 Not anymore. Latvia is a Baltic state, a part of the former
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). The Baltic states were among
those most eager for the fall of the USSR and for separation from it.
The downfall of the USSR, though, has led to worsening conditions for
many, especially the vulnerable, such as the elderly, single women with
children, and the disabled and chronically ill.Â The Soviet system, like
some other communist systems, encouraged a somatic view of distress.
Neurasthenia was a common diagnosis.69 Soviet medicine had, though, also
been holistic, looking at affect, bodily experience, and behavior.
Recent medical policy has held that Latvians were over-doctored under
the Soviet regime. The number of specialists has been reduced,
especially psychiatrists and neurologists. Medicine increasingly
addresses the individual, not the social system. Doctors are aware of
the hard lives of their patients, but cannot do much about them.
Conferences organized by pharmaceutical companies promote not only drugs
themselves, but the diagnoses, such as depression, that warrant their
use. Western psychiatry has high social status. Somatic distress is
increasingly seen as somatization, or masked depression. Patients adopt
pharmaceutical language, but antidepressants remain a luxury item,
likened to opera.70 In Latvia's antidepressant era, the dominant view of
distress is individualistic and drug reliant, but the drugs are hard to
get. Depression diagnoses and antidepressant use have also been surging
in Iran since the 1980s. In Iranian collective memory, the surge is
linked to the harrowing effects of the Iran--Iraq war that began with
Iraq's invasion in 1980, and ended with a ceasefire in 1988. Prior to
the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Iranians discussed psychological
distress in poetic or spiritual terms. Some degree of melancholy showed
character and spiritual achievement. Freudian psychoanalysis was used,
but it was not part of medicine. Iranian psychiatry emphasized the
brain. After

the revolution, Freudian thought was further marginalized, because the
state considered it a Westernization. The war legitimized psychiatric
views of suffering, as wars often do. The educated and younger were
quickest to absorb psychiatric language, but gradually psychiatric
discourse seeped deeply into public media. Depression became more than
an illness, but a national character trait. The use of "Prozak" (used to
refer to all antidepressant drugs) became common and an important part
of national discussion. Iranians see the cause of depression as social,
pointing to the long-term traumatic effects of war, but also responsive
to physical treatment. The efficacy of drugs never implied that the
illness was "just chemical." If anything, Iran's age of Prozac looked
more to social explanations for depression than earlier psychiatric
culture in the country.71 Japan is also a place where depression has
become a signature national illness.72 Ironically, it was once one of
the candidates for a place with no depression at all, at least not until
big pharma drummed up depression for consumption. The history is more
complex. Japanese scholars who picked up on Ruth Benedict's contrast
with America argued that Japan lacked depression. Some saw in Benedict
an implication of Western superiority. For these scholars, the more
socially-embedded Japanese self was a cultural achievement, protective
against depression. A medical language of depression as sickness,
including medical words for it, dates back at least to the sixteenth
century in Japan, however. The discourse was based on the concept of ki,
similar to the Chinese chi, a life force flowing through the body. Ki
could, because of changes in things like climate, diet, or lifestyle,
become blocked or stagnant. A gloomy state followed, driving people to
such deep sorrow they became ill or died. In the first Japanese textbook
of internal medicine, a translation from a Dutch one, melancholia
appeared, explained with ki. But Japanese psychiatry began to phase out
melancholia in favor of depression around the time Western psychiatry
did, and became more brain-based, less based on ki. Most of the major
Western physical treatments for mental illness, such as ICT and
Convulsive Therapy, came to Japan within months of their appearance in
Europe.73 Anxiety medications also made inroads.74 Depression was seen
as a hereditary brain disease -- and then became so deeply stigmatized
that

no one in Japan wanted to admit having it. Grounding an illness in the
body is no guarantee against stigma. This picture began to change with
the influence of the antipsychiatry movement in Japan. Antipsychiatry's
influence was brief, but it dislodged the dominance of biology. The
search for alternatives led to the creation of community mental health
centers. As in Western contexts, the reach of psychiatry outside of
large institutions increased treatment of depression. Yet stigma
remained. In order to get patients to take antidepressants, doctors
stressed that depression was a disease, with a biology. A lot of
patients started taking antidepressants. But it seems that when this
happens, disillusionment follows. Doctors were disappointed by patients
who did not recover. Patients became frustrated by the limits of the
biological frame, which ignored so much of what they were going through.
Japan had little tradition of psychotherapy -- Freud had been rejected
as non-scientific. The psychiatric profession lacked an approach
adaptable for more holistic treatment. Treatments developed in the West,
such as the shock treatments, were also introduced into India during the
twentieth century, as was psychoanalysis.75 The antidepressants were
subject to some translation. In Calcutta, psychiatrists describe
antidepressants to patients as food for the mind. In Bengali medical
concepts, the belly is the center of good health. Illness and health are
thought to most deeply involve the digestive system. Direct-toconsumer
advertising is not legal, but drug companies distribute leaflets with
depression symptom checklists and run awareness campaigns, warning that
depression is under-diagnosed. These campaigns have been effective with
doctors, but patients are more resistant. Doctors think that patients
are "bowel obsessed," tending to view health in terms of the digestive
system. Many problems, including hair loss, headaches, impotence, skin
disease, and fatigue, are explained by digestive imbalance. Bengali
psychiatrists also perceive a lot of masked depression. If a patient
complains of GI problems, they look for depression. If they are found,
an antidepressant might be warranted -- and if the GI problems go away,
this might prove that the problem was depression all along. Cultural
differences are important, but can also be exaggerated. Kramer reports
that a lot of his patients also come in with puzzling GI complaints.
They are "employed in unrewarding service jobs, came with stories of

disrupted childhoods, conflict-ridden marriages, workplace abuse, and
money troubles. They experienced their problems as physical." These
patients, he finds, often do well on tricyclics.76 Still, Kramer
probably did not have to compare Prozac to food to convince his patients
to try it. In Calcutta, doctors only bring up brain chemistry to compare
it with food metabolism. Diabetes has also been on the rise in India,
and the diabetes/depression comparison is popular with doctors to
encourage taking drugs.77 Western psychiatric language and methods can
influence other idioms and traditions without displacing them. In
Kerala, far on the other side of India, depression and tension are
increasingly used as a way to describe distress, though older ideas such
as possession retain power. The idea of depression as a neurochemical
imbalance, though, is considered compatible with older Ayurvedic ideas
of imbalances and blockages of channels. The Ayurvedic texts also held
that there were inborn predispositions to mental illness. The study of
classic Ayurvedic texts, reread in biopsychiatric terms, is a part of
the training of Ayurvedic psychiatric doctors. They do not consider the
texts outdated by biopsychiatry, but rather as anticipating it. The
validity of the texts is demonstrated by their compatibility.78
Introduction of antidepressants into new cultural settings produces
varied results, just as their use in individuals does. Some
commonalities emerge, though. One is the pressure to use Western
psychiatric language.79 Western psychiatry is associated with progress
and science in many areas -- perhaps more than in the West itself.
Prevailing local body concepts, though, often prove to be resilient.
But, whether because they are able to fit the drugs to their existing
concepts, or simply because they feel better, many take the medicines
anyway. Diagnosis and drug use are in a reciprocal relationship. If the
drugs are antidepressants, and the drugs are prescribed, the diagnosis
of depression needs to be used. Antidepressants did not create
depression, but the rise of the diagnosis is tied to the world the drugs
helped create. We should not lose sight of how much that upward spiral
may relieve suffering. It's possible, as critics argue, that many people
may be taking medicines they do not really need, and might be better
without, though people who have unwanted effects that outweigh benefits
can stop taking the drugs, as many

do. Many others, though, may be freed from misery they had been enduring
for years.

After Prozac: New Biopsychiatry of Depression The biological science of
depression continues to make uneven progress. Current biological
psychiatry combines hopeful new developments, disappointment, and
caution. The hope comes from new causal theories and new exploratory
treatments. The disappointment comes from knowing the unfulfilled
promise of the late twentieth-century research, which did not yield the
level of discovery that was hoped for: not in genetics, not in brain
science, and not in drug development. The caution comes from knowing
that hopes were over-hyped. Critics of psychiatry sometimes see the
present uncertainty and say that all the biological research and
pharmacology has gotten us nowhere. I disagree. The observations
stimulated in the beginning by the effects of MAOIs and tricyclics led
to a lot of new knowledge. The new knowledge led to some
simplifications. The simplification probably led to an unfortunate
devaluing of psychotherapy. That was a cost, but does not mean the new
knowledge was worthless. The disillusionment itself is a kind of
progress. It reminds us that depression is complex. Claims that a single
cause will explain depression are rare in current research. Psychiatry
now has no unified theory of depression with the prestige the
psychoanalytic view once held, or the catecholamine hypothesis
afterwards. This is healthy. Research articles on the neurobiology of
depression do not claim that life events and social factors are
unimportant. And the reverse: little research on the sociology or
psychology of depression dismisses biology. The challenge remains to see
how everything interacts. That challenge will never be met if any of
these domains are dismissed as irrelevant. Some newer biological
theories on depression link it to inflammation; disruptions in
neuroendocrine mechanisms beginning in fetal development; and problems
in the gut microbiome.80 New physical treatments for depression include
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which seeks to

mimic the effects of ECT with fewer adverse effects.81 Psychedelic drugs
are also getting renewed attention as treatments for depression and
other mental illnesses. Some non-Western medical traditions have long
used psychedelic substances therapeutically, just as many have used
plants that do similar work to the antipsychotics.82 After it was first
synthesized in a laboratory, LSD was developed as a psychiatric drug,
before it became the recreational drug of the 1960s counter-culture. LSD
stimulates a serotonin receptor in the brain.83 In its early days, it
was hoped to enhance self-awareness and recollection, making
psychotherapy easier. By 1965, over a thousand studies reported
therapeutic promise from LSD.84 Ketamine, which is also used
recreationally, is a psychedelic that is receiving a lot of attention
for depression treatment.85 Ketamine seems to work quickly, in a matter
of hours or days instead of the weeks most antidepressants usually take
to have effect, and may also be effective in patients for whom other
treatments have failed. A derivative, esketamine, was approved for use
in 2019 by the FDA, and sold by Janssen Pharmaceuticals as Spavato -- a
nasal spray. How good Spavato is remains to be seen. The history of
somatic treatments for mental illness counsels caution. If we rush to
hail a treatment as a miracle cure, we have learned nothing from
history. Efficacy is often overstated when a treatment is new, and
adverse effects are not always apparent right away. Only one of
Janssen's three clinical trials for Spavato showed an advantage over
placebo, and the difference was small.86 And as with previous
antidepressants, it does not cure depression; relapse after
discontinuation is common.87 Some critics say that the FDA approval was
rushed.88 Same as it ever was. Despite progress in psychological and
biological knowledge -- in classical antiquity, in the Middle Ages, in
early modernity, in modernity, in the heyday of psychoanalysis, to the
antidepressant era -- depression has presented a multi-faceted problem.
Inborn characteristics, lifestyle, and life events all have a role in
the genesis of illness, and all may be relevant to treatment. The era of
reductionisms, physical or psychological, may be coming to an end. One
can hope. A summary of the antidepressant era might say: a new treatment
for depression was developed, in the form of antidepressant drugs. The

treatment had some variations, but the variations were based on shared
premises. The treatment was widely perceived to be effective, by both
doctors and patients. A theory was offered about what causes depression,
but it had only modest empirical support. The excitement over the
treatment led to some inflated claims, both about causes and treatment.
Some clinicians began to use the treatment to the exclusion of all
others. After some of the inflated claims failed to match reality,
backlash followed. While some felt disillusionment with treatment they
thought was good, critics came to see the treatment as worthless at
best, or a positive evil.89 If the treatment was indeed worthless, the
money being spent on it was an enormous waste. The arc of this story may
sound familiar. It is the same arc as we saw in chapter 3, which also
showed how a new treatment for depression was developed, psychoanalytic
psychotherapy. It too had some variations, though based on shared
premises. Doctors and patients thought the treatment was effective.
Psychoanalysis also offered theories about what causes depression, but
those theories also had modest empirical support. Enthusiasm led to
inflated claims. And, as would happen again with the rise of
antidepressants, some clinicians used psychoanalytic therapy to the
exclusion of all others. Backlash followed when the more inflated claims
for psychoanalysis fell short of reality. Some felt only disillusionment
with psychoanalytic therapy, but critics came to see the treatment as
worthless at best -- or a positive evil. If the treatment was indeed
worthless, the money being spent on it, too, was an enormous waste. One
theory about how psychotherapy works is that patients are locked into
repeatedly telling the same story about themselves -- about their
loneliness, or their victimization, for example. The therapy helps
patients see that they do not have to repeat the same story. They can
tell new stories of their lives. History can have a similar role. When
new treatments are developed, we can be more realistic about their
empirical basis. We do not have to overhype them, or discard older
knowledge about what helps. We can be wary of claims that the treatment
is harmless. We do not have to live the same story, time after time.

From Brain to Person

Virginia Woolf struggled for years with a mood disorder before taking
her life by drowning in 1941. Two years after her essay marking the date
human nature changed, Woolf wrote an essay, "On Being Ill," in which she
observed that illness was seldom a subject of writing. Illness had an
embarrassing quality that made it hard to render in a public forum.
Perhaps in the 1920s. Not in the age of Prozac. A flood of published
depression memoirs has appeared in the last 30 years or so. Depression
is not the only illness people have been writing about. Illness memoirs
of all kinds have been coming out in large numbers. The interest in
these narratives is a reaction to several strands of modern medical
history: advanced medical technology that heightens distance between
clinicians and patient; a research culture that sees illness in numbers
more than individuals; a profit-driven medical system that hinders long
office visits. Technology and statistical research can bring a lot of
benefits. They do not hear the complex stories sick people have about
their bodies and lives. Neither does a doctor under pressure to see as
many patients in a day as possible. Insurance companies certainly do
not. You are lucky if you can get someone on the phone to fix a billing
error. I doubt, though, that we have seen as many memoirs for any
ailment as we have for depression. In part, this reflects the nature of
the ailment. Terminal ailments yield few memoirs, for obvious reasons.
Depression can be fatal, but it usually is not. Certain ailments, like
schizophrenia and Alzheimer's disease, make writing hard (though we do
have memoirs even of these). Mild or short-lived illnesses are not
typically thought worthy of autobiography. They are also not usually a
part of one's sense of self, as depression often is. And the age of
Prozac is also an age when depression is a cultural preoccupation. The
memoirs ask the questions this book has asked and give them an
autobiographical cast: Do I have an ancient and universal ailment, or is
my diagnosis a cultural fad? What makes my illness real, what does it
even mean for an illness to be real? Does my suffering come from psychic
traumas I suffered, or my chemistry? If chemistry, does talk therapy
have a role in my recovery? If trauma, do medications have a role in my
recovery? Who or what am I, if a pill can change how I feel about life
itself? What are the financial, social, and personal costs of these
medications? The memoirs

show that having depression means not only to suffer from an ailment. It
is to live these questions on a daily basis.

Notes 1. Daphne Merkin, This Close to Happy: A Reckoning with Depression
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2017), 16. 2. Quoted in Midelfort,
A History of Madness in Sixteenth-Century Germany, 91. 3. Virginia
Woolf, "Mr.Â Bennett and Mrs.Â Brown,"
http://www.columbia.edu/\~em36/MrBennettAndMrsBrown.pdf, accessed
October 31, 2019, originally published 1924. 4. Mark Ruffalo, "The Story
of Prozac: A Landmark Drug in Psychiatry," Psychology Today (March 1,
2020). 5. I love this point, but it's not mine, but Katie
Kilroy-Marac's. 6. Solomon, The Noonday Demon, 22. 7. See, for example,
Carol P. Weingarten and Timothy J. Strauman, "Neuroimaging for
Psychotherapy Research: Current Trends," Psychotherapy Research 25, 2
(March 2015) 185--213. 8. Alison Karasz and Liza Watkins, "Conceptual
Models of Treatment in Depressed Hispanic Patients," Annals of Family
Medicine 4, 6 (November/December 2006) 527--33; Sushrut Jadhav, Mitchell
G. Weiss, and Roland Littlewood, "Cultural Experience of Depression
among White Britons in London," Anthropology and Medicine 8, 1 (2001)
47--69. 9. Sadowsky, Electroconvulsive Therapy in America; Sadowsky,
"Somatic Treatments." 10. For more on the physical treatments for mental
illness that preceded widespread use of psychopharmaceuticals, both
those covered here and some others, see Braslow, Mental Ills and Bodily
Cures; Sadowsky, "Somatic Treatments."

11. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 57--9. 12. There is a large historiography
of lobotomy. See Elliott S. Valenstein, Great and Desperate Cures: The
Rise and Decline of Psychosurgery and Other Radical Treatments for
Mental Illness (New York: Basic Books, 1986); Braslow, Mental Ills and
Bodily Cures, chs.Â 6 and 7; Jack D. Pressman, Last Resort: Psychosurgery
and the Limits of Medicine (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998); Mical Raz, The Lobotomy Letters: The Making of American
Psychosurgery (Rochester: University of Rochester Press, 2013); Jenell
Johnson, American Lobotomy: A Rhetorical History (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2014). 13. Nicolas Rasmussen, On Speed: The Many
Lives of Amphetamine (New York: New York University Press, 2008). 14.
The discussion of ECT that follows largely draws on my Electroconvulsive
Therapy in America. See also Timothy Kneeland and Carol A. B. Warren,
Pushbutton Psychiatry: A History of Electroshock in America (Westport:
Praeger Publishers, 2002) and Edward Shorter and David Healy, Shock
Therapy: A History of Electroconvulsive Treatment in Mental Illness (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2007). 15. Karen V. Kukil, ed., The
Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath, 1950-- 1962 (New York: Anchor
Books, 2000), 455. 16. Sylvia Plath, The Bell Jar (New York: Bantam
Books, 1971, originally published 1963), 118. 17. Harrington, Mind
Fixers, 102. 18. Ibid., 102--4. 19. Malaria Fever Therapy is the only
truly curative one. 20. Sheldon Gelman, Medicating Schizophrenia: A
History (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1999). 21. More recent
research looks at the possibility that abnormalities in the receptors of
the neurotransmitters matter, not just the availability of the

transmitters. Stephen M. Stahl, Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 262--6. 22. The most detailed
accounts of the history of psychopharmacology are David Healy's The
Creation of Psychopharmacology (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1992) and The Anti-Depressant Era (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1997). 23. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 191--2. 24. Nathan Kline usually
gets most of the credit for the use of MAOIs as antidepressants, but
there was some dispute about this. Healy, The Antidepressant Era,
68--71. 25. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 192--3. 26. Stahl, Stahl's
Essential Psychopharmacology, 327. 27. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 194. 28.
Several changes since the early days of MAOIs make them less risky now,
including a patch the patient can wear to mitigate adverse effects. 29.
Valenstein, Blaming the Brain, 39. 30. Harrington, Mind Fixers, 194--5.
As with Kline and MAOIs, there is some question as to whether Kuhn
deserves all or most of the credit for identifying imipramine as an
antidepressant. Healy, The Antidepressant Era, 52. 31. Healy, The
Antidepressant Era, 53. 32. Shorter, Before Prozac. 33. J. Alexander and
Jessica GÃ¶ren, "Not Obsolete: Continuing Roles for TCAs and MAOIs,"
Psychiatric Times 24, 10 (September 15, 2007). 34. Ibid. 35. Valenstein,
Blaming the Brain, 71. 36. Ibid., 72; Alexander and GÃ¶ren, "Not
Obsolete."

37. Alexander and GÃ¶ren, "Not Obsolete." 38. Joseph Schildkraut, "The
Catecholamine Hypothesis of Affective Disorders: A Review of the
Supporting Evidence," American Journal of Psychiatry 122, 5 (November
1965) 509--22. 39. Joseph J. Schildkraut, "The Catecholamine Hypothesis:
Before and Thereafter,"
http://inhn.org/fileadmin/user_upload/User_Uploads/INHN/FILES/BAN
\_OF_BULLETIN_14\_\_2_THE_CATECHOLAMINE_HYPOTHESIS\_*1*.pdf, accessed
October 26, 2019. 40. Valenstein, Blaming the Brain, 72. 41. Lauren
Slater, Blue Dreams: The Science and the Story of the Drugs That Changed
Our Minds (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 2018), 159. 42. Stahl, Stahl's
Essential Psychopharmacology, 269; Cathy Spatz Wilson, Kimberly DuMont,
and Sally J. Czaja, "A Prospective Investigation of Major Depressive
Disorder and Comorbidity in Abused and Neglected Children Grown Up,"
Archives of General Psychiatry 64 (2007) 49--56. 43. Levinson and
Nichols, "Genetics of Depression," 301--2; Falk W. Lohoff, "Overview of
the Genetics of Major Depressive Disorder," Current Psychiatry Reports
12, 6 (2010) 539--46. 44. Douglas F. Levinson, "The Genetics of
Depression: A Review," Biological Psychiatry 60, 2 (2006) 84--92. 45.
Meredith Platt, Storming the Gates of Bedlam: How Dr.Â Nathan Kline
Transformed the Treatment of Mental Illness (Dumont, NJ: DePew
Publishing, 2012), 8. 46. Jason Schnittker, "An Uncertain Revolution:
Why the Rise of a Genetic Model of Mental Illness Has Not Increased
Tolerance," Social Science & Medicine 67, 9 (November 2008), 1370--81;
Patrick W. Corrigan and Amy C. Watson, "At Issue: Stop the Stigma: Call
Mental Illness a Brian Disease," Schizophrenia Bulletin 30, 3 (2004)
477--9.

47. Peter Kramer, Listening to Prozac: A Psychiatrist Explores
Antidepressant Drugs and the Remaking of the Self (New York: Penguin
Books, 1993), xiv. 48. Callahan and Berrios, Reinventing Depression,
147. 49. Eric J. Nestler, "New Approaches for Treating Depression," in
Charney et al., Charney and Nestler's Neurobiology of Mental Illness,
378. 50. For work in this vein, see Ian Dowbiggin, The Quest for Mental
Health (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), and some of the
essays in Carl Elliott and Tod Chambers, eds., Prozac As A Way of Life
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004). 51. Laurie
Zoloth, "Care of the Dying in America," in Elliott and Chambers, Prozac
As A Way of Life. 52. Valenstein, Blaming the Brain, 96. 53. See for
example, Kelli Maria Korducki, "It's Not Just a Chemical Imbalance," The
New York Times July 27, 2019,
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/27/opinion/sunday/its-not-just-achemical-imbalance.html?
action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype=Homepage, accessed July 28, 2019. 54.
Erick H. Turner, Annette M. Matthews, Eftihia Linardatos, Robert A.
Tell, and Robert Rosenthal, "Selective Publication of Antidepressant
Trials and Its Influence on Apparent Efficacy," New England Journal of
Medicine 358 (January 17, 2008) 252--60. 55. Hirshbein, American
Melancholy, 37. 56. Greenberg, Manufacturing Depression, 215--26. 57.
Joanna Moncrieff, The Myth of the Chemical Cure: A Critique of
Psychiatric Drug Treatment (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 139.
See also Greenberg, Manufacturing Depression, 8. 58. Moncrieff, Myth of
the Chemical Cure, 20, 138.

59. Stahl, Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology, 285. 60. B. Timothy
Walsh, Stuart N. Seidman, Robyn Sysko, and Madelyn Gould, "Placebo
Response in Studies of Major Depression: Variable, Substantial, and
Growing," Journal of the American Medical Association 287, 14 (April 10,
2002) 1840--7. 61. Personal Communication, August 14, 2019. 62. These
are the animating questions of Irving Kirsch, The Emperor's New Drugs,
in my view one of the smartest critiques of antidepressant trials,
though much of Kirsch's book is devoted to showing that the placebo
effect is real, which I don't think is in serious question. 63. In The
Emperor's New Drugs, Kirsch concedes that the tailoring effect might
explain this gap, but counters reasonably that it is the job of the drug
producers to prove that their products work, not his to prove beyond
doubt that they do not. Clinical trials rarely test individual patients
on a series of different drugs. A large study called STAR\*D tracked
patients on different medications, and found that patients with more
treatment-resistant depression can improve if different treatments are
tried or added on. The odds of success declined with every additional
treatment strategy, though. Some depressions are just hard to treat.
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/funding/clinicalresearch/practical/stard/allmedicationlevels.shtml,
accessed October 14, 2019. 64. Peter Kramer makes these arguments in
Ordinarily Well: The Case for Antidepressants. He also points out that
other researchers did their own analyses of Kirsch's data and had
different results. Kirsch included trials of the drug Serzone, which
fared poorly and is not used now. Kramer agrees that the placebo effect
complicates the picture, and says we need more studies with active
placebos -- placebos that have effects, but are not antidepressants. 65.
This point is also stressed in Shorter, Before Prozac, but only to
support the use of MAOIs and tricyclics, not SSRIs. 66. Kramer,
Ordinarily Well, 167.

67. Vieda Skultans, "From Damaged Nerves to Masked Depression:
Inevitability and Hope in Latvian Psychiatric Narratives," Social
Science and Medicine 56 (2003) 2421--31. 68. Healy, The Creation of
Psychopharmacology, 66, quote on p.Â 372. 69. Corina Dubos, "Psychiatry
and Ideology: The Emergence of 'Asthenic Neurosis' in Communist
Romania," in Sarah Marks and Mat Savelli, eds., Psychiatry in Communist
Europe (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2015). 70. My account is based on
Skultans, "From Damaged Nerves to Masked Depression." Mat Savelli and
Sarah Marks note that Soviet psychiatry was anti-Freudian, avoiding
stress on early childhood, and placing emphasis on social and physical
environment. Sarah Marks and Mat Savelli, "Communist Europe and
Transnational Psychiatry," in Marks and Savelli, eds., Psychiatry in
Communist Europe. 71. Orkideh Behrouzan, Prozak Diaries: Psychiatry and
Generational Memory in Iran (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2016).
72. Except where noted, my account of Japan is based on Kitanaka,
Depression in Japan. 73. Akihito Suzuki, "Global Theory, Local Practice:
Shock Therapies in Japanese Psychiatry, 1920--1945," in Waltraud Ernst
and Thomas Mueller, eds., Transnational Psychiatries: Social and
Cultural Histories of Psychiatry in Comparative Perspective,
c.Â 1800--2000 (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,
2010). 74. Healy, The Creation of Psychopharmacology, 66. 75. Waltraud
Ernst, "Practicing 'Colonial' or 'Modern' Psychiatry in British India?
Treatments at the Indian Mental Hospital at Ranchi, 1925--1940," in
Ernst and Mueller, eds., Transnational Psychiatries. 76. Kramer,
Ordinarily Well, 67--8. 77. Stefan Ecks, Eating Drugs:
Psychopharmaceutical Pluralism in India (New York: New York University
Press, 2014).

78. Claudia Lang and Eva Jansen, "Appropriating Depression:
Biomedicalizing Ayurvedic Psychiatry in Kerala, India," Medical
Anthropology 32, 1 (2013) 25--45. 79. Jadhav, "The Cultural Construction
of Western Depression," 42. 80. Caroline MÃ©nard, Madeline L. Pfau,
Georgia E. Hodes, and Scott J. Russo, "Immune Mechanisms of Depression,"
in Charney et al., Charney and Nestler's Neurobiology of Mental Illness;
Jill M. Goldstein, L. Holsen, S. Cherkerzian, M. Misra, and R. J.
Handra, "Neuroendocrine Mechanisms of Depression" in Charney et al.,
Charney and Nestler's Neurobiology of Mental Illness. 81. See Sarah H.
Lisanby, ed., Brain Stimulation in Psychiatric Treatment (Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004). 82. Jamilah R. George,
Timothy I. Michaels, Jae Sevelius, and Monica T. Williams, "The
Psychedelic Renaissance and the Limitations of a Whitedominant Medical
Framework: A Call for Indigenous and Ethnic Minority Inclusion," Journal
of Psychedelic Studies 4, 1 (2020) 4--15. 83. "LSD Alters Perception Via
Serotonin Receptors," Science News, January 26, 2017,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/01/170126123127.htm, accessed
October 30, 2019. Links between LSD and the serotonin system have been
known for decades; see Healy, The Creation of Psychopharmacology, 106.
84. Franz X. Vollenweider and Michael Kometer, "The Neurobiology of
Psychedelic Drugs: Implications for the Treatment of Mood Disorders,"
Nature Reviews, Neuroscience 11 (2010) 642--51. 85. Ibid. On the
medicinal origins of LSD, see Erica Dyck, Psychedelic Psychiatry: LSD
from Clinic to Campus (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
2008). 86. William Ralston, "Has Eskatamine Been Vastly Overhyped?"
Gentleman's Quarterly, July 20, 2019. 87. Vollenweider and Kometer, "The
Neurobiology of Psychedelic Drugs."

88. Erick H. Turner, "Eskatamine for Treatment-Resistant Depression:
Seven Concerns about Efficacy and FDA Approval," The Lancet, October 31,
2019. 89. Moncrieff, Myth of the Chemical Cure; Johann Hari, Lost
Connections: Uncovering the Real Causes of Depression -- And the
Unexpected Solutions (New York: Bloomsbury, 2018).

6 Darkness Legible "Professor Higashi often emphasizes that depression
lies at the 'limit of language' ... \[and\] creates a fundamental
disruption in the sense of self." -- Junko Kitanaka, Depression in
Japan1 "You feel the thinness of your identity." -- Bruce Springsteen,
Born To Run2

Mood and Metaphor "Bell jar. noun: a bell-shaped usually glass vessel
designed to cover objects or to contain gases or a vacuum."3 In The Bell
Jar, Plath chose an odd image. Metaphors often make something strange
more accessible, by comparing it to something more familiar. "This is
your brain on drugs" -- we have all seen an egg frying, and we know that
it will change, harden. Once in its new form, it cannot be changed back.
The campaign was a gut-level appeal, to make vivid the risks of
recreational drug use. You cannot see your brain on drugs, so their
dangerous effects may seem remote. Depression is also hard to
understand. Certainly, many who have had it feel that others just don't
get it. Yet when Sylvia Plath tried to render it, she compared it to
being under an obscure scientific instrument, something few will
encounter. Plath's image, a vessel designed to contain a vacuum, has a
certain power, though. It expresses a sense of suffocation, as well as
the "portability" of depression -- you are stuck with it wherever you
go. As the protagonist Esther Greenwood says, "on the deck of a ship or
at a street cafÃ© in Paris or Bangkok -- I would be sitting under the
same glass bell jar, stewing in my own sour air."4

But while it is a powerful image, it is still an obscure one. Maybe that
is the point. A familiar image might be too tame for this beastly
illness. An image from everyday life would risk exactly what people with
depression want to avoid -- the impression that the monster they fight
is like everyone else's bad mood. And while metaphors can help to convey
the unfamiliar, they can themselves become overly familiar -- does
Churchill's image of a "black dog" help anyone understand depression?
Plath was expert at pushing language to the rawness of life, as in the
stark and musical Ariel poems, written shortly before her suicide. In
the novel, she uses metaphor to explain metaphor, heaping images one on
another: To the person in the bell jar, blank and stopped as a dead
baby, the world itself is the bad dream.5 Any questions?

The Depression Memoir as Genre and Source I began with a scene from
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's novel, Americanah. The debate between Ifemelu
and her physician aunt Uju dramatizes complex issues swirling around
depression: is it a real illness? How much do depression diagnoses
medicalize distress, and how much do they helpfully name medical
problems? The depression memoirs of recent years wrestle with the same
questions. A major theme has been: do not confuse my illness with your
bad mood: I have a real illness. The urgency of the message may explain
the explosion of depression memoirs. And yet, many of the authors
confess that it is not just those around them who fail to see their
illness and its reality. Often, they have trouble recognizing it
themselves. Styron's Darkness Visible came out in 1990.6 By that time,
medical interest in depression had been growing for four decades and
Prozac was newlyapproved. A memoir of the illness by an already-famous
author was bound to get a lot of attention, and it did. After Styron,
deluge. These books command interest as documents of an era marked by
the rise of depression and antidepressants.

What kind of stories do they tell? Arthur Frank argues that illness
narratives can be divided into three types. The first is the restitution
narrative: the sick person's self and well-being are restored by
successful treatment or remission. The second is the quest narrative:
the illness provides the sufferer with a new sense of purpose. The third
is chaos -- no clear path -- the illness is not conquered, and provides
no redemptive meaning.7 Depression memoirs contain elements of all three
of these. The majority contain elements of restitution. Most of the
writers found a treatment that gave relief and convey a sense of hope.
Many of them also found purpose, writing in the hopes of educating the
nondepressed about what it is like, conveying to others with depression
that they are not alone, that they are seen and understood, and showing
solutions. Yet the majority of them also contain a lot of what Frank
calls chaos. Most lack a clear sense of resolution. The chaos stems from
two problems. First, depression has no reliable cure. Some people get a
treatment, feel better, and that is the end of it, but they are not
typical. Treatments often provide relief, often immense, but depression
usually lingers or recurs. Second, the treatments become problems
themselves. They have adverse effects, some can be hard to quit, and in
some cases, they disrupt the patient's sense of self as much as the
illness. Some of the memoirs are even ambivalent towards recovery.
Norman Endler's Holiday of Darkness (1982), is an exception. Written
before depression memoirs became common, it is a "clean" restitution
narrative. Endler, a psychologist then in his forties, had some setbacks
-- failure to get a grant he wanted, a rejection from a woman from whom
he wanted greater intimacy. His symptoms seemed out of proportion to
these losses, though. He lost motivation and hope, and often went to the
bathroom to cry, until he sought treatment. When other therapies failed,
he tried ECT, which was, for him, a miracle cure. Endler's story also
has elements of the quest narrative, as he finds purpose in telling of
his recovery through a feared treatment. A type of narrative Frank does
not consider is also visible: conversion. Endler had not only shared the
common fear of ECT, but had a professional distaste for it, having seen
it used on howling patients without anesthesia during his training. He
overcame his fear, however, and was blessed by recovery.8 He became an
ECT evangelist -- not the first or last patient in ECT history to do so.
Many accounts of ECT, including those that express appreciation for its
therapeutic power, also express sorrow at

memory losses. Endler, though, gives an account of robust cure, with
minimal side effects.9 Few depression memoirs have such a spotless happy
ending. While hope is not the whole story of depression in these
memoirs, it is usually a part of it. The memoirs document steep
challenge, often to the point of despair, but also paths out, even for
some of the most afflicted. The memoirs have limitations as historical
sources. Their authors may not be typical depression patients, at least
not in all respects. Severe depression is incapacitating. How many
severely depressed people lack the will to make it to the keyboard
anyway? What about those who simply don't have the skills or resources
to write? Bias toward stories of at least partial recovery is likely.
People who have gotten better may have both more motivation and more
capacity to write. Publishers also might prefer stories of redemption
and hope. The memoirs are also written mostly by middleclass White
people, many of them mental health professionals. This is a serious
limitation, since poverty and other forms of adversity increase the risk
of depression. The authors are also mostly middle-aged. We hear little
from children or the elderly in depression memoirs. All historical
sources, though, have limitations. Archives only contain the record
people thought worthy of preserving. Newspapers only document what
editors thought was news. Oral history is limited by who is available
and willing to talk to you. The depression memoir may not provide a
complete record of the experience of depression in our era, but it
provides a valuable one. Historians would treasure a cache of
first-person narratives like this for most any illness, at any time in
history. These memoirists want us to know what it was like for them.
Their urgent agenda is to have their illness seen. Despite the torrent
of attention to depression over the past 100 years, and even more over
the last 40, many sufferers find their anguish invisible, misread, or
dismissed. And if the memoirists have one message they all wish to
convey it is this: those who have not had it just don't understand. And
what they don't understand, above all, is that depression is an illness.

You Don't Get It

Styron's openness about his illness in Darkness Visible is honored for
helping to decrease depression stigma. Many have said how splendidly it
conveys the experience of depression. Yet it has an odd vagueness. Even
as Styron tries to describe depression, he keeps saying it is impossible
to do so. Early in the book, Styron says the illness is "very close to
being beyond description,"10 and repeatedly says we will not understand
if we have not had it. For him, he said, it was "most closely connected
to drowning or suffocation -- but even those images are off the mark."11
A renowned wordsmith, Styron is saying that words fail him. We know
Styron felt awful. We learn little about what he was thinking and doing
through the anguish. Styron's title refers to vision, but he himself is
somewhat invisible. Psychoanalyst Darian Leader says that historical
case reports and clinical practice both often reveal that depressives
need to express their state, but find language inadequate.12 In Prozac
Diary (1998), Lauren Slater says: "How do you describe emptiness?"13 The
resistance to description is not only about the poverty of language for
certain inner states. It is an argument of its own, an argument for the
realness and seriousness of depression. In one passage, Styron laments
that the word depression is a "wimp" of a word for such a beastly
experience.14 The weakness of the word is partly in its ambiguity,
referring to illness and mood. As Tracy Thompson says in The Beast
(1996), "a person who says they're 'depressed' could mean they had a
fender bender on the way to work, or that they might get a gun and shoot
their self."15 The word "cancer" is scary because we know that people
who get cancer are often sick indeed, and it is not something everyone
gets. No one has a few blue days of having a passing cancer because
their pet died. This is one of the most urgent messages in depression
memoirs: I have an illness, not a bad mood. If you got over your bad
mood by "taking charge of your life," or ramping up your exercise
regime, or getting out more, I am here to tell you that your recovery by
those measures shows that you did not have the illness. You had a bad
mood with the same name. We can blame Adolf Meyer. Styron did.16

Getting Real

"I found myself looking for a real ailment." -- Elizabeth Wurtzel17 I
assigned Daphne Merkin's depression memoir, This Close to Happy (2017)
to my class on depression.18 It came late in the course, after the
students had looked at all the problems I have posed in this book:
challenges posed by cross-cultural study of depression, melancholia in
earlier eras, psychoanalytic theories, the rise of psychopharmacology.
The class was versed in critiques of depression as an illness category
-- and the students largely rejected them. Several were open about their
own depression and treatment for it. I advise students to be cautious
about selfdisclosure, but in class I often learn things such as what
medications they are on, which ones those are replacing, and how long
they have been in treatment. To my surprise, many of them found Merkin's
book, which I found brisk and engaging, to be off-putting. Merkin grew
up in an affluent Manhattan family, and from a material point of view
had every advantage. Several students were annoyed to see a privileged
person suffering so much. What does she have to complain about? This
went on for a few minutes, until one student asked, would we be
resenting her wealth so much if this were a cancer memoir? Would we be
saying, what business does she have, getting cancer in the midst of
affluence?19 The story shows how fraught depression remains as an
illness category even now, decades into the antidepressant era, with the
World Health Organization naming it a serious global public health
problem. Wurtzel's Prozac Nation (1994) addressed this problem at
length. Prozac Nation is partly a response to Styron, whose book she
found restrained and lacking candor.20 Wurtzel's narrative is powerful
in its lack of inhibition. She knows that not everything she reveals
about her thoughts or her choices are attractive, and this candor makes
her story vivid. Yet she shares with Styron an urgent need to express
the reality of illness, its discontinuity from normal life experience:

That's the thing I want to make clear about depression: It's got nothing
to do with life. In the course of life there is sadness and pain and
sorrow, all of which, in their right time and season, are normal --
unpleasant, but normal. Depression is in an altogether different zone
because it involves a complete absence: absence of affect, absence of
feeling, absence of response, absence of interest. The pain you feel in
the course of a major clinical depression is an attempt on nature's part
(nature, after all, abhors a vacuum) to fill up the empty space.21 The
rest of the book tells a different story, though. Her depression had a
lot to do with her life: her harried and sometimes unavailable mother,
her distant father, and the pain of being in the middle during their
divorce. In her depressions, she also felt plenty of affect. Sadness,
despair, sometimes rage -- not all blankness. So why does Wurtzel insist
that depression is not about life? She wants to make clear that
depression belongs to the realm of sickness. Wurtzel uses the word
"clinical" to modify "depression." If the status as illness were secure,
you would not need to. No one speaks of "clinical tuberculosis" or
"clinical cancer." The skepticism that depressed people have to endure
about the reality of illness is acute when they do not seem outwardly
depressed, or when their lives do not seem to warrant it. Think of how
much trouble people had trying to reconcile Robin Williams's suicide
with his public persona. In Running Uphill (2007), Lora Inman says
someone told her that she could not be depressed, since she was
attractive and smart, and had a great husband and home.22 Merkin adds
that depression does not "look" crazy.23 The memoirists say repeatedly,
no, I can't just "cheer up," go for a run, clean my room, or simply will
it away, in order to "snap out of it." Merkin suggests that when people
say you should get a massage or take a yoga class, they are really
expressing their own boredom and impatience: "Just don't go on and on
about it, is what they don't say."24 Merkin thinks they may also be
defending themselves against "catching" the despair. Some of these
measures, such as exercising, may help, but saying that they are all
that is necessary misreads the illness. People who say exercise more, or
have a more positive attitude, or go into the woods and get in touch
with nature, may be expressing their own solutions to bad moods well.
They

have not, though, been in a chasm so deep these measures could not pull
them out. What makes them so sure their advice works for everyone? What
makes them so sure that what was a bad mood for them is not an illness
requiring treatment for others?25 Some sufferers of depression have
their own doubts about realness. The widely-held belief that illness
always has a clear physical sign may be internalized.26 So might the
suspicion that what is really going on is a failure of will and
character. Tracy Thompson's depression was bad enough for
hospitalization, but once admitted, she looked at her fellow patients
and wondered: "Were these people really ill, the same way that having
diabetes or a brain tumor made you ill?"27 In Skating to Antarctica
(1997), Jenny Diski saw her depression as illness, requiring medical
attention, but also struggled to see where it departed from the
not-illness in her life. Where did her dour personality end and sickness
begin?28 Gillian Marchenko (Still Life, 2016), was bed-ridden for months
at a time, lost interest in everything she had cared about, withdrew
from her social life, and had suicidal ideation. Marchenko had been
through post-partum depression three times, and two of her children have
serious disabilities. "It's a lot, right? So, is it a depression or a
challenging life?"29 Where did her adversity end and her illness begin?
Sally Brampton, whose Shoot the Damn Dog (2008) is a record of a severe,
treatment-resistant depression, had to reassure herself that she was
sick: "I still had a place to live, money from a redundancy payout, a
child I adored, friends I loved, work if I wanted it. What right did I
have to be depressed?"30 Imagine feeling you have no right to the pain
you are in. Several textual tactics show realness, to push back against
people who tell them to "get their act together." The tactics of
realness include analogy to other ailments (no one expects someone with
a serious physical illness to "pull themselves together"), reference to
physical process (if it is biochemical, exerting will may not be an
option), and appeal to antiquity (people have been calling this an
illness for millennia, so it is not just the normal blue moods of life).
Marchenko found validation simply in the name "Major Depressive
Disorder," which sounded more like a real biomedical problem than
"depression."

Styron used medical analogy, stressing that depression can be as serious
as diabetes or cancer.31 Meri Nana-Ama Danquah faced a doubled stigma as
a Black woman. Some told her that having depression was inconsistent
with the strength Black women are supposed to have. In Willow, Weep for
Me: A Black Woman's Journey Through Depression (1998) she tells of
acquaintances who said things like, "What do you have to be depressed
about? If our people could make it through slavery, we can make it
through anything."32 She responded that "depression, in its most basic,
clinical form, is biochemical. It is an illness."33 Or as Inman puts it,
"Many people still seem to believe you can just 'pull yourself
together.' They don't understand that it is a chemical imbalance ... it
is a physical disorder."34 Thompson appealed to the biochemical too, but
also to history. She liked reading Stanley Jackson's history of
depression, because it drew a continuous line from the melancholia of
antiquity to the depression of the age of Prozac.35 If it is so old, it
must be real. These appeals to analogy, biochemistry, and history serve
a pressing purpose. We should imagine, though, what it would be like if
they were not necessary. Depression may be like other illnesses, it may
be a biochemical process, it may have great antiquity. What if not,
though? Would it then be OK to dismiss the suffering? What if we could
imagine that depression as real even if it were not like other
illnesses, not a biochemical process, and not of great antiquity? The
biological revolution in psychiatry was supposed to change everything.
Mental illness was supposed to become a disease like any other, as Nancy
Andreasen put it. Nathan Kline hoped simply having medicines would help
people think of depression as illness. For Wurtzel, though, if
depression is now everywhere, it is nowhere: "I can't escape the icky
feeling I get every time I'm sitting in a full car and everyone but the
driver is on Prozac."36 Brampton insisted, though, that we must continue
to underline the realness of illness. If we do not, stigma and secrecy
will continue to shroud it. Brampton had fears about disclosure -- how
it would affect her career, for example.37 In most cases, we tell our
co-workers when we are sick. This is, after all, a key aspect of the
sick role as sociologist Talcott Parsons conceived it: when we assume
the social role of a sick person, we get benefits, such as the right to
miss work and other obligations. We also

assume new obligations, such as those to follow doctor's orders and to
try to get better. Taking the sick role gets messy when you worry that
people will see it as a character flaw instead of a real illness, or go
too far the other way, and think you are "crazy," whatever that means.
People with depression can lead a double life, masquerading as healthy
people day to day. People who disclose their depression risk stigma, and
once you disclose, you lose the option of secrecy forever. But lack of
disclosures reinforces stigma. Loneliness lives in these dilemmas.
Several of the memoirists published summaries in the popular press, and
each received numerous letters from strangers who felt seen in a new
way, relieved to know they were not alone. Many of those who wrote to
Thompson said they had never before seen their pain described as
illness, rather than character flaw.38

How Did I Get Here? "Causes are more like vapours than facts." -- Tim
Lott39 For Esther Greenwood, ECT was a scary experience. For Plath
herself, the story was more complicated. It was scary, but one of her
ECT treatments was deeply and rapidly therapeutic. ECT might seem a most
physical of treatments, but Plath interpreted her illness, and the
therapy's success, in psychoanalytic terms. She assumed her illness was
due to unconscious guilt, which the ECT relieved because it was itself a
punishment.40 Patients' explanations for their illnesses and recoveries
can draw on prevailing medical models and also challenge them. Plath
used psychoanalytic ideas dominant in her time. Many ECT memoirs have
appeared more recently, and while several complain about the procedure,
they do not usually describe it as punitive. Few of the recent
depression memoirs invoke unconscious guilt or aggression turned inward
as the source of their illness. Not surprisingly, many of them use the
language of chemical imbalance -- but many also push back against it. In
a hybrid history of modern depression/depression memoir, psychologist
Gary Greenberg reports that during his time as a subject in an

antidepressant clinical trial, the idea of his illness as biochemical
grew on him.41 Slater echoes: "I slowly came to see Prozac's point of
view, which posits God as a matter of molecules and witchcraft as a
neural mishap."42 But something counter-intuitive lingers. Inman: "I
don't understand why my mood is black because of some chemicals floating
around -- or not floating around correctly -- in my brain."43 While the
meaning of molecular mishap may be elusive, it helps to make sense of
other enigmas. Psychiatrist Linda Gask (The Other Side of Silence, 2015)
struggles with a past that strikes her as not traumatic enough to
warrant her illness.44 She felt that maybe she was born with a low
threshold for stress. Marchenko thought the worst "trauma" she had as a
child was a couple of broken bones which, she confesses, brought her a
lot of desired attention -- though she was prone to asking existential
questions about why she was alive to begin with at an age that seemed,
in retrospect, a little early.45 Wurtzel looked at herself at times and
had the same question my students had about Merkin: how dare affluent
Manhattan me have depression? Wurtzel had a strong attraction to Bruce
Springsteen, longing for an identification, because his working-class
roots would justify her depression.46 (As we will see, Wurtzel had more
in common with Springsteen than she realized.) Wurtzel also perversely
valued a miscarriage she had, because it gave her a good excuse to feel
so bad.47 Many carry an intuition that to feel this bad, something
really bad has to happen. Chemistry fills the gap. But while serving
this purpose, and cementing depression as illness, most of the
memoirists find chemistry lacking, by itself. No matter how much they
may value physical treatments for symptom relief, they often bristle if
those treatments are unaccompanied by exploration of their inner, and
outer, lives. In My Fight for Sanity (1959), Judith Kruger expressed a
deep ambivalence with a course of ECT. The treatment did relieve her
symptoms, but also caused physical pain and mental disorientation, and
perhaps worst of all, left her feeling unseen. She only felt a robust
sense of recovery after work with an attentive psychoanalyst -- work
which uncovered suppressed feelings of hostility and envy toward her
younger brother.48 Wurtzel was quicker to try medication than therapy,
but says she went "from a thorough certainty that \[depression's\]
origins are in bad biology to a more flexible

belief that after an accumulation of life events made my head such an
ugly thing to be stuck in, my brain's chemicals started to agree."49 The
past, the deep and personal past, matters to these writers. And the past
that matters the most is the past with their parents. Or perhaps better
put, the past without their parents. Karl Abraham would have found these
cases sadly familiar.

Seen and Not Seen Abraham, and later AndrÃ© Green and Alice Miller, found
that many depressed patients had parents who, because of their own
traumas or insecurities, were emotionally absent even if they were
physically present. Physically or emotionally absent parents come up a
lot in the memoirs. The restrained Styron does not tell us much about
his childhood. He puts it abstractly. The causes of depression remain
incompletely known, he says, but loss and especially childhood loss,
"has been established beyond reasonable doubt" as a cause of
depression.50 Styron's father suffered from depression himself, and his
mother died of cancer when he was 14. Neither of these losses are
mentioned in Darkness Visible. Often, even if a parent is physically
with the child, the child does not feel attended to. Wurtzel's parents
divorced. "I don't think it matters how many parents you've got, so long
as the ones who are around make their presence felt in a positive way.
But I got two parents who were constantly at odds with each other, and
all they gave me was an empty foundation that split down the middle of
my empty, anguished self."51 Her father was completely unavailable. When
she did get time with him, he would sleep. Thompson describes her father
as "jovial" but remote, and says her mother, a devout Christian,
couldn't see her for who she was, being too invested in her image of
what a Christian girl should be like. Diski's mother, herself depressed,
sent Diski to skating lessons. Diski felt this was not so much for the
daughter's benefit, but for the mother's wish for an accomplished child
to display. Danquah, who insists depression is biochemical, considered
her parents' divorce pivotal.52 Brampton describes loving parents, but
her father, who she thinks was on the autism spectrum though
undiagnosed, was not emotionally giving. She had to deal with her
parents' deep

discontent with each other, which left her emotional needs unmet.53 They
sent her to boarding school which she hated, and left her feeling
abandoned. (One of Brampton's therapists said that 80 percent of her
patients went to boarding school.54) Inman says she never really knew
her father. Slater describes her mother as "distant."55 Bruce
Springsteen's autobiography Born to Run is both a celebration of the
joys of rock and roll and a meditation on the origins of Springsteen's
depression. Like Plath, Mingus, and Robin Williams, Springsteen is a
depressive with vibrant creativity and a voracious appetite for life.
The contrast between the dynamo reveling on stage and the morose
depressive in bed is poignant, but both are real. The bleak lives and
towns that fill his songs are not the product of some uncanny empathic
imagination, but portraits of places and people he knew, including his
father and himself. His father, he is sure, had undiagnosed depression.
The depression, in Springsteen's account, left his father emotionally
hobbled and compromised any ability to engage with his talented child.
In later life, the elder Springsteen developed paranoid schizophrenia.
Springsteen's father was well-meaning, but he was not fully present when
he and Bruce were together. Plath and her mother were close, but her
mother was also preoccupied by ailments suffered by Sylvia's brother
Warren. Plath's father died when she was eight. Read her poem "Daddy"
some time. It gently suggests this may have had some effect on her.56
The theme of absent parents in the memoirs may support some of the
psychological theories of depression. But aside from cause, this theme
in the memoirs shows how psychological meaning always matters, whatever
the biochemistry. Life presents all of us with adversity, inner
conflict, and loss. These will matter in the most "endogenous"
depressions, whether they are the cause of the depression or not. In
addition to absent parents, many of the writers had palpably traumatic
events in childhood. Thompson was hit by a car in a near fatal accident,
disfiguring her face when she was on the cusp of puberty.57 Inman was
sexually molested in early puberty.58 Diski was once sent to sleep with
her naked father and was also sexually abused by her mother.59 In a
dramatic example of feeling unseen, Diski once found her mother in a
psychotic

state, and her mother literally did not know who Diski was.60 Merkin was
beaten by an aloof nanny her mother had hired, leaving Merkin to wonder
why her mother would entrust her to such a person.61 Slater's mother was
full of anxious intensity, sometimes slapping Slater hard across the
cheeks, sometimes rubbing her hands in apparent disapproval across her
developing breasts in early puberty.62 One time she forced Slater to
swallow detergent.63 In research literature, stuff like this has the
strangely dead name "life events."

The Body and Biology Purely biological explanations feel flat. Work by
Frank and others in recent decades has shown how vital it is for people
with serious illness to create a narrative about it. Biology is limited,
but not simply because it leaves out the psychological and social
aspects. The biology itself remains so unclear. Cancer sufferers may or
may not have a clear story about an exposure to a carcinogen. But they
do have a story about cell growth to tell, one that has a lot of
scientific support, and is widely accepted. A depression illness
narrative will always have some chaos to it, because any reflection on
the causes will leave the sick person stuck in the swamps of the
unsettled science. Biology clearly matters for depression, though, and
not only for clinical reasons. While biological explanations alone are
limited, they help to make sense of the intensity of bodily experience
in depression. The embodied quality of depression is not only intense.
For some it is unexpected. This is a loss we bear when we call it a
"mood disorder." Brampton: "Why do they call it a 'mental' illness? The
pain isn't just in my head; it's everywhere, but mainly at my throat and
in my heart." She was surprised at the physicality, which at another
point she found mostly in stiff arms and legs.64 David Karp, a
sociologist who collected people's reports of their depressions and
placed them alongside his own in Speaking of Sadness (1996) found the
physicality bracing, as it seemed to shift from one part of the body to
another: a "grief knot" in his throat, chest pains, heavy eyes, pressure
in the head, "sadness in the cheeks," shaky hands and legs.65

Though most physical descriptions range from a dull woodenness to
searing agony, Danquah's description of the sensual quality seems
ambivalent: Depression offers layers, textures, noises. At times
depression is as flimsy as a feather, barely penetrating the surface of
my life, hovering like a slight halo of pessimism. Other times it comes
on gradually like a common cold or a storm, each day presenting new
signals and symptoms until finally I am drowning in it. Most times, in
its most superficial and seductive sense, it is rich and enticing. A
field of velvet waiting to embrace me. It is loud and dizzying, inviting
the tenors and screeching sopranos of thoughts, unrelenting sadness, and
the sense of impending doom.66

Gender The biological era in depression may affect men and women
differently. The memoirs have surprisingly little explicit discussion of
gender. Perhaps the writers feel that they can only speak to their own
experience, and not to social generalizations. Thompson's guess is that
men and women become depressed at equal rates, but that women appear in
the statistics more because they are more inclined to seek treatment.
Sharon O'Brien, in The Family Silver (2004), suspects that the problem
for women is that they are expected to be nice.67 If you're socialized
to be nice, what happens when you feel mean, as everyone will?
Presumably, it gets turned inward. Merkin thinks that although women get
depression more, the men write about it more. I am not sure this is
true. Observations she makes about the content of depression memoirs may
be more convincing: the men are more inclined to biological explanations
of their own sickness, and less revealing about their lives. "Men, that
is, have cannily figured out how to sidestep the implications of moral
failing that attaches to mental illness -- as well as the specific
criticism of self-indulgence that is attributed to more introspective
accounts of this condition -- by insisting on a force outside
themselves."68

In Bed Depression causes immobility. In Where the Roots Reach for Water:
A Personal and Natural History of Melancholia (1999), Jeffrey Smith says

that it "seems your vital fluid has seeped out some invisible rent in
your flesh" and that "The melancholic's limbs feel weighted, blood and
bone and muscle alike gone viscid with some invisible burden."69 This
paralysis is often keenly felt in bed. Wurtzel had dreams about
paralysis, and then had the waking experience of literally being unable
to move while in bed. Marchenko wrote of her "cinder-block legs" while
trying to get out of bed.70 The memoirs depict a lot of time in bed,
sleeping too much, too little, or not at all. The being and staying in
bed have multiple meanings and motivations. Physical fatigue, a
relentless lethargy, is one part. So is low motivation, hopelessness,
futility. Brampton tells of "duvet diving," hiding in bed, not answering
the phone, turning down invitations, the social withdrawal observed in
melancholics since antiquity.71 For O'Brien, the prospect of bedtime and
sleeping pills offered respite from the agony of waking life.72
Springsteen, legendary for his explosive energy on stage, had a bout of
depression where, buried in unwanted thoughts and relentless anxiety, he
could not get out of bed: I was uncomfortable doing anything. Standing
... walking ... sitting down ... everything brought waves of an agitated
anxiety ... Demise and foreboding were all that awaited and sleep was
the only respite. If I can't work, how will I provide for my family?
Will I be bedridden? Who the fuck am I? You feel the thinness of your
identity.73 The confinement to bed may feel overwhelming to the point of
being involuntary. Yet the depressed person still has to wonder about
the border between their sickness and the normal challenges of living.
If active suicidality is a fair measure of severity, Inman was sick
indeed, as she made more than one attempt. Yet when she had trouble
getting out of bed, Inman asked herself, doesn't everyone?74 Getting out
of bed is easier if you are interested in things. Loss of interest is
one of depression's keenest losses. Diski, on a ship with others
spotting a whale: "I like a whale as much as the next person."75 As if
to say, not at all. Diski -- the author of 19 books -- is eloquent on
her capacity for inaction:

Indolence has always been my most essential quality ... the single
quality I am convinced I possess ... and also in the sense that I feel
most essentially myself when I am exercising it. I cannot recall a time
when the idea of going for a walk was not a torment to me ... As to the
freshness of the air, I'm not so eager for it. Though it is invigorating
I admit, I very rarely have the desire to be invigorated.76

Taunted by the Beautiful and the Good Things that are supposed to give
pleasure offer a special torment. Psychologist Martha Manning,
vacationing in Montana, during the depths of depression: "I know it's
beautiful and everything, but to be perfectly honest, I hate nature."77
On a visit to Disneyland, Karp was pierced by the contrast between how
he felt and how he was supposed to feel at the happiest place on
earth.78 A girlfriend tried to cheer Smith with some upbeat music, but
its cheer and vibrancy felt like an assault.79 "Nice" weather mocks the
depressed person. Brampton: "I hate the sun. When the sun is shining, I
should be happy."80 On a nice day, a friend asked Brampton how she can
be depressed on a day like that. Brampton asked if she would have the
same question if it were flu.81 Merkin says that the surest test of
depression is a dismal loitering of your wintry state on the first
beautiful day of Spring when for most people hope and enthusiasm
renew.82 Christian writers may feel that their faith itself requires
them to be cheerful.83 Like the medieval monks with acedia, they have
the added burden of seeing their sickness as sin. Martin Luther thought
Christians should be cheerful, so having melancholia was reason for
guilt. As Marchenko writes, a central premise of Christianity is hope,
and depression is above all loss of hope. Throughout Marchenko's writing
runs underlying guilt for having the illness in the first place,
implying that God's love isn't enough, and also because her loss of
interest in things extends even to Jesus. In this too, though, she
wonders what is illness and what is not. Faith, she says, comes hard to
her. But, she remembers, doesn't it come hard to everyone, just as
getting up in the morning does?84

Oblivion

If someone like Diski does not long for vigor, what did she long for?
The answer is often oblivion. The word appears regularly in depression
memoirs -- not as how the depressed people feel, but as what they want.
Brampton: "I don't want sleep. I want oblivion."85 On an upswing from
the worst of depression, Marchenko said "one of my biggest struggles
still is whether to cease to exist."86 The longing for oblivion often
leads to drugs. Brampton sought oblivion in combining Valium or Xanax
with heavy alcohol use. Diski took an overdose of her mother's Nembutal,
not so much seeking death, but wanting everything to stop.87 This can
look like suicidality, which is of course a real risk in people with
depression, but several of the writers are clear that the longing for
oblivion is not the same as a wish for death. It is a wish for release
from pain. Matt Haig writes "I wanted to be dead. No, that's not quite
right. I didn't want to be dead. I just didn't want to be alive."88
Suicidality has gradations, ranging from a vague feeling that it would
be better to be dead, to more active fantasy about how that could be
achieved, to concrete planning and steps.89 Brampton wrote that these
gradations are known to all depressives. She ultimately did take her own
life.

Treatments, Recoveries, Damages, and Regrets Most of the writers have
found some treatment that has helped and give vivid descriptions of
medicine's restorative powers. Many of these dramatic and unexpected
transformations make a placebo explanation feel hard to sustain.90 Tim
Lott was sure medicines would not help him, decided to take them anyway,
and thought the symptom relief was unmistakable. After a short time on
Prozac, Slater felt healthy for the first time. Obsessive symptoms
cleared, and she started to feel at home in her body in a new way. She
felt that she was becoming the person she was meant to be.91 She finally
moved out of a dank basement apartment she had been living in, and had a
new ability to find pleasure:

I bit into an apple, and I enjoyed the gesture. I enjoyed the white
chair on which, over many weeks, I snoozed and rocked, my defenses
dwindling down. I started to take more baths, some, even, with petals
and scent. Prozac brought me to pumpkin muffins, yellowfin tuna, and
plum sauce.92 Most ECT memoirs stress that ECT works. Many memoirs of
depression are written to make the illness understood; ECT memoirs are
often written to make the treatment understood. Endler's story of
complete success is not typical but also not unique. Celebrities such as
Kitty Dukakis and Carrie Fisher wrote about how vital ECT was to their
recovery from depression.93 Manning's own first thoughts upon the
recommendation of ECT were of Cuckoo's Nest. She feared that if she
needed such an extreme treatment, she must be really sick. But after
several treatments, she had improved sleep and appetite, and decreased
agitation: "The weight of the depression has definitely eased."94 Many
writers on ECT struggled to explain to their friends why they were
willing to have the treatment. At a party, someone said to Manning, "How
could you let them do that to you?" I bristle and answer, "I didn't let
them do it to me. I asked them to do it." "But why would you ever do
that?" she insists. "Because I was trying to save my life," I answer,
hoping to end the conversation. Emboldened by a couple of bourbons, she
challenges. "Aren't you being just a bit dramatic? Depression is hardly
a life-and-death condition."95 But the writers of the ECT memoirs
frequently feel that the treatment is also misunderstood by the doctors
who provide it. The writers may want to erase Cuckoo's Nest images from
the mind of the lay public, but they also resent doctors who say the
treatment is harmless. Kruger recounted how ECT helped bring her back
from an episode of what looks like psychotic depression. After treatment
she slept normally for the first time in weeks and had a sense of calm
relief. But relief did not translate into love of the treatment, which
she continued to dread. She also resented how impersonal her doctor was,
that he had no interest in her story, and only wanted to provide the
ECT. After emerging from acute depression, she found a psychoanalyst
whom she found rigid at first, but who finally helped her, she said, to
uncover some suppressed hostility toward her family.96

Complaints about ECT in the memoirs are primarily about memory loss and
the dismissal of memory loss by some clinicians. ECT handbooks and
textbooks sometimes portray the treatment as painless and harmless.
Doctors often say that any memory loss will concern short-term memories
of events near the treatment, and that memory losses are usually
temporary. This may or may not be true for the majority of patients. I
do not think the science is conclusive. ECT memoirs, though, are loaded
with complaints about memory loss. Anne Donohue published an account in
2000 which contrasted the mild warning she received with the severity of
loss that she experienced. She felt like she was being "mocked by
science."97 In his autobiography, physician Sherwin Nuland credits the
memory loss with his recovery, thinking ECT must have blotted out some
trauma.98 Most accounts, though, see the memory losses as a grim
sacrifice. The complaints about memory loss are compelling because they
do not come only from patients who consider ECT worthless, though some
do. Many come from patients, including Manning, Dukakis, and Fisher, who
all wrote to convey how much ECT helped them, who said they would do it
again even if they knew they would lose the memories, and who went back
for voluntary treatments.99 The picture is similar in some ways for how
drugs are written about -- a minority of writers present them as
unambiguous goods, but more express ambivalence. Springsteen is emphatic
that both medicines and psychotherapy helped him. On one occasion, a
bout of relentless weeping halted within days of starting an
antidepressant.100 Gask -- a psychiatrist -- was shocked at the speed of
her recovery, and she related no adverse effects. But in most of these
books, unwanted effects of the drugs must be reckoned with. In most,
these do not occasion the massive sense of loss that comes from the
memory gaps from ECT. They are not minor, though. The SSRIs were
launched with hopes that they would have milder side effects than MAOIs
or tricyclics, but sexual side effects are common. Sex is important to
most people. Slater: "I know of no theorist, from Stack Sullivan and
Freud to Horney and Lifton, who would claim it's OK to be, shall we say,
dysphoric in the genitals."101 Sometimes people taking antidepressants
fear that the drugs must be bad for you. Wurtzel describes at one point
being on both lithium and Prozac. Side effects were unwelcome but
tolerable, and outweighed by the relief the

medicines provided. But she was sure that the drugs must be bad for you,
a price must be paid, even if she did not know what the price was. The
worry may seem superstitious, and it may indeed have elements of magical
thinking, but drugs usually do have costs, and often these costs are not
all known, particularly when the drugs are new. Slater: "Taking a pill,
especially a recently developed psychotropic pill about which
researchers have more questions than answers, is always an exercise in
the existential, because whatever happens, happens to your body alone.
Each time you swallow a pill you are swallowing not only a chemical
compound but yourself unmoored."102 The very word "drug" raises
specters. The antidepressant era was born and raised with a twin: the
war on drugs. As if in a psychological study, they were raised in
contrasting environments. The antidepressants were a fairhaired child,
brought up told how promising they were. They were medicine, a gifted
child, the gift of healing. Recreational drugs were the bad seed who
would never amount to anything, destined for prison or early death,
sometimes evil incarnate, society's greatest menace. To be clear, I am
not saying that the line drawn between prescription and recreational
drugs is completely arbitrary. But it is also not completely objective
or scientific. Some substances, like amphetamine, migrate from the
medical realm, where they were used for depression, to the recreational
realm, and sometimes back again, as they are now used to treat attention
deficit.103 LSD has followed a similar trajectory.104 Cultural
associations bear heavily, and remain a barrier to medical marijuana and
to LSD's medicinal use. Slater worried that she became an addict on
Prozac. Wurtzel began referring to her psychiatrist's office as "the
crack house."105 A recent column about trying to get off antidepressants
was entitled "Hi, I'm David. I'm a Drug Addict."106 These anxieties
about drugs are close to the doubt about the realness of depression as
illness. Merkin writes:

Although I have been on antidepressants for three and a half decades, I
continue to feel defensive about them ... Even as I faithfully took my
pills I couldn't help wondering: Was I medicating a bad childhood or a
chemical irregularity? And did it matter what the cause was if the drugs
helped keep me going, steered me away from the thoughts of suicide that
had haunted me ever since I was a young girl?107 One can say, and on one
level believe, that depression is an illness like diabetes, requiring
regular doses of medicine. Whatever distaste people with diabetes might
have toward taking insulin, though, it does not cause them to worry that
they have become a drug addict, with all the grave associations cast on
that identity. Doubts about treatments are heightened by adverse
effects, which are common. Few things frustrate these writers more than
dismissal from their doctors when they complain about adverse effects.
For decades, patients have been saying they have permanent memory losses
from ECT. ECT providers often say the complaints are rare (though the
rarity is not proven) or perhaps the result of the depression itself.108
Brampton told one doctor of weight gain she thought was from her
medication, but which he was sure had another cause. An adverse effect
from a treatment may be rare, yet still occur for that particular
patient. When an adverse effect is felt only when on the drug, and never
when on another drug or no drugs at all, it is hard for a patient to
hear that they should or could not be getting the effect from the drug.
When a treatment is new, an adverse effect may not yet have registered
in the clinical science, and it takes complaining patients to bring it
to light. When she was on another medication, one of Brampton's doctors
dismissed her complaints about side effects -- which included physical
aches, poor vision, shaking, troubled sleep, and nausea -- on the
grounds that the drug (Venlafaxine, or Effexor) is ordinarily tolerated.
He did not relent even after she showed him articles she had found about
people having the same side effect (these are all now known side effects
of Effexor).109 Patients can, of course, also be wrong about a drug
causing their problem, but they are understandably dismayed when a
clinician assumes them to be, as with the doctor who told Jeffrey Smith
"I've never heard of any such thing. I don't see how the pills could be
causing that. The PDR \[Physician's Desk Reference\] doesn't mention
it."110

Medication's drawbacks are often used to support talk therapies, but
therapy can arouse complaints too. Inman regretted seeing a therapist
who told her the best thing she could do was sit and let herself feel
the pain.111 Brampton complained about the rigidity of a psychodynamic
therapist who made her stand in the rain when she was early for an
appointment. Such rigidity is not as common among psychoanalysts as is
often thought, but it does occur.112 Brampton found some help in CBT,
but found it too cognitive, and too behavioral. Brampton disapproved
precisely of one of its selling points, time-limitedness, which she
thought fails to see depression's complexity, and how hard it is to work
through. CBT "might teach me how to function more happily and
effectively but it does not teach me what the point of functioning well
(or badly) is in the first place."113 Ambivalence toward depression
treatments is likely, in part because they do not usually provide
permanent cure. Manning felt recovered after ECT, but in the midst of
mourning memory losses, she also bore some recurrence of depression,
though milder than before the ECT. Wurtzel wrote that "The secret I
sometimes think that only I know is that Prozac really isn't that great.
Of course, I can say this and still believe that Prozac was the miracle
that saved my life."114 Weirdly, even recovery can cause ambivalence.
Wurtzel: In a strange way, I had fallen in love with my depression ... I
loved it because I thought it was all I had. I thought depression was
the part of my character that made me worthwhile. I thought so little of
myself, felt that I had such scant offerings to give to the world, that
the one thing that justified my existence at all was my agony ... I was
so scared to give up depression, fearing that somehow the worst part of
me was actually all of me.115 Similarly, Thompson: "To eliminate the
disease would eliminate everything I thought of as me."116 After
recovery on medications, Gask confessed she did not want to think the
solution could be so simple.117 Some writers rejected medications
altogether. Simple dislike of side effects, by itself, seems not to be
the reason. Ann Cvetkovich did so for partly political reasons. She sees
the causes of depression in capitalism -- the inequalities and
alienation it produces, and how its relentless demands on

our time crowd out the opportunities for creativity. The symptoms of
depression, in this view, are political signs that demand attention, and
covering them up with drugs is hiding the problem, not solving it.118
Smith, who adopted a humoral way of thinking about his depression and
prefers to call it melancholia, came to think (as Jung did) that
depression was telling you something important about yourself and that
you should listen.119 Cvetkovich and Smith are both saying that
depression tells us something important, whether personal or political,
and that medications silence the messenger. They both came to this view
honestly, because both got some symptom relief from the medications they
gave up. They made a brave choice, though as Cvetkovich acknowledges, it
is not right for everyone.

Memoir as Manifesto In Americanah, the tension between Ifemelu and her
aunt about whether depression is an illness is not resolved. In
non-fictional reflection on her own experience, though, Adichie takes a
stand: depression is an illness, and needs to be understood and
de-stigmatized.120 The memoirs have points to make: depression is an
illness, though one that is hard to describe. Not being treated as a
sick person is one of the hardest things about it -- even if the writers
sometimes have trouble seeing themselves as sick. As people with
sickness, they want and benefit from medical treatment. They also feel
that their life stories and present psychology matter. The memoirs
support, from a subjective point of view, the view that drugs and
psychotherapy are most effective combined. Whether or not the biology is
well-described as a "chemical imbalance," people with depression feel
they have lives out of balance. They welcome what helps them to feel
better, whether it is physical or psychological. Put another way, the
memoirs are manifestos against biological reductionism. They anticipate
the state of the science, which says depression has a biology, many
specifics of the biology remain unclear, and the biological treatments
are incomplete. Memoirs said this during the boom years of the
biological model. The memoirs have an attraction-repulsion response to
"chemical imbalance" theories of depression, welcoming them for
affirming the

realness of illness, while rejecting them for failing to see how
manyfaceted depression is. They are often ahead of the science in
finding adverse effects. Medical anthropologists have shown that DSM
labeling and giving antidepressants can hide the complexity of the
suffering person, their life history, and their social world.121 The
ethnographers often tell us that the people being studied, who are
distant from the culture of Western psychiatry, have, and also demand,
more complex explanatory models. They have a particular life trajectory
and social context, and they want more than a pill. They want to be
seen, not merely labeled. The depression memoirs, though, say that you
do not have to be far away from Western psychiatry to feel the same.
From the beginnings of ECT through the rise of the SSRIs, patients have
been saying that they want more than relief from their symptoms.
Psychoanalysis got this right, with its immersion into the inner life
and history of the patient. Meyer also got this right. The patient, he
insisted, is a biological organism, and an individual with distinct
needs, and embedded in a set of social relations. Meyer was once
considered the most influential psychiatrist in America. He trained many
psychiatrists, many of whom went on to chair psychiatry departments.122
Yet his vision has often been disregarded. It's worth thinking about
why. Meyer was not a great writer, and he had no bestselling book. But a
deeper reason his influence waned may ironically lie in the virtue of
his approach: its complexity. It was hard to put into slogans, and hard
to practice. It is not easy for doctors to hold in view the biological,
the psychological, and the social, even if they are supported in the
effort. That effort is not supported by a medical culture deeply driven
by profit, where profit is driven by speed. The whole person is hard to
grasp in short office visits that are limited in number by a third-party
payer. Treating a whole person takes time. The whole person is not
captured in a randomized, double-blind, clinical trial. The complexity
of depression is hard to manualize.

Notes 1. Kitanaka, Depression in Japan, 97.

2. Bruce Springsteen, Born to Run (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2016),
499. 3. Definition taken from the Merriam Webster app. 4. Sylvia Plath,
The Bell Jar (New York: Bantam Books, 1971, originally published 1963),
152. 5. Ibid., 193. 6. William Styron, Darkness Visible: A Memoir of
Madness (New York: Vintage Books, 1990). 7. Arthur Frank, The Wounded
Storyteller (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). See also
Brenda Dyer, "Winter Tales: Comedy and Romance Story-Types in Narratives
of Depression," in Hilary Clark, ed., Depression and Narrative: Telling
the Dark (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2008). Frank
acknowledges that many narratives will not fit neatly into just one of
the types he identifies. See also Jette Westerbeek and Karen Mutsaers,
"Depression Narratives: How the Self Became a Problem," Literature and
Medicine 21, 1 (2008) 25--55. 8. Norman S. Endler, Holiday of Darkness:
A Psychologist's Personal Journey Out of His Depression (Toronto: John
Wiley & Sons, 1982). 9. For similar restitution accounts with ECT
treatment, see Frank Kimball, "Hope for Tired Minds," Hygeia (December
1946) 906--7 and 946, (January 1947) 36--7, 66--9; and Leon Rosenberg,
"Brainsick: A Physician's Journey to the Brink," Cerebrum 4 (2002)
43--60, for a similar account. 10. Styron, Darkness Visible, 7. See also
Lewis Wolpert, Malignant Sadness: The Anatomy of Depression (London:
Faber and Faber, 1999), 1. 11. Styron, Darkness Visible, 17. 12. Leader,
The New Black, 187--8. 13. Lauren Slater, Prozac Diary (New York:
Penguin Books, 1998), 16. On the incommunicability of depression, see
also David A. Karp, Speaking

of Sadness: Depression, Disconnection, and the Meanings of Illness
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996) 40--2. 14. Kimberly K. Emmons
has drawn attention to gendered language in Styron and others, including
making this observation about Styron's gendered use of the word itself.
See her Black Dogs and Blue Words: Depression and Gender in the Age of
Self-Care (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2010), 5. 15. Tracy
Thompson, The Beast: A Journey Through Depression (New York: Penguin
Books, 1996), 189. 16. Styron, Darkness Visible, 37. 17. Wurtzel, Prozac
Nation, 68. 18. Merkin, This Close to Happy. 19. Merkin anticipated my
students' displeasure, noting that the presence of money in a person's
life provokes an envy that can block sympathy. This pre-emptive
observation had little impact on my students. See also Matt Haig,
Reasons to Stay Alive (New York: Penguin Books, 2015). 20. Wurtzel,
Prozac Nation, 22. Merkin also describes Darkness Visible as "strangely
contextless." Merkin, This Close to Happy, 12. 21. Wurtzel, Prozac
Nation, 22. 22. Lora Inman, Running Uphill: A Memoir of Surviving
Depressive Illness (Jacksonville Beach: High-Pitched Hum Publishing,
2007), 113. 23. Merkin, This Close to Happy, 16. The perceptions of
memoirists that many people (1) regard depression as a failure of will,
and (2) do not realize that one can look well to others even when
suffering from the illness, are borne out in research. Shoji Yokoya,
Takami Maeno, Naoto Sakamoto, Ryohei Goto, and Tetsuhiro Maeno, "A Brief
Survey of Public Knowledge and Stigma Towards Depression," Journal of
Clinical Medicine Research 10, 3 (March 2010) 202--9; thanks to Kevin
Parvizi for this reference. 24. Merkin, This Close to Happy, 10.

25. On the themes in this paragraph, see also O'Brien, The Family
Silver, 105, and Jeffrey Smith, Where the Roots Reach for Water: A
Personal and Natural History of Melancholia (New York: North Point
Press, 1999), 7. 26. Thanks to Marnie Nichole for suggesting this to me.
27. Thompson, The Beast, 161. 28. Jenny Diski, Skating to Antarctica
(London: Virago, 2014, originally published 1997). Thompson says the
same in The Beast, 52. 29. Gillian Marchenko, Still Life: A Memoir of
Living Fully with Depression (Downers Grove: IVP Books, 2016), 13--14.
30. Sally Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog: A Memoir of Depression (New
York: W. W. Norton & Co., 2008), 63. Brampton tried many medications and
more than one psychotherapy, but her depression was deeply resistant to
treatment. Tragically, she died by suicide. 31. Styron, Darkness
Visible, 9. 32. Meri Nana-Ama Danquah, Willow, Weep for Me: A Black
Woman's Journey Through Depression (New York: Ballantine Publishing
Group, 1998), 21; see also pp.Â 18--20. 33. Ibid., 247. 34. Inman,
Running Uphill, 63. 35. Thompson, The Beast, 187. 36. Wurtzel, Prozac
Nation, 341. 37. On worries about the damage to career, see also Karp,
Is It Me or My Meds?, 162--3. 38. Thompson, The Beast, 7. See also
Styron, Darkness Visible, 34; Lewis Wolpert, Malignant Sadness: The
Anatomy of Depression (New York: The Free Press, 2000), viii. 39. Tim
Lott, The Scent of Dried Roses (London: Penguin, 1996), 34.

40. Sadowsky, Electroconvulsive Therapy in America, 1--2, 86, 99. 41.
Greenberg, Manufacturing Depression, 43. 42. Slater, Prozac Diary, 107
43. Inman, Running Uphill, 2. 44. Linda Gask, The Other Side of Silence:
A Psychiatrist's Memoir of Depression (Chichester: Summersdale
Publishers, 2015). 45. Marchenko, Still Life, 19. 46. Wurtzel, Prozac
Nation, 50. 47. Ibid., 193. 48. Judith Kruger, My Fight for Sanity
(Greenwich: Crest Books, 1959). I look at Kruger's narrative in more
detail in Sadowsky, Electroconvulsive Therapy in America, 82--3. 49.
Wurtzel, Prozac Nation, 345. 50. Styron, Darkness Visible, 56. 51.
Wurtzel, Prozac Nation, 29. 52. Danquah, Willow, Weep for Me, 34--5. 53.
Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 158. 54. Ibid., 148. 55. Slater, Prozac
Diary, 21. 56. Stevenson, Bitter Fame, 7--10. 57. Thompson, The Beast,
25. 58. Inman, Running Uphill, 26. 59. Diski, Skating to Antarctica,
109--11. 60. Ibid., 192.

61. Merkin, This Close to Happy, 85. 62. Slater, Prozac Diary, 82--3.
63. Ibid., 142. 64. Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 34, 251. 65. Karp,
Speaking of Sadness, 7. 66. Danquah, Willow, Weep for Me, 22. 67.
O'Brien, The Family Silver, 89. 68. Merkin, This Close to Happy, 12. 69.
Jeffrey Smith, Where the Roots Reach for Water: A Personal and Natural
History of Melancholia (New York: North Point Press, 1999), 5 and 72.
70. Marchenko, Still Life, 29. 71. Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 123.
72. O'Brien, The Family Silver, 219. 73. Springsteen, Born to Run,
498--9. 74. Inman, Running Uphill, 2. 75. Diski, Skating to Antarctica,
131. 76. Ibid., 60--1. 77. Martha Manning, Undercurrents: A Life Beneath
the Surface (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994), 89. 78. Karp, Speaking
of Sadness, 4--5. 79. Smith, Where Roots Reach for Water, 14. 80.
Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 29. 81. Ibid., 31

82. Merkin, This Close to Happy, 97--8. 83. Thompson, The Beast, 35, 51.
84. Marchenko, Still Life, 159--60. 85. Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog,
29. 86. Marchenko, Still Life, 50. 87. Diski, Skating to Antarctica,
225. 88. Haig, Reasons to Stay Alive, 11. 89. See also Solomon, The
Noonday Demon, 244. 90. As Karp says, "The power of antidepressants
seems most incontrovertible when relief occurs precisely on the time
schedule predicted and is experienced as a complete cure." Karp, Is It
Me or My Meds?, 53. 91. Slater, Prozac Diary, 29--44. 92. Slater, Prozac
Diary, 103. 93. Kitty Dukakis and Larry Tye, Shock: The Healing Power of
Electroconvulsive Therapy (New York: Penguin, 2006); Carrie Fisher,
Shockaholic (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011). 94. Manning,
Undercurrents, 138. 95. Manning, Undercurrents, 165--6. Endler was also
asked by a friend why he allowed "them" to do that to him; Endler,
Holiday of Darkness, 76. 96. Judith Kruger, My Fight for Sanity
(Greenwich: Crest Books, 1959). 97. Anne B. Donahue, "Electroconvulsive
Therapy and Memory Loss: A Personal Journey," The Journal of ECT 16, 2
(2000) 133--43, quote is on p.Â 138. 98. Sherwin Nuland, Lost in America:
A Journey with My Father (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2003), 7--8.
Clinical science has not found a

correlation between memory loss and symptom remission in ECT, so it is
unlikely that the memory loss is the reason for efficacy. 99. See
Sadowsky, Electroconvulsive Therapy in America, ch.Â 6. 100. Springsteen,
Born to Run, 487. 101. Slater, Prozac Diary, 154. 102. Ibid., 10--11.
103. Rasmussen, On Speed. 104. Dyck, Psychedelic Psychiatry. 105.
Wurtzel, Prozac Nation, 17. 106. David Lazarus, "Hi, I'm David. I'm a
Drug Addict," Los Angeles Times (September 6, 2019). 107. Merkin, This
Close to Happy, 126. 108. This theme is explored at length in Sadowsky,
Electroconvulsive Therapy in America, ch.Â 6. 109. Brampton, Shoot the
Damn Dog, 28, 219; see also Karp, Speaking of Sadness, 27. 110. Smith,
Where the Roots Reach for Water, 22. 111. Inman, Running Uphill, 92.
112. Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 199. 113. Ibid., 195--8. 114.
Wurtzel, Prozac Nation, 342. 115. Wurtzel, Prozac Nation, 326--7. 116.
Thompson, The Beast, 167. 117. Gask, The Other Side of Silence, 182.

118. Cvetkovich, Depression: A Public Feeling. Hari makes similar
arguments in Lost Connections. 119. Smith, Where Roots Reach for Water.
120.
http://bookslive.co.za/blog/2015/03/13/i-felt-violated-chimamandangozi-adichie-reveals-her-anger-at-the-guardian-over-article-ondepression/,
accessed October 25, 2019. 121. For example, O'Nell, Disciplined Hearts.
122. Susan Lamb, Adolf Meyer: Pathologist of the Mind (Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014).

Epilogue: Depression's Past and Future "The last word about melancholy
will probably never be written." -- Judith Shklar1 "The treatment of
mental health is an inexact science. But, as I am slowly coming to
understand, depression is an inexact illness." -- Sally Brampton2

Sorrow Is Everywhere You Turn As the COVID-19 pandemic progresses, many
are experiencing new hardships and griefs. Everything we know suggests
this will be accompanied and followed by increased rates of depression
and mental illnesses. Many people already at risk for depression will
not only face more adversity, but will have to do so in isolating
circumstances -- the worst possible scenario for a depressive person.
Disruptions in supply chains may make antidepressants less available --
a scary prospect for many, whatever you think of the data from clinical
trials. Meanwhile, human action has rendered the earth's climate
dangerous for human survival, and efforts to slow or reverse the change
are met with massive counterattacks by the people making money from the
causes of the change. In industrialized countries, wealth inequality has
been rising since the 1970s. Elites have so much money they are planning
personal space travel, while their employees need public assistance to
buy basic necessities. The elites remain unsatisfied, and say they are
still over-taxed. Much of the world is enduring terrible violent
conflicts. And apart from the specifics of our historical moment, one
enduring lesson has been passed down in virtually every religious and
philosophical tradition, all over the world: life is hard. Babies and
children confront, on an hourly basis, lack of autonomy and power, their
dependence on the bigger and stronger, and the frustration dependence
causes. Older children remain hemmed in by rules grown-ups

impose. Most people will know the sting of unreturned love, or the
wasteland of lost love. Middle age can be a slog; most people have heavy
responsibilities, and many are stuck in dull, alienating jobs. Some
people find they have made a mistake in marriage, and have to decide
between the pain of leaving or the pain of staying. The easiest and most
loving of children will stretch one's endurance and patience. Those who
have known the best health and most prosperity will still know mourning,
aging, and physical pain. And at every age, the question: what is it all
for? And yet, not everyone gets depression, the illness. Many people in
terrible life situations do not. Many people in the best of
circumstances do. Despite our inability to help all who get ill with
depression, we have a wide array of treatments, some old and some just
being tested; that they can help many people is reason for celebration.
Those who worry about unrealistic expectation of happiness have a point.
People with depression -- "clinical" depression -- do not, however,
expect unbridled joy. They want to have a massive extra burden lifted,
so they can live with rewarding interests, better connections with
others, enough energy to do normal tasks, release from constant sorrow,
and the ability to go to sleep when tired and wake up feeling restored.
We cannot change some of the problems that make life hard. Depression,
however, is a problem that can be relieved. We will mostly likely not
eradicate it, and we have no reliable permanent cure. But we have
effective treatments, and we also know of preventive measures, such as
education and lifestyle advice that could reduce the burden of the
illness.3 We also know of social factors that increase the risk of
depression and worsen its course. These social factors can be changed.
We could, for example, treat mental health care, and all health care, as
a human right and provide universal access. Instead, many of our
political leaders, at least in the United States, pretend to care about
mental health only when they want to distract us from the real causes of
gun violence. How well we manage the future of depression depends in
part on how well we understand its past.

History Against Compulsive Repetition

History does not simply enrich us, or humanize us in some vague or
abstract sense. It is worth knowing, because as psychoanalysis tells us,
our past sets us in patterns of thought. If we do not examine them, they
will control us without our realizing it. With regard to depression, we
learn that: We do not have to keep having the same arguments. Rigid
proponents of psychological approaches and their counterparts in the
biological camp have spent the last 100 years like an unhappy married
couple, having the same fights over and over. Wise voices have, like a
good marriage counselor, urged each to try to remember what is lovable
in their spouse. The least productive idea is that only one approach has
merit. Reductionism in the treatment of depression has led to dead ends.
Counting depressions is a vexed project. Epidemics may be more apparent
than real. Whether in the Renaissance or now, claims of depression
reaching epidemic levels should not be dismissed. They should, however,
be evaluated with care, since definitions and treatment patterns vary.
The case for over-diagnosis, though, should get as much critical
scrutiny as the case for rising prevalence. Overly broad definitions of
illness have costs, but so do restrictive ones. Don't Scorn the Past.
Current science, no matter how valuable, is always a product of a
historical moment, and the reigning assumptions of that moment. Past
views that do not conform to those assumptions may have insights we
struggle to see if we idealize current views. Many earlier students of
depression -- from Rufus and Burton, to Abraham and Melanie Klein,
through to biological psychiatrists of a scant generation ago -- may
have had insights worth preserving. They may, even some of the recent
ones, have expressed the insights in language that seems quaint now. But
as my professor said in my college course on English literature from
Beowulf to Milton, "If we know more than they do, it is only because we
know them." Don't believe the hype. New treatments will be coming. Some
of them may build on existing ideas, and some may come from entirely
new, nowunimagined paradigms. Either way, if the treatments are good,
people will be tempted to declare past approaches to depression
obsolete. Given the flaws in our current treatment repertoire, better
ones would be welcome.

But when new ones come, we should be wary of claims that they lack
downsides, or that the final truths about depression are close at hand.
Listen to patients. You don't have to take my word about reductionism
(though I think I have made a good case). Patients say they don't like
it. Yes, some may like a certain somatic intervention. Yes, some prefer
psychotherapy. Much evidence agrees, though, that patients want their
individual biology, psychology, and social setting considered. The
product they want resembles the one Meyer was selling, though it is hard
to find in the current market. Patients are also attuned to adverse
effects of treatments, sometimes before those effects are acknowledged
in clinical science.

The Way Forward What to do, faced with the explosive growth in
depression diagnoses, combined with troubles such as poor efficacy data
from clinical trials for antidepressants, and the realization that the
drugs have adverse effects? One response might be that psychiatry needs
to get back to basics, treat the severely ill -- those with a "real
medical problem." Making judgments about severity is crucial for making
treatment plans and is obviously important. The history of depression
shows, though, that the line between really sick and healthy is not
easily drawn. Instead of treating the blurry border as a damning flaw of
diagnosis, we could use it as inherited wisdom. Instead of insisting
that the line must be drawn more sharply, we could admit the need for
some flexibility and even uncertainty. Depression is not monolithic, but
a group of illness states with enough in common to bear the same name.
It is more like a family name than a given name. A wide definition of
clinical depression does have costs. Concern for those costs needs to
weighed against benefits, however. There is much to be said for the
ability to bear suffering. There is also much to be said for not
suffering needlessly.4

Notes

1. Foreword by Judith N. Shklar in Wolf Lepenies, Melancholy and Society
(Jeremy Gaines and Doris Jones, eds., Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1992), xvi. 2. Brampton, Shoot the Damn Dog, 84. 3. Pim Cuijpers,
Aartan T. F. Beekman, and Charles Reynolds, "Preventing Depression: A
Global Priority," Journal of the American Medical Association 301, 10
(March 2012) 1033--4. 4. These last two sentences are drawn from my
review of Ian Dowbiggin's The Quest for Mental Health. My review is in
the Bulletin of the History of Medicine 86, 2 (Summer, 2012).

Note on the Historiography I tried (though at times failed) not to get
overly involved in debates with other scholars in the main body of the
text. I want to explain some of my choices further here. The trend in
recent years has been for historians to stress the newness of the
current conceptions of depression. As I mentioned in chapter 2, the
recent focus by historians on the newness of depression is itself new,
and largely a post-Prozac trend. Before the 1990s, many psychiatrists
used melancholia and depression interchangeably. Some historians did
too, though few historians had written much about depression before
Prozac came out. In his 1986 book, Stanley Jackson stressed continuities
between modern depressive illnesses and precursor syndromes, mainly
melancholia. Janet Oppenheim's work assumed that melancholia and
depression are the same thing.1 More recently, other scholars have
focused more on the dramatic increase in the use of the term depression
starting in the second half of the twentieth century, and seen it as
discontinuous with earlier uses. Clark Lawlor's 2012 book is more
similar to Jackson's in its approach than much of the other recent work.
Flux in conceptions and categories has been a constant, however, and was
so before DSM-III and before Prozac. I have not wanted to revive the
emphasis on continuity in Jackson. For all the virtues in his book, one
big flaw in it is that it traces continuities in descriptions without
grappling adequately with the tendency of many writers to copy from each
other. Still less have I wanted to assume identity between melancholia
and depression, as Oppenheim did. I do think, though, that reasonable
concerns about the dangers of retrospective diagnosis can spill over
into a rigid taboo that forecloses meaningful comparisons across time
and space. No one can reasonably argue for perfect continuity over time
and place in the meaning of depressive illness -- and few have. Treating
the DSM-III or DSM-5 definitions of Major Depressive Disorder as utterly
and entirely discontinuous with either twentieth-century antecedents or
earlier ones, seems to me an over-emphasis in the other direction.

Historians use a lot of categories that have varying and contested
meanings over time, including some of the most foundational -- male,
female, class, labor, race, sex -- without concluding that we cannot
compare their meanings and functions across time and space. I wonder if
our nervousness about making these comparisons about mental illnesses
reflects an implicit suspicion that they are too "socially constructed"
to be really real. But which of the categories in this paragraph has not
been shown to be a social construction in important ways? I tried to
make this project as global as possible. I tried especially to look
beyond North America and Western Europe, where most histories of
depression have been confined. I would have liked to have done still
better. We are limited by the state of the research, though. Most of the
writing on depression in non-Western contexts is by medical
anthropologists and mental health professionals, not historians,
although some of it has been historically informed. I have used work in
other disciplines in writing this. Still, I hope future synthetic
histories of depression will be able to draw on a richer source pool of
research in diverse contexts. If depression is as widespread as the WHO
says it is, a focus on the West is too limited, and if it is not that
widespread, then we need to explain how the WHO came to its conclusion.
We will also have a better understanding of depression in the West once
we have a better comparative frame. I hope I will have spurred further
discussion of this knotty problem. There is, though, also some
justification for looking closely at Europe and the United States, where
the labels now used, and the ideas underpinning them, were forged. I
also have looked more closely at two twentieth-century treatments for
depression that preceded the antidepressant era -- psychoanalysis and
ECT -- than most general histories of depression have. I often feel,
reading histories of depression, that the authors were not interested in
psychoanalysis, and gave it a section out of a sense of duty. While its
influence has waned in recent decades, it remains a vital source of
thinking about depression. A lot of psychoanalytic thinking on
depression is simply omitted in most histories of depression.
Psychoanalysis has less prestige in recent decades, but was dominant for
much of modernity. To pay it less attention in historical writing now
because it no longer has the prestige it once had is presentist.
Psychoanalysis is also important beyond the era of its heyday. It
birthed

much of what came afterwards, sometimes in expected ways (such as
reaction against it), but also in some surprising continuities. As for
ECT, it has mostly been looked at in work devoted specifically to ECT,
and skipped over even more lightly than psychoanalysis in general
histories of depression. For historical writing on any illness to touch
so lightly on what so many clinicians consider the most effective
treatment is more than a little strange. I am, of course, aware that ECT
is controversial. That's what my book on ECT is about. The controversies
make ECT more important to grasp historically, not less. My account is
as interdisciplinary as I could make it. Interdisciplinarity is often
idealized in academia, depicted as a magic wand that will end all
barriers to knowledge. Worse, it can be used -- often by administrators
who want to avoid the costs of building up disciplines -- to undermine
any disciplinarity at all. I use disciplines besides history for
concrete practical reasons. You cannot get a good look at depression
outside of the countries in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization if
you don't use anthropology. The story of depression is also a story of
inequalities. You can't make a serious engagement with social
disparities, such as of class, race, and gender, without looking at the
sociology and epidemiology. The role of social inequality in depression
is considerably under-studied by historians. I also am not shy about
commenting on efficacy of treatments. Too many historians of psychiatry,
in my opinion, decline to say whether treatments work, calling that a
clinical, and not a historical, question. Historians often say they
intend to explore what the treatment means, rather than whether it
works. For people with an illness, though, the meaning of a treatment
cannot be separated from the question of whether it works. No one would
write about the history of antibiotics or chemotherapy and decline to
say whether they work. Sometimes the evidence may be inconclusive, and
when it is, we can say so. That is different from saying the question of
efficacy is not the historian's business at all. Sometimes historians do
assess efficacy, in a harshly critical way, focusing on treatments they
do not approve of. Or, we offer critique of treatments for their
negative effects, or social control utility. If it is our job to make
those kinds of assessments -- and it is -- we have to take the
responsibility of making judgments about the positives. This is not just
a matter of being fair to psychiatry. It is also an ethical
responsibility to people who are ill, because we can give the

impression that they should not seek treatment. Any historian who truly
believes there is no utility in psychiatry at all -- and some seem to
write as though that is the case -- is of course free to argue and
document that claim. I disagree with it. I think evidence shows that
effective treatments for depression (and for other mental illnesses)
exist -- not all equally effective, sometimes differing in the way they
are effective, and often having costs. In any event, for someone to say
they have no opinion about whether a treatment works, after spending
years studying it, is an abdication of responsibility. We should not, I
think, be afraid to assert any progress in clinical science. History of
medicine, as a field, has worked hard over roughly the last half century
to overcome an earlier tendency to tell naÃ¯ve stories of inevitable, but
nonetheless heroic, progress. The earlier "progress narratives" left out
too much -- about, for example, coercive and abusive practices, blind
alleys in research, excessive medicalization, or those left out of the
progress because they received no treatment at all. Historical
narratives that allow no possibility of progress at all are also
incomplete, however. The impulse of medical historians to be skeptical
of progress may have been over-learned, to the point where simply
calling a work of history a progress narrative is supposed to be a
critique by itself. I think this is a problem in history of psychiatry
above all. Reading much work in the field, one might often feel that
nothing has been accomplished in psychiatry at all. We do not have to
idealize any treatments to acknowledge that some offer benefit. For
those who can obtain treatment -- and there are too many who cannot --
more hope is available for people with mental illness than there was in
1850.

Notes 1. Janet Oppenheim, "Shattered Nerves": Doctors, Patients and
Depression in Victorian England (New York: Oxford University Press,
1991).

Partial Bibliography This list is partial since it does not list every
work cited in the footnotes -- and also, because I learned a lot from
them, it lists books I am partial to. It includes books I broadly agree
with and others I have strong disagreements with. It is annotated -- but
only partially.

General Works on the History and Philosophy of Depression and
Melancholia Stanley Jackson's erudite work has been foundational for all
later historical scholarship. Jennifer Radden's work brings exceptional
clarity to many of the issues. Andrew Solomon's book is a remarkable
look at depression from multiple perspectives. Callahan, Christopher M.
and German E. Berrios, Reinventing Depression: A History of the
Treatment of Depression in Primary Care, 1940--2004 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005). Greenberg, Gary. Manufacturing Depression: The
Secret History of a Modern Disease (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010).
Hirshbein, Laura D. American Melancholy: Constructions of Depression in
the Twentieth Century (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
2014). Jackson, Stanley. Melancholia and Depression: From Hippocratic
Times to Modern Times (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986).
Lawlor, Clark. From Melancholia to Prozac: A History of Depression
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012). Radden, Jennifer. Moody Minds
Distempered: Essays in Melancholy and Depression (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009). Radden, Jennifer. Melancholy Habits: Burton's
Anatomy and the Mind Sciences (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).

Solomon, Andrew. The Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression (2nd edition,
New York: Scribner, 2015, originally published 2001).

Anthropology of Depression and Related Issues Kleinman's pioneering work
in this area remains valuable, and the subtlety of his arguments is
often missed. The listed ethnographies of antidepressant use --
Behrouzan, Ecks, Kitanaka -- are excellent. Behrouzan, Orkideh. Prozak
Diaries: Psychiatry and Generational Memory in Iran (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2016). Ecks, Stefan. Eating Drugs:
Psychopharmaceutical Pluralism in India (New York: New York University
Press, 2014). Field, Margaret. Search for Security: An Ethno-Psychiatric
Study of Rural Ghana (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press,
1960). Kitanaka, Junko. Depression in Japan: Psychiatric Cures for a
Society in Distress (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012).
Kleinman, Arthur. Social Origins of Distress and Disease: Depression,
Neurasthenia, and Pain in Modern China (New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1986). Kleinman, Arthur. Rethinking Psychiatry: From Cultural
Category to Personal Experience (New York: The Free Press, 1991).
Kleinman, Arthur and Byron Good, eds., Culture and Depression: Studies
in the Anthropology and Cross-Cultural Psychiatry of Affect and Disorder
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1985). O'Nell, Theresa
DeLeane. Disciplined Hearts: History, Identity, and Depression in an
American Indian Community (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
1996).

Psychoanalysis

Some historians of medicine and psychiatry think that psychoanalysis has
received too much attention. Many who say that are also the ones who
don't like psychoanalysis much. I think psychoanalysis has enduring
value, but even if you disagree, its historical importance is
unquestionably huge. Really good new books -- fresh, smart, original --
on the history of psychoanalysis come out every year. I've only listed
ones I used for this book. George Makari's book is about as good an
introduction to the history of the movement as one could hope for. Julia
Segal's book on Klein is an unusually clear introduction to a difficult
thinker. The Solms book is a good overview of neuropsychoanalysis.
Abraham, Karl. Clinical Papers and Essays on Psychoanalysis (London:
Maresfield Reprints, 1955). Bentick van Schoonheten, Anna. Karl Abraham;
Life and Work, a Biography (Liz Waters, trans., London: Karnac Books,
2016, originally published 2013). Busch, Fredric N., Marie Rudden, and
Theodore Shapiro, Psychodynamic Treatment of Depression (Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2004). Fiorini, Leticia, Thierry
Bokanowski, and Sergio Lewkowicz, eds., On Freud's "Mourning and
Melancholia" (London: Karnac Books, 2009, originally published 2007).
Freud, Sigmund. On Murder, Mourning, and Melancholia (Shaun Whiteside,
ed., London: Penguin Books, 2005). Green, AndrÃ©. On Private Madness
(London: Karnak Books, 1997, originally published 1986). Jacobson,
Edith. Depression: Comparative Studies of Normal, Neurotic, and
Psychotic Conditions (Madison, CT: International Universities Press,
1971). Kristeva, Julia. Black Sun: Depression and Melancholia (Leon S.
Roudiez, trans., New York: Columbia University Press, 1989, originally
published 1987).

Leader, Darian. The New Black: Mourning, Melancholia and Depression
(Minneapolis, MN: Graywolf Press, 2008). Makari, George. Revolution in
Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis (New York: HarperCollins, 2008).
Miller, Alice. The Drama of the Gifted Child: The Search for the True
Self (Ruth Ward, trans., New York: Basic Books, 2007, originally
published 1979). Mitchell, Juliet, ed., The Selected Melanie Klein (New
York: The Free Press, 1986). Segal, Julia. Melanie Klein (London: Sage
Publications, 1992). Solms, Mark. The Brain and the Inner World: An
Introduction to the Neuroscience of the Subjective Experience (New York:
Other Press, 2003).

Politics, Social Identity, and Inequality Study of the politics and
demographics of depression has given most attention to gender. There is
still more to do on this subject, but there is also a lot of research
waiting to be done on depression and other forms of inequality and
injustice. Some of the books below are more about other aspects of
psychiatry or medicine, not depression. I've not listed articles in this
bibliography, but much of the sociology and epidemiology on inequality
and depression is in journals; see the footnotes to chapter 4. The
historical literature on depression and social inequality is thin, and
awaiting researchers. Brown, George W. and Tirril Harris, Social Origins
of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric Disorder in Women (New York: The
Free Press, 1978). Cvetkovich, Ann. Depression: A Public Feeling
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012). Davies, William. The
Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big Business Sold Us
Well-Being (London: Verso, 2015).

Emmons, Kimberly K. Black Dogs and Blue Words: Depression and Gender in
the Age of Self-Care (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
2010). Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth (New York: Grove Press,
1963). Han, Byung-Chul. Psychopolitics: Neoliberalism and the New
Technologies of Power (Erik Butler, trans., London: Verso, 2017). Metzl,
Jonathan. Prozac on the Couch: Prescribing Gender in the Era of Wonder
Drugs (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003). Metzl, Jonathan. The
Protest Psychosis: How Schizophrenia Became a Black Disease (Boston, MA:
Beacon Press, 2009). Mustakeem, Sowande' M. Slavery at Sea: Terror, Sex,
and Sickness in the Middle Passage (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois
Press, 2016). Schiesari, Juliana. The Gendering of Melancholia:
Feminism, Psychoanalysis, and the Symbolics of Loss in Renaissance
Literature (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992).

The DSM All of these books are worth reading, but in my opinion the one
by Hannah Decker is the best. Decker, Hannah S. The Making of DSM-III: A
Diagnostic Manual's Conquest of American Psychiatry (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2013). Frances, Allen. Saving Normal: An Insider's
Revolt Against Out-of-Control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-V, Big Pharma,
and the Medicalization of Ordinary Life (New York: William Morrow,
2013). Greenberg, Gary. The Book of Woe: The DSM and the Unmaking of
Psychiatry (New York: Plume, 2013). Kutchins, Herb and Stuart A. Kirk.
Making Us Crazy: DSM: The Psychiatric Bible and the Creation of Mental
Disorders (New York: The

Free Press, 1997).

Biological Psychiatry and Pharmaceuticals For thoroughness on the
history of psychopharmacology, David Healy's work remains unsurpassed.
In the spirit of listing books that I am partial towards, I have listed
my own book on ECT; see Kneeland and Warren for a less favorable take on
ECT than mine, and Shorter and Healy for a more favorable one than mine.
Many of the treatments that preceded the antidepressant era are ably
examined in Joel Braslow's even-handed book. Anne Harrington's book is a
recent and lucid overview of biological psychiatry in general.
Andreasen, Nancy C. The Broken Brain: The Biological Revolution in
Psychiatry (New York: Harper and Row, 1984). Braslow, Joel. Mental Ills
and Bodily Cures: Psychiatric Treatment in the First Half of the
Twentieth Century (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1997).
Elliott, Carl and Tod Chambers, eds.Â Prozac as a Way of Life (Chapel
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2004). Harrington, Anne.
Mind Fixers: Psychiatry's Troubled Search for the Biology of Mental
Illness (New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2019). Healy, David. The
Anti-Depressant Era (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997).
Healy, David. The Creation of Psychopharmacology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1992). Karp, David A. Is It Me or My Meds?: Living
with Antidepressants (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
Kirsch, Irving. The Emperor's New Drugs: Exploding the Antidepressant
Myth (New York: Basic Books, 2010).

Kneeland, Timothy and Carol A. B. Warren, Pushbutton Psychiatry: A
History of Electroshock in America (Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers,
2002). Kramer, Peter. Listening to Prozac: A Psychiatrist Explores
Antidepressant Drugs and the Remaking of the Self (New York: Penguin
Books, 1993). Kramer, Peter. Ordinarily Well: The Case for
Antidepressants (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2016). Moncrieff,
Joanna. The Myth of the Chemical Cure: A Critique of Psychiatric Drug
Treatment (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008). Rasmussen, Nicolas. On
Speed: The Many Lives of Amphetamine (New York: New York University
Press, 2008). Sadowsky, Jonathan. Electroconvulsive Therapy in America
(New York: Routledge, 2006). Shorter, Edward. Before Prozac: The
Troubled History of Mood Disorders in Psychiatry (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009). Shorter, Edward and David Healy, Shock Therapy:
A History of Electroconvulsive Treatment in Mental Illness (New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2007). Valenstein, Elliot S.
Blaming the Brain: The Truth About Drugs and Mental Health (New York:
The Free Press, 1998).

Memoir and Narrative I believe deeply that while other experts obviously
matter, no one can understand any illness state without an immersive
reckoning with the words of people who have had it. This is why I
devoted substantial attention here to patients' voices, as I did in my
previous books. The list below features my personal favorites. The books
by Jamison and Saks are about other mental illnesses, but they are
incredible and should be read by anyone trying to understand mental
illness and psychiatry.

Danquah, Meri Nana-Ama. Willow, Weep for Me: A Black Woman's Journey
Through Depression (New York: Ballantine Publishing Group, 1998). Diski,
Jenny. Skating to Antarctica (London: Virago, 2014, originally published
1997). Fisher, Carrie. Shockaholic (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011).
Frank, Arthur. The Wounded Storyteller (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1995). Gask, Linda. The Other Side of Silence: A
Psychiatrist's Memoir of Depression (Chichester: Sommersdale Publishers,
2015). Jamison, Kay Redfield. An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and
Madness (New York: Vintage Books, 2011, originally published 1995).
Manning, Martha. Undercurrents: A Life Beneath the Surface (New York:
HarperSanFrancisco, 1994). Merkin, Daphne. This Close to Happy: A
Reckoning with Depression (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2017).
Saks, Elyn R. The Center Cannot Hold: My Journey Through Madness (New
York: Hachette Books, 2007). Slater, Lauren. Prozac Diary (New York:
Penguin Books, 1998). Springsteen, Bruce. Born to Run (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 2016). Styron, William. Darkness Visible: A Memoir of
Madness (New York: Vintage Books, 1990). Thompson, Tracy. The Beast: A
Journey Through Depression (New York: Penguin Books, 1996). Wurtzel,
Elizabeth. Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America (New York:
Riverhead Books, 1994).

Index Page numbers in italic refer to figures.

A Abraham, Hilda 115 Abraham, Karl 48--53, 55, 57, 60, 61, 62, 65, 75,
77--8, 82, 117, 146 acedia 30--1, 32, 40, 151 Adichie, Chimamanda Ngozi
1--2 Americanah 1--2, 5, 9, 11, 101, 136, 158 adversity in life,
depression and 19, 42, 86, 88--92, 142, 147, 161 Africa 12--14, 41
aggression 54, 55 infant tendencies 51--2, 52, 56, 57 projection of 56
see also anger turned inward alienation 2, 58, 97 all-or-nothing
thinking 79, 97 Alzheimer's Disease 6, 133 amphetamine 77, 107, 114,
117, 155 Andreasen, Nancy 6--7, 70, 92, 96--7, 118--19, 143 anger turned
inward 44--5, 48, 49, 52, 55, 57, 59, 79, 100, 110, 117, 123, 144--5
anhedonia 76--7 antibiotics 125

antidepressants viii--ix, xi--xii, 2, 21, 22, 63, 65, 101, 112--33, 160
adverse side effects 114, 154, 156 antidepressant era 112--33 clinical
trials 122, 123--5 cosmetic psychopharmacology 120, 121 critics of 81,
121, 123, 125, 132 disillusionment with 46, 122, 128, 132 efficacy 63,
64, 65, 114, 122, 123, 124--5 global use of 126--30 overuse 126 patient
ambivalence towards 68, 155--6 placebo effect 123--4 rise of 73, 75, 77,
78, 98, 111, 112--18 tailoring effect 124, 213n63 see also specific
drugs antihistamines 115 antipsychiatry 7, 93, 96, 109--10, 128
antipsychotics 73, 111--12, 114, 131 anxiety 19, 38, 51, 56, 58, 77, 81
age of anxiety 98, 99 drug treatments 98 separation of anxiety and
depression 19 appetite loss 4, 14, 52 Aretaeus 5 Arieti, Silvano 63, 64
Aristotle 29

Asian Americans, depression and 90 asylums 12, 77, 106 attachment and
loss 64, 65, 146 Avicenna 18 Axelrod, Julius 115 Ayurvedic medicine 129

B Beard, George 13, 38 A Beautiful Mind (film) 107 Beck, Aaron 79--81
Beck Depression Inventory 79 bed, confinement to 150 Bemporad, Jules 63,
64 Benedict, Ruth 127 bereavement exclusion 5, 95 Berger, Frank 112
Bibring, Edward 59, 60, 65 Bini, Lucio 108, 109 biological model of
depression 19, 20--1, 22, 63, 64, 86, 88, 105, 119, 122, 130, 148, 158
biological psychiatry 63, 67, 68, 96, 102, 105, 106, 118--19, 122, 123,
130, 143 bipolar disorder xi, 21, 38, 64, 111 heritability 118 Black
Americans, depression and 89--90 black bile 25, 28--9, 31, 33

boarding schools 147 Bowlby, John 64, 65, 66, 82, 117 brain chemistry
63, 86, 112--18, 114, 122, 123 catecholamine hypothesis 113, 116, 117,
118, 119--20, 131 Brampton, Sally 142, 143--4, 147, 148, 150, 151, 152,
156, 157, 160 breast relationship of child to 51, 52, 56, 67 trauma of
weaning 56 Bright, Timothy 34, 40, 102 Brooks, Arthur 83 Buddhism 14
bupropion 116 see also Wellbutrin Burton, Robert 24--5, 32, 34--7, 42,
51, 88 Anatomy of Melancholy 24--5, 34--7, 120

C Cade, John 111 cancer 7, 13, 89, 91, 139, 141, 148 cannibalistic
drives 52 Carlsson, Arvid 116 Carter, Jimmy 101 Cassian, John 31
catatonia 77 catecholamine hypothesis 113, 116, 117, 118, 119--20, 131
Cerletti, Ugo 109

change, unwillingness to 52 character flaw, depression as 102, 118, 144,
149 Chemical Convulsive Therapy 108 "chemical imbalance" trope 28, 45,
104, 105, 122--3, 126, 143, 145, 158 Chestnut Lodge, Maryland 66--7, 68,
69, 82 children aggressive tendencies 51--2, 52, 56, 57 child abuse 88,
90, 147--8 depression 58, 59, 88 depressive position 56, 57
paranoid-schizoid position 56 play technique 55 self-punishment 59
traumatic events 117, 147--8 see also mother chlorpromazine 111--12
Christian faith 151 chronic illness, depression and 91, 92 Churchill,
Winston 136 class, depression and 88--9, 91--2, 202n81 climate change
160 clinical trials 122, 123--5 placebo effect 123--4 randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) 69, 80 Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) xii,
78--9, 80, 81, 82, 122, 157 efficacy 81, 83, 84

Cold War 99 colonial psychiatry 12--13, 41 complementarity of models of
depression 20, 21, 22, 42 concentration, poor 4 cortisol 66, 96 cosmetic
psychopharmacology 120, 121 counting depression 2, 3, 69, 86--8, 162 see
also diagnosis COVID-19 pandemic x, 8, 92, 160 creativity 20, 51, 60,
61, 62, 85, 147 cross-cultural study of depression 11--19, 86, 126--30,
166 cultural idioms of distress 17--18 cultural imperialism 12--13, 17
culture-bound syndromes 11, 18 Cvetkovich, Ann 92, 157, 158

D Danquah, Meri Nana-Ama 48, 143, 146--7, 149 Davies, William 83
deinstitutionalization 106 dejection 29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 40, 86
delusional states 25--6, 76, 77, 96 dementia praecox see schizophrenia
demonic possession 34 depressive position 56, 57 depressive realism 20

depth psychology xii, 44, 46, 61, 114, 121 see also psychoanalysis
diabetes analogy 91, 102, 104, 129, 156 diagnosis absence of signs of
sadness 16--17 bereavement exclusion 5, 95 better detection of
depression 3, 12 crisis of diagnosis 93 diagnostic drift xiii, 3, 97
diagnostic shuffle 39 discredited 9 labelling illness states 6--9
over-diagnosis xiii, 68, 101, 162 proportionality criterion 5, 6, 19,
29, 36, 53, 89 reductive 8, 92, 96--7 retrospective 17, 166 rising rates
of xiii, 2, 3, 68, 75, 97--8, 130, 163 stigmatization xiii, 8, 9, 78,
105, 118, 119, 128, 139, 144 time criterion 4--5, 6 true prevalence 3,
97 see also symptoms

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 8--9, 16, 92--7
critiques of 8--9, 96--7, 172n22 DSM-III 63, 77, 93--4, 96, 102, 118,
166 DSM-IIIR 94--5 DSM-IV 95, 101 DSM-5 4--5, 16, 95, 96, 166 diseases
co-morbidity between depression and 91 depression as "disease like any
other" 104, 118, 119, 128, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 156, 158 Diski,
Jenny 142, 146, 147--8, 150--1, 152 disqualifying the positive 79
Donohue, Anne 154 dopamine 113, 116 "drapetomania" 9 dreams 79, 80
Dukakis, Kitty 153, 154 DÃ¼rer, Albrecht 27 "duvet diving" 150 dynamic
psychology see depth psychology dysthymia 94 see also Persistent
Depressive Disorder

E Effexor 156

efficacy of treatments xii--xiii, 83--4, 124--5, 167--8 antidepressants
63, 64, 65, 114, 122, 123, 124--5 Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 81,
83, 84 electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 109, 110, 111, 153 Interpersonal
Therapy (ITP) 83, 84 psychodynamic therapy 48, 84 psychotherapy 48,
83--4, 133 electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) xii, 17, 66, 77, 86, 98,
108--11, 117, 121, 137, 138, 144, 157, 167 disciplinary use 109, 110 ECT
memoirs 144--5, 153--4 efficacy 109, 110, 111, 153 memory loss 111, 138,
154, 156 unmodified 108, 110, 138 Eli Lilly 103, 116 Endler, Norman,
Holiday of Darkness 137--8, 153 endogenous depression 76, 96, 147,
197n20 energy depletion 61 envy 60 epilepsy 108 esketamie 131 Esquirol,
Jean-Ãtienne 37, 38 Evagrius Ponticus 31 exercise 142

F

Fanon, Frantz 41 fatigue 4, 150 fearfulness 25, 26, 30, 37 Fenichel,
Otto 57, 60 Ferenczi, Sandor 55 Ficino, Marsilio 33, 36 Field, Margaret
41 Fisher, Carrie 105, 153, 154 fluoxetine 102, 116 see also Prozac food
and diet 33, 35--6 Foucault, Michel 100 Frances, Allen 95, 101 Frank,
Arthur 137--8, 148 free association 55 Freeman, Walter 107 Freud,
Sigmund xii, 5, 38, 40, 43, 44, 45, 47--8, 49, 52, 53--5, 57, 61, 62--3,
66, 69, 75, 80, 81, 114, 117 "Mourning and Melancholia" 5, 47, 53, 54
Fromm-Reichmann, Frieda 60, 66

G Galen 28--9, 30 Gask, Linda 145, 154, 157 Geigy 115

gender ratio depression 26, 64, 86--8, 91--2, 149, 200n64, 200n65,
201n69 melancholia 26, 27, 35, 87--8 genetic predisposition 21, 42, 52,
57, 62, 63, 64, 66, 76, 105, 118 germ theory of disease 25, 37, 106
Gestalt therapy 78 gift or opportunity, depression as a 20, 62 see also
creativity global incidence of depression 2 Goes, Hugo van der 32, 40
gratitude industry 83 Green, AndrÃ© 57--8, 69, 146 Greenberg, Gary 145,
172n22 grief see sadness guilt culture 40, 41, 187n116 guilt,
inappropriate 4, 39--41, 43, 44--5, 52, 53--4, 76, 144, 151 gut
microbiome 131

H Haig, Matt 152 Hamilton, Max 78 Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
78 Hamlet (William Shakespeare) 23--4, 53 happiness, expectations of
viii, 14, 161 happiness industry 83 Harvey, David 99

Harvey, William 37 heartbreak 6 Heffernan, Virginia viii--ix Hentoff,
Nat 85 heritability of depression see genetic predisposition Hildegard
of Bingen, St.Â 31--2, 40 Hippocratics 29 HIV/AIDS xv, 92
Hoffmann-LaRoche 113 homosexuality 96, 109 medicalization of 6, 7
hopelessness 65, 76, 99, 150 Horney, Karen 47, 49 Horwitz, Allan 98, 101
humanistic therapy 78 humoral theory of the body 25, 28--30, 31, 32, 33,
35, 36--7, 42, 105 hysteria 9, 48, 97

I idioms of distress 17, 98, 104, 177n58 imipramine 115 impostor
syndrome 71 indecisiveness 4 India 17--18, 41, 128--9 individualism 99

inequality, politics of ix, x, 85, 86, 92, 99, 167 see also adversity in
life, depression and inflammation 21, 131 Inman, Lora 141, 143, 145,
147, 150, 156--7 insomnia 76 Insulin Coma Therapy 107--8 insurance 9, 94
interest, loss of 4, 150 Interpersonal Therapy (ITP) 67, 79, 81--2
efficacy 83, 84 intersectionality 201n73 introjection 54, 55, 64
involutional depression 38 involutional melancholia 76 iproniazid 113,
114, 115 Iran 14, 127

J Jackson, Stanley 143, 165, 181n10 Jacobson, Edith 60, 69, 77--8
Jamison, Kay Redfield 21 Janet, Pierre 45 Janssen Pharmaceuticals 131
Japan 87, 127--8, 187n116 Johnson, Samuel 37 Joseph Syndrome 60

Jung, Carl xii, 46--7, 60--2, 73, 158

K Kalinowsky, Lothar 109 Karp, David 62, 148, 151 Kaysen, Susanna 20
Kernberg, Otto 65--6 ketamine 131 ki 128 Kitanaka, Junko 135 Klaesi,
Jacob 107 Klein, Melanie 49, 55--6, 57 Klerman, Gerald 67, 69, 82, 116
Kline, Nathan 66, 68, 73, 74, 112, 114, 117, 118, 119, 143 Kraepelin,
Emil 38, 45, 76, 196n15 Kramer, Peter 118, 120--1, 129 Kristeva, Julia
64--5, 69 Kruger, Judith 145, 153--4 Kuhn, Ronald 115

L Laborit, Henri 111 Lambo, T.A. 13--14 Latinos, depression and 90
Latvia 126--7 Lawlor, Clark 165

Leader, Darian 52, 139 learned helplessness 59--60, 82 lethargy 4, 12,
76, 95, 101, 150, 151 LGBT people, depression and 90 libido 61 Lincoln,
Abraham 20 linguistic shift xiii lithium 111, 155 lobotomy 85, 107, 110
loneliness 133, 144 Lott, Tim 144, 152 LSD 131, 155 Luther, Martin 32,
33, 34, 42, 103, 151

M Macbeth (William Shakespeare) 24 MacCurdy, John 76 McWilliams, Nancy
63--4 madness 11, 29, 32, 33, 34, 42, 173n25 Maimonides 31 Major
Depressive Disorder (MDD) 3--4, 94, 95, 96, 98, 143, 166 symptoms 4--5
Malanda, Ted 14 Malaria Fever Therapy 106 mania xi, 29, 31

manic-depressive disorder xi, see also bipolar disorder Manning, Martha
151, 153, 154, 157 manualization 75, 86, 93 see also Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; rating scales Marchenko, Gillian
142, 143, 145, 150, 151--2 marijuana 155 masked depression 16, 127, 129,
176n49 Maslow, Abraham 77 medical model of depression ix, xiv Meduna,
Ladislas 108 melancholia xi, 5, 18, 22, 23--43, 52, 53, 75, 96, 151, 158
in antiquity 28--9, 30 biblical accounts 33--4 declining use of term
37--9, 39, 74 early modern period 23--8, 30--43 Freud on 52, 53 gender
ratio 26, 27, 35, 87--8 historical relationship with depression xi,
25--8, 37, 38--9, 39, 75 humoral theories of 25, 28--30, 31, 32, 33, 35,
36--7, 105 interchangeability with depression 165 as mood 29, 39 sin,
association with 30--2, 34, 35, 151 symptoms 25--6, 29, 30, 34--5, 37,
96 treatments 30, 34, 36

memoir writing 121, 133--4, 135--59 ambivalence towards depression
treatments 157 chaos narrative 137 ECT memoirs 144--5, 153--4
limitations 138 quest narrative 137 realness, tactics of 142--3
resistance to description 139 restitution narrative 137 meprobomate 112
Merkin, Daphne 103, 141--2, 148, 149, 151, 155--6 This Close to Happy
140 metaphors 135--6 Metzl, Jonathan 85 Meyer, Adolf 26, 37, 38, 74--5,
82, 93, 97, 140, 159, 163 Miller, Alice 58, 146 Miltown 98, 112
mind-reader error 79 mind--body dualism ix, 26, 42--3 Mingus, Charles
85, 147 Moniz, Egas 107 monoamine oxidase 113, 115, 122 monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) xii, 73, 74, 77, 102, 113--14, 115, 116, 124,
130 monoamines 113

mood depression as a 9, 28, 39, 61, 75 melancholia as 29, 39 mood drugs
112--15, 123, 124 moral failing, implied 30--2, 34, 102, 118, 119, 144,
149, 151 mother ambivalence toward 55--6 emotionally unavailable 49, 51,
57--8 identification with the 64, 65 maternal depression 49, 57--8
psychic division of the mother figure 51 see also breast mourning 5, 53,
95 Myerson, Abraham 76--7, 107, 114

N Nash, John 107 Native Americans, depression and 90, 92 neo-liberalism
98--100 neurasthenia 13, 38, 97, 101, 126 neurology 65
neuropsychoanalysis 65 neurosyphilis 106 neurotic depression 76
neurotransmitters 112, 113, 114, 115--16, 117 "newness" of depression x,
19--20, 25, 165

norepinephrine 113, 116 nortriptyline 116 Nuland, Sherwin 154

O object relations 55 oblivion, desire for 152 O'Brien, Sharon 149, 150
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (novel/film) 109--10, 153 O'Nell,
Theresa DeLeane 92 Oppenheim, Janet 165, 166 Osheroff, Rafael 62, 66--8,
82 over-generalization 79

P Pamelor 116 Paracelsus 33, 34 paranoid-schizoid position 56 parents
emotionally remote 49, 51, 58, 146--7 loss of a parent 64 unstable
relationship with 64 see also mother Parsons, Talcott 144 Paul, St.Â 30

Persistent Depressive Disorder 94 see also dysthymia Pfizer 104
pharmaceutical industry 2--3 phrenitis 29 physical lesion test 6, 7, 11
physicality of depression 4, 16, 42, 148--9, 150 Pine, Daniel 124 Pinel,
Philippe 37 Plath, Sylvia 86, 110, 144, 147 The Bell Jar 110, 135--6
play technique 55 political depression 92, 157--8 see also inequality,
politics of Pollock, Edmund 85 positive psychology 83 post-modernity 98,
99, 100 post-partum depression 142 poverty 42, 88, 89, 92 Pride and
Prejudice (Jane Austen) 47 Problemata 29 projection 45, 54, 56 prolonged
sleep therapy 107, 115 proportionality criterion 5, 6, 19, 29, 36, 53,
89

Prozac xii, 24, 25, 62, 65, 74, 77, 102, 103--5, 105, 106, 116, 117,
120--1, 122, 137, 145, 152, 155, 157 cultural sensation 104, 117
Listening to Prozac (Peter Kramer) 118, 120--1 Prozac Nation (Elizabeth
Wurtzel) 24, 140--1 psychedelic drugs 131 psychiatry antipsychiatry 7,
93, 96, 109--10, 128 biological psychiatry 63, 67, 68, 96, 102, 105,
106, 118--19, 122, 123, 130, 143 cultural system 12 harms x out-patient
psychiatry, rise of 77, 97 Western 19 see also psychoanalysis;
psychotherapy psychic energy 61, 62, 73, 112, 114, 117

psychoanalysis 22, 44--69, 159, 167 Abrahamic tradition 48--63
disillusionment with 45, 46, 80, 118, 167 feminist tradition 49 Freudian
tradition see Freud, Sigmund "full-blown" psychotherapy 46 integration
of biology 63--6 Jungian tradition see Jung, Carl new forms of 78
open-ended nature of 78 supposed anti-biological dogma 54--5 supposed
sexism 45, 47 psychodynamic therapy 46, 84 psychological model of
depression 20, 21, 22, 42, 63, 106 psychopharmacology 73, 82
psychotherapy 21, 22, 44, 46, 48, 63 efficacy 48, 83--4, 133 psychotic
depression 76 Punjabis 17--18

R racist science 12--13, 41, 85 RadÃ³, Sandor 59 randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) 69, 80 rating scales 75, 78, 79, 93 reactive depression
76, 197n20

recreational drugs 155 reductionism 8, 22, 42, 132, 158, 162, 163 Reich,
Wilhelm 93 Renaissance 23, 24, 25, 30, 32, 33, 102 reserpine 115 reverse
somatic symptoms 10 Rosenhan, David 93 Rostow, Walt 70 Rothko, Mark
70--3, 72, 74, 196n9 Rufus of Ephesus 29, 30, 31

S sadness viii, xv, 1, 5, 14, 16, 24, 43, 53, 60, 91, 101, 122
bereavement exclusion 5, 95 blurred distinction between depression and
1--2 medicalization of xiii, 101 mourning 5, 53, 95 normality of 141
Sakel, Manfred 107--8 Saks, Elyn 21, 22 Saul, King 19 Schildkraut,
Joseph 116 schizoaffective disorder 182n12 schizophrenia xi, 21, 38, 85,
88, 89, 93, 107, 108, 113, 115, 119, 133, 147 heritability 118
Schoenberg, Bernard 73

Seasonal Affective Disorder 36 seeking system in the brain 65 Segal,
Julia 47 Segantini, Giovanni 49--51, 50 selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) xii, 74, 101, 102, 113, 116, 120, 121, 123, 154
self-actualization 77, 78 self-esteem, low 53 self-loathing 63
self-punishment 59, 60 see also guilt, inappropriate Seligman, Martin
59--60, 82--3 serotonin 102, 113, 116, 117, 120, 131 serotonin
antagonist and reuptake inhibitors (SARIs) 116 serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) 116 sexual side effects of drugs 116, 154
Shakespeare, William 23--4 Shklar, Judith 160 shock therapies 57, 107,
128 see also Chemical Convulsive Therapy; electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT); Insulin Coma Therapy; prolonged sleep therapy sick role 7, 88,
144, 171n16 Simon, Paul xv Sinequan 196n9 sinking heart 17, 31 Skultans,
Vieda 126

Slater, Lauren 147, 148, 152--3, 154, 155 Prozac Diary 139, 145 sleep
irregularities 4, 76 Smith, Jeffrey 150, 151, 156, 158 social control 81
social inequality, depression and see inequality, politics of social
isolation 89, 97 social model of depression ix, x, xiv, 19, 20, 22, 42
social withdrawal 12, 30, 150 socioeconomic status (SES) 202n81 Solms,
Mark 65 Solomon, Andrew 88--9, 104 somatization 16, 127 Sontag, Susan xv
sorrow see sadness Spavato 131--2 Spitzer, Robert 93--4, 96 splitting
51, 55, 56, 57 Springsteen, Bruce 135, 145, 147, 150, 154 Stekel,
Wilhelm 48, 57 stigma xiii, 8, 9, 78, 105, 118, 119, 128, 139, 144
Structural Adjustment Programs 100 Styron, William 74, 76, 140, 143
Darkness Visible 74, 137, 139, 146 suicidal ideation x, 4, 23, 76, 90
suicidality 6, 32, 40, 95, 150, 152

Sullivan, Harry Stack 66, 82 Summerfield, Derek 70 symptoms
affective/behavioral 9, 10 DSM criteria 94--5, 96 duration of 4--5, 6
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) 4--5 melancholia 25--6, 29, 30, 34--5,
37, 96 psychotic 9, 10 somatic/physical 9, 10, 16 synaptic cleft 113,
114 Szasz, Thomas 7, 93

T talk therapies xi, xii harms x see also Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy
(CBT); psychoanalysis; psychotherapy Tardive Dyskinesia 112 Thatcher,
Margaret 99 "thinking too much" 18 Thompson, Tracy 81, 139, 142, 146,
147, 149, 157 time-limited treatments see Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy
(CBT); Interpersonal Therapy (ITP) tranquilizers 98, 112, 117
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 131 transference 46

transgender people, depression and 90 tricyclics xii, 66, 68, 73, 74,
77, 82, 102, 113, 114, 115--16, 124, 129, 130 tuberculosis xv, 8, 92,
113, 141 twin studies 118

U unconscious mind 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 61 unipolar depression xi, 63,
118 see also Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) United States 2, 16, 18,
89--90 universality of depression 11--19

V Valium 152 Venlafaxine 156 victim-blaming 30, 32, 34

W Wagner-Juaregg, Julius 106 Wakefield, Jerome 101 wealth inequality 99,
160--1 weight gain/loss 4, 156 Wellbutrin 116 Western model of
depression 12, 14, 18, 19, 40, 166 Weyer, Johannes 40 Williams, Robin
14, 141, 147

Willis, Thomas 91 witches 41 women, depression and see gender ratio
Woolf, Virginia 103, 133 "On Being Ill" 133 To the Lighthouse 104--5,
117 World Health Organization (WHO) 2, 140, 166 "worried well" 77
worthlessness, feelings of 4 Wurtzel, Elizabeth 24, 140--1, 143, 145,
146, 150, 155, 157 Prozac Nation 24, 140--1

X Xanax 152

Z zimelidine 116 Zoloft 104, 116, 117

POLITY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT Go to www.politybooks.com/eula to
access Polity's ebook EULA.


