OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

The world needs this book---today more than ever. By reframing the
discussion of mental health to brain health, Dr. Daniel Amen obliterates
the concept that mental health issues are someone's fault, or that
people should just deal with them any differently than they would the
flu or a broken arm. Most important, Dr. Amen gives everyone not just
the permission but the validation and hope to seek help for a better
tomorrow. DARRIA LONG GILLESPIE, MD, emergency physician; national TV
expert and host; author of bestselling book Mom Hacks

The End of Mental Illness is a radical new way to overhaul psychiatry,
using the lessons from neuroimaging in the context of a whole-person
functional medicine approach. My family has benefited from Dr. Amen's
work, and I hope you will too. MARK HYMAN, MD, Pritzker Foundation Chair
in Functional Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine;
director of the Cleveland Clinic Center for Functional Medicine

Dr. Amen's approach has revolutionized our understanding of the causes
and therefore the treatment of mental illness. DAVID PERLMUTTER, MD,
author of the #1 New York Times bestseller Grain Brain and Brain Wash

This is a great book. It presents a radical challenge to the psychiatric
status quo and represents the best of the clinical transformative
traditions. Dr. Amen makes disciplined observations and pursues them to
the end for the sake of his patients without regard to the dense (and
increasingly toxic) academic politics that make psychiatry impotent to
accomplish much. MANUEL TRUJILLO, MD, clinical professor in the
department of psychiatry; director of the Public Psychiatry Fellowship
program at New York University School of Medicine

Through his vast experience with neuroimaging, Dr. Amen has learned that
the "wiring diagram" of our brain is not fixed but constantly changes
depending on our choices, environmental factors, and experiences. By
recommending that we balance our choices in the biological (diet and
exercise), psychological (stress control), social (relationships), and
spiritual components of our lives, he provides a desperately needed road
map to maximize brain health and prevent or reverse many of the epidemic
mental afflictions that are often poorly treated in our medical system.
JOSEPH C. MAROON, MD, vice chairman of neurosurgery, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center; team neurosurgeon, the Pittsburgh Steelers;
author of Square One: A Simple Guide to a Balanced Life

A truly revolutionary work, at least I certainly hope it will be! Books
like this challenge and change the existing paradigm of mental health
and brain health. A fantastic and comprehensive approach for patients
and health-care providers alike. ANDREW NEWBERG, MD, bestselling author
of How God Changes Your Brain; director of research at the Marcus
Institute of Integrative Health at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital;
adjunct professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine

A timely must-read that will change the way we think about brain health.
DR. MIKE DOW, New York Times bestselling author of The Sugar Brain Fix

Mental illness is a complex and often confusing world. There is a lack
of certainty on what is going wrong and what to do about it. Dr. Amen's
new contribution is a thoughtful and well-planned approach to looking at
the actual brain's health as a fundamental aspect of maintaining a
vibrant life in emotions, relationships, and career.

JOHN TOWNSEND, PHD, New York Times bestselling author of Boundaries
series, Leading from Your Gut, and People Fuel; psychologist and
leadership consultant; founder of The Townsend Institute for Leadership
and Counseling

Daniel Amen, a staunch advocate for mental health and one of today's
most important neuropsychiatrists, provides an insightful challenge to
the mental illness industry: Focus on brain health rather than deficits!
Read this book carefully. Reclaim your brain; reclaim your life. JEFFREY
K. ZEIG, PHD, The Milton H. Erickson Foundation

The End of Mental Illness is a powerful new book that directly attacks
the outdated mental health paradigm of making diagnoses based on symptom
clusters without any biological data. In simple, straightforward
language, Dr. Amen shows readers how to optimize the physical
functioning of their brains to improve their minds. It is brilliant, and
I highly recommend it! STEVEN MASLEY, MD, FAHA, FACN, FAAFP, CNS, author
of The Mediterranean Method

Daniel Amen has been one of the real pioneers in using imaging
technology to correlate brain blood flow and activity patterns with
various types of mental health issues. More important, he has developed
innovative dietary and lifestyle techniques that can improve these
patterns with significant improvement for his patients. The End of
Mental Illness extends his leadership. If you want to keep the most
complex organ in the body in top condition, this book provides the
technical information to do so. I recommend it highly. BARRY SEARS, PHD,
author of The Zone and The Resolution Zone

Dr. Amen's book The End of Mental Illness is a defining mark in the
history of psychiatry. Scientific research has completely eliminated the
notion that nutritional deficiencies and nutritional supplements are a
form of alternative medicine. Those of us who have practiced integrative
medicine for many years understand that objective, biological testing is
simply good medicine. Our current symptomatic treatment model in the
field of psychiatry has been inadequate for those struggling with mental
illness. Dr. Amen captures the essence of hope and healing by
transforming a model of mental illness into a model of brain health.
Please read The End of Mental Illness and make sure your doctors
understand how neuroscience can redefine our current models of
treatment. JAMES GREENBLATT, MD, founder of Psychiatry Redefined; chief
medical officer of Walden Behavioral Care

The End of Mental Illness offers a wealth of vital information,
including fascinating SPECT imaging results, about how to create optimal
mind-body-spirit health and overcome the stigma of "mental illness."
Dr. Amen offers a multitude of options to create a healthy brain and a
healthy, happy life. JUDITH ORLOFF, MD, psychiatrist; author of
Emotional Freedom

By outlining the compelling research he and his colleagues have
published in peer-reviewed journals, and by including a myriad of
elucidating case studies, Dr. Amen provides an optimistic yet realistic
approach to life that demonstrably improves brain health. Given his
prescience in collecting what is now surely one of the largest databases
of brain scans and behavioral, cognitive, and emotional data, we can
expect to see even clearer science and more comprehensive lifestyle and
medical suggestions in the near future. J. GALEN BUCKWALTER, PHD,
research psychologist and CEO of psyML

As Dr. Amen helps us reframe the discussion from mental health to brain
health, people will see their problems as medical, not moral. This new
perspective decreases shame and guilt for those who suffer and increases
forgiveness, patience, and compassion from their families. The End of
Mental Illness will give you a totally new way of thinking about and
getting help for anxiety, depression, bipolar disorders, ADHD,
addictions, OCD, PTSD, schizophrenia, and even personality disorders.
Thank you, Dr. Amen. DR. DERWIN GRAY, former NFL player; lead pastor at
Transformation Church

When someone has a broken ankle, they don't call it "motion sickness,"
but sadly, when the brain malfunctions, we have used the stigma-filled
and shaming term mental illness. Dr. Daniel Amen takes the focus off
outdated labels and places it properly on the injured and damaged organ
by looking at the way it functions, rather than just the symptoms it
produces. The path set by Dr. Amen really could be the end of focusing
on mental illness and the beginning of creating brain health, which is
exactly what Dr. Amen has done for me. STEPHEN ARTERBURN, MED, New York
Times bestselling author of Take Your Life Back; host of New Life Live!

Dr. Daniel Amen has made the natural progression from psychiatrist to
brain imaging researcher to neuroendocrinologist in his quest for a
greater understanding of the relationship between one's emotional
constitution and the traumas encountered during life. Addressing the
underlying inflammation precipitated by these traumas can lead to a
normalization of the brain's

function and a return to a life without mental illness. Dr. Amen has
unraveled the code that decrypts the means by which illness can become
wellness. MARK L. GORDON, MD, neuroendocrinology, Millennium-TBI
Centers, Encino, California

I have conducted research with and known Daniel Amen for many years.
With The End of Mental Illness, he delivers an inspiring tour de force
on brain health. This book will educate people, make them question the
status quo as they seek to know their brains better, and inspire them to
change their lives so that they might change their brains . . . for the
better. THEODORE A. HENDERSON, MD, PHD, child, adolescent, and adult
psychiatrist; cofounder of Neuro-Luminance Inc. Brain Health Centers;
president of the International Society of Applied Neuroimaging

The End of Mental Illness blends cutting-edge brain science with
progressive regenerative medicine to deliver revolutionary treatment for
anyone suffering from a brain illness. The therapies work---I have
witnessed firsthand the tremendous improvements in both my family and
clients. Thank you, Dr. Amen, for showing how we can better care for our
precious brains. DR. MARK CALARCO, national medical director for
clinical diagnostics, Addiction Labs of America

My dream is that, in future years, after seeing more mental health
tragedies, we don't find ourselves saying, "We should have listened
closer to Dr. Daniel Amen's call for a paradigm shift in the treatment
of mental illness. His scientific leadership could have prevented so
many of our personal and national disasters." Dr. Amen lays out proven
sciencebased solutions to this in his book The End of Mental Illness.
JIM FAY, coauthor of Parenting with Love and Logic

Audacious claims and revolutionary ideas come from "out of the box"
thinkers like Dr. Daniel Amen. He is leading the way in the fight to end
mental illness, and he's doing it based on solid science and extensive
clinical expertise. WILLIAM S. HARRIS, PHD, president of OmegaQuant
Analytics, LLC; professor of medicine, University of South Dakota

As usual, Dr. Amen is on point about mental illness and the use of
advanced technologies to help diagnose and treat them. I applaud
Dr. Amen's attention to SPECT scans, genetics, QEEG, and other modern
technologies as tools to aid the prescriber. The day is coming soon when
not using these techniques will be considered out of the norm, if not
malpractice. DANIEL A. HOFFMAN, MD, FAPA, retired neuropsychiatrist

The End of Mental Illness is a courageous, science-based approach to
tackling our society's most pressing problems. Every day we read about
suicide, drug addiction, and abnormal behavior ending in horrific crime.
This book helps us understand these difficult behaviors and, most
important, gives clear solutions. The book is very aptly titled and is a
superb read. ANDREW W. CAMPBELL, MD, editor-in-chief of Alternative
Therapies in Health and Medicine; editor-in-chief of Advances in
Mind-Body Medicine ; editor of Integrative Medicine: A Clinician's
Journal

Dr. Amen brings a functional medicine approach to mental health so you
can learn how to support your brain health, reclaim your mood, and take
care of yourself naturally. By sharing how the brain works and what we
need to do to care for it, Dr. Amen hopes to end the stigma of mental
health issues and replace it with compassion and understanding. ALISA
VITTI, HHC, author of In the FLO; founder of FLOliving.com

Having lost a brother to suicide and dealing with the life struggles of
more than 14,000 students who attend my schools each year, I found in
The End of Mental Illness the empowerment I need to bravely move forward
without the shame and stigma associated with mental health issues. Dr.
Amen delivers this valuable information with his neuroscience knowledge,
but he is also a brilliant storyteller, which makes his message both
relevant and relatable. In addition to a solid plan, The End of Mental
Illness provides hope---a commodity rarely offered in the world of
psychiatry today. WINN CLAYBAUGH, dean and cofounder, Paul Mitchell
Schools; author of Be Nice (Or Else!)

Dr. Amen is again well ahead of his time with this comprehensive,
insightful, and compelling book. This book is a must-read for any
individual or mental health professional who desires to obtain a more
clear understanding of how to heal our brains for a happier and
healthier life. Dr. Amen's refreshing biological and brainbased approach
to understanding and resolving brainrelated issues has the power to
revolutionize the mental health industry. DR. KRISTY HODSON, EDD in
organizational change and leadership from the University of Southern
California

OceanofPDF.com

A SAMPLE OF OTHER BOOKS BY DANIEL AMEN Feel Better Fast and Make It
Last, Tyndale, 2018 Memory Rescue, Tyndale, 2017 Stones of Remembrance,
Tyndale, 2017 Captain Snout and the Super Power Questions, Zonderkidz,
2017 The Brain Warrior's Way, with Tana Amen, New American Library, 2016
The Brain Warrior's Way Cookbook, with Tana Amen, New American Library,
2016 Time for Bed, Sleepyhead, Zonderkidz, 2016 Change Your Brain,
Change Your Life (revised), Harmony Books, 2015, New York Times
Bestseller Healing ADD (revised), Berkley, 2013, New York Times
Bestseller The Daniel Plan, with Rick Warren, DMin, and Mark Hyman, MD,
Zondervan, 2013, #1 New York Times Bestseller Unleash the Power of the
Female Brain, Harmony Books, 2013 Use Your Brain to Change Your Age,
Crown Archetype, 2012, New York Times Bestseller The Amen Solution,
Crown Archetype, 2011, New York Times Bestseller Unchain Your Brain,
with David E. Smith, MD, MindWorks, 2010 Change Your Brain, Change Your
Body, Harmony Books, 2010, New York Times Bestseller

Magnificent Mind at Any Age, Harmony Books, 2008, New York Times
Bestseller The Brain in Love, Three Rivers Press, 2007 Making a Good
Brain Great, Harmony Books, 2005, Amazon Book of the Year ADD in
Intimate Relationships, MindWorks, 2005 Preventing Alzheimer's, with
William R. Shankle, MS, MD, Penguin, 2004 Healing Anxiety and
Depression, with Lisa Routh, MD, Putnam, 2003 New Skills for Frazzled
Parents, MindWorks, 2000 The Most Important Thing in Life I Learned from
a Penguin!?, MindWorks, 1995 OceanofPDF.com

Visit Tyndale online at www.tyndale.com. Visit Tyndale Momentum online
at www.tyndalemomentum.com. Visit Daniel G. Amen, MD, at
http://www.amenclinics.com. TYNDALE, Tyndale Momentum, and Tyndale's
quill logo are registered trademarks of Tyndale House Publishers. The
Tyndale Momentum logo is a trademark of Tyndale House Publishers.
Tyndale Momentum is the nonfiction imprint of Tyndale House Publishers,
Carol Stream, Illinois. The End of Mental Illness: How Neuroscience Is
Transforming Psychiatry and Helping Prevent or Reverse Mood and Anxiety
Disorders, ADHD, Addictions, PTSD, Psychosis, Personality Disorders, and
More Copyright © 2020 by Daniel G. Amen, MD. All rights reserved. Cover
illustration of brain copyright © John Parrot/Stocktrek Images/Getty
Images. All rights reserved. Torn paper brush by Marko Dimic/Tricorn
Design on Brusheezy.com. Interior photographs, including brain scans,
and illustrations provided by author and used with permission. All
rights reserved. Interior photographs, including brain scans and
illustrations, provided by author and used with permission. All rights
reserved. Designed by Libby Dykstra Published in association with the
literary agency of WordServe Literary Group, www.wordserveliterary.com.
Scripture quotations are taken from the Holy Bible, New Living
Translation, copyright © 1996, 2004, 2015 by Tyndale House Foundation.
Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Carol Stream, Illinois
60188. All rights reserved. For information about special discounts for
bulk purchases, please contact Tyndale House Publishers at
csresponse@tyndale.com, or call 1-800-323-9400. Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Amen, Daniel G., author. Title:
The end of mental illness : how neuroscience is transforming psychiatry
and helping prevent or reverse mood and anxiety disorders, ADHD,
addictions, PTSD, psychosis, personality disorders, and more / Daniel G.
Amen, MD. Description: Carol Stream, Illinois : Tyndale Momentum, the
nonfiction imprint of Tyndale House Publishers, \[2020\] \| Includes
bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2019042700
(print) \| LCCN 2019042701 (ebook) \| ISBN 9781496438157 (hardcover) \|
ISBN 9781496438171 (kindle edition) \| ISBN 9781496438188 (epub) \| ISBN
9781496438195 (epub) Subjects: LCSH: Mental health--Popular works. \|
Mental illness--Treatment--Popular works. \| Mental illness--Popular
works. Classification: LCC RA790 .A52 2020 (print) \| LCC RA790 (ebook)
\| DDC 616.89--dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2019042700

LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019042701 ISBN
978-1-4964-3818-8 (ePub); ISBN 978-1-4964-3817-1 (Kindle); ISBN
978-14964-3819-5 (Apple) Build: 2020-02-24 15:16:49 EPUB 3.0

OceanofPDF.com

To Alizé and Amelie. Your history is not your destiny. Let's end mental
illness with your generation. OceanofPDF.com

MEDICAL DISCLAIMER The information presented in this book is the result
of years of practice experience and clinical research by the author. The
information in this book, by necessity, is of a general nature and not a
substitute for an evaluation or treatment by a competent medical
specialist. If you believe you are in need of medical intervention,
please see a medical practitioner as soon as possible. The case studies
in this book are true. The names and circumstances of many of those
profiled have been changed to protect the anonymity of patients.

OceanofPDF.com

Contents Publisher Note List of Illustrations Before You Begin
Introduction: Why I Hate the Term Mental Illness and You Should Too Part
1: Reframing Mental Health as Brain Health Changes Everything Chapter 1:
From Demon Possession to the 15-Minute Med Check: A Brief History of
Mental Illness Diagnoses and Treatments Chapter 2: Making Invisible
Illnesses Visible: How Looking at the Brain Disrupts an Outdated
Paradigm and Charts a New Path Forward Chapter 3: 12 Guiding Principles
to Change Your Life Chapter 4: Get Your Brain Right and Your Mind Will
Follow: It Starts with Four Circles and Preventing or Treating 11 Risk
Factors Part 2: How to Create or Eliminate Mental Illness: A BRIGHT
MINDS Approach Chapter 5: B Is for Blood Flow: Optimize the Foundation
of Life Chapter 6: R Is for Retirement and Aging: When You Stop
Learning, Your Brain Starts Dying

Chapter 7: I Is for Inflammation: Quenching the Fire Within Chapter 8: G
Is for Genetics: Know Your Vulnerabilities, But Your History Is Not Your
Destiny Chapter 9: H Is for Head Trauma: The Silent Epidemic That
Underlies Many Mental Illnesses Chapter 10: T Is for Toxins: Detox Your
Mind and Body Chapter 11: M Is for Mind Storms: Soothing the Abnormal
Electrical Activity That Drives Mood Swings, Anxiety, and Aggression
Chapter 12: I Is for Immunity and Infections: Attacked from Inside and
Out Chapter 13: N Is for Neurohormone Issues: Miracle Grow for Your Mind
Chapter 14: D Is for Diabesity: Reverse the Epidemic That's Destroying
Brains, Minds, and Bodies Chapter 15: S Is for Sleep: Wash Your Brain
Each Night to Have Brighter Days Part 3: Practical Strategies to End
Mental Illness Now Chapter 16: Mind Meds Versus Nutraceuticals: What
Does the Science Say? Chapter 17: You Cannot Change What You Do Not
Measure: Prevention Starts by Knowing Your Important Health Numbers

Chapter 18: Food Made Insanely Simple: The BRIGHT MINDS Diet to End
Mental Illness Chapter 19: How to Make a Massive Difference: Brain
Health in Families, Schools, Businesses, Churches, and Anywhere People
Congregate

Appendix A: How to Find a BRIGHT MINDS Brain Health Practitioner
Appendix B: 10 Common Genes That May Influence Brain Health/Mental
Health Gratitude and Appreciation About Daniel G. Amen, MD Resources
Index OceanofPDF.com

List of Illustrations

Alizé (right) and Amelie Healthy SPECT Chase's SPECT Chase Plows into a
Wall Chase's Before SPECT Jarrett and Dr. Amen Trepanation to Allow
Trapped Evil Spirits to Escape Lobotomy: Surgically Damaging Frontal
Lobes Healthy SPECT Jason's SPECT Healthy Surface Scan Two Strokes
Alzheimer's Disease Brain Trauma Toxicity from Drug and Alcohol Abuse
Healthy Active Scan Obsessive Compulsive Traits Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder Seizure Activity Scalloping Examples Overall Increased Activity
Examples TBI Examples Hyperfrontality Examples

Hypofrontality Examples Diamond Pattern Examples Temporal Lobe
Hypoperfusion Temporal Lobe Examples Your Brain: A Brief Primer Brain
Reserve Why Trauma Leaves Some People, but Not Others, with "Mental
Health" Problems Dave's Toxic SPECT Scan Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS
Program Alizé's SPECT Study Brooke's SPECT Study Typical Aging Brain
SPECT Scans Activity in the Aging Posterior Cingulate Gyrus Brain Health
Workouts by Region Lynn's Scan Before Treatment After Treatment Leeza
and Dr. Amen Gary's SPECT Scan Before A Look inside the Skull Steven's
SPECT Scans Before and After Treatment Brain SPECT Scan of Heavy Alcohol
Use Karen's SPECT Scans Before, After Aortic Aneurysm Surgery, After
BRIGHT MINDS Tommy's Surface SPECT Scan Tim's Surface SPECT Scan Action
Potential

Trey's Baseline Active SPECT Red Dye #40 Active SPECT Juan's Surface
SPECT Scan at Rest Surface SPECT Scan with Concentration Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome Brain SPECT Scan Schizophrenia versus Lyme Toxoplasma gondii
Henry's Active SPECT scan Brain Surface SPECT Scans Alicia's Surface
SPECT Scans: Before and After Toxicity on Surface SPECT Scans of Some
Medications The Real Weapons of Mass Destruction Destroying the Health
of America

OceanofPDF.com

Before You Begin

Daniel Amen, MD, believes that brain health is central to all health and
success. When your brain works right, he says, you work right, and when
your brain is troubled, you are much more likely to have trouble in your
life. His work is dedicated to helping people have better brains and
better lives. Sharecare.com named him the web's #1 most influential
expert and advocate on mental health, and the Washington Post called him
the most popular psychiatrist in America. A military-trained
psychiatrist, he spent 10 years on active duty in the US Army---first as
an infantry medic and Xray technician and later as an officer in the
Medical Corps. He is board-certified in child and adolescent psychiatry
and general psychiatry. He holds active medical licenses in nine states.
He was given the Marie H. Eldridge Award for research by the American
Psychiatric Association for his work on suicide, and he received the
Distinguished Fellow Award from his peers at the American Psychiatric
Association (the highest award given to members). He has presented his
research and clinical work at scientific meetings around the world,
including Harvard's Learning & the Brain conference and the National
Science Foundation.

Discover magazine listed his research using brain SPECT imaging to
accurately distinguish post-traumatic stress disorder from traumatic
brain injury as one of the top 100 stories in science for 2015. He is
the principal investigator on the first and largest brain imaging and
rehabilitation study on active and retired NFL players, showing high
levels of damage but also the possibility of recovery for many, using
the principles in this book. He was a consultant on the 2015 movie
Concussion starring Will Smith. Amen Clinics, which he founded in 1989,
has the world's largest database of functional brain scans (SPECT and
QEEG) related to behavior, totaling more than 170,000 scans on patients
from 121 countries. Amen Clinics has some of the best published outcomes
on complex psychiatric patients. On average, their patients have 4.2
diagnoses and have failed 3.3 providers and 5 medications. At the end of
6 months, 75 percent report being better; 84 percent if they maintained
treatment at Amen Clinics. Dr. Amen has hosted 14 public television
specials about the brain, which have aired more than 110,000 times
across North America during the past 12 years. He is passionate about
brain health education. Together with Pastor Rick Warren and Dr. Mark
Hyman, Dr. Amen is also one of the chief architects of The Daniel Plan,
a program designed to help people all around the world get healthy
through religious organizations. This program has already been put in
place in thousands of churches, mosques, and synagogues. Dr. Amen and
Professor Jesse Payne created the high school and college course Brain
Thrive by 25, which has students from 7 countries and all 50 states.
Independent

research has found the program decreases drug, alcohol, and tobacco use;
decreases depression; and improves selfesteem in teens. In November
2017, a video of Dr. Amen's passion story (six minutes) was anonymously
posted and now has more than 40 million views.\[1\] No doubt Dr. Amen
and his colleagues at Amen Clinics are disrupting psychiatry, the only
medical specialty that virtually never looks at the organ it treats.
Dr. Amen has published more than 70 peer-reviewed scientific articles,
including some of the largest brain imaging studies ever done on 21,000,
46,000, and 62,000 SPECT scans. If you type in "brain SPECT" in the
search tool at the National Library of Medicine's website,
www.pubmed.gov, it will return more than 14,000 scientific abstracts.
More than 10,000 mental health and medical professionals have referred
patients to Amen Clinics, and more than 3,000 have been trained in his
brain health coaching certification course. Scientists in Canada have
replicated his brain imaging work, publishing studies showing it
improved diagnoses and outcomes.\[2\] Dr. Amen does not work for or hold
stock in any pharmaceutical companies, yet he believes in using
psychiatric medications when necessary. However, they are usually not
his first choice because, once started, they are often very hard to
stop. Dr. Amen owns BrainMD, a nutraceutical company he founded after
seeing on brain imaging studies the negative effects of some medications
he had prescribed. He believes in the principle taught to all first-year
medical students: "First, do no harm."

LOOK FOR THESE ICONS As you read The End of Mental Illness, keep an eye
out for the three icons below.

BRIGHT MINDS TIPS: Tips will highlight essential information.

BRAIN LOVE STORIES: When one person falls in love with their brain and
optimizes how it functions, it tends to lead to many other people
falling in love with their brains and a cascade of healing. When "brain
love" goes viral, whole family, work, and community systems improve. We
call these "brain love stories."

TINY HABITS: Helping people change has been Dr. Amen's passion for more
than 40 years, so he partnered with BJ Fogg, director of the Persuasive
Tech Lab at Stanford University, and his sister Linda

Fogg-Phillips to learn the latest change technology. They believe
creating "tiny habits" is the most effective way to facilitate big
change: making small, incremental changes over time that evolve into big
ones.

\[1\] See https://www.facebook.com/Illumeably/videos/283984572006650.
\[2\] Howard Schneider et al., "Conventional SPECT Versus 3D Thresholded
SPECT Imaging in the Diagnosis of ADHD: A Retrospective Study," Journal
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 26, no 4 (Fall 2014):
335--43. J. F. Thornton et al., "Improved Outcomes Using Brain
SPECT-Guided Treatment Versus Treatment-as-Usual in Community
Psychiatric Outpatients: A Retrospective Case-Control Study," Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 26, no. 1 (Winter 2014):
51--56.

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction WHY I HATE THE TERM MENTAL ILLNESS AND YOU SHOULD TOO In
times of profound change, the learners inherit the earth, while the
learned find themselves beautifully equipped to deal with a world that
no longer exists. ERIC HOFFER

Stuck at a traffic light midday at the corner of Hollywood and Vine in
Hollywood, California, on my way to record a podcast with storyteller
and social media phenom Jay Shetty, I saw a thirtysomething man, about
5′10″, with dirty blond hair, ripped clothes, and blood on his face,
talking to himself while gesturing wildly in the air. He seemed
oblivious to everyone around him, and those walking on the street paid
him no mind. After all, this was Hollywood and Vine. Most of my
colleagues would have diagnosed him with schizophrenia or unstable
bipolar disorder and wondered why he wasn't taking his medication to
help the voices and visions stay away. When I saw him, I wondered when
he'd had his last brain injury, if he had been exposed to mold or
environmental toxins, if he suffered with severe gut-health issues, or
whether he had an infectious disease like Lyme or toxoplasmosis ravaging
his brain.

We are on the cusp of a new revolution that will change mental health
care forever. The End of Mental Illness discards an outdated,
stigmatizing paradigm that taints people with disparaging labels,
preventing them from getting the help they need, and replaces it with a
modern brain-based, whole-person program rooted in neuroscience and
hope. No one is shamed for cancer, diabetes, or heart disease, even
though they have significant lifestyle contributions. Likewise, no one
should be shamed for depression, panic disorders, bipolar disorder,
addictions, schizophrenia, and other brain health issues. Over the last
30 years, my colleagues and I have built the world's largest database of
brain scans related to behavior. We have performed more than 160,000
brain SPECT (single photon emission computed tomography) scans, which
measure blood flow and activity patterns, and over 10,000 QEEGs
(quantitative electroencephalograms), which measure electrical activity,
on patients from 9 months old to 105 years from 121 countries. Our brain
imaging work has completely disrupted how we help our patients get well,
and this information can help you, even if no one ever looks at your
brain. The human brain is an organ just like your heart and all your
other organs, and you can only be as mentally healthy as your brain is
functionally healthy. It has become crystal clear to us that, as
psychiatrists, we are not dealing with mental health issues, but we are
dealing with brain health issues; and this one idea has changed
everything we do to help our patients.

We are not dealing with mental health issues, but we are dealing with
brain health issues; and this one idea has changed everything.

I have come to hate the terms mental illness and psychiatric disorders,
and you should too. They place emphasis in the wrong domain (the mind or
the psyche), when our imaging work teaches us that we must first focus
on the brain. "Mental illness" and "psychiatric disorders" conjure up
stigmatizing images of lunacy in people who are mad, disturbed,
unbalanced, or unstable, even though these adjectives apply to an
extremely small percentage of people who struggle with brain
health/mental health issues. Being diagnosed with a mental illness or a
psychiatric disorder insidiously taints or stains everyone who struggles
with perceived issues of the mind, making them less likely to ever want
to seek help for fear they'll be diminished in the eyes of others. Just
look at what happened to 1972 vicepresidential nominee Thomas Eagleton.
The up-and-coming senator from Missouri, who had been the Show-Me
State's youngest-ever attorney general, a devout Catholic, and a fiery
opponent to the Vietnam War, was tapped to be presidential candidate
George McGovern's running mate and was considered a perfect choice.\[3\]
But when it was discovered that he had been treated for depression, he
was asked to step down from McGovern's political ticket only 18 days
after his nomination. Ever since this dark national memory, mental
health issues have been considered lethal in political circles. Yet,
according to biographer Joshua Wolf Shenk, Abraham Lincoln "fought
clinical depression all his life, and if he were alive today, his
condition would be treated as a 'character issue'---that is, as a
political liability. His condition was indeed a character issue: It gave
him the tools to save the nation."\[4\] Shenk argues that because of
depression, Lincoln knew how to suffer and how to rise above his bad
feelings in difficult times. Of note, Lincoln had a serious

head injury at age ten, when he was kicked in the head by a horse and
left unconscious.\[5\] You will see that head injuries are a common and
often overlooked cause of emotional and behavioral problems.

\[Lincoln's depression\] was indeed a character issue: It gave him the
tools to save the nation. By labeling these issues as mental health or
psychiatric instead of brain health, people suffer in silence because of
the shame they feel. Consider the rash of celebrity suicides and deaths
by overdose of people who were too embarrassed or ashamed to ask for
help (from Ernest Hemingway, Judy Garland, and Junior Seau to Robin
Williams, Mindy McCready, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Anthony Bourdain, and
Kate Spade). On the outside, they seemed as if they had everything; on
the inside, they were suffering. If we do not erase---or at least
lower---the stigma for these brain health issues, many more people will
unnecessarily suffer and die without getting the help they need. We must
do better because: About every 14 minutes, someone dies by suicide in
the United States. Suicide is the 10th leading cause of death overall
and the second leading cause of death for those 10 to 34 years of
age.\[6\] Since 1999, suicide has increased 33 percent, decreasing
overall life expectancy, while during the same period of time cancer has
decreased 27 percent.\[7\] The last time America experienced a decrease
in life expectancy was in the early 20th century, when the Spanish
influenza and World War I killed nearly one million people. I've been
surrounded by suicide, with an aunt who killed

herself, as did my adopted son's biological father, and my son-in-law's
father. The pain of suicide is unlike any other loss because people see
it as a choice, rather than as a consequence of an illness. Every eight
minutes, someone dies of a drug overdose, \[8\] and the recent opiate
crisis in America is only getting worse year after year. In 2017, there
were more than 70,000 drug overdoses, with 67 percent of them from
opiates (an increase of 45 percent from 2016).\[9\] In 2017, teens and
young adults in the United States were more prone to depression,
distress, and suicide compared with millennials when they were the same
age.\[10\] Thirty-six percent of girls will experience clinical
depression during their teenage years, compared to 13 percent of teenage
boys.\[11\] Both numbers are unacceptable. Twenty-three percent of women
between the ages of 40 and 59 are taking antidepressant
medication.\[12\] According to a large epidemiological study, 50 percent
of the US population will struggle with a mental health issue at some
point in their lives.\[13\] Anxiety disorders (28 percent), depression
(21 percent), impulse control disorders (25 percent), and substance use
disorders (15 percent) are the most common. Half of all cases start by
age 14, and 75 percent start by age 24. According to the World Health
Organization, 25 percent of all health-related disability is due to
mental health and substance use conditions---eight times more than
disability caused by heart disease and 40 times more than cancer.\[14\]

Shame holds people back from getting the help they need. No one is
shamed for cancer, diabetes, or heart disease; likewise, no one should
be shamed for depression, panic disorders, bipolar disorder, and other
brain health issues. Even though I have loved being a psychiatrist for
the past 40 years, I am not a fan of my professional label because
psychiatrists are often dismissed as unscientific and scorned by other
medical professionals and the general public. In 1980, when I told my
father, a highly intelligent and successful entrepreneur, that I wanted
to be a psychiatrist, he asked me, "Why don't you want to be a 'real'
doctor? Why do you want to be a nut doctor and hang out with nuts all
day long?" At the time, his words upset me, but 40 years later, I have a
deeper understanding of why he was concerned. In a similar vein, I've
heard countless patients say, "I'm not going to see a psychiatrist
because I'm not crazy." Stigma reigns. I prefer the term clinical
neuroscientist to psychiatrist.

REIMAGINING MENTAL HEALTH AS BRAIN HEALTH CHANGES EVERYTHING Early in my
career, I learned that very few people want to see a psychiatrist. No
one wants to be labeled as defective or abnormal, but once people learn
about the importance of their brain, everyone wants a better one. What
if mental health was brain health? That is what the brain imaging work
we are doing at Amen Clinics teaches us daily. Think of it this way.
Your brain can have problems just as your heart can have problems. Most
people who see cardiologists,

however, have never had a heart attack. They are there because they have
risk factors---a family history of heart disease, high blood pressure,
or too much abdominal fat--- and they want to prevent a heart attack. To
end mental illness, we must develop a similar way of thinking. Reframing
the discussion from mental health to brain health changes everything.
People begin to see their problems as medical, not moral. It decreases
shame and guilt and increases forgiveness and compassion from their
families. Reframing the discussion to brain health is also more accurate
and elevates hope, increases the desire to get help, and increases
compliance to make the necessary lifestyle changes. Once people
understand that the brain controls everything they do and everything
they are, they want a better brain so they can have a better life.

Reframing the Discussion from Mental Health to Brain Health Changes
Everything People see their problems as medical, not moral. It decreases
stigma, shame, and guilt. It increases compassion and forgiveness from
families. It is a more accurate description of the biology involved. It
elevates hope. It increases compliance with treatment plans.

The End of Mental Illness will give you a completely new way to think
about and treat brain health/mental health issues, such as anxiety,
depression, bipolar disorders, attention deficit disorder/attention
deficit hyperactivity

disorder (ADD/ADHD), addictions, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), schizophrenia, and even
personality disorders. It is based on a very simple premise: Get your
brain right, and your mind will follow. In study after study, improving
the physical functioning of the brain improves the mind.\[15\]

YOUR BRAIN'S HISTORY IS NOT YOUR DESTINY The reason I dedicated this
book to my two nieces, Alizé (15) and Amelie (10), is that they were
born into a family plagued by mental illness---multiple suicides, major
depression, schizophrenia, drug abuse, manic depressive behavior, OCD,
anxiety and panic disorders, ADD/ADHD, body dysmorphia, and criminal
behavior. Their genetic vulnerability for mental illness was incredibly
high from before birth. In addition, they were born into chaos, with
parents who struggled with addictions, depression, and behavioral
issues. In 2016, Child Protective Services, who deemed they were living
in a dangerous situation, took them from their parents. The two girls
still vividly remember the panic and horror of police taking them from
their mother. At the time, my wife, Tana, was estranged from her
halfsister, Tamara, the girls' mother, but when we found out that the
children were taken into foster care, we knew we must act. We wrapped
brain health/mental health services around Tamara (at the time, the
father refused to get help), and she was able to gain control over her
addiction, depression, ADHD, and past head trauma (19 car accidents).
Thanks to this progress, she was reunited with her children

on Mother's Day 2017. Since that time, using the principles in this
book, Tamara, Alizé, and Amelie have thrived. Like all people who
experience this type of chaos, they have had ups and downs, but Tamara
is gainfully employed at a job she loves, and the girls are both A
students, happy, social, and purposeful. At the time of this writing,
Alizé is an honor society student and participates in cross country and
track and field. In the last year, she has been awarded Language Arts,
Life Science, and Automation and Robotics Student of the Year. Tana,
Tamara, and I are committed to ending the cycle of mental illness in the
girls as well as in their future children and grandchildren. This book
is our blueprint. It is your blueprint too. The end of mental illness
starts with you and the people close to you. ALIZÉ (RIGHT) AND AMELIE

THIS BOOK IS YOUR BLUEPRINT Part 1 will briefly introduce you to the
history of psychiatry and mental health treatment. To illustrate this, I
will reveal some of the surprising and downright shocking ways one of my
patients, Jarrett, would have been treated throughout the ages. I'll
help you reframe mental illness. We'll discard an outdated diagnostic
paradigm based solely on symptom clusters and replace it with a
brain-centered paradigm based on symptoms plus neuroimaging, genetics,
and a personalized medicine approach to brain/body health. Then I'll
share the 12 major lessons we've learned from our brain imaging work
that completely changed the way we think about and help our patients.
You will be introduced to the Amen Clinics Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS
Program to end mental illness, which reveals the simple yet very
powerful concept that, in order to have a healthy mind, you must first
have a healthy brain. To do that, you must optimize the four circles of
a whole life (biological, psychological, social, and spiritual), as well
as prevent or treat the 11 major risk factors that damage the brain and
steal your mind. In part 2, you will learn how to create or eliminate
mental illnesses. If you know how they're created, you will have the
prescriptions to avoid and treat them. Here you'll discover the enormous
impact that modern society has had on the exploding brain health/mental
health crisis in America. This section will also explore the 11 BRIGHT
MINDS risk factors that steal your mind and show you how to avoid them.
I wrote about these risk factors extensively in my

book Memory Rescue but only as they relate to memory; these same factors
greatly influence other brain health/mental health problems. BRIGHT
MINDS stands for: Blood Flow Retirement/Aging Inflammation Genetics Head
Trauma Toxins Mind Storms (abnormal brain electrical activity)
Immunity/Infections Neurohormone Issues Diabesity Sleep As you will see,
once you reduce your risk factors, your brain---and mind---will be
healthier. In part 3, I'll share many practical strategies on how to
boost your brain and optimize your mind, including how to think about
psychiatric medicines versus nutritional supplements (nutraceuticals),
the important health numbers to check every year, and the critical
importance of your food. In addition, the final chapter summarizes the
strategies on how to create and end mental illness.

Get your brain right, and your mind will follow. It's time to get the
help you need by discarding an outdated, stigmatizing,

unscientific paradigm.

Here's an example of why we need to discard the current outdated
paradigm in favor of our new model.

HOW CHASE ELIMINATED HIS "MENTAL ILLNESS" BY HEALING HIS BRAIN Chase was
a smart, successful young man fresh out of college with a great job. But
inside, he was suffering. Chase struggled with severe anxiety,
uncontrollable mood swings, negative thought patterns, crippling panic
attacks, a bad temper, and disrupted sleep. He had difficulty with work
relationships and making friends. He couldn't talk to people and always
seemed to be in a bad mood. He also lacked a clear sense of any purpose.
As a teenager, he saw a psychiatrist, who after asking him to fill out a
questionnaire, diagnosed Chase with bipolar disorder (a severe mood
disorder in which people cycle between depression and mania) as well as
ADHD and intermittent explosive disorder (IED). Chase also had a family
history of depression and addictions.

Over the years, he jumped from one medication to the next, trying to
find something that worked. The side effects only made things worse, and
he gained more than 80 pounds. This young man, who already had social
anxiety, now had even more reasons to isolate himself. Chase's brain and
body finally gave up; he had a nervous breakdown and was unable to work.
Chase's stepmother, Terry, suggested he come to our clinic in New York
City for an evaluation. Terry's daughter had struggled with learning and
anxiety attacks but had a dramatic turnaround after coming to our
clinic. That inspired Terry to visit one of our clinics, which helped
her improve her own troubled brain to become a better businesswoman.
Subsequently, Terry sent many other members of her family to our clinics
for help. As we do with all our patients, we did a comprehensive
evaluation of Chase. As part of our diagnostic process, we took a
detailed history, performed neuropsychological tests, ran a lab workup
(Chase had low levels of vitamin D and testosterone), and scanned his
brain to assess blood flow and activity patterns in the brain. SPECT
looks at how the brain works. It is different than CAT scans and MRIs,
which are anatomy studies that look at the structure of the brain. SPECT
looks at brain function and, in my opinion, is much more helpful for
people with complex brain health/mental health problems, like ADD/ADHD
and bipolar disorder. You will learn much more about our work with SPECT
in chapters 2 and 3. Chase's SPECT scan (see images on the following
pages comparing his scan to a healthy scan) showed significantly low
overall blood flow to his brain, especially to his prefrontal cortex (a
brain region associated with focus, forethought, judgment, planning,
empathy, and impulse

control) and his temporal lobes (a brain region associated with mood
stability, learning, memory, and temper control). His scan was
consistent with past head trauma and toxicity, which caused us to ask
Chase more pointed questions to try to understand why his brain looked
so troubled. It turned out that his family owned a NASCAR speedway, and
Chase had been racing cars since he was a child, spending a lot of time
around and breathing in toxic gasoline fumes. He'd had a number of
significant concussions, including one from racing. Many people are
misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder (mental illness) after they have had
a significant concussion (brain illness) that affects their prefrontal
cortex and temporal lobes.

Many people are misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder after they have had a
significant concussion. The right diagnosis is critical to effective
treatment.

HEALTHY SPECT

Full, even, symmetrical activity

CHASE'S SPECT

Low activity (areas that look like indentations), especially in
prefrontal cortex and temporal lobes

CHASE PLOWS INTO A WALL

After seeing his scans and understanding the story of Chase's life, it
was clear he did not have bipolar disorder, ADHD, and IED but, rather,
the long-term effects of concussions and toxic exposure to the gasoline
fumes, giving him these symptom clusters. We stopped his medications,
gave him brain supportive supplements, and went to work rehabilitating
his brain using the Amen Clinics Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS Program,
which will be laid out in detail in upcoming chapters. As part of the
program, we completely changed Chase's diet, encouraging him to only eat
foods that served his brain health rather than ones that hurt it. Plus,
he started exercising daily. Chase did everything we asked him. CHASE'S
BEFORE SPECT

Low activity, especially in prefrontal cortex and temporal lobes

AFTER SPECT

Overall improvement

Before

After

In just a few months, his confidence soared. Several months later, his
brain showed significant improvement. (His skin also cleared up, and he
had lost 80 pounds---other signs that his brain was healthier.) Now he
has an even

better job where he says he has great working relationships, lots of
friends outside the office, loves trying new things, and is in a
committed relationship. After learning about his brain, Chase still
loves watching car racing but says he'll personally never race again.
And not just because of the concussions but also because of the toxins
he was inhaling: gas, oil, burned rubber, and all the other chemicals he
does not want inside his body.

Chase desperately needed a radical new approach; both his physical and
mental health were going the wrong way. Chase had been given three major
psychiatric diagnoses ---bipolar disorder, ADHD, and IED---from his
psychiatrist, who used checklists and groups of related symptoms, known
as symptom clusters, from the American Psychiatric Association's
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), and his
treatment was doing him more harm than good. Yes, on the surface, it is
much easier to try different medications, hoping for a quick fix, and
not have to bother with changing your life. But the medications we use
in psychiatry are often insidious, meaning once you start them, they are
very hard to stop. They change your brain to need them in order for you
to feel normal. In the long run, it is generally easier to do a bit of
work to change your habits, so you need fewer medications or, in some
cases, none at all.

On the surface, it's easier to try different medications, hoping for a
quick fix, and not have to bother with lifestyle changes. But

psychiatric medications are often insidious, meaning once you start them
they are very hard to stop. They change your brain to need them in order
for you to feel normal.

The way we evaluated and helped Chase is very different from the typical
way most people are diagnosed and treated for "mental illnesses." In
2020, if you suspect you have a mental health issue, you are likely to
visit a psychiatrist or primary care physician (who prescribe 85 percent
of psychiatric medications), who will ask you to describe your symptoms.
In most cases, your doctor will listen, do an examination, then look for
symptom clusters. Based on this, they will give you a diagnosis and
treatment plan, usually involving one or more psychiatric medications.
For example, if you are anxious, you usually get an "anxiety disorder"
diagnosis and end up with a prescription for an anti-anxiety medication,
which has been found in some studies to be associated with an increased
incidence of dementia.\[16\] If you have attention problems, you may end
up with a diagnosis of ADHD and a prescription for stimulant medication,
such as Ritalin or Adderall. These medications can help many people, but
it's important to be aware that they can also make some people worse. Or
you may say, "I'm depressed." Your doctor will then label you with a
diagnosis that has the same name as your symptoms---depression, in this
example---without taking any biological information into consideration.
Treatment is typically an antidepressant medication.

According to psychiatrist Thomas Insel, the former director of the
National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH), "For the antidepressants .
. . the rate of response continues to be slow and low. In the largest
effectiveness study to date, with more than 4,000 patients with major
depressive disorder in primary care and community settings, only 31
percent were in remission after 14 weeks of optimal treatment. . . . In
most double-blind trials of antidepressants, the placebo response rate
hovers around 30 percent . . . The unfortunate reality is that current
medications help too few people to get better and very few people to get
well."\[17\] This is consistent with what Insel's predecessor, Steve
Hyman, former director of the NIMH, wrote in 2018, that in the last half
century we have failed to progress significantly in medications to treat
psychiatric illnesses.\[18\] A typical example of this outdated
diagnostic method is for people who have temper problems, like Chase,
and who explode intermittently. They often get diagnosed with IED, which
is an ironic acronym. These people are often prescribed anger management
classes or any number of medications.

From our experience with tens of thousands of patients at Amen Clinics
and after 40 years in the field, I'm convinced that making diagnoses
solely based on DSM symptom clusters, such as anxiety, depression,
temper outbursts, or a short attention span, is inadequate and
disrespectful to patients. Symptoms don't tell us anything about the
underlying biology of the problems our patients have. All other medical
professionals look directly at the organs they treat, but psychiatrists
are taught to assume what the underlying biological mechanisms are for
illnesses ---such as depression, ADD/ADHD, bipolar disorder, and
addiction---without ever looking at the brain, even though our patients
are every bit as sick as those with heart disease, diabetes, or cancer.

Making diagnoses solely based on DSM symptom clusters, such as anxiety,
depression, temper outbursts, or a short attention span, is inadequate.
An explosive 2019 study in Psychiatry Research confirms what I've been
saying for decades: Making psychiatric diagnoses based solely on symptom
clusters is scientifically meaningless and disingenuous. The study, led
by University of Liverpool researchers, focused on a meticulous analysis
of five chapters in DSM-5: anxiety disorders, depressive disorders,
trauma-related disorders, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. Their
main findings highlight many of the shortcomings of the current
diagnostic paradigm:\[19\] There is a major overlap of symptoms among
diagnoses. Many diagnoses overlook the role of psychological trauma and
head trauma. The current approach rarely takes the individual into
account. This study's deep dive into the numbers shows just how murky
and inconsistent the diagnostic model is. For example, "there are almost
24,000 possible symptom combinations for panic disorder in DSM-5,
compared with just one possible combination for social phobia." Equally
concerning is their finding that "two people could receive the same
diagnosis without sharing any common symptoms." And the sheer number of
combinations of symptoms makes the ability to arrive at an accurate
diagnosis nearly impossible. Take this stunning fact, for instance: "In
the DSM-5 there are 270 million combinations of symptoms that would meet
the criteria for both PTSD and major depressive disorder, and when five
other commonly made diagnoses are seen alongside these two, this figure

rises to one quintillion symptom combinations---more than the number of
stars in the Milky Way." The researchers conclude that following a
different approach may be more effective than remaining committed to
what they called a "disingenuous categorical system."\[20\] Rest
assured, it doesn't have to be this way. Reframing the way we think
about "mental illnesses" by looking at them as brain health issues is
more accurate. It is this discovery that completely changed the way we
approach diagnosing and treating our patients at Amen Clinics. It is
also the underlying reason why Amen Clinics has one of the highest
published success rates for complex patients, who have failed an average
of 3.3 providers and five medications.\[21\] In fact, 84 percent of the
complex, treatment-resistant patients we treat at Amen Clinics report
feeling better after six months. This book will share some of those
stories and provide the steps to end mental illness now, not just in the
lives of Alizé and Amelie, but also in your own life and in the lives of
your children and grandchildren. 1. Eliminate the term mental illness
and replace it with the term brain health/mental health issues. 2.
Discard an outdated diagnostic paradigm based solely on symptom clusters
and replace it with a brain-centered paradigm based on symptoms plus
neuroimaging, genetics, and a personalized medicine approach to
brain/body health (chapters 1-- 3). 3. Assess and treat whole people in
four circles--- biological, psychological, social, and spiritual
(chapter 4).

4. Prevent or treat the 11 major BRIGHT MINDS risk factors that damage
the brain and steal the mind (chapters 5--15). 5. First, do no harm.
Know the science comparing "mind meds" versus nutraceuticals.
Nutraceuticals have more scientific support than most people know and
are often an evidence-based option (chapter 16). 6. Know your important
health numbers and re-check them on a yearly basis to help prevent brain
health/mental health issues before they start (chapter 17). 7. Eat foods
that enhance brain health rather than those that accelerate brain/mind
illnesses (chapter 18). 8. Provide brain health/mental health education
in schools, businesses, churches, and anywhere people congregate
(chapter 19).

\[3\] NPR Staff, "The Thomas Eagleton Affair Haunts Candidates Today,"
NPR, August 4, 2012,
www.npr.org/2012/08/04/157670201/the-thomas-eagletonaffair-haunts-candidates-today.
\[4\] Joshua Wolf Shenk, "Lincoln's Great Depression," Atlantic, October
2005,
www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2005/10/lincolns-greatdepression/304247/.
\[5\] Edward J. Kempf, "Abraham Lincoln's Organic and Emotional
Neurosis," A.M.A. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry 67, no. 4 (April
1952): 419--33; accessed at
www.lincolnportrait.com/emotional_neurosis.html. Timothy P. Townsend,
"Life of Lincoln, 1809--1865," National Park Service, US Department of
the Interior, https://www.nps.gov/liho/learn/historyculture/life.htm.
\[6\] National Institute of Mental Health, "Suicide," updated April
2019, www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/suicide.shtml.

\[7\] Holly Hedegaard, Sally C. Curtin, and Margaret Warner, "Suicide
Mortality in the United States, 1999--2017," National Center for Health
Statistics Data Brief No. 330, November 2018,
www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db330.htm. \[8\] Jürgen Unützer,
"What If We Treated Mental Health Like Cancer?" NEJM Catalyst event,
"Expanding the Bounds of Care Delivery: Integrating Mental, Social, and
Physical Health," January 25, 2018, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, catalyst.nejm.org/videos/treat-mental-health-like-cancer/. \[9\]
Lawrence Scholl et al., "Drug and Opioid-Involved Overdose
Deaths---United States, 2013--2017," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, January 4, 2019,
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm675152e1.htm? s_cid=mm675152e1_w.
\[10\] J. M. Twenge et al., "Age, Period, and Cohort Trends in Mood
Disorder Indicators and Suicide-Related Outcomes in a Nationally
Representative Dataset, 2005--2017," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 128,
no. 3 (April 2019): 185--99. \[11\] J. Breslau J et al., "Sex
Differences in Recent First-Onset Depression in an Epidemiological
Sample of Adolescents," Translational Psychiatry 7 (2017): 1139. \[12\]
Janice Wood, "Antidepressant Use Up 400 Percent in US," Psych Central,
January 8, 2018,
psychcentral.com/news/2011/10/25/antidepressant-use-up400-percent-in-us/30677.html.
\[13\] R. C. Kessler, M. Angermeyer, J. C. Anthony et al. "Lifetime
Prevalence and Age-of-Onset Distributions of Mental Disorders in the
World Health Organization's World Mental Health Survey Initiative,"
World Psychiatry 6 no. 3 (October 2007):168--76,
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2174588/. "Learn about
Mental Health," Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, January 26,
2018, https://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/learn/. \[14\] Jürgen Unützer,
"What If We Treated Mental Health Like Cancer?" NEJM Catalyst, January
25, 2018,
https://catalyst.nejm.org/videos/treat-mentalhealth-like-cancer/. K.
Kroenke and J. Unützer, "Closing the False Divide: Sustainable
Approaches to Integrating Mental Health Services into Primary Care,"
Journal of General Internal Medicine 32, no. 4 (2017): 404--10. \[15\]
Julia Velten et al., "Lifestyle Choices and Mental Health: A
Representative Population Survey," BMC Psychology 2, no. 58 (2014): 58.
\[16\] Mitsutaka Takada, Mai Fujimoto, Kouichi Hosomi, "Association
between Benzodiazepine Use and Dementia: Data Mining of Different
Medical Databases," International Journal of Medical Sciences 13, no. 11
(October 18, 2016): 825--34.

\[17\] Thomas R. Insel, "Disruptive Insights in Psychiatry: Transforming
a Clinical Discipline," Journal of Clinical Investigation 119, no. 4
(April 1, 2009): 700-- 705. I. Kirsch, "Antidepressants and the Placebo
Response," Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale 18, no. 4
(October--December 2009): 318--22. \[18\] Steven E. Hyman, "The Daunting
Polygenicity of Mental Illness: Making a New Map," Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences 373, no. 1742 (March 19, 2018): 20170031. \[19\] Kate Allsopp
et al., "Heterogeneity in Psychiatric Diagnostic Classification,"
Psychiatry Research 279 (September 2019): 15--22. \[20\] Ibid. \[21\]
Daniel G. Amen et al., "Multi-Site, Six Month Outcome Study of Complex
Psychiatric Patients Evaluated with Addition of Brain SPECT Imaging,"
Advances in Mind-Body Medicine 27, no. 2 (January 1996): 6--16.

OceanofPDF.com

PA RT 1

REFRAMING MENTAL HEALTH AS BRAIN HEALTH CHANGES EVERYTHING
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 1

FROM DEMON POSSESSION TO THE 15-MINUTE MED CHECK A BRIEF HISTORY OF
MENTAL ILLNESS DIAGNOSES AND TREATMENTS The first known use of
"headshrinker" as a slang term for a psychotherapist appeared in the
Nov. 27, 1950 issue of Time magazine, which asserted that anyone who had
predicted the phenomenal success of the television Western Hopalong
Cassidy would have been sent to a "headshrinker." The article explained
in a footnote that headshrinker is Hollywood slang for a psychiatrist. .
. . The headshrinker metaphor arguably reflects the feelings of fear,
mystery, and hostility traditionally associated with the profession.
Another theory holds that it implicitly refers to shrinking a patient's
narcissistic, inflated sense of self. Although many mental-health
professionals have come to accept the term with self-deprecating humor,
it has also been criticized as a relic of an outmoded therapeutic
approach that reduces people to mere causes and symptoms rather than
regarding them as complex individuals.\[22\]

When one person gets better, it can cause a cascade of help across
generations of people. When I first met my wife, Tana, in 2006, I
really, really liked her. Having been divorced for six years, I had told
myself that before I ever married again, I would need to see the woman's
brain scan before going to the next level. About three weeks after we
met, I invited Tana to the clinic. She was a neurosurgical intensive
care nurse, and we bonded over our love of the brain, so it wasn't that
weird. Her brain was beautiful, and two-and-ahalf years later we were
married. Over the years, that one scan changed many other brains. A few
months after Tana was scanned, a neurologist diagnosed Tana's estranged
father with Alzheimer's disease, but when I scanned her dad, his SPECT
scan showed he did not have Alzheimer's disease but, rather, depression
masquerading as it. We prescribed natural dietary supplements for him,
and several months later, he was able to teach a six-hour seminar at a
local church. Then Tana's mother and uncle were fighting at work, so I
evaluated and scanned them. It turned out they both had terrible
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On medication they got
along much better, and their business improved. Then, a friend of Tana's
from her early 20s saw us on a public television show together and
reached out to Tana because her son, Jarrett, was really struggling.

JARRETT

Jarrett was diagnosed with ADHD in preschool. His mother said he was
driven by a motor that was revved way too high. He was hyperactive,
hyper-verbal, restless, and impulsive, and he couldn't focus. He also
didn't sleep well and interrupted everyone all the time. He had no
friends--- his classmates avoided him, and their parents kept their
children away from him. His third-grade teacher said he would never do
well in school and cautioned his parents to lower their expectations. He
had seen five doctors and was prescribed five stimulant medications for
ADHD. All of them made Jarrett worse, triggering mood swings and
terrible rages. He put holes in the walls of their home and scared his
siblings. His behavior had gotten so bad that his last doctor wanted to
put him on an antipsychotic medication. This is when his mother brought
him to see us. Jarrett's brain SPECT scan clearly showed dramatic
overactivity in a pattern we call "the ring of fire." No wonder
stimulants didn't work; it was like pouring gasoline on a fire. Our
published research shows that stimulants make this pattern worse 80
percent of the time.\[23\] On a group of natural supplements to calm his
brain--- together with parent training and structured, brain-healthy
habits---Jarrett's behavior dramatically improved. His grades went up,
the rages stopped, and he was able to make friends. He has now been on
the honor roll for eight straight years. After searching for so long,
his parents are grateful to have found the correct treatment plan for
him, which has completely altered the course of his life. There is no
telling what the future would have held for Jarrett if he had stayed on
his previous path. JARRETT AND DR. AMEN

HOW WOULD JARRETT HAVE BEEN TREATED THROUGHOUT HISTORY? The word
psychiatry originates from the Medieval Latin psychiatria, meaning
"healing of the soul."\[24\] Many societies have viewed mental illness
as a form of divine punishment or demon possession. This chapter will
walk you through history to show you some of the strange and unsettling
things that would have been prescribed in an attempt to heal Jarrett.

Ancient civilization In ancient Indian, Egyptian, Greek, and Roman
writings, mental illness was often seen as a religious or personal
failure. As early as 6,500 BC, prehistoric skulls and cave art showed
evidence of trepanation, a surgical procedure that involved drilling or
scraping a hole in the skull to release evil spirits thought to be
trapped inside.\[25\]

Treatment: Religious leaders may have attempted an exorcism for Jarrett
or drilled a hole in his skull to release the evil spirits. TREPANATION
TO ALLOW TRAPPED EVIL SPIRITS TO ESCAPE

HIPPOCRATES

The Greek physician Hippocrates (460--370 BC) believed all mental
illnesses came from the brain.\[26\] He wrote, "Men ought to know that
from the brain, and from the brain only, arise our pleasures, joy,
laughter, and jests, as well as our sorrows, pains, despondency, and
tears. . . . And by the same organ we become mad and delirious, where
fears and terrors assail us. . . . All these things we endure from the
brain, when it is not healthy."\[27\] Recognized as the "father of
medicine," Hippocrates proposed one of the first classifications of
mental disorders, including mania, melancholy, phrenitis (brain
inflammation, fever, delirium), insanity, disobedience, paranoia, panic,
epilepsy, and hysteria. Some of those terms are still used today. The
renowned physician did not view mental illness as shameful; he believed
that mentally ill people were not responsible for their behavior and
advocated that their family care for them at home. He was a pioneer in
treating mentally ill people with more rational techniques, focusing

on changing a person's diet, environment, or occupation and adding
medications, exercise, music, art therapy, and even divine solicitation.
It's incredible to consider that nearly 2,500 years ago, Hippocrates was
already suggesting that mental illnesses should be treated as physical
medical illnesses and treated with lifestyle changes (the main point of
this book).\[28\] However, he also theorized that physical and medical
illnesses were caused by an imbalance of four essential bodily fluids or
humors (blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm), which is partly to
blame for the practices of bloodletting and purging (similar to taking
laxatives to empty the bowels).

Treatment: Likely, Hippocrates would have had Jarrett exercise, listen
to music, create art, and focus on an occupation that fit his restless
nature. He may have also bled him to release excess blood and had him
take some natural supplements. GALEN

Galen (AD 130--201), another Greek physician during the Roman Empire and
ultimately one of the most influential physicians in history, agreed
with Hippocrates' four-humor theory of illness and associated them to
four temperaments: Sanguine (blood: extroverted, social, risk-taking)
Phlegmatic (phlegm: relaxed, peaceful, easy-going) Choleric (yellow
bile: take-charge, decisive, goaloriented) Melancholic (black bile:
creative, kind, and introverted)

Like Hippocrates, Galen believed no difference existed between mental
and physical illness\[29\] and noted that psychological stress could
cause mental health issues. He is credited with the development of a
tripartite theory of the soul, attempting to localize where the three
parts were housed in the body: rational (brain), spiritual (heart), and
appetitive (liver). In his book, On the Diagnosis and Cure of the Soul's
Passion, Galen discussed how to treat psychological problems, which some
have called an early attempt at psychotherapy.\[30\] He directed people
with psychological issues to share their deepest passions and secrets,
which can help them feel better.

Treatment: Galen would have prescribed Jarrett a treatment plan similar
to Hippocrates, with the addition of talk therapy. Middle Ages By the
Middle Ages, supernatural explanations of mental illnesses resurfaced in
Europe in an attempt to explain natural disasters, such as plagues and
famines. In the 13th century, mentally ill people, especially females,
were treated as demon-possessed witches. In the 16th century, Dutch
physician Johann Weyer and Englishman Reginald Scot tried to persuade
their populations that those accused of witchcraft were actually people
with mental illnesses in need of help, but the Catholic Church's
Inquisition banned their writings. This practice did not decline until
the 17th and 18th centuries. In the largest set of witch trials in
America, between February 1692 to May 1693, more than 200 people were
accused of being witches in Salem, Massachusetts; 20 were executed (14
females and 6 males), and others died in prison.

In the 16th and 17th centuries, asylums were created to house the
mentally ill against their will. Inmates, many of whom were chained and
beaten, often lived in squalor. Sometimes they were even exhibited to
those willing to pay a fee. They were also subjected to a host of arcane
medical practices, such as purging, blistering, or bloodletting.\[31\]

Treatment: Religious leaders may have attempted an exorcism on Jarrett,
or physicians may have placed him in an asylum, where he would have been
blistered, bled, or given laxatives. 18th and 19th centuries In 1789,
King George III of England descended into madness. His doctors were
unable to say if he would recover or if someone else should replace
him.\[32\] This crisis triggered physicians at England's insane asylums
to begin looking into the inheritance patterns of mental illness. Long
before the discovery of DNA, doctors started collecting family histories
of the insane, criminals, and those with intellectual disabilities among
those in the asylums, prisons, and schools for "feebleminded" children.
At the time, physicians who specialized in mental illness were called
alienists because they treated people who were alienated from society.
Some alienists thought stress caused mental illness, but most ascribed
to the belief that it was transmitted through families by heredity.
Asylum directors started using family trees and surveys to study and
track down affected relatives of their patients and institutionalized
them as well, believing these people should be discouraged from
reproducing. Asylum superintendents, legislators, and social reformers
embarked on a deeply misguided eugenics movement to improve

society by passing sterilization laws that were eventually supported by
the US Supreme Court (1927 Buck vs. Bell case). They passed in 32 states
and formed part of the rationale for Nazi Germany's atrocities. This
movement continued into the 1960s, with more than 60,000 Americans
undergoing sterilization.\[33\] In 18th-century Europe, protests broke
out over the conditions in the asylums, and reformers aimed to end the
abusive practices. They took the patients out of chains and encouraged
good hygiene, recreation, and occupational training.\[34\] In the United
States, one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence, physician
Benjamin Rush, who is considered the father of American psychiatry,
established a more benevolent approach, unshackling patients, forbidding
beatings, and lobbying for improved living conditions in Pennsylvania.
This doesn't mean that all of Rush's therapies were helpful. In his
book, Medical Inquiries and Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind,
he wrote that hypochondriasis, a form of melancholia or modern-day
depression, needed to be treated by "direct and drastic interferences"
that involved "assaulting the patient's mind and body" in an attempt to
reset their constitution.\[35\] He recommended that doctors "plumb"
patients' systems by bleeding (leeches), blistering, and cupping
(similar to the current cupping trend that reached national attention
when swimmer Michael Phelps was spotted at the 2016 Olympics with the
telltale purple blotches on his back that arise from the
treatment\[36\]). Rush also prescribed drugs, like mercury, arsenic, and
strychnine---now known to be poisonous---to induce vomiting and diarrhea
and suggested fasting for two or three days.\[37\] Once the body was
cleaned out, he recommended stimulants, such as tea and

coffee, ginger, and black pepper in large doses; magnesia, mustard rubs;
hot baths to induce sweating followed by cold baths; and exercise. When
Abraham Lincoln was severely depressed in January 1841, his physician
Dr. Anson Henry subscribed to Rush's aggressive theories and likely
subjected the future president to these punishing treatments. After
Lincoln spent a week alone with Dr. Henry, he described himself "as the
most miserable man living."\[38\] Rush also believed many psychiatric
illnesses were the result of blocked circulation. To improve brain blood
flow in schizophrenic patients, Rush would strap them into the "gyrating
chair," a device that spun them around until they became dizzy. It
didn't work. In the 1770s, Europe was influenced by German physician
Franz Anton Mesmer, who attempted to treat the "energy blockages" he
believed were at the root of mental illness. He thought all illnesses
could be attributed to an insufficient flow of what he called "animal
magnetism." By putting patients into a trance-like state and then
probing certain body parts to restore energy flow, Mesmer drove his
patients to states of crisis (delirium or seizures). In some patients,
symptoms miraculously vanished after the treatment, rocketing Mesmer to
celebrity status. In 1843, Scottish physician James Braid coined the
term hypnosis for a technique originally derived from animal magnetism
to induce hypnotic trances.

Treatment: Jarrett may have been institutionalized and sterilized, if
not euthanized, and his family placed under suspicion. American
physician Rush might have prescribed

blistering and poisonous drugs like arsenic, followed by hot and cold
baths. Germany's Mesmer might have hypnotized Jarrett to relieve the
blockage of energy. FREUD AND PSYCHOANALYSIS

In the late 19th century, Viennese physician Sigmund Freud voyaged to
Salpêtriere Hospital in Paris, where he studied with the founder of
modern neurology Jean-Martin Charcot, who was best known for his work
with hysteria and hypnosis. Charcot used hypnosis as a cathartic energy
release to enable healing. Freud later abandoned hypnosis in favor of
psychoanalysis, the talking cure, which dominated psychiatry for the
first half of the 20th century. Freud, a neurologist, was determined to
understand the human mind. He tried to understand it from a neuroscience
or brain perspective, but gave up in 1895, when he concluded that the
science of his time was not up to the task of explaining patients'
symptoms. Eventually, he came to believe in the power of the
subconscious, which could not be accessed during wakefulness but could
be accessed in hypnotic trances and later through psychoanalysis. For
Freud, the mind was like an iceberg---the largest part was unconscious
and hidden from sight. He argued that the mind had three parts: (1) the
id (child self, selfish desires, and instincts), (2) ego (adult self
that helps control the id to make more rational decisions), and (3)
superego (moral self that is the voice in your head judging your
actions). He developed the "talking cure" of psychoanalysis to help rid
mentally ill patients of the internal conflicts between their id, ego,
and superego, which he viewed as the cause of many mental illnesses. For
example, if a man wants to steal from his employer (id), he may
sublimate the

desire by writing crime stories or deny the desire altogether. But what
if these defense mechanisms (sublimation and denial) are not strong
enough? Freud hypothesized the person may develop a psychiatric
disorder. By encouraging people to talk about their hidden fears and
desires, Freud believed he could lead them to a cure. He encouraged his
patients to talk about everything that came to mind, including their
dreams, then he would psychoanalyze them. He believed many conflicts
typically started in childhood. Psychoanalysis provided the launching
pad for hundreds of schools of psychotherapy and "talking cures" still
in existence today, including behavior therapy; cognitive behavioral
therapy; psychodynamic therapy; and marital, family, and group therapy.

Treatment: Freud may have had Jarrett lying on the psychiatrist's couch
four or five times a week, attempting to work out his internal
conflicts. KRAEPELIN AND THE BIOLOGICAL CAUSES OF MENTAL ILLNESS

A contemporary of Freud's, German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin believed
the primary cause of mental illness was biological with a strong genetic
component. His theories were influential during the early 20th century
and reemerged at the end of the 20th century when psychoanalysis fell
out of favor. Viewing psychiatry as a branch of medicine, he began
developing the modern classification system for mental disorders. He
also protested against the inhumane treatments in psychiatric asylums
and argued against alcoholism and capital punishment. He emerged as an
advocate for the treatment, rather than the imprisonment, of the insane
and rejected Freud's

psychoanalytical theories as unscientific, especially those suggesting
that early sexual urges were the cause of mental illness.

Treatment: Kraepelin would have diagnosed Jarrett with a brain that was
misfiring and attempted to find a biological cure. Early 20th century
FEVER, INSULIN SHOCK, ECT, AND LOBOTOMY CURES

Austrian physician Julius Wagner-Jauregg experimented with curing
psychosis by inducing fevers. Misguided, he infected his patients with a
by-product of the bacteria that causes tuberculosis. It was not
successful. Undeterred, he began to use malaria parasites in 1917 to
treat psychotic patients suffering from syphilis. Fifteen percent of
them died, and the rest contracted malaria, but the fevers did
temporarily decrease their symptoms. Wagner-Jauregg was awarded the
Nobel Prize for his research in 1927. In 1927, another Austrian
psychiatrist, Manfred Sakel, administered large doses of insulin to
purposely cause seizures in psychotic patients. Researchers discovered
that if blood glucose levels went too low, people fell into a coma or
experienced seizures, and this could temporarily alleviate symptoms.
Unfortunately, the treatment was associated with negative side effects,
such as obesity, and more severe consequences, including brain damage
and even death. In 1938, Italian neurologists Ugo Cerletti and Lucino
Bini were the first to deliver electric shocks to patients to induce
seizures. They found that electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) had more
lasting benefits than insulin-shock therapy with fewer side effects. ECT
is still used today to treat severe cases of schizophrenia, depression,
mania, and serious suicidal thoughts.\[39\] With anesthesia, muscle
relaxants,

and more targeted dosing, it can be an effective technique, but it can
also cause memory problems, confusion, headaches, and muscle aches. In
1935, Portuguese neurologist António Egas Moniz drilled holes into the
skulls of 20 mentally disturbed patients and used a wire in 13 of them
to sever the connections in the brain's frontal lobes. Moniz was hoping
the procedure, called a lobotomy, would calm his patients, who suffered
from anxiety, depression, and schizophrenia. It worked! Patients became
more compliant, spurring wide adoption of the procedure, which was
subsequently used on thousands of patients. Over time, however, it
became apparent that it destroyed personalities and turned people into
zombie-like beings. Despite these alarming side effects, Moniz also
received a Nobel Prize for his work.

Treatment: Wagner-Jauregg would have given Jarrett malaria in an attempt
to heal him. Sakel would have tried insulinshock therapy on Jarrett.
Cerletti and Bini would have subjected Jarrett to electric shock therapy
to reset his brain. Moniz would have performed a frontal lobotomy on
Jarrett, calming his aggression but permanently damaging his
personality. Today, there is a renaissance of surgical techniques for
psychiatric illnesses, but they are very different from the frontal
lobotomy of old. Very precise, nondamaging surgical interventions can be
used to turn off or on certain circuits in the brain. This approach has
been effective in Parkinson's disease and has shown some efficacy for
obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) and some patients with refractory
depression.

LOBOTOMY: SURGICALLY DAMAGING FRONTAL LOBES

The late 20th century THE MIND MEDICATION REVOLUTION

Despite psychoanalysis and the other techniques listed above, there was
little hope for a cure for serious mental illnesses until the 1950s,
when a host of psychiatric medications became available to practitioners
and patients. The first effective medication for schizophrenia
(chlorpromazine, brand name Thorazine) was developed in 1951 to treat
nausea and allergies and to calm patients before surgery. When it was
administered to a hospitalized violent young man, it immediately calmed
him and caused such an improvement in his behavior, he was discharged a
few weeks later. Chlorpromazine and subsequently other antipsychotic
medications, which reportedly block excessive dopamine in the brain, led
to dramatic improvements for many psychotic patients and ultimately to a
significant reduction in state hospital populations.

The 1950s also saw the release of methylphenidate (Ritalin), which soon
was prescribed to help hyperactive children; chlordiazepoxide (Librium),
the first benzodiazepine, for anxiety disorders; and imipramine
(Tofranil) for severe depression. The age of psychopharmacology had
begun in earnest, with medications for bipolar disorder, OCD, and other
disorders flooding the market in the decades that followed. While I was
in medical school, Xanax was released for panic disorders with the
erroneous notion that it was less addictive than Librium and the other
benzodiazepines. Since it was new, psychiatric residents prescribed it a
lot, which is something I later regretted when I saw what it did to
SPECT scans. Plus, whenever I prescribed it to patients, I found it was
incredibly hard for them to get off it. In 1987, with the FDA approval
of the blockbuster antidepressant Prozac (fluoxetine), the mind drug
revolution began to dominate psychiatry. Reportedly, Prozac had fewer
side effects than imipramine and medications like it, leading to other
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRIs) antidepressant
medications being approved for depression. Since Prozac was introduced,
antidepressant use in the United States has increased 400 percent, and
more than one in 10 Americans now takes one. Only medications to lower
cholesterol are prescribed more often than antidepressants in the United
States.\[40\] After the global success of Prozac, the "chemical
imbalance" theory of mental illness burst into the public consciousness,
and many people began proactively asking their doctors to fix their down
moods. Famously, after actress Carrie Fisher was cremated, her ashes
were placed in a green and white Prozac-pill shaped urn.

Since Prozac was introduced, antidepressant use in the United States has
increased 400 percent, and more than one in 10 Americans now takes one.
Taking pills may seem like an easier and quicker solution to bad moods
than taking the time and effort to develop brain-healthy habits, build
skills, or change troublesome behavior. Yet there is a dark side to the
mind-meds that is often overlooked. Thousands of lawsuits claim that
Prozac and other psychiatric medications increase violent or suicidal
behavior. Virtually all antidepressants and antipsychotic medications
have black box warnings, which, in simple terms means the FDA cautions
patients in the strongest terms to pay close attention to potentially
extremely harmful or dangerous threats to their health. In 1991, just
when I was beginning to use brain SPECT imaging, reports surfaced
suggesting Prozac increased violent behavior. When it happened to one of
my patients, it horrified me. It caused us to start reviewing scans to
see if we could predict which scan patterns were associated with
medications making patients worse, such as the negative reaction Jarrett
had on multiple stimulants. We have published papers on ADD/ADHD\[41\]
and depression,\[42\] revealing the SPECT patterns that are associated
with both positive and negative responses to medications. Despite the
problems, the pharmaceutical industry is incredibly successful at
marketing psychiatric medications to doctors and the general public.
From 1997 to 2016, the industry increased direct-to-consumer
prescription drug advertising from \$1.3 billion to \$6 billion.\[43\]
Prescription drug ads often do not adequately explain side effects, and
because of repeated exposure, many people tune out those statements at
the end of TV commercials, often delivered in

a rapid-fire manner, such as, "This drug may cause permanent liver
damage, seizures, an allergic reaction that leads to fatal throat
swelling and suicidal tendencies." Patients in the United States are
more than twice as likely to ask for drugs seen in ads compared with
those in Canada, where most direct-to-consumer advertising is
prohibited. \[44\] There is no doubt in my mind that psychiatric
medication saves lives, especially for people who have the more serious
brain-health/mental-health disorders, such as bipolar disorder and
schizophrenia. Yet we should all be cautious with meds because, once
they are started, they are hard to stop,\[45\] and they do not just
reset your brain; they change it. An Oxford University study found most
SSRIs--- such as Prozac, Paxil, Zoloft, and Lexapro---do not just
decrease negative emotions; they reduce all emotions, including love,
happiness, and joy. Participants felt separated from their surroundings
and cared less about important things in their daily lives. They felt
like their personalities had changed.\[46\]

Treatment: Even though Jarrett had failed five prescription medications
before seeing us, other doctors would continue the trial and error
method of trying to get his symptoms under control. THE DSM: A MORE
SCIENTIFIC APPROACH?

In an effort to adopt a more objective and scientific approach and to
increase standardization in a field that struggled with credibility, in
1952, the American Psychiatric Association (APA) released the first
version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-I), which categorized all mental disorders. Initially modeled after
diagnostic tools used by the military and Veterans

Administration, the DSM has since undergone revisions resulting in five
subsequent editions (DSM-II 1968, DSM-III 1980, DSM-IIIR 1987, DSM-IV
1994, and DSM-V 2013). The DSM has had great success and nearly all
mental health professionals in the United States and many around the
world use it. Yet it is not without controversy. In a 2005 lecture at
the annual meeting of the APA, Thomas Insel, one of the most powerful
psychiatrists in the world at the time as director of the National
Institutes of Mental Health, caused an uproar when he announced the DSM
was 100 percent reliable . . . but zero percent valid, meaning if you
make a diagnosis with the criteria today for a certain disorder, like
depression, you will make it again tomorrow, but zero percent valid
because it is not based on any underlying neuroscience. After the DSM-V
was released in 2013, Insel posted a blog: The goal of this new manual,
as with all previous editions, is to provide a common language for
describing psychopathology. While DSM has been described as a "Bible"
for the field, it is, at best, a dictionary, creating a set of labels
and defining each. The strength of each of the editions of DSM has been
"reliability"---each edition has ensured that clinicians use the same
terms in the same ways. The weakness is its lack of validity. Unlike our
definitions of ischemic heart disease, lymphoma, or AIDS, the DSM
diagnoses are \[not\] based on . . . any objective laboratory measure. .
. . Patients with mental disorders deserve better.\[47\]

After using a number of the DSM versions on thousands of patients over
the past 40 years, it is clear to me that it can help us categorize
illnesses such as depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, panic
disorder, or borderline personality disorder, but it doesn't tell us
anything about what causes them or how to predict which treatments will
work because, as Insel suggested, it is not based on any underlying
neuroscience. What's more, each new version of the DSM adds additional
mental disorders, which leads to an increase in the number of people
diagnosed with problems---a concept called medicalization, where, in a
given year, about one in five Americans will suffer from at least one
DSM disorder. \[48\] Contrast that with rates from the 1950s when far
fewer people were being diagnosed each year. The more disorders that are
included in the DSM, and the more lenient their definitions, the easier
it is to diagnose healthy people as having a problem. Predictably, the
increase in "sick" people correlates with an increase in treatment,
especially medications.

Treatment: Jarrett had been diagnosed with DSM-IV ADHD since the age of
three, but none of the standard medications recommended had worked. In
fact, they all made him worse. THE 15-MINUTE MED CHECK

When I was in training in the late 1970s to mid-1980s, psychiatrists
were able to spend time with patients. If patients needed to be
hospitalized, psychiatrists could treat and stabilize them over weeks or
months. In outpatient settings, psychiatrists performed both
psychotherapy and medication management, often seeing patients one to
two times a week. In the early 1990s, when managed health care became
more popular, insurance companies began to

dictate how long patients could stay in the hospital and how many
sessions they could have with therapists. Having been in the trenches at
the time, it seemed to me that many of their decisions were based not on
patient need but on attempts to optimize company profits. Over the
years, professionals have been squeezed to see more patients in less
time in order to make enough money to pay back their student loans and
support their families. Less trained and less expensive professionals
were doing more therapy and psychiatrists were relegated to 15minute
monthly med checks. As med checks increased, so did the use of
psychiatric medication, in part because it was the unique tool
psychiatrists had in their toolboxes. As a side effect of the 15-minute
med check, psychiatrists became more disconnected from the intimate
details of patients' lives.

Treatment: Jarrett and his parents had seen 5 different doctors who all
practiced with the 15-minute med check model. It was not helpful. The
21st century NONPSYCHIATRIC PHYSICIANS, NURSE PRACTITIONERS, AND
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS ARE NOW WRITING MOST OF THE PRESCRIPTIONS TO MANAGE
YOUR MIND

One of the most disturbing trends is that nearly 85 percent of
psychiatric medications are prescribed by primary care physicians, nurse
practitioners, and physician assistants in short office visits, and 72
percent of these prescriptions are accompanied by no diagnosis in the
charts.\[49\] These medical professionals often do not have the time or
the specialized training to develop comprehensive treatment plans or to
tell you about safer and more natural solutions.

Some primary care physicians do a wonderful job handling mental health
issues, while others cause more harm than good.

Treatment: Many patients like Jarrett start by getting prescriptions
from their family physicians or pediatricians. Sometimes this is
helpful, sometimes not. TRANSCRANIAL MAGNETIC STIMULATION (TMS)

TMS is a newer treatment to change the brain for the better. It uses
brief magnetic pulses to stimulate activity in the areas of the brain
known to affect mood, anxiety, and pain. This is not the same as ECT
from the 1930s. TMS does not require anesthesia, plus it's less
expensive and has fewer side effects than ECT. An Israeli study showed
that TMS and ECT have similar efficacy.\[50\] The FDA has approved TMS
for the treatment of resistant depression, but new evidence shows it can
enhance memory and potentially help improve a wide range of other
brain-related issues, including depression;\[51\] anxiety;\[52\]
addiction;\[53\] smoking cessation;\[54\] post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD);\[55\] OCD;\[56\] cognitive problems, memory, and dementia;\[57\]
and tinnitus (ringing in the ears).\[58\] At Amen Clinics, we use TMS
differently than most of our colleagues. We change the settings based on
what we see from our brain imaging work. Doing the same treatment
settings for everyone is like giving every depressed patient the same
medication, which seems to work about as well as giving a placebo.

Treatment: Jarrett may have tried a course of TMS. MARIJUANA AND
PSYCHEDELICS

The current trend, besides pharmaceutical medication, is using marijuana
and psychedelic drugs---such as LSD, ketamine, psilocybin mushrooms,
ecstasy, ayahuasca, and

ibogaine---to treat psychiatric illnesses. At the time of this writing,
using marijuana for at least medical purposes is legal in 30 states,
with more on the way. As the perception of the danger of a drug goes
down, its use goes up. Many clinicians are now prescribing marijuana and
CBD (cannabidiol, one of the ingredients of the marijuana and hemp
plants) oil to help patients with anxiety, depression, irritability, and
aggression despite limited research. This new market has made many
marijuana millionaires with an exuberance rarely seen. The FDA recently
approved a cannabidiol solution, Epidiolex, for two seizure disorders.
Our brain imaging work over the last 30 years has given me pause in
regard to marijuana, and at the time of this writing, the jury is still
out for me on CBD. Over the last 30 years, I've seen thousands of SPECT
scans of patients who were regular marijuana users. In 2016, my
colleagues and I published a study on more than 1,000 marijuana users
and showed that virtually every area of the brain was lower in blood
flow compared to healthy scans, especially in the hippocampus, one of
the brain's major memory centers.\[59\] In 2018, we published the
world's largest brain imaging study on 62,454 SPECT scans on how the
brain ages. Marijuana was associated with accelerated aging in the
brain.\[60\] So caution is needed. Other professionals are also studying
and using psychedelics for addictions and depression, especially
ketamine. Due to its hallucinogenic effects, ketamine has a reputation
as a popular and illicit party drug, going by the nickname "Special K."
It dulls pain and users often feel detached or dissociated from their
own body. First developed in the 1960s, ketamine was administered as an
anesthetic and given to soldiers during the Vietnam War. In 2000,
researchers started studying ketamine as a treatment

for depression and discovered that it improves mood much faster than
traditional antidepressant medications, and sometimes works when other
drugs have failed. More than a hundred studies have shown that ketamine
has antidepressant effects.\[61\] Unlike antidepressants, which work by
enhancing neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine, ketamine is
thought to change the way brain cells talk to each other---similar to a
computer reboot or hardware fix. Ketamine is showing potential, but a
new study argues for caution. It showed that the antidepressant effects
of ketamine were eliminated with the opiate blocker naltrexone, meaning
it worked by activating the opiate centers of the brain.\[62\] In the
long run, could it have similar damaging effects as other opioids and be
causing more harm than good?

Treatment: As Jarrett became an adult, his doctor may have treated him
with marijuana or ketamine.

INSANITY IS OFTEN DESCRIBED AS DOING THE SAME THING AND EXPECTING A
DIFFERENT RESULT: The Psychiatric Diagnostic and Treatment System Needs
a New Paradigm When President Barack Obama called for more mental health
services\[63\] after 20-year-old Adam Lanza murdered his mother and went
to the Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, where he
fatally shot 20 six- and seven-year-old children and six adults, I knew
that if we spent more money using the same symptom-based diagnostic and
treatment model, we would still get the same

disturbing results. Like Lanza, a number of our nation's most notorious
mass shooters had seen psychiatrists or mental health professionals and
had received "standard of care" treatment before their crimes, including
Kip Kinkel (Springfield, OR, 1998), Eric Harris (Columbine, CO, 1999),
Seung-Hui Cho (Virginia Tech, 2007), James Holmes (Aurora, CO, 2012),
and Nikolas Cruz (Parkland, FL, 2018). We do not need more of the same.
We need a completely different paradigm rooted in neuroscience and hope.
A new way forward in psychiatry will require ending the paradigm of
mental illness, because psychiatric issues really are so much more. Your
brain creates your mind. The issues that affect our minds stem from our
brains, our bodies, our thoughts, our social and work interactions with
others, and our deepest sense of meaning and purpose. We were able to
help Jarrett change the trajectory of his life by addressing all of
these factors in an integrative way. It started by looking at his brain,
because if you never look, you never really know.

\[22\] John Green, "What Is the Origin of the Word 'Shrink' for
Psychologists?" Classroom, last modified July 31, 2019,
https://classroom.synonym.com/origin-word-shrink-psychologists-11814.html.
\[23\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Predicting Positive and Negative
Treatment Responses to Stimulants with Brain SPECT Imaging," Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs 40, no. 2 (June 2008): 131--38. \[24\] "Psychiatry,"
Dictionary.com, https://www.dictionary.com/browse/psychiatry. \[25\]
Richard Restak, Mysteries of the Mind (National Geographic Society,
2000). \[26\] Christos F. Kleisiaris et al., "Health Care Practices in
Ancient Greece: The Hippocratic Ideal," Journal of Medical Ethics and
History of Medicine 7, no. 6 (March 15, 2014).

\[27\] Hippocrates, The Genuine Works of Hippocrates (New York: W. Wood
and Company, 1886). \[28\] Kleisiaris et al., "Health Care Practices in
Ancient Greece: The Hippocratic Ideal." \[29\] R. J. Hankinson, "Galen's
Anatomy of the Soul," Phronesis 36, no. 2 (1991): 197--233. \[30\] D.
Brett King, William Douglas Woody, and Wayne Viney, A History of
Psychology: Ideas and Context (New York: Routledge, 2013), 72. \[31\]
Ingrid G. Farreras, "History of Mental Illness," in R. Biswas-Diener and
E. Diener, eds. Noba Textbook Series: Psychology (Champaign, IL: DEF
Publishers), see http://noba.to/65w3s7ex. \[32\] Theodore Porter,
Genetics in the Madhouse (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2018). \[33\] Alexandra Minna Stern, "That Time the United States
Sterilized 60,000 of Its Citizens," Huffington Post, January 7, 2016,
www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/sterilization-unitedstates_us_568f35f2e4b0c8beacf68713.
\[34\] Farreras, "History of Mental Illness." \[35\] Joshua Wolf Shenk,
Lincoln's Melancholy (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2005), 58. \[36\]
Melissa Fares, "Michael Phelps' Purple Blotches Spotlight 'Cupping'
Trend," Reuters, August 8, 2016,
www.reuters.com/article/us-olympics-rio-swimmingphelps-cupping-idUSKCN10J214.
\[37\] Joshua Wolf Shenk, Lincoln's Melancholy, 58--59. \[38\] Joshua
Wolf Shenk, "Lincoln's Great Depression," Atlantic, October 2005. \[39\]
Mayo Clinic Staff, "Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)," Mayo Clinic,
October 12, 2018,
www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/electroconvulsivetherapy/about/pac-20393894.
\[40\] Brendan L. Smith, "Inappropriate Prescribing," Monitor on
Psychology 43, no. 6 (June 2012): 36,
www.apa.org/monitor/2012/06/prescribing.aspx. \[41\] Daniel G. Amen et
al., "Predicting Positive and Negative Treatment Responses to Stimulants
with Brain SPECT Imaging." \[42\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Deficits in
Regional Cerebral Blood Flow on Brain SPECT Predict Treatment Resistant
Depression," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 63, no. 2 (2018): 529--38.
\[43\] Lisa M. Schwartz and Steven Woloshin, "Medical Marketing in the
United States, 1997--2016," Journal of American Medical Association 321,
no. 1 (January 1/8, 2019): 80--96. \[44\] "Review Article Takes Rare
Look at Impact of Advertising Psychiatric Drugs," Brown University press
release, September 13, 2016,
https://www.brown.edu/news/2016-09-13/advertising.

\[45\] Benedict Carey and Robert Gebeloff, "Many People Taking
Antidepressants Discover They Cannot Quit," New York Times, April 7,
2018,
www.nytimes.com/2018/04/07/health/antidepressants-withdrawal-prozaccymbalta.html.
\[46\] G. M. Goodwin et al., "Emotional Blunting with Antidepressant
Treatments: A Survey among Depressed Patients," Journal of Affective
Disorders 221 (October 15, 2017): 31--35. \[47\] Thomas Insel,
"Transforming Diagnosis," National Institute of Mental Health, April 29,
2013,
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/about/directors/thomasinsel/blog/2013/transforming-diagnosis.shtml.
\[48\] "Mental Illness," National Institute of Mental Health, February
2019, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml.
\[49\] Ramin Mojtabai and M. Olfson, "Proportion of Antidepressants
Prescribed without a Psychiatric Diagnosis Is Growing," Health Affairs
30, no. 8 (August 2011): 1434--42. \[50\] Racheli Magnezi et al.,
"Comparison between Neurostimulation Techniques Repetitive Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation vs Electroconvulsive Therapy for the Treatment of
Resistant Depression: Patient Preference and CostEffectiveness," Patient
Preference and Adherence 10 (August 4, 2016): 1481-- 87. \[51\] Tarique
Perera et al., "The Clinical TMS Society Consensus Review and Treatment
Recommendations for TMS Therapy for Major Depressive Disorder," Brain
Stimulation 9, no. 3 (May--June 2016): 336--46. \[52\] D. White and S.
Tavakoli, "Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation for Treatment of
Major Depressive Disorder with Comorbid Generalized Anxiety Disorder,"
Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 27, no. 3 (August 2015): 192--96. \[53\]
Marco Ceccanti et al., "Deep TMS on Alcoholics: Effects on Cortisolemia
and Dopamine Pathway Modulation. A Pilot Study," Canadian Journal of
Physiology and Pharmacology 93, no. 4 (April 2015): 283--90. \[54\]
Limor Dinur-Klein et al., "Smoking Cessation Induced by Deep Repetitive
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation of the Prefrontal and Insular
Cortices: A Prospective, Randomized Controlled Trial," Biological
Psychiatry 76, no. 9 (November 2014): 742--49. \[55\] Paulo Sergio
Boggio et al., "Noninvasive Brain Stimulation with HighFrequency and
Low-Intensity Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Treatment for
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 71, no. 8
(August 2010): 992--99. \[56\] Alisson Trevizol et al., "Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation for ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder: An Updated
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of ECT 32, no. 4 (December
2016): 262--66. \[57\] Hellen Livia Drumond Marra et al., "Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation to Address Mild Cognitive Impairment in the
Elderly: A Randomized Controlled Study," Behavioural Neurology (2015).

William M. McDonald, "Neuromodulation Treatments for Geriatric Mood and
Cognitive Disorders," American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 24, no.
12 (December 2016): 1130--41. Jose M. Rabey et al., "Repetitive
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Combined with Cognitive
Training Is a Safe and Effective Modality for the Treatment of
Alzheimer's Disease: A Randomized, Double-Blind Study," Journal of
Neural Transmission 123, no. 12 (December 2016):1449--55. \[58\] Mehmet
Yilmaz et al., "Effectiveness of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Application in Treatment of Tinnitus," Journal of Craniofacial Surgery
25, no. 4 (July 2014): 1315--18. \[59\] Daniel G. Amen et al.,
"Discriminative Properties of Hippocampal Hypoperfusion in Marijuana
Users Compared to Healthy Controls: Implications for Marijuana
Administration in Alzheimer's Dementia," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease
56, no. 1 (2017): 261--73. \[60\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Patterns of
Regional Cerebral Blood Flow as a Function of Age throughout the
Lifespan," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 65, no. 4 (2018): 1087--92.
\[61\] Chittaranjan Andrade, "Ketamine for Depression, 1: Clinical
Summary of Issues Related to Efficacy, Adverse Effects, and Mechanism of
Action," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 78, no. 4 (April 2017):
e415--e419. Michael F. Grunebaum et al., "Ketamine for Rapid Reduction
of Suicidal Thoughts in Major Depression: A Midazolam-Controlled
Randomized Clinical Trial," American Journal of Psychiatry 175, no. 4
(April 1, 2018): 327--35. \[62\] Nolan R. Williams et al., "Attenuation
of Antidepressant Effects of Ketamine by Opioid Receptor Antagonism,"
American Journal of Psychiatry 175, no. 12 (December 1, 2018): 1205--15.
\[63\] Nedra Pickler, "Obama Calls for End to Mental Illness Stigma,"
San Diego Union-Tribune , June 3, 2013,
www.sandiegouniontribune.com/sdut-obamacalls-for-end-to-mental-illness-stigma-2013jun03-story.html.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 2

MAKING INVISIBLE ILLNESSES VISIBLE HOW LOOKING AT THE BRAIN DISRUPTS AN
OUTDATED PARADIGM AND CHARTS A NEW PATH FORWARD The significant problems
we face cannot be solved at the same level of thinking we were at when
we created them. A L B E RT E I N S T E I N

If you have crushing chest pain, your doctor will scan your heart; but
if you have crushing depression, no one will ever look at your brain. If
you are sick to your stomach, your doctor will image your abdomen; but
if you are sick with anxiety, no one will ever look at your brain. If
you have stabbing back pain, your doctor will order an MRI; but if you
have urges to stab others, no one will ever look at your brain.

If you have persistent knee pain, your doctor will image your knees; but
if you have persistent heartache, no one will ever look at your brain.
If you have a chronic cough, your doctor will x-ray your chest; but if
alcoholic behavior is ruining your life, no one will ever look at your
brain. If you have tormenting hip pain, your doctor will scan your hip;
but if you torment your spouse so much that he or she leaves you, no one
will ever look at your brain. If you are paralyzed from an accident,
your doctor will scan your spine; but if you are paralyzed with
obsessive thoughts, no one will ever look at your brain. If you develop
a runaway tachycardia, your doctor will scan your heart; but if your
teenager runs away and lives on the street, no one will ever look at his
or her brain. You have heard it said that a picture is worth 1,000
words, but a map is worth 1,000 images. Without a map, you are lost. If
you are lost in the wilderness without a map, you unnecessarily suffer
and are at risk of dying. Likewise, many people are lost in the morass
of psychiatric care, and lack of proper diagnosis and treatment costs
many people their lives. In 2020 this is simply unacceptable. Here is an
example.

JASON

Jason was 18 and in his first year of college at the University of Rhode
Island when he first started hearing voices and having visual
hallucinations. Based on his symptoms, the university psychiatrist
diagnosed him with schizophrenia and told his parents he would need to
be on antipsychotic medication for the rest of his life, but the
medication triggered suicidal thoughts. Horrified, his mother called me.
She and I had worked together at a large public television station. I
told her I wanted to see Jason immediately. Jason's brain SPECT scan
showed evidence of a past brain injury affecting his left temporal lobe,
which when damaged is often involved in mood instability, dark thoughts,
and hallucinations, and it also revealed low activity in his frontal
lobes (where focus, forethought, and planning occur). When he was five
years old, Jason had jumped headfirst into an empty bathtub and was
unconscious for a brief period. He had also sustained several
concussions while wrestling and playing soccer. Since the age of five,
Jason had struggled with low-grade depression. His symptoms worsened
when he was 12 years old and experienced bullying at school. While at
college, Jason started hearing voices. They constantly made mean
comments about him and others. Often, the voices would speak at the same
time. In addition, he began seeing gory visions of his own death,
including being strangled by a snake. HEALTHY SPECT

Full, even, symmetrical activity

JASON'S SPECT

Low activity, especially in prefrontal cortex and temporal lobes

After meeting with Jason and reviewing his SPECT brain scans, my
conclusion was that he did not have schizophrenia; rather, he had a
psychotic depression, which

had been made worse by the prior brain injury, undisciplined thought
patterns, and chronic stress. I took him off his antipsychotic
medication, supported his brain recovery with healing nutrients, and had
him do cognitivebehavioral therapy (you'll find out more about this
simple method to eliminate ANTs---automatic negative thoughts---in an
upcoming chapter) and hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) to help heal his
prior brain injury. Within four months, he was remarkably improved. The
following year, he was back at school. Subsequently, we have also helped
many people in Jason's family, including his mother, father, nephew, and
cousin.

HOOKED ON BRAIN IMAGING When we first started our brain imaging work, we
were so excited because it added incredibly useful information to help
our patients, as in Chase's case in the introduction and Jarrett's case
in chapter 1. Once I knew people were getting better faster because of
what we learned about them through our brain imaging work, I was hooked
on SPECT, despite the fierce criticism that would eventually come my
way. When I started to talk about our work at national psychiatric
meetings, academic psychiatrists chastised me and my colleagues for
using these tools in our clinics, saying they were only for
research---not immediate application to people's lives. But, for me,
once my patients got better faster, there was no going back. After
giving all-day courses on SPECT for several years in the early 1990s,
the APA dismissed the use of SPECT and related neuroimaging because it
did not match their diagnostic bible (the DSM, which it owns and profits
from).

\[64\] Unfortunately, the APA's position completely missed the point on
how doctors and patients benefit from brain imaging tools, leaving
psychiatrists as the only medical specialists who virtually never look
at the organ they treat, condemning them to make diagnoses of complex
cases based only on talking to the patients, looking at them, and
looking for symptom clusters, similar to how Dr. Anson Henry diagnosed
Lincoln with melancholia back in 1841.

Without imaging, psychiatrists still make symptomcluster diagnoses,
similar to how Dr. Anson Henry diagnosed Lincoln with melancholia in
1841. Those of us who use functional brain imaging know that scans will
never match the DSM because the DSM was not based on any underlying
neuroscience and was developed before there was access to functional
assessment tools, such as SPECT and QEEG. Experienced clinicians can
tell if someone is likely to have attention deficit disorder/attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD), obsessive compulsive disorder
(OCD), or bipolar disorder without the benefit of these tools. But what
clinicians cannot do, and will never be able to do, without functional
brain imaging is to know the underlying brain biology of the patients
they treat. Without imaging your brain, your doctor cannot tell if your
inattention, depression, or aggression is from: Low blood flow from
vascular disease A premature aging process An inflammatory process,
related to low omega-3 fatty acids or gut problems A genetic abnormality
Lasting physical trauma from playing football in high school

Toxic exposure to carbon monoxide or mold, which needs to be treated
Seizure activity A brain infection Nutrient or neurohormone
abnormalities Blood sugar abnormalities Undiagnosed sleep apnea A brain
that is working too hard and needs to be calmed down A brain that is not
working hard enough and needs to be stimulated If we don't look at the
brain, we are unnecessarily flying blind. That can lead us to miss
important diagnoses, give the wrong treatment plan, and hurt the people
entrusted to us to help.

If we don't look at the brain, we are unnecessarily flying blind, which
can hurt the people entrusted to us to help.

WHY DON'T ALL PSYCHIATRISTS USE BRAIN IMAGING? If I'm right, then why
isn't the whole of psychiatry on board? Because this new way of thinking
completely changes the diagnostic and treatment paradigm that has been
taught in medical schools and psychiatric residency training programs
for more than 50 years. Functional brain imaging takes psychiatry from a
generalized symptom-cluster diagnostic and treatment specialty without
any biological evidence to a

more objective specialty, one that is solidly based on using
state-of-the-art brain mapping tools to help optimize the patient's
brain function. Besides completely changing the way we diagnose brain
health/mental health, functional imaging leads to entirely different
treatment protocols to improve brain function. These include strategies
that are often more natural and lifestyle-based and more directly
accessible to patients. These types of protocols are not taught in
medical schools and are not underwritten by the pharmaceutical industry
that has dominated the financial support of the psychiatric
establishment. (One only has to attend psychiatric meetings or read most
psychiatric journals to see the massive advertising funded by the
pharmaceutical industry.) When my colleagues began attacking me for our
brain imaging work, it initially made me anxious and upset. Then I
realized anyone who tries to change a paradigm invites vitriol. In the
16th century, the Italian politician Niccolò Machiavelli explained,
"There is nothing more difficult to plan, more doubtful of success, nor
more dangerous to manage than a new system. For the initiator has the
enmity of all who would profit by the preservation of the old
institution." Yet, by functionally imaging Chase's, Jarrett's, and
Jason's brains and then developing treatments personalized for them, we
were able to positively change the trajectory of their lives.

Thomas Kuhn: The Structure of Scientific Revolution In 1962, scientific
historian and philosopher Thomas Kuhn wrote that scientific revolutions
typically occur in five stages.

STAGE I: THE DISCREPANCIES SHOW In the first stage, the revolution is
started when the standard paradigm begins to fail. For example, I would
diagnose patients with major depression or ADD/ADHD based on DSM
criteria, put them on standard treatments---such as Prozac or
Ritalin---and then see them become suicidal or aggressive. This was a
paradigmbased failure that occurred far too often and was emotionally
traumatic for my patients, as well as for me.

STAGE II: THE DISAGREEMENTS START Once the paradigm begins to fail,
experts begin to look for ways to fix their theories, but they resist
discarding their old models entirely and instead look for small fixes.
Over time, the failing model splinters into many competing schools of
thought. More than 250 types of psychotherapies and myriad medications
exist to treat mental illnesses. Kuhn wrote that no matter how wrong
their models have become, the leaders maintain their beliefs and
continue trying to tweak their ideas to preserve their power and
influence. This makes me think of the six versions of the DSM, which has
been tweaked but not substantially overhauled since 1980.

STAGE III: THE REVOLUTION Over time, a new paradigm emerges that
resolves many of the problems in the field. A new paradigm---such as
"Get your brain right, and your mind will follow"---reinterprets
existing

knowledge, retaining the best of the old thinking and integrating the
latest knowledge into a fresh model, a paradigm shift.

STAGE IV: THE REJECTION The new paradigm is then rejected and ridiculed
by the leaders in the field. This is one of the most reliable stages of
a scientific revolution. The old guard becomes frustrated that the new
idea did not come from them and because they hold tightly to their own
theories, this period may last for decades until they retire or die.
Nobel Prize-- winning physicist Max Planck wrote, "A new scientific
truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see
the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new
generation grows up that is familiar with it."\[65\] Science advances
through funerals.

STAGE V: THE ACCEPTANCE The new theory is adopted gradually as younger,
more open-minded scientists accept it early in their careers and later
become the leaders of the field. Kuhn also noted that professionals who
are outsiders and not wed to the status quo are often the ones who
champion new paradigms. It takes courage to be on the outside, but in
the long run it pays off because everyone gets better care. Currently,
thousands of young psychiatrists and brain health practitioners have
been trained in our work, and we're training more of them all the

time. We and others are also publishing landmark research articles with
the new paradigm in respected scientific journals.

BRAIN SPECT IMAGING MADE RIDICULOUSLY SIMPLE The brain SPECT imaging
work we do at Amen Clinics has revolutionized my life and is an
important part of the foundation for The End of Mental Illness.
Throughout this book you'll see many more SPECT scans, so it is
important to know a bit about the science and how to look at the images.
First, let me give you the brief backstory on how I fell in love with
brain imaging, which I've written about in Change Your Brain, Change
Your Life. In 1972, I joined the US Army and became an infantry medic,
which is when my love of medicine was born. After about 18 months, I was
retrained as an X-ray technician and developed a passion for medical
imaging. As our professors used to say, "How do you know unless you
look?" In 1979, when I was a second-year medical student, someone I
loved tried to kill herself, and I took her to see a wonderful
psychiatrist. Over time, I realized that if he helped her, which he did,
it would not just help her; it would eventually help her children and
even her future grandchildren as they would be shaped by someone who was
happier and more stable. I fell in love with psychiatry because I
realized it had the potential to help generations of people. I have
loved it every day for the past 40 years.

Yet I fell in love with the only medical profession that almost never
looks at the organ it treats. As you saw in the opening to this chapter,
cardiologists image the heart; gastroenterologists image the stomach and
intestines; and orthopedic doctors image bones. Virtually every other
medical specialty images the organs it treats, but psychiatrists don't
look at the brain. Rather, they are trained to make diagnoses based on
symptom clusters and to make educated guesses about treatment needs.
Early in my career, I knew there had to be a better way and began
searching for it. In 1991, I went to a lecture on brain SPECT imaging by
Jack Paldi, MD, who was the chief of medicine at the hospital where I
worked. Dr. Paldi told us that SPECT was a tool to give psychiatrists
more information to help their patients. SPECT looks at blood flow and
activity. It looks at how the brain works. It is different from MRI and
CT studies that look at brain structure. SPECT looks at brain function.
He said SPECT basically tells us three things about the activity in each
area of the brain: if it is healthy, underactive, or overactive.

SPECT basically shows three important things about each area of the
brain: if it is healthy, underactive, or overactive.

To help you understand our brain imaging work, look at the following
examples of common brain SPECT patterns. A surface SPECT scan helps us
see areas that have healthy activity and those with low activity on the
outside surface of the brain. The surface scans show the top 45 percent
of activity in the brain. Any areas that fall below that percentage look
like a hole or indentation on the scan. These "holes" are not actually
missing brain structures but, rather, a sign of too little activity. An
active SPECT scan reveals inner areas of the brain where there is too
much activity. Following are examples of common brain SPECT patterns,
looking down from the top of the head.

Surface SPECT Scans The first scan is a healthy one, showing the outside
surface of the brain. It shows full, even, symmetrical activity and
blood flow. HEALTHY SURFACE SCAN

(looking from the top down)

Full, even, symmetrical activity

Now compare the healthy brain to that of a woman who had two strokes.
TWO STROKES

Holes indicate low or missing activity

Based on the level of activity, SPECT can see how much tissue can be
improved or rehabilitated. ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE

Back half of brain is dying

Alzheimer's disease starts years, even decades, before people develop
any symptoms. This 59-year-old woman likely had negative changes in her
brain in her 20s. BRAIN TRAUMA

Soccer head trauma

Brain trauma is a major cause of mental health issues, but few
psychiatrists know it because they rarely image the brain. TOXICITY FROM
DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE

Scalloping or overall low activity

The real reason not to use drugs or much alcohol is because they damage
the brain.

Active SPECT scans In an active SPECT scan, the gray background
represents average activity; white represents the top 15 percent. In a
healthy scan, the most activity typically appears in the back, bottom
part of the brain, in an area called the cerebellum (Latin for "little
brain"), because this area contains 50 percent of the brain's neurons.
HEALTHY ACTIVE SCAN (looking from the top down)

Gray is average activity; white is top 15 percent showing most active
areas of the brain

OBSESSIVE COMPULSIVE TRAITS

Marked increased activity in frontal lobes

POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER

Diamond pattern of increased activity in deep emotional part of brain
(diamond)

SEIZURE ACTIVITY

Focal area of increased activity (arrow)

THE RESEARCH ON SPECT SPECT was originally developed more than 50 years
ago to evaluate living tissue. SPECT is a nuclear medicine study that
uses very small pieces of light called photons to look at living tissue.
Because SPECT is a nuclear medicine procedure, there is some radiation
exposure with it. It is about the same as a head CT, which was ordered
19 million times in the US in 2006.\[66\] Michael Devous, PhD, the past
president of the Society of Nuclear Medicine, wrote, "SPECT . . .
procedures have no more risk than MRI-based procedures. . . . Indeed,
there are no data demonstrating harm to humans by radiation exposure at
diagnostic imaging levels."\[67\] Since the 1970s, brain SPECT has been
used to evaluate strokes, seizures, and brain tumors.\[68\] In the
1980s, scientists were also using it to study Alzheimer's disease, head
trauma, schizophrenia, depression, ADD/ADHD, and

substance abuse. Today, physicians around the world typically order
brain SPECT scans to look at the following conditions:\[69\] Alzheimer's
disease and other types of dementia Seizures Strokes Head trauma
Chemical exposure Lyme disease Brain inflammation Drug toxicity The
research on brain SPECT is vast, with more than 14,000 scientific
research articles on it listed on www.pubmed.com. Below is a listing of
the number of scientific articles for some common neurological and
psychiatric conditions. CONDITION

SCIENTIFIC ARTICLES\[70\]

Strokes

> 1,300

Dementia

> 2,200

Alzheimer's disease

> 1,500

Seizures and epilepsy \> 1,600 Depression

> 850

Schizophrenia

> 570

Head trauma

> 350

Drug abuse

> 310

Alcohol abuse

> 280

Infections

> 270

Anxiety disorders

> 250

OCD

> 150

ADD/ADHD

> 120

Bipolar disorder

> 120

Autism

> 75

Eating disorders

> 70

PTSD

> 50

The first 10 cases where I ordered SPECT scans completely changed the
way I help my patients and created a revolution in how I practice
psychiatry and even how I live my life. I care about my brain as never
before. Since 1991, Amen Clinics has built the world's largest database
of SPECT scans for psychiatric issues, totaling nearly 160,000 scans on
patients from 121 countries. We have studied and used SPECT to help us
with complex psychiatric patients and have published 70 peer-reviewed
scientific studies on SPECT, including those on: ADD/ADHD\[71\] and
predicting treatment response to stimulants in ADD/ADHD\[72\]
Aging\[73\] Aggression\[74\] and murder\[75\] Alzheimer's disease\[76\]
Anxiety\[77\] Autism\[78\] Depression, predicting treatment response in
depression\[79\] and mania\[80\] Distinguishing depression from
dementia\[81\] Gender differences\[82\] Distinguishing PTSD from a
traumatic brain injury (TBI) in veteran and general populations\[83\]
(Discover magazine listed this research as one of the top 100 stories in
science \[#19\] for 2015) Marijuana\[84\] Meditation\[85\]

Omega-3 fatty acids\[86\] Obesity\[87\] Suicide\[88\] TBI\[89\] Impact
of playing football in the NFL\[90\] Rehabilitating brain trauma in NFL
players\[91\] HBOT in TBI\[92\] Based on our experience, a number of
common SPECT patterns guide diagnosis and treatment decisions. Here are
several of the common patterns.

COMMON SPECT PATTERNS THAT GUIDE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT 1.
Scalloping/overall decreased perfusion on surface SPECT

This pattern shows overall low activity and blood flow, which look like
waves or scallops on a surface SPECT scan

This pattern is most commonly seen with: Drug or alcohol abuse
Chemotherapy or radiation exposure Environmental toxins, such as mold
Heavy metal exposure Carbon monoxide poisoning Anoxia (lack of oxygen
for several minutes, e.g., from a heart attack or near drowning)
Infections, such as Lyme disease or herpes Hypothyroidism Severe anemia
(SPECT looks at blood flow) When this pattern is seen, we consider the
following treatments: Finding and stopping the toxin or infection if
present Treating any medical causes Brain rehabilitation program is
essential. Components include: Avoiding anything that hurts the brain
Engaging in regular brain healthy habits Neurofeedback HBOT Targeted
nutraceuticals and medications SCALLOPING EXAMPLES

Moderate to severe scalloping from inhalant abuse

Moderate to severe scalloping from chemotherapy and radiation

SCALLOPING: BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT

Moderate scalloping from arsenic poisoning

Marked improvement 11 months after treatment

2.  Overall increased activity on active SPECT

This pattern shows overall increased activity on scans

This pattern is most commonly seen with: Bipolar disorder/mania
Autoimmune or inflammatory processes, such as acute allergies,
infections, or lupus ADD/ADHD---when we see this in people with
ADD/ADHD, we call it the "ring of fire." Stimulants make this pattern
worse in 80 percent of cases.\[93\] When this pattern is seen, we
consider the following treatments: Investigating and treating potential
causes of inflammation, such as lupus or food allergies Eliminating
allergens Treating any underlying conditions Calming interventions, such
as magnesium, gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA), or antiseizure medication
OVERALL INCREASED ACTIVITY EXAMPLES

Overall increased activity: bipolar disorder, manic

Overall increased activity: lupus flare

OVERALL INCREASED ACTIVITY EXAMPLES (CONTINUED)

Overall increased activity: ring of fire ADD/ADHD

Overall increased activity: obsessional psychotic state

3.  Traumatic brain injury (TBI) patterns on surface SPECT

There are many TBI patterns

We suspect a TBI if the following patterns are present: Low activity in
one or more areas of the brain One side looks worse than the other
Flattening of the frontal lobes Decreased activity in the poles (front
portion) of the temporal lobes Damage seen in both the front and back of
the brain (coup contrecoup injury) When this pattern is seen, we
consider the following treatments: Brain rehabilitation
program---components include: Avoiding anything that hurts the brain
Engaging in regular brain-healthy habits Neurofeedback HBOT Targeted
nutraceuticals and medications

TBI EXAMPLES Underside View

Frontal and left temporal lobe damage: fall from roof Underside View

Damage to whole right side of brain: motorcycle accident

Top-Down View

Damage to left parietal lobe: blunt force trauma from assault Top-Down
View

Damage to left side of brain: fall down stairs

TBI: BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT (NFL PLAYER ANTHONY DAVIS, USC AND LA
RAMS) Underside View

Damage to left frontal/temporal lobe: multiple concussions Underside
View

Marked improvement: 10 years later, after treatment

4. Hyperfrontality on active SPECT

This pattern shows increased activity in the front part of the brain.

This pattern is most commonly seen with: OCD Obsessive compulsive
personality disorder Oppositional defiant disorder\[94\] Autistic
spectrum disorders People who are worried, rigid, and inflexible and get
stuck on negative thoughts Types of anxiety, depression, ADD/ADHD, and
addictions where people get stuck on negative thoughts or negative
behaviors When this pattern is seen, we consider the following
treatments: Increasing serotonin to calm the front part of the brain
Exercise Supplements such as 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), saffron, or
St. John's wort for anxiety or depression

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as Lexapro,
Zoloft, or Prozac for anxiety or depression Antipsychotics, such as
Risperdal, for psychosis HYPERFRONTALITY EXAMPLES

Hyperfrontal pattern: OCD

Hyperfrontal pattern: anxiety with obsessive thoughts

HYPERFRONTALITY: BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT (BUSINESS OWNER WITH OCD
PERSONALITY)

Hyperfrontal pattern: OCD personality traits

Calming of hyperfrontal pattern: improved personality, work
relationships, and marriage

5.  Hypofrontality on surface SPECT

This pattern shows decreased activity in the front part of the brain

This pattern is most commonly seen with: ADD/ADHD

Schizophrenia TBI Alcoholics at risk of relapse Lack of
conscientiousness Forms of depression Types of anxiety, ADD/ADHD, and
addictions where people struggle with short attention spans,
distractibility, disorganization, and impulse control issues When this
pattern is seen, we consider the following treatments: Increasing
dopamine to increase frontal lobe activity Exercise Stimulating
supplements, such as green tea, Ltyrosine, or rhodiola Stimulants for
ADD/ADHD Stimulating antipsychotics if needed, such as Abilify
Stimulating antidepressants, such as Wellbutrin, or s-adenosyl
methionine (SAMe) if depressed Brain rehab if needed HYPOFRONTALITY
EXAMPLES

Underside View

Low prefrontal cortex activity: sex addiction Underside View

Low prefrontal cortex activity: classic ADD/ADHD

HYPOFRONTALITY: BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT (SCHOOL FAILURE)

Underside View

Low prefrontal cortex activity: college failure Underside View

Marked improvement: after six months of treatment

6.  Diamond pattern on active SPECT

Underside View

This pattern shows increased activity in anterior cingulate (top of
diamond), basal ganglia (sides of diamond), and deep thalamus (bottom of
diamond)

This pattern is most commonly seen with: PTSD Past unresolved trauma
Types of anxiety, depression, and addictions where people get stuck on
negative thoughts or negative behaviors, which make them anxious and sad
When this pattern is seen, we consider the following treatments: EMDR
for PTSD to calm unresolved past trauma Increasing serotonin and GABA to
calm the front part of the brain Exercise Supplements such as 5HTP,
saffron, GABA, and magnesium SSRIs, such as Lexapro, Zoloft, or Prozac

Anticonvulsants, such as Neurontin, Trileptal, or Lamictal DIAMOND
PATTERN EXAMPLES

Diamond pattern: PTSD

Diamond pattern: does not meet criteria for PTSD, but patient grew up in
abusive alcoholic home and struggles with anxiety and worry

DIAMOND PATTERN (PTSD): BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT (EMDR THERAPY)

Diamond pattern: PTSD

Calming of diamond pattern, improved sleep and anxiety

7.  Temporal lobe hypoperfusion on surface SPECT

TEMPORAL LOBE HYPOPERFUSION

This pattern shows decreased activity in one or both of the temporal
lobes.

The temporal lobes are involved with memory, learning, mood stability,
and emotional reactions. This pattern is most commonly seen with: Memory
problems Forms of dementia Temporal lobe epilepsy Dyslexia and other
learning disabilities Mood instability Intermittent explosive disorder
(IED) Types of anxiety, depression, ADD/ADHD, and addictions where
people struggle with mood instability, irritability, dark thoughts, and
memory and learning When this pattern is seen, we consider the following
treatments: Ketogenic diet

Neurofeedback GABA-enhancing nutraceuticals or medications, such as
antiseizure medications, for mood instability or irritability
Memory-enhancing nutraceuticals, such as gingko, vinpocetine, or
huperzine A, or memory-enhancing medications, such as Namenda or
Aricept, for memory of learning issues TEMPORAL LOBE EXAMPLES Underside
View

Low prefrontal cortex and left and right temporal lobe activity
(arrows): intermittent explosive disorder

Underside View

Low right temporal lobe activity: social skills issues; trouble reading
social cues

INTERMITTENT EXPLOSIVE DISORDER Underside View

Low prefrontal cortex activity and left temporal lobe damage: learning
problems

SOCIAL SKILLS ISSUES (TROUBLE READING SOCIAL CLUES) Underside View

Low left and right temporal lobe activity: behavior and learning
problems

Seeing is believing. When you look inside the skull, you can see that
mental health problems are actually brain health problems, and it makes
sense that healing the brain is the key to ending mental illness.
Looking at the brain changes everything for the better for our patients.
Our brain imaging work does the following: Decreases stigma, shame, and
guilt (people see their problems as medical and not moral). Increases
compliance (people want better brains). When taken together with
patients' symptoms, helps our doctors devise personalized treatment
programs specially targeted to individual brains.

Gives a different perspective on the notions of "good" and "evil." It is
easy to judge people as bad. Our brain imaging work has caused us to
take a step back and ask why. Helps to prevent mistakes, such as
stimulating an overactive brain or calming one that is underactive.
Shows that illnesses, such as Alzheimer's disease, start decades before
people have any symptoms. Imaging is an excellent early screening tool
to assess your vulnerabilities. Shows that no two brains are the same.
Treatment needs to be targeted to your brain, not a cluster of symptoms.

Looking at the brain changes everything. Our imaging work has provided
us with a greater understanding of the amazing organ between our ears,
leading us to identify 12 simple principles about the brain and
behavior. In the following chapter, you will discover these fundamental
truths and see how they can help you begin to live the life you want.

\[64\] Michael B. First et al., "Clinical Applications of Neuroimaging
in Psychiatric Disorders," American Journal of Psychiatry 175, no. 9
(September 1, 2018): 915--16. \[65\] Max Planck, Scientific
Autobiography and Other Papers (New York: Philosophical Library, 1949),
33--34. \[66\] Fred A. Mettler Jr. et al., "Radiologic and Nuclear
Medicine Studies in the United States and Worldwide: Frequency,
Radiation Dose, and Comparison with Other Radiation
Sources---1950--2007," Radiology 253, no. 2 (November 2009): 520--31.

\[67\] Michael D. Devous et al., "Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography in Neurotherapeutics," NeuroRx 2, no. 2 (April 2005):
237--49. \[68\] Ronald Jack Jaszczak, "The Early Years of Single Photon
Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT): An Anthology of Selected
Reminiscences," Physics in Medicine & Biology 51, no. 13 (July 7, 2006):
R99--115. \[69\] "Brain SPECT," Cedars-Sinai (2019),
www.cedars-sinai.edu/Patients/Programsand-Services/Imaging-Center/For-Patients/Exams-by-Procedure/NuclearMedicine/Brain-SPECT.aspx;
Mayo Clinic staff, "SPECT Scan," Mayo Clinic (December 23, 2016),
www.mayoclinic.org/tests-procedures/spectscan/about/pac-20384925. \[70\]
See PubMed.gov for a list of studies. Type in "Brain SPECT and \[the
condition\]" for best matches. For example, "Brain SPECT and Strokes"
provides the following list: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?
term=brain+SPECT+strokes. \[71\] S. Yassin et al., "Differences in SPECT
Perfusion in Children and Adolescents with ADHD," Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology 29, no. 6 (September 2014): 541--42 Daniel G. Amen and
B. D. Carmichael, "High-Resolution Brain SPECT Imaging in Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder," Annals of Clinical Psychiatry 9, no. 2
(June 1997): 81--86. \[72\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Predicting Positive
and Negative Treatment Responses to Stimulants with Brain SPECT
Imaging," Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 40, no. 2 (June 2008): 131--38.
\[73\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Patterns of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
as a Function of Age throughout the Lifespan," Journal of Alzheimer's
Disease 65, no. 4 (September 25, 2018): 1087--92. \[74\] J. Link et al.,
"SPECT Differences between Those with Higher and Lower Levels of
Aggression: An Exploratory Analysis," Archives of Clinical
Neuropsychology 29, no. 6 (September 2014): 576. \[75\] Daniel G. Amen
et al., "An Analysis of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow in Impulsive
Murderers Using Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography," Journal of
Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 19, no. 3 (Summer 2007):
304--9. \[76\] Jada J. Stewart et al., "Diagnostic Accuracy of SPECT
Scans: Examining Specific Brain Areas of Regional Hypoperfusion at
Baseline in Alzheimer's Disease," Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology
(2014). \[77\] J. Messerly et al., "Preliminary Investigation of SPECT
Differences between Individuals with Varying Levels of Anxiety,"
Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 29, no. 6 (September 2014): 579.
\[78\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Functional Neuroimaging Distinguishes
Autistic Spectrum Disorder from Healthy and Comorbid Conditions in
Focused and Large Community Datasets," Journal of Systems and
Integrative Neuroscience 3 (April 2017).

\[79\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Deficits in Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
on Brain SPECT Predict Treatment Resistant Depression," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 63, no. 2 (2018): 529--38. \[80\] Lucas Driskell et
al., "A SPECT Exploratory Analysis of Differentiating Mania Symptomology
Severity," Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 29, no. 6 (September
2014): 578. \[81\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Classification of Depression,
Cognitive Disorders, and Co-Morbid Depression and Cognitive Disorders
with Perfusion SPECT Neuroimaging," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 57,
no. 1 (2017): 253--66. \[82\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Gender-Based
Cerebral Perfusion Differences in 46,034 Functional Neuroimaging Scans,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 60, no. 2 (2017): 605--14. \[83\] Daniel
G. Amen et al., "Functional Neuroimaging Distinguishes Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder from Traumatic Brain Injury in Focused and Large
Community Datasets," PLOS One (July 1, 2015),
http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0129659. Cyrus A. Raji et al., "Functional
Neuroimaging with Default Mode Network Regions Distinguishes PTSD from
TBI in a Military Veteran Population," Brain Imaging and Behavior 9, no.
3 (September 2015): 527--34. \[84\] Daniel G. Amen et al.,
"Discriminative Properties of Hippocampal Hypoperfusion in Marijuana
Users Compared to Healthy Controls: Implications for Marijuana
Administration in Alzheimer's Dementia," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease
56, no. 1 (2017): 261--73. \[85\] Andrew B. Newberg et al., "Cerebral
Blood Flow Differences between LongTerm Meditators and Non-Meditators,"
Consciousness and Cognition 19, no. 4 (December 2010): 899--905. Dharma
Khalsa et al., "Cerebral Blood Flow Changes during Chanting Meditation,"
Nuclear Medicine Communications 30, no. 12 (December 2009): 956--61.
\[86\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Quantitative Erythrocyte Omega-3 EPA Plus
DHA Levels Are Related to Higher Regional Cerebral Blood Flow on Brain
SPECT," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 58, no. 4 (2017): 1189--99.
\[87\] K. Willeumier et al., "Elevated Body Mass in National Football
League Players Linked to Cognitive Impairment and Decreased Prefrontal
Cortex and Temporal Pole Activity," Translational Psychiatry 2, no. 1
(January 2012): e68. K. Willeumier et al., "Elevated BMI Is Associated
with Decreased Blood Flow in the Prefrontal Cortex Using SPECT Imaging
in Healthy Adults," Obesity 19, no. 5 (May 2011): 1095--97. \[88\] K.
Willeumier et al., "Decreased Cerebral Blood Flow in the Limbic and
Prefrontal Cortex Using SPECT Imaging in a Cohort of Completed
Suicides," Translational Psychiatry 1, no. 8 (August 9, 2011): e28.

Daniel G. Amen et al., "A Comparative Analysis of Completed Suicide
Using High Resolution Brain SPECT Imaging," Journal of Neuropsychiatry
and Clinical Neurosciences 21, no. 4 (Fall 2009): 430--39. \[89\] Cyrus
A. Raji et al., "Clinical Utility of SPECT Neuroimaging in the Diagnosis
and Treatment of Traumatic Brain Injury: A Systematic Review," PLOS One
9, no. 3 (March 19, 2014): e91088. \[90\] Daniel G. Amen et al.,
"Perfusion Neuroimaging Abnormalities Alone Distinguish National
Football League Players from a Healthy Population," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 53, no. 1 (April 25, 2016): 237--41. Daniel G. Amen
et al., "Impact of Playing American Professional Football on Long-Term
Brain Function," Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences
23, no. 1 (Winter 2011): 98--106. \[91\] Daniel G. Amen et al.,
"Reversing Brain Damage in Former NFL Players: Implications for
Traumatic Brain Injury and Substance Abuse Rehabilitation," Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs 43, no. 1 (January--March 2011): 1--5. \[92\] Paul G.
Harch et al., "A Phase I Study of Low-Pressure Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy
for Blast-Induced Post-Concussion Syndrome and Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder," Journal of Neurotrauma 29, no. 1 (January 1, 2012): 168--85.
\[93\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Predicting Positive and Negative
Treatment Responses to Stimulants with Brain SPECT Imaging." \[94\]
Daniel G. Amen and Blake Carmichael, "Oppositional Children Similar to
OCD on SPECT: Implications for Treatment," Journal of Neurotherapy 2,
no. 2 (August 1997): 1--6.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 3

12 GUIDING PRINCIPLES TO CHANGE YOUR LIFE To expect a personality to
survive the disintegration of the brain is like expecting a cricket club
to survive when all of its members are dead. B E RT RA N D R U S S E L L

Our clinical and brain imaging work has led us to 12 simple principles
that underlie all we do. I've written about these principles in depth in
several of my books, including Change Your Brain, Change Your
Life.\[95\] If you embrace them, they will set a foundation for brain
health---and start to change everything in your life. 1. Your brain is
involved in everything you do. How you think, how you feel, how you act,
and how well you get along with other people has to do with the
moment-by-moment functioning of your brain. Your brain is involved in
every decision you make. 2. When your brain works right, you work right.
When your brain is troubled, you have trouble in your life. When your
brain is healthy, you tend to be effective, thoughtful, creative, and
energetic. When your brain is troubled---for whatever reason---you are

much more likely to have problems in your life, including issues with
depression, anxiety, impulsivity, anger, inflexibility, and memory.
Brain dysfunction, even when subtle, gets in the way of your ability to
be successful in your relationships, your work, and even your finances.
3. Your brain is the most complicated organ in the universe. With about
100 billion neurons (nerve cells) and about another 100 billion support
cells, your brain has more connections than there are stars in the
universe. Your brain accounts for only 2 percent of your body's weight,
yet it uses 20 to 30 percent of the calories you consume and 20 percent
of the oxygen and blood flow in your body. 4. Your brain has needs that
must be met in order to work at optimal efficiency. The requirements for
optimal brain function include: Healthy blood flow (to deliver oxygen,
vitamins, and essential minerals to the brain) Proper hydration Physical
and mental exercise Stimulation (new learning) Fuel (aka food) Hormones
A strong (but not too strong) immune system An efficient waste
management system Adequate sleep Meaning and purpose in your life Being
socially connected to other brains

5. Your brain is soft, and it is housed in a very hard skull. Your brain
is about the consistency of soft butter, and it floats inside your head
in a bath of cerebrospinal fluid. Inside your skull, there are sharp
bony ridges that can easily damage your brain. You must protect it. 6.
Many things can hurt the brain. It is critical for you to know what
hurts the brain (the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors will be discussed in part
2). A colored version of the poster on the right hangs in more than
100,000 schools, prisons, and therapist's offices around the world as a
reminder of this principle. 7. Many things can help the brain. It is
critical for you to know what enhances the brain (see the BRIGHT MINDS
interventions in part 2).

Many things both hurt and help the brain. It is critical for you to know
the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors and interventions.

8. Like an orchestra, all parts of your brain need to be working well
together to make you the best that you can be. Certain brain systems
tend to do specific things. For example: Prefrontal cortex
(PFC)---language, focus, forethought, judgment, empathy, impulse
control, and learning from mistakes. This is called the executive brain
because it is like the boss at work and helps you plan and make good
decisions. Temporal lobes---visual and auditory processing, memory,
learning, mood stability, and emotional reactiveness On the inside of
the temporal lobes are two critically important structures: the
hippocampus, involved with mood and memory; and the amygdala, involved
with signaling fear, emotional reactions, and anxiety. The hippocampus
is one of the few parts of your brain that continues to make new neurons
every day. If you put it in a healing environment, it can grow bigger.
If it comes under toxic attack or sustained stress, it can be easily
damaged. Parietal lobes---direction sense, math, and constructing
Occipital lobes---visual processing Cerebellum---physical, emotional,
and cognitive coordination and processing speed. It houses half of the
brain's neurons, even though it makes

up only 10 percent of the brain's volume. It is one of the most
underrated parts of the brain. I call it the "Rodney Dangerfield" part
of the brain, because it gets little respect. Anterior cingulate
cortex---shifting attention and error detection Basal
ganglia---pleasure, motivation and adjusting movements Deep limbic
system---sensory gating and emotional processing None of these areas of
your brain work in isolation. 9. Understanding your brain helps you
identify specific problems and which part of your brain may need help.
Problems in certain brain systems tend to be associated with specific
issues, such as: PFC---language problems, short attention span,
distractibility, a lack of planning and forethought, poor judgment, low
empathy, poor impulse control, and not learning from mistakes Temporal
lobes---visual and auditory abnormalities, poor memory, learning
disabilities, mood instability, and temper issues Parietal lobes---poor
direction sense and trouble with math Occipital lobes---visual
processing issues Cerebellum---problems with physical, emotional, and
thought coordination and processing speed

Anterior cingulate cortex---trouble shifting attention, worry, holding
grudges, obsessions, and excessive error detection Basal
ganglia---addictions, tremors, and low motivation Deep limbic
system---sensory overload, sadness, and negativity YOUR BRAIN: A BRIEF
PRIMER Outside View of the Brain

Inside View of the Brain

10. Psychiatric "illnesses" are not single or simple disorders; they all
have multiple types that require their own treatments. Taking a
onesize-fits-all approach to treatment invites repeated failure and
frustration. Depression, for example, is a symptom, not an illness. I've
written books on: Seven types of anxiety and depression (Healing Anxiety
and Depression) Seven types of ADD/ADHD (Healing ADD) Six types of
addicts (Unchain Your Brain) Five types of overeaters (Change Your
Brain, Change Your Body)

Psychiatric illnesses are not single or simple disorders; they all have
multiple types that require their own specific treatment

strategies. Taking a one-size-fits-all approach to treatment invites
failure and frustration.

11. The amount of "brain reserve" you have can help you handle life's
    stresses or make you more vulnerable to them. Did you know that the
    adult brain loses an average of about 85,000 neurons a day? In early
    childhood, the brain is very active, sprouting new neurons and
    developing new connections between synapses. Older adults have
    significantly less activity in the brain. As we get older, our
    muscles tend to wither, and a similar process takes place in the
    brain. What we have learned from our brain imaging work is that your
    day-to-day lifestyle and activities are either accelerating or
    slowing the brain aging process. Just as you can train your muscles
    to retain a more youthful tone, you can use strategies to keep your
    brain functioning more optimally. Ultimately, brain aging is
    optional if you consistently use the right strategies. When I talk
    to my patients about brain aging, I find it helpful to introduce
    them to the concept of "brain reserve." That's the extra cushion of
    brain function you have to help you deal with the stresses life
    throws at you. In general, the more brain reserve you have, the more
    resilient you are and the better your brain can handle the aging
    process to keep "mental health" disorders at bay. To illustrate this
    point to my patients, I typically show them the

following "brain reserve" drawing. It shows the intersection of brain
activity and age and habits. As you can see, at a certain point along
the line in the graph, you cross a threshold indicating that your
reserve is gone. This is when symptoms like anxiety, depression, memory
problems, or temper flare-ups can appear.

Today marks one year since our first visit at Amen Clinics. My husband
and I are forever grateful for you. My shame has been lifted and my mind
renewed! I cannot imagine taking on this new position a year ago,
thankful for how far I've come! MEL E.

BRAIN RESERVE

Let's backtrack a bit to explain why some people have more brain reserve
than others. A growing body of science is showing that even before you

were conceived, your parents' lifestyle habits were laying the
foundation for your overall wellbeing and physical and mental
health.\[96\] At conception, your brain had a certain potential for
reserve. However, if your mom smoked (or got second-hand smoke from your
dad), drank too much alcohol, ate junk food, was chronically stressed,
or had infections during the pregnancy, it depleted your reserve---even
before you were born. If, on the other hand, your mom (and dad) didn't
smoke, and she was healthy, ate nutritious meals, took prenatal
vitamins, and was not overly stressed, it was contributing to a boost in
your reserve. After your grand entrance to the world, this increase or
depletion in your brain reserve continues for the rest of your life. For
example, if you were exposed to chronic stress or you witnessed domestic
abuse at home, it decreased your reserve. If you fell off your bike and
hit your head when you were in grade school, it lowered your reserve,
even if you didn't have any symptoms. If you started smoking marijuana
as a teenager, it further depleted your reserve. Then if you played
tackle football or hit a lot of soccer balls with your head, it took an
additional toll on your reserve. Despite all of these knocks on your
reserve, you may not have developed any symptoms . . . yet. Here's an
example I like to use with my patients. Imagine two soldiers in a
war-torn region. They are both in the same tank and exposed to the same
blast injury at the same angles. They both survive the blast without
physical injuries, yet one of them is subsequently racked by
post-traumatic stress

disorder (PTSD) and depression, while the other one experiences no
residual mental health problems. Why? Luck? Probably not. It is far more
likely that the two soldiers had different levels of brain reserve going
into the accident. One soldier had more reserve because he took good
care of his brain, he had lots of educational opportunities, his parents
fed him well, and they didn't let him play football. The other soldier
had less reserve due to an unstable home environment, three previous
concussions from playing football, a junk-food diet, and drug use as a
teenager. They were both effective at their jobs, but they started at
different places in terms of reserve. And even though the blast
diminished both of their reserves, the one with more reserve avoided any
mental health consequences while the one with less reserve crossed that
threshold I mentioned earlier where the reserve is gone, making him
vulnerable to brain health/mental health problems like PTSD and
depression. WHY TRAUMA LEAVES SOME PEOPLE, BUT NOT OTHERS, WITH "MENTAL
HEALTH" PROBLEMS

At Amen Clinics, most of the people we see are already symptomatic,
which means they have crossed the brain reserve threshold (the dotted
line in the previous two illustrations). Getting well is not just about
eliminating the symptoms of "mental illness"; it's also about increasing
brain reserve to get it back above the line. To boost your brain
reserve, you need to follow three simple strategies: Love your brain
(you have to really care about your brain). Avoid the things that hurt
your brain. Do the things that help your brain. The decisions you make
and the habits you engage in on a daily basis are either boosting or
stealing your brain's reserve and are either accelerating the aging
process or rejuvenating your brain. When you grasp this concept, you
realize that you have a lot of influence on the health and age of your
brain, as well as on your own mental health and ability to end "mental
illness."

12. The most important lesson from imaging is that you are not stuck
with the brain you have. You can make it better, and we can prove it.
This is perhaps the most exciting and hopeful lesson we've learned. We
all need to work hard to improve how our brains function because, with a
better brain, a better life and better mental health always come.

The most exciting lesson learned from nearly 160,000 brain SPECT scans
is that you can change your brain, change your life, and change your
mental health . . . and I can prove it.

THE 12 GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND "MENTAL ILLNESS" When you grasp the
concepts of the 12 guiding principles, it becomes increasingly clear
that mental health problems are, in fact, brain health problems. And it
makes even more sense that eliminating brain health/mental health
disorders involves optimizing brain function and boosting brain reserve.
You'll discover the interventions to help you do it in the rest of the
book. I understand that you may be in a hurry to start putting these
strategies into practice in your own life, but I urge you not to skip
ahead. It's very important to understand why you need to take a

comprehensive approach to healing. Then you'll have a stronger
foundation to make the strategies in part 2 even more effective for you.

\[95\] Read about these principles in depth in Change Your Brain, Change
Your Life (New York: Harmony Books, 2015). \[96\] Jonathan Day et al.,
"Influence of Paternal Preconception Exposures on Their Offspring:
Through Epigenetics to Phenotype," American Journal of Stem Cells 5, no.
1 (2016): 11--18.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4

GET YOUR BRAIN RIGHT AND YOUR MIND WILL FOLLOW IT STARTS WITH FOUR
CIRCLES AND PREVENTING OR TREATING 11 RISK FACTORS She will be a star if
you surround her with stars. She will go to jail if you surround her
with people who go to jail. MY COMMENT TO THE MOTHER OF ONE OF MY T E E
N AG E PAT I E N T S

To get your mind right, you must first have a healthy brain. Imagine
going to a psychotherapist for depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, or
an addiction with a brain that has been physically traumatized; a brain
that is inflamed, poisoned, infected, or low in neurohormones; or a
brain that works too hard or not hard enough. You spend the time, invest
the money, make the effort, and open up your emotional vulnerability
trying to get the help you need, but it doesn't work because you cannot
focus, remember, or process the information. You are likely to quit
therapy and feel demoralized and "less than others" who you assume are
benefitting from similar techniques. You wonder why therapy seems to
work for them but not for you. When this

is the case, therapy can actually do more harm than good because of the
failed expectations and wasted resources. Here is an example:

DAVE AND BONNIE

Dave and Bonnie were struggling in their marriage. Dave had a bad temper
and many negative thoughts, and Bonnie was having a hard time dealing
with his behavior. They decided to go to a psychologist for marital
therapy and stuck with it for three years. But it was a frustrating
endeavor. Try as they might to get closer, nothing seemed to work. The
therapy sessions were filled with blaming, bickering, frequent
explosions, and a general sense of unhappiness. The therapist, who was
very experienced, tried and tried. She had diagnosed Dave with mixed
personality disorder with narcissistic and antisocial features, along
with intermittent explosive disorder, but none of the usual treatments,
strategies, or relationship tools helped them make any progress. After
considerable thought, the doctor decided to give the couple an F in
marital therapy. She told Dave and Bonnie that, in her opinion, it was
time for divorce. After spending years of effort and more than \$25,000
trying to heal their marriage, the couple protested, and the therapist
said there was one more option. She told them about Amen Clinics, where
some of her most difficult clients had found help. After an evaluation,
our team performed brain SPECT scans on the couple. Bonnie's scan was
healthy. But Dave's brain scan looked shriveled and full of holes, the
same

pattern that we see in drug or alcohol abusers. This was odd because
Dave said he didn't drink and never used drugs. To make sure, in front
of Bonnie, I asked Dave if he was drinking heavily or using drugs, and
he denied it. I turned to Bonnie for more information, knowing that
alcoholics are often in denial and drug abusers often lie. She said,
"He's right. He doesn't drink and, as far as I know, has never used
drugs. That is not his problem, Dr. Amen. He's just a jerk." As an
aside, his therapist's diagnosis of mixed personality disorder with
narcissistic and antisocial features was her way of calling him a jerk,
but "jerk" is not a billable diagnosis. DAVE'S TOXIC SPECT SCAN

Notice shriveled appearance and huge "holes" of decreased activity

I chuckled at Bonnie's comment. But if Dave was really not a drinker or
drug abuser, my mind started immediately looking for alternatives about
why he had such a toxic-

looking brain. My psychiatrist friend Harold Bursztajn, former
codirector of the program in psychiatry and law at Harvard, often says
that scans don't always give you the answer; they teach you to ask
better questions. I went through the different potential medical causes
in my head--- brain infections, a near-drowning episode, hypothyroidism,
anemia, environmental toxins. My next question to Dave was, "Where do
you work?" He replied, "I work in a furniture factory." "What do you do
there?" I asked. "Finish furniture." "Is there good ventilation in the
room?" "No," Dave said. "It's often hot and reeks with fumes." Oh my
goodness, I thought. Dave has a drug-affected brain from the solvents he
is using at work. Even though he had never willfully used drugs, the
chemicals were eating away at his brain. Dave thought he was going to
work to support his family, but he was really being poisoned. "Do you
wear a mask?" I asked. "No. They tell me I should, but I don't think
it's important." "Ouch," I said. "You really should." My next question
was to Bonnie: "When did he start becoming a jerk?" She thought for a
moment. "We weren't always unhappy. We've been married for 15 years. It
just seems that the last eight were hard. The first years were great. He
was so different." Then a look of "Aha" washed over Bonnie's face. "Dave
started to work at the furniture factory eight years ago. Do you think
his personality change can be from his job?" "You bet," I answered.
"Something is damaging his brain and damaging his ability to be the
kind, thoughtful, empathic, and loving man you married."

I urged Dave to take a six-month medical leave of absence and would only
allow him to return to a nontoxic job at the plant. After seeing Dave's
brain scans, Bonnie developed empathy for her husband. She went from
thinking he was a jerk to seeing him as someone who was in need of help
and understanding. When a person's behavior changes dramatically or does
not make sense, like Dave's, it is important to consider brain health
issues as a potential cause of the trouble. It was clear to me that
Dave's problem was not just psychiatric; it was biological. Numerous
studies have shown that exposure to chemicals and solvents has negative
effects on brain health, including mood, memory, and attention.\[97\] No
amount of therapy and no amount of effort on Dave's part was going to
heal the damaging effects the solvents had on his brain. The problem is
virtually no marital therapists, psychologists, or psychiatrists start
by mapping the brain, so they have no idea if it is healthy or unhealthy
and in need of repair. And most don't look into a patient's biology that
might be contributing to the problem. We can and must do better.

AMEN CLINICS FOUR CIRCLES BRIGHT MINDS PROGRAM To end mental illness in
people like Dave---as well as in my nieces, Alizé and Amelie, whom I
told you about at the beginning of the book---we need to stop looking at
psychiatric problems through a singular lens as just a cluster of
symptoms and start assessing and treating the whole person. The Amen
Clinics Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS

Program was developed to help you and your loved ones achieve long-term
brain health/mental health. This program has three main components: 1.
Optimize the four circles of a whole life---biological, psychological,
social, and spiritual (covered in this chapter). 2. Prevent or treat the
11 major risk factors that damage the brain and steal your mind (covered
in part 2). 3. Target treatment to your specific needs, such as
ADD/ADHD, anxiety, depression, psychosis, or insomnia (covered in part
3).

THE FOUR CIRCLES When I started medical school in 1978, our dean,
Dr. Sid Garrett, gave us one of our first lectures on how to help people
of any age for any problem. He told us, "Always think of people as whole
beings, never just as their symptoms." He insisted that whenever we
evaluated and treated anyone, we should take into consideration the four
circles of health and illness: Biological: how your physical body and
brain function (body) Psychological: developmental issues and how you
think (mind) Social: social support and interactions, and your current
life situation (connections)

Spiritual: your connection to God, the planet, and past and future
generations; and your deepest sense of meaning and purpose
(spirit)\[98\] At Amen Clinics, we use these four circles as part of a
balanced, comprehensive approach to assessment and healing. I wrote
about them in Change Your Brain, Change Your Life. Each of these four
circles interacts with the 11 BRIGHT MINDS risk factors you will read
about in part 2. The interplay of these four circles and 11 risk factors
is our guide for alleviating mental illness. When you ignore the four
circles, it allows your risk factors to get out of control, and they can
then conspire against you to create mental illnesses. On the other hand,
when you care for the four circles, it minimizes your risk factors. They
begin to work in concert to help prevent or treat mental illness not
only in yourself but also in the next generation, whether nieces (like
Alizé and Amelie), nephews, children, or grandchildren. In this chapter,
you will see how each of the four circles affects brain health/mental
health. You will also discover how modern society is attacking the four
circles and contributing to the rise of mental health/brain health
problems. To offset these attacks, I'll offer simple strategies to
optimize each of the four circles. It starts by knowing and caring about
them, avoiding anything that hurts them, and engaging in simple habits
to optimize them. FOUR CIRCLES BRIGHT MINDS PROGRAM

I want you to imagine two rulers in rival kingdoms. One is an evil ruler
whose top priority is to create and perpetuate mental illness as a way
to diminish and control the kingdom's subjects. How would he or she do
it? The evil ruler would turn the four circles against us, creating
policies

and promoting behaviors guaranteed to increase the BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors (part 2). The other one is a benevolent ruler, who is passionate
about ending mental illness in order to create more effective, happier
humans. What would he or she do to end mental illness? The good ruler
would encourage people to use the four circles to enhance brain health
and to advocate policies and behaviors that would help minimize their
risk factors. Throughout this chapter, you'll find charts for each of
the four circles, detailing the societal influences and the steps that
will contribute to either creating mental illness and making future
generations (like my nieces, Alizé and Amelie) suffer or to ending
mental illness and keeping future generations healthy. Biological Circle

The first circle of a whole life and a healthy brain is biology ---how
the physical aspects of your brain and body function together. In order
for your biology to operate at peak efficiency, its machinery (cells,
connections, chemicals, energy, blood flow, and waste processing) needs
to work right. The brain is like a supercomputer, with both hardware and
software. Think of the biological circle as the hardware. Within it are
the BRIGHT MINDS factors (which will each be explored in subsequent
chapters): Blood Flow Retirement/Aging Inflammation Genetics Head Trauma
Toxins

Mind Storms (abnormal brain electrical activity) Immunity/Infections
Neurohormone Issues Diabesity Sleep When the brain's biology is healthy,
all these factors work together in a positive way to maximize your
success and sense of well-being. When any of the BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors are troubled, you are more likely to suffer with a wide variety
of symptoms.

BIOLOGICAL CIRCLE THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . Perpetuate the biological
warfare in America by keeping 88 percent of the population metabolically
unhealthy. (More biological evildoings in the BRIGHT MINDS chapters.)
THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . Counteract the biological warfare waged
on society by creating a nationwide program that would help people fall
in love with their brains. It would start in schools and go into
churches, businesses, and senior centers---anywhere people gather.

Unfortunately, America's population is being assaulted by biological
warfare. Only 12 percent of the population is metabolically
healthy.\[99\] According to a 2018 study, researchers reported that 88
percent of the population did not meet the following criteria for
optimal health: Waist circumference---less than 45/35 inches for
men/women Fasting glucose---less than 100mg/dL and hemoglobin A1c less
than 5.7 percent

Blood pressure---systolic less than 120 and diastolic less than 80mmHg
Triglycerides---less than 150mg/dL High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol greater than 40/50mg/dL for men/women Not taking any related
medication\[100\] No wonder there is a high incidence of mental illness.
Your brain is an organ linked to the rest of your body. When your body
is unhealthy, so too is your brain. Singer Demi Lovato, who has talked
openly about having bipolar disorder, has been publicly urging people to
look at the biology behind mental disorders. In 2015, she told People
magazine, "The problem with mental illness is people don't look at it as
a physical illness. When you think about it, the brain is actually the
most complex organ in your body. We need to treat it like a physical
illness and take it seriously."\[101\]

In the biological circle, each one of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors can
create a mental illness.

BIOLOGICAL CIRCLE

STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND
AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your brain. 2. Engage in habits that
hurt your brain and promote the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors (see part 2).
3. Avoid regular brain-healthy habits. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . .
AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Love your brain. 2.
Avoid anything that hurts your brain (such as the BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors, see part 2). 3. Engage in regular brain-healthy habits
(explored throughout the rest of the book).

Here is my favorite tiny habit that relates not only to the biological
circle but to all four circles.

When you come to a decision point in your day, ask, "Is the decision I'm
about to make good for my brain or bad for it?" It takes three seconds,
and if you consistently make good decisions, your brain and mental
health will begin to improve immediately.

Psychological Circle

The psychological circle includes how we think and talk to
ourselves---the running dialogue in our minds---as well as our
self-concept, body image, past emotional traumas, upbringing, and
significant developmental events.\[102\] This circle helps us decide if
we are enough---good enough,

smart enough, pretty enough, strong enough, rich enough, and so on. When
we feel as if we are enough, we are happier and more successful in our
relationships and work. When we feel less than enough, it drives a sense
of sadness, anxiety, and failure.

I keep fighting voices in my head that say I'm not enough. LAUREN
DAIGLE, "YOU SAY"

Growing up in a reasonably happy home, receiving positive messages, and
feeling confident and comfortable with our abilities and our bodies all
contribute to good psychological health and the feeling of being enough.
When we struggle in any of these areas, we are less likely to be
"psychologically healthy." If we perceive ourselves as unattractive or
somehow inferior to our peers, trouble starts to accumulate. If our
thoughts are excessively harsh or critical---I call these automatic
negative thoughts (ANTs)---it will have a negative impact on our moods,
anxiety levels, and ultimately on our biology. Developmental issues,
such as adoption, neglect or abuse, or surviving a significant loss or
trauma as a child, are also important. Children often believe that they
are the center of the universe and if something bad happens, such as a
child's dad having a heart attack, the child may think it's his fault
and be racked with guilt. Successes and failures, hope, a sense of
worth, and personal power or control are a part of the psychological
circle.

In the psychological circle, past emotional trauma, undisciplined
thinking, ANTs, excessive social media and screen time, and shame can
create a mental illness.

PSYCHOLOGICAL CIRCLE THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Use psychological
warfare to hurt subjects. This includes ignoring past emotional trauma
created by alcoholic or drug-abusing parents and not addressing current
or past traumas from earthquakes, fires, floods, immigration, and
criminal behaviors. 2. Model undisciplined, negative thinking patterns
and never teach people how to eliminate the ANTs that infest their
minds. 3. Perpetuate shame, one of the most powerful psychological
weapons. Shame is a painful emotion that results from negatively
comparing yourself to others or not living up to your own standards.
Social media outlets are masterful at creating shame as they invite
nonstop comparisons to other people who may or may not even be real.
Because of this, the evil ruler would use social media to shame others
and would give people free rein to spout hateful ideas without
consequences. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Make psychotherapy
readily available for those who want or need it, especially if they've
had past emotional trauma, after they have worked to optimize their
brains. 2. Teach subjects how to deal with current or past emotional
traumas. 3. Make rational thinking skills (eliminating the ANTs) part of
the educational curriculum, along with ways to help people self-regulate
their bodies and emotions with guided imagery, meditation, and hypnosis.
4. Limit social media so people cannot endlessly compare themselves to
others, never feeling enough.

5. Require all therapists to have brain health modules as part of their
education programs. 6. Incorporate more green space into urban planning
to promote better moods and reduce the incidence of mental
illness.\[103\]

I find Eckhart Tolle's concept of the "painbody" to be a very helpful
psychological concept. He writes, "There is such a thing as old
emotional pain living inside you. It is an accumulation of painful life
experience that was not fully faced and accepted in the moment it arose.
It leaves behind an energy form of emotional pain. It comes together
with other energy forms from other instances, and so after some years
you have a 'painbody,' an energy entity consisting of old
emotion."\[104\] When your painbody bumps up against the painbodies of
others, it can cause intense relational disturbances, where each
painbody feeds off the others. Tolle teaches us: Recognize the painbody
when it shifts from dormant to active, when something triggers a very
strong emotional reaction. At that moment, when it does take over your
mind, the internal dialogue, which is dysfunctional at the best of
times, now becomes the voice of the painbody talking to you internally.
Everything it says is deeply colored by the old, painful emotion of the
painbody. Every interpretation, everything it says, every judgment about
your life, about other people, about a situation you are in, will be
totally distorted by the old emotional pain.\[105\] If you are present
by being "in the moment," the painbody cannot feed anymore on your
thoughts or on other people's reactions. The antidote to the painbody is
to

recognize it by asking, "Could this be my painbody talking? Am I
reacting from the present moment or from pain in the past?" Tolle
writes, "You can simply observe it, and be the witness, be the space for
it. Then gradually, its energy will decrease."\[106\] To optimize your
psychological circle, it is important to train your mind to help you
rather than hurt you. In a recent public television special, my
16-year-old daughter, Chloe, shared some of her own anxieties about
school, the way she looked, and her future. She knows these are common
worries for teens, but that doesn't mean they're not painful. For many
years, she thought she was the only person who felt that way. Many
adults still carry the ANTs they collected during adolescence . . .
which can continue to infest them for the rest of their lives unless
they learn how to eliminate them.

To optimize the psychological circle, it is critical to train your mind
to help you by eliminating the ANTs and soothing any painbodies.

You can train your mind to help you, but left undisciplined it can spin
out of control. Unfortunately, most people are never taught how to train
their minds. Chloe shared the following examples of the thoughts that
used to torture her.

I'm not good enough.

I'm not smart enough. Why do I have to work harder than other people?
Why am I the only person who feels this way? I don't fit in. I taught
Chloe the following principles to train her mind: 1. Whenever you have a
sad thought, a mad thought, or a hopeless thought, such as "I don't fit
in," your brain releases chemicals that make you feel bad. Your hands
get colder, they start to sweat, your breathing changes, your muscles
tense, you can't think, and these changes happen immediately. But the
opposite is also true. 2. Every time you have a happy thought, a hopeful
thought, or an empowering thought, such as "I don't fit in, which may be
a good thing," your brain releases a different set of chemicals that
make you feel good . . . immediately. Your hands become warmer and
drier, your breathing rate slows down, your muscles become more relaxed,
and you feel happier. 3. Thoughts are powerful, and they can help you
feel wonderful or miserable. 4. Thoughts are automatic; they just
happen. 5. Unfortunately, thoughts lie. They lie a lot, and it is these
bad thoughts that steal our happiness. We call them ANTs, but you can
learn to kill the ANTs and be happier. 6. To kill ANTs, write down what
you're thinking whenever you feel mad, sad, nervous, or out of control.
Then ask yourself if the thoughts are

factually true or whether you are jumping to a conclusion or making an
assumption. Often ANTs are simply interpretations that you cannot prove
as true. Can you absolutely know if they're true? Challenging the ANTs
helps to take away their power. (For a more in-depth look at how to kill
the ANTs, see my book Feel Better Fast and Make It Last.) Many of my
patients wear rubber bands around their wrists and snap them whenever
they notice bad thoughts to remind themselves to eliminate the ANTs. You
don't have to believe every thought you have. Killing the ANTs made a
big difference for Chloe, and normally it only takes a few minutes.
Plus, the more you do it, the easier it gets. If teenagers can do it, I
think you can do it too. Also, it is critical to program your mind to
look for what is right, rather than just thinking about what is wrong.
Where you bring your attention determines how you feel. I start every
day with the phrase, "Today is going to be a great day." It's a simple
way to begin training your brain to look for what's right rather than
what's wrong, and it sets a positive tone for the rest of the day.
Ending each day by journaling or meditating on what went well that day
sets up your dreams to be much more positive. This simple technique will
take about three minutes and can decrease depression in just 30 days. Do
this as a household or family. Start every day by saying to each other,
"Today is going to be a great day." End each day by asking "What went
well today?" It will completely change your relational dynamics in just
a few days. Practicing gratitude is also incredibly powerful. It
increases happiness, self-esteem, self-control, you live longer, and
your relationships are better. Gratitude should

be written at the top of every prescription your doctor gives you, and
journaling gratitude doesn't have to take more than three minutes a day.
It really helped Sarah, a 16-yearold who came to our clinic in Chicago
in search of help for crushing depression.

Sarah Discovers the Power of Gratitude Journaling February 2017 is when
my story of mental illness began. What started out as frequent feelings
of sadness slowly intensified into a numb depression. As time went on,
the depression overcame and muted any feelings of happiness I had,
making it seemingly impossible for me to enjoy the things I once loved.
Thankfully, I hadn't lost hope yet, and I found the strength to reach
out and get professional help. In the beginning, I tried therapy. I went
to many appointments with several therapists, but I left each one
feeling no better than when I went in. To me, it was simple. I didn't
have anything wrong with my life; I didn't have anything to talk about
or "fix." When therapy didn't help, I tried medication. I spent month
after month trying what seemed like randomly selected cocktails of
medications. Unfortunately,

this was a dead end as well. Each time a medication didn't help, I lost
a little more hope. Throughout these months my depression only continued
to consume me, and anxiety decided to join the party. After tirelessly
trying to feel better for months with my symptoms only declining, I
settled at my lowest point yet. I had lost all hope of recovering, there
was no more light to hold on to, and I felt as if there was no reason to
keep trying. I gave up. It was at this point that my grandma discovered
Amen Clinics. Instead of randomly selecting medications to put me on,
they would use brain scans to see exactly what I needed, my grandma
explained to me. Seeing how much hope my mom and my grandma had in this,
I went along with it. In February 2018 my mom, my grandma, and I drove
to the Chicago location of Amen Clinics. The first two days I was there
I got both my brain scans done and completed a computer test. On the
third day, I got my evaluation. From the test results, Dr. Michelle
Flowers determined what the best treatment option would be for me.
First, I would begin taking deliberately selected vitamins and
supplements. I would also continue on the medication I was still on from
my last doctor because with the help of these new

supplements my body could use the medication to its full advantage.
Secondly, I would begin trying a new type of therapy, and unlike the
form \[of\] therapy I previously tried, this new therapy would be used
to retrain my brain, not pick at it. And the third major piece of the
puzzle was gratitude journaling. In the beginning, it was challenging to
think of pleasant moments to write about, but over time my brain learned
to find these moments without thought. Before long, my brain was
noticing moments to be grateful for all throughout the day. I left
knowing we had physical evidence and facts to back up the treatment
plan. We had a plan that we knew would help. It wasn't just some doctor
telling me it would be okay, it was a doctor showing me what was wrong
and how we could fix it. I still have a way to go in my recovery, but I
have exactly what I need to keep growing, healing, and taking on what
life throws at me. ---Sarah, 16

It is important to recognize the psychological warfare being perpetuated
by our society with the excessive use of social media, where teenagers
and young adults are endlessly comparing themselves to others, never
feeling enough. I talk about this with my nieces, Alizé and Amelie,

on a regular basis to help them maintain a healthy perspective about
social media. In a study of more than a million teens since 1991,
researchers found that when the teens limited social media, spent time
with their friends in person, exercised, played sports, attended
religious services, read, and even did homework, they were happier than
those who spent time on the internet and social media, playing computer
games, texting, using video chat, or watching TV.\[107\]

PSYCHOLOGICAL CIRCLE STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't think or care about your
psychological health. 2. Engage in habits that hurt your mind,
including: Comparing yourself to others (the seeds of shame) Telling
yourself you are not enough Believing the ANTs Not recognizing the
painbody or getting help for your past emotional traumas Focusing
primarily on what's wrong with you and others 3. Avoid any education or
habits on how to help your mind. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND
KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care deeply about your
psychological health. 2. Engage in regular healthy psychological habits,
including: Telling yourself you are enough Challenging and eliminating
the ANTs Noticing what's right about yourself more than what is wrong
Saying, "Today is going to be a great day." At the end of the day,
journaling what went well that day Practicing gratitude Recognizing a
painbody and focusing on being present to calm it down Seeking
brain-informed psychotherapy, when needed

3. Avoid excessive social media use and bad psychological habits, such
as believing every thought you have or not dealing with past emotional
trauma.

Here are three of my favorite psychological circle tiny habits.

Whenever you feel sad, mad, nervous, or out of control, write down your
ANTs and ask yourself if they are assumptions, conclusions,
interpretations, or truth. Can you absolutely know if they are true?
Questioning your thoughts helps to take away their power. Every day when
your feet hit the floor in the morning, say to yourself, "Today is going
to be a great day!" That way your subconscious mind will find why it
will be a great day. This helps to train your mind to look for what is
right rather than what is wrong. Every night before bed, write down what
went well that day. Research suggests it can improve your happiness
after just one month. \[108\]

Social Circle

In a computer analogy, the biological circle is the hardware, the
psychological circle is the software, and the social circle is the
network connections. The social circle includes the quality of your
relationships and any current stresses---think problems with your spouse
or kids, crazy deadlines at work,

a family member's health crisis, or mounting credit card debt. When we
have great relationships, healthy families, a job we love, and enough
money, our brains tend to do much better than when any of these areas
are troubled. Dealing with difficult life circumstances---such as a
divorce, moving, a job change, or the death of a close family member---
elevates stress hormone levels and makes us more vulnerable to many
illnesses, including depression, anxiety disorders, and more.

You become like the people with whom you spend the most time.
Relationship health is critical to the health of your brain and mind.

Stress occurs when a person perceives excessive demands on his or her
emotional or physical resources. Stress increases to toxic levels when
we feel things are out of control. In 1967, US psychiatrists Thomas
Holmes and Richard Rahe studied the effects of stress on health,
surveying more than 5,000 medical patients. They asked them to say
whether they had any of a series of life events in the previous two
years. The more events someone had, the more likely they were to become
physically or emotionally sick.\[109\] Toxic stress has been associated
with obesity, heart disease, cancer, ADD/ADHD, learning disabilities,
social anxiety, depression, alcohol and drug abuse, PTSD, being
arrested, and an unhealthy "fight or

flight" aggressive tendency in the brain. Decreasing everyday stress
(relationships, work, finances, and health) lowers inflammation and
improves immune system function. \[110\]

SOCIAL CIRCLE THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Cause strife among the
people, subjecting them to chronic stress that separates them from each
other, so that the ruler could retain more power. 2. Bombard people with
negative news cycles, creating an us-versus-them mentality and pitting
political, racial, and other groups against each other. 3. Create a
society where recreational marijuana dispensaries are on every corner
and alcohol is promoted as a health food. (In an example of evilruler
entrepreneurial genius, Girl Scouts are now setting up outside marijuana
dispensaries. In 2014, a 13-year-old Girl Scout sold 177 boxes of
Samoas, Tagalongs, and Thin Mints outside a San Francisco pot
dispensary. After being there just a short time, she had to call for
help to be restocked. In 2018, a nine-year-old Girl Scout sold 300 boxes
of the tasty treats outside a San Diego pot dispensary in about six
hours.\[111\] Smarter still, inside the pot dispensaries they are
offering cookies with THC in them and a strain of marijuana called Girl
Scout Cookies.) 4. Increase the social pressure to stay connected to
your phone and social media for work and relationships, not allowing
enough time for sleep and self-care. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1.
Make job training, healthcare, parent training, and financial assistance
readily available to those who need it. 2. Advocate for
stress-management classes in schools and businesses. 3. Provide classes
on decision-making skills so people would make better life decisions and
be less stressed. Decisions are better when you have clear goals, sleep
more than seven hours, avoid low-blood-sugar states (have protein and
healthy fat at every meal), and eliminate the ANTs when they attack.

Social warfare---that's when our society wages an attack on our
well-being---is one of the most common causes of mental illness.
Negative news cycles create an us-versusthem mentality, pitting
political, racial, and other groups against each other. Just 14 minutes
of negative news has been found to increase both anxious and sad
moods.\[112\] Such chronic stress and relational separation damages
brains. In addition, bad relationships, health problems, and financial
stress all contribute to the social causes of mental illnesses. That's
why all four circles of health matter so much. Loneliness is also a
concern in the social circle. Baby boomers are aging alone more than any
generation in US history. About 10 percent of Americans who are 50 and
older do not have a spouse, partner, or living child. This group has the
highest rate of suicide and an increasing problem of drug
addiction.\[113\] Loneliness is a recognized risk factor for Alzheimer's
disease.\[114\] We're increasingly spending more time on the internet,
with social media rapidly replacing in-person connections. But social
media doesn't provide us with the same benefits as socializing
face-to-face. In fact, in a new study, there was a clear, causal link
between Facebook, Snapchat, and Instagram and depression and loneliness,
especially in teenage girls.\[115\] These sites also made vulnerable
people feel worse about their bodies.\[116\] In addition, new research
shows that using screens for long periods changes children's brains in a
negative way. Researchers at the National Institutes of Health performed
brain scans of 4,500 children. Those who had daily screen time usage of
more than seven hours showed premature thinning of the cortex, the
outermost brain layer responsible for processing information from the
physical world.\[117\]

Even more frightening is the reported emergence of seemingly innocent
online videos directed at children that encourage them to engage in
challenges involving selfharm. For example, reports have surfaced of
deadly suicide games aimed at teens called the "Momo" (a scary-looking
doll-like figure) challenge and the Blue Whale challenge. \[118\] Even
if these games don't actually exist, the social media buzz surrounding
them can spread quickly among vulnerable children and teens who think
they are real and who may act on them. In addition, the health habits of
the people with whom you spend time have a dramatic impact on your own
health and habits. If you spend time with unhealthy people, you are much
more likely to be unhealthy yourself. Brazilian supermodel Gisele
Bündchen discovered this in her twenties when, despite her
multimillion-dollar career and romantic involvement with Hollywood
heartthrob Leonardo DiCaprio, she sank into depression and began to
experience panic attacks. Not surprisingly, a doctor suggested she take
Xanax. But the supermodel chose to make some lifestyle changes instead.
The jet setter who had basically been living on wine, coffee, and
cigarettes cut back on those bad habits, reduced her work schedule, and
integrated yoga, meditation, and family time into her daily life. "I've
learned that our thoughts, words, and actions are all connected, and why
we need to be careful with them. I began nourishing my body, mind, and
spirit through meditation, healing foods, and a positive outlook, and as
a result was able to experience a deeper clarity and greater sense of
purpose," she wrote in her book Lessons: My Path to a Meaningful
Life.\[119\] That's when she came to realize her boyfriend was not quite
right for her, and the pair split.

Getting healthy means avoiding people who encourage habits that
contribute to illness and, instead, surrounding yourself with those who
support brain-healthy choices. Social connections are also essential to
mental health. German Emperor Frederick II conducted a barbaric
13thcentury experiment because he wanted to know what language and words
children would speak if they were raised without hearing any words at
all. He took a number of infants from their homes and put them with
people who fed them but had strict instructions not to touch, cuddle, or
talk to them. The babies never spoke a word. They all died before they
could speak. Salimbene, a historian of the time, wrote of the experiment
in 1248, "They could not live without petting."\[120\] This powerful
finding has been rediscovered over and over. In the early 1990s,
thousands of Romanian infants were orphaned and warehoused without touch
sometimes for years at a time. PET studies (similar to SPECT studies) of
a number of these deprived children have shown marked overall decreased
activity across the whole brain.\[121\]

In the social circle, an us-versus-them mentality, chronic stress,
social pressure that encourages bad habits and illness, loneliness, and
a lack of affection and touch can create a mental illness.

SOCIAL CIRCLE STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY NIECES,
ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't think about your social connections or
how you manage stress. 2. Engage in things that damage your social
connections and generate stress, including: Loneliness, social isolation
Poor or disconnected relationships Us-versus-them mentality, pitting
social or political groups against each other Excessive health, school,
job, financial, relational, or legal stress Toxic societal stress;
constant negative news cycles Associating with people with negative
health habits Being in easy proximity to illness temptations, such as
fast food restaurants, marijuana dispensaries, happy hour, decadent
holiday parties, etc. Staying connected to your phone and other devices
at all times Choosing social media connections over in-person
relationships 3. Avoid any education or habits on how to strengthen your
social connections or lower stress. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . .
AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your social
connections and how you manage stress. 2. Avoid anything that hurts your
relationships or increases stress, such as: Unhealthy people
Us-versus-them mentality Negative news cycles Unnecessary stress
Excessive screen time and social media 3. Engage in habits that
strengthen your relationships and lower unnecessary stress, such as:
Positive relationship habits (responsibility, empathy, time, listening,
assertiveness, noticing what you like more than what you don't,
forgiveness) Volunteering to help others in need Looking for ways to
bring your social connections together Cultivating stress management and
decision-making skills

Surrounding yourself with positive, healthy people---the fastest way to
get healthy is to find the healthiest people you can stand and spend as
much time around them as possible. Keeping your distance from fast food
restaurants, marijuana dispensaries, happy hour, decadent holiday
parties, etc.

Here are three of my favorite social circle tiny habits.

After I've had a fight with a loved one, I will take responsibility for
my part and quickly apologize. When I feel overwhelmed or stressed, I
will take five deep breaths, taking twice as long to exhale to settle
and center myself. If I have children, I'll spend at least 20 minutes a
day fully present with them, doing something they want to do. I will
make no commands, ask no questions, and give no directions. It is just a
time to be together. (This dramatically improves bonding.)

Spiritual Circle

Beyond the biological, psychological, and social aspects of our lives,
we are also spiritual beings. To fully heal and be your best, it is
important to recognize that we are more than just our cells, thoughts,
and connections. We are all spiritual beings created with divine
purpose, whether or not we believe in God. Having a sense of purpose and
a moral code, as well as connections to God, the planet, past
generations (my grandfather, as an example: I was named after him,

and he was my best friend growing up), and future generations (my
grandchildren and great-grandchildren) reminds us that our lives matter;
we have a role to play and a calling to fulfill. Without this spiritual
connection, many people experience a sense of despair or
meaninglessness, which can lead to depression.

SPIRITUAL CIRCLE THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Lead people to live
meaningless lives, devoid of values and connection to a life beyond
themselves. 2. Model an amoral life, making it seem normal, even
desirable. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Model a purposeful life
and encourage everyone else to do the same. 2. Encourage spiritual
beliefs and practices without dictating them, such as prayer,
meditation, worship, and service. 3. Foster a deep connection to the
past, the future, and the planet.

Purposeful people, defined as having "the psychological tendency to
derive meaning from life's experiences and to possess a sense of
intentionality and goal directedness that guides behavior," live longer
and are healthier overall.\[122\] In a large study, purposeful people
were found to have better mental health, less depression, greater
happiness and satisfaction, more personal growth and self-acceptance,
and better sleep. Over time, higher scores on this scale were also
associated with a reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease, less cognitive
impairment, and a slower rate of cognitive decline in old age.\[123\]
Research shows that having a strong "purpose in life" also reduces the
chances that your self-esteem will fluctuate with the number of likes
you get on social media.\[124\]

Ultimately, feeling as if your life matters and living purposefully
helps protect you from the social warfare you now understand is behind
so much mental illness. On the flip side, a lack of purpose has been
linked to higher levels of the stress hormone cortisol, more abdominal
fat, and other negative health markers. It's easy to see how increased
stress, a bigger belly, and poorer health can contribute to negative
feelings that, when combined with low brain reserve, can create mental
illness. Think of how easily that can be passed on to younger people,
such as my nieces, who are vulnerable. In our society, the media
constantly highlights people--- such as politicians, religious and
business leaders, and celebrities---who model amoral lives. In addition,
on a dayto-day basis, we often come into contact with people---
including our own parents, teachers, or bosses---whose lives are devoid
of meaning and purpose. With so much confusion about the spiritual
circle in our society, how can we find our purpose in life? Dr. Viktor
Frankl, a psychiatrist, World War II concentration camp survivor, and
author of Man's Search for Meaning, believed there were three ways to
create meaning: 1. Purposeful work or being productive---asking
questions such as, "Why is the world a better place because I am here?"
or "What do I contribute?" 2. Love for the people who are central to our
lives. 3. Courage in the face of difficulty---shouldering whatever
difficult fate we have and helping others shoulder theirs.

I suggest engaging in spiritual practices, such as prayer, meditation,
worship, and service. I stay connected to God and my Christian faith
through daily prayers, meditation, and attending church with my family.
Think of your church or other places of worship, as well as any
nurturing environment, as a space that fosters all four circles of
health. I also have my patients ask themselves: What does your life
mean? What is your purpose? Why are you here? What are your values? Do
you believe in God or a higher power? How does that affect your life?
What is your connection to past generations, future generations, and the
planet?\[125\]

In the spiritual circle, a lack of purpose or connections to something
larger than yourself and not living up to your own moral code can create
a mental illness.

Here are two of my favorite spiritual circle tiny habits.

In the morning, I will ask myself, What one purposeful thing will I do
today?

When I start getting upset about something happening in my day, I'll ask
myself, Does this have eternal value?

SPIRITUAL CIRCLE STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care or think about your
spiritual well-being or purpose in life. 2. Live a meaningless
existence, focused solely on yourself and the pleasures of the moment.
3. Behave in opposition to a moral code (anger, gluttony, addictions,
affairs, pornography, etc.). 4. Look up to people who live amoral lives.
5. Avoid a sense of passion or purpose. 6. Avoid connections to the
past, future, and planet. 7. Avoid role models who are living spiritual
lives. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND
AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your deepest sense of meaning and purpose.
You are more than just your cells, thoughts, and connections. 2. Stop
engaging in habits that hurt your spiritual circle. 3. Live by a moral
code. 4. Engage in regular positive spiritual habits, including: Living
with intentionality, being goal oriented toward a higher purpose.
Building or rediscovering connections with God, the church, the past,
the future, and/or the planet. Engaging in meaningful work, such as
volunteering at your church or place of worship. Engaging in meaningful
relationships with people who share your values and faith. Having
courage and faith in the face of challenges. Living with the end in
mind---what does God want you to accomplish while you are alive?

THE POWER OF PURPOSE AND THE SPIRITUAL CIRCLE I met Byron Katie in 2005,
and we immediately became friends. She is the author of one of my
favorite books Loving What Is and was helpful to me personally during a
difficult time of grief. She worked with people I loved to help
discipline their minds, and I worked with people she loved to help
balance their brains. Eventually, I scanned Katie's brain. It was not
healthy and looked like the scan of someone who was suffering. Yet she
was at peace. Her spiritual practice overrode her brain issues.
Likewise, a number of years ago, I scanned Sam, who had been practicing
loving-kindness meditation for 20 years. Of note, his SPECT scan looked
quite terrible, with decreased activity to his left frontal and temporal
lobes. He told me he'd had a motorcycle accident 20 years earlier, and
he started the meditation practice to deal with the depression he
experienced after the trauma. In the last 15 years, he had started his
own chiropractic office, had been very successful, and had not
experienced any more depression, although he admitted he was quite
disorganized and relied on his wonderful wife and practice manager to
keep him on track.

Psychological health, positive social connections, and spiritual
practices can help stabilize troubled brains.

Both Byron Katie's story and Sam's story point to how psychological
health, positive social connections, and spiritual practices can help
override brains that are in trouble. Getting and staying well involves
all four circles. In part 2, you'll see how the four circles intersect
with and influence the 11 BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. And I'll introduce
you to some simple strategies using each of the four circles that you
can use to prevent or heal those risk factors to enhance your brain
health and end mental illness.

\[97\] Erika L. Sabbath et al., "Time May Not Fully Attenuate
Solvent-Associated Cognitive Deficits in Highly Exposed Workers,"
Neurology 82, no. 19 (May 13, 2014): 1716--23. Samuel Keer et al.,
"Neuropsychological Performance in Solvent-Exposed Vehicle Collision
Repair Workers in New Zealand," PLOSOne 12, no. 12 (December 13, 2017):
e0189108. \[98\] Daniel G. Amen et al., Change Your Brain, Change Your
Life (New York: Harmony Books, 2015), 49. \[99\] J. Araújo et al.,
"Prevalence of Optimal Metabolic Health in American Adults: National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2009--2016," Metabolic Syndrome
and Related Disorders 17, no. 1 (February 2019): 46--52. \[100\] Ibid.
\[101\] Michele Corriston, "Demi Lovato Fights for Mental Health Reform
on Capitol Hill: 'I Went through Several Years of Pain and Suffering,'"
People, October 5, 2015,
people.com/celebrity/demi-lovato-fights-for-mental-health-awarenessin-washington-dc/.
\[102\] Amen, Change Your Brain, Change Your Life, 51. \[103\] Kristine
Engemann et al., "Residential Green Space in Childhood Is Associated
with Lower Risk of Psychiatric Disorders from Adolescence into
Adulthood," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 116, no. 11 (March 12, 2019): 5188--93. \[104\]
Eckhart Tolle, "Living in Presence with Your Emotional Pain Body,"
HuffPost The Blog, October 6, 2010,
www.huffingtonpost.com/eckhart-tolle/living-inpresence-with-y_b_753114.html.

\[105\] Ibid. \[106\] Ibid. \[107\] Jean Twenge, "What Might Explain the
Current Unhappiness Epidemic?" Ladders.com, (December 7, 2018),
www.theladders.com/career-advice/whatmight-explain-the-current-unhappiness-epidemic.
\[108\] M. E. Seligman et al., "Positive Psychology Progress: Empirical
Validation of Interventions," American Psychologist 60, no. 5
(July--August 2005): 410--21. \[109\] Thomas H. Holmes and Richard H.
Rahe, "The Social Readjustment Rating Scale," Journal of Psychosomatic
Research 11, no. 2 (August 1967): 213--18. \[110\] Emily J. Jones et
al., "Chronic Family Stress and Adolescent Health: The Moderating Role
of Emotion Regulation," Psychosomatic Medicine 80, no. 8 (2018):
764--73. \[111\] Scott Stump, "Girl Scout Sells 300 Boxes of Cookies
outside Marijuana Dispensary in 6 Hours," Today.com, February 7, 2018,
www.today.com/parents/girl-scout-sells-300-boxes-cookies-outside-marijuanadispensary-6-t122455.
\[112\] Wendy M. Johnston and Graham C. L. Davey, "The Psychological
Impact of Negative TV News Bulletins: The Catastrophizing of Personal
Worries," British Journal of Psychology 88, pt. 1 (February 1997):
85--91. \[113\] Janet Adamy and Paul Overberg, "The Loneliest
Generation: Americans, More Than Ever, Are Aging Alone," Wall Street
Journal, December 11, 2018,
www.wsj.com/articles/the-loneliest-generation-americans-more-than-ever-areaging-alone-11544541134.
\[114\] "Loneliness and Alzheimer's," Rush University Medical Center,
www.rush.edu/health-wellness/discover-health/loneliness-and-alzheimers.
\[115\] Melissa G. Hunt et al., "No More FOMO: Limiting Social Media
Decreases Loneliness and Depression," Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology 37, no. 10 (2018): 751--68. Denis Campbell, "Depression in
Girls Linked to Higher Use of Social Media," Guardian, January 3, 2019,
www.theguardian.com/society/2019/jan/04/depression-in-girls-linked-tohigher-use-of-social-media?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other.
\[116\] Jacqueline V. Hogue and Jennifer S. Mills, "The Effects of
Active Social Media Engagement with Peers on Body Image in Young Women,"
Body Image 28 (March 2019): 1--5. \[117\] Lisa Lee, "NIH Study Probes
Impact of Heavy Screen Time on Young Brains," Bloomberg Quint, December
9, 2018,
www.bloombergquint.com/technology/screen-time-changes-structure-of-kidsbrains-60-minutes-says#gs.ddq1FHk.
\[118\] Larry Magid, "Dire Warnings about Children Dying because of Apps
and Games Are a Form of 'Juvenoia,'" ConnectSafely.org, August 27, 2018,
www.connectsafely.org/dire-warnings-about-children-dying-because-of-appsand-games-are-a-form-of-juvenoia/.

\[119\] Gisele Bündchen, Lessons: My Path to a Meaningful Life (New
York: Avery, 2018). \[120\] "Frederick's Experiment," Digma.com,
https://www.digma.com/digmaimages/video-scripts/fredericks_experiment.pdf.
\[121\] Harry T. Chugani et al., "Local Brain Functional Activity
Following Early Deprivation: A Study of Postinstitutionalized Romanian
Orphans," NeuroImage 14, no. 6 (December 2001): 1290--301. \[122\]
Patricia A. Boyle et al., "Effect of Purpose in Life on Risk of Incident
Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment in Community-Dwelling
Older Persons," Archives of General Psychiatry 67, no. 3 (March 2010):
304-- 10. \[123\] Ibid. \[124\] Anthony L. Burrow and Nicolette Rainone,
"How Many Likes Did I Get?: Purpose Moderates Links between Positive
Social Media Feedback and SelfEsteem," Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 69 (March 2017): 232--36. \[125\] Daniel G. Amen, Change Your
Brain, Change Your Life, 53--54.

OceanofPDF.com

PA RT 2

HOW TO CREATE OR ELIMINATE MENTAL ILLNESS: A BRIGHT MINDS APPROACH To
keep your brain and mind healthy, or to rescue it if it is headed for
trouble, you have to prevent or treat the 11 major BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors that steal your mind. In Memory Rescue, I wrote extensively
about these risk factors in relation to memory and cognitive decline.
But these risk factors also have huge implications on other areas of
brain health/mental health. Addressing them can help you prevent or
reverse "mental illness," and your memory will also benefit in the long
run. The following chapters will help you determine which of the risk
factors you may have and how to prevent and treat them, including
specific strategies and nutraceuticals when appropriate. Foods to
support each risk factor will be discussed in chapter 18.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 5

B IS FOR BLOOD FLOW OPTIMIZE THE FOUNDATION OF LIFE One way to get high
blood pressure is to go mountain climbing over molehills. EARL WILSON

DANIEL

Daniel Ara was the kindest person I've ever known. He was my
grandfather. I was named after him, and he was my best friend growing
up. Being the third of seven children, I did not have much individual
time with my parents, but when I was at his home, it felt like I was the
most special person in the world. Plus, he was a professional candy
maker. It doesn't get any better than that for a child. My earliest
memories were of standing by the white stove in his kitchen, learning
how to make fudge and pralines. Yum. Yet all the sugar took a toll on
him, and he had his first heart attack at age 69. Before that, I can't
remember a single time when Grandpa was irritable or upset, even being

married to my grandmother, which could be stressful. He was happy,
always smiling, and positive. But after his heart attack, he changed. He
cried easily, had trouble sleeping, and lost his joy. He was clinically
diagnosed with major depression and put on antidepressant medication. I
was in college and medical school during that time and learned firsthand
about the connection between cardiovascular disease and depression. His
funeral was the saddest day of my life. He was one of the main reasons
why I fell in love with helping people who are suffering from brain
health/mental health issues. I wish I had known then what I know now
about sugar, blood flow, heart disease, and depression. Blood flow is
critical for life. It transports nutrients, including oxygen, to every
cell in your body and flushes away toxins. Even though your brain, which
weighs about three pounds, makes up only 2 percent of your body's
weight, it uses 20 percent of the oxygen and blood flow in your body.
Anything that damages your blood vessels or impairs blood flow hurts
your brain. This means that taking care of your heart and blood vessels
to ensure healthy blood flow to your brain is not just important for
your physical health, but it is also essential for your mental
well-being. And this relationship goes both ways. People with
depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia are more likely
to develop cardiovascular disease, even at young ages; and people with
cardiovascular disease are more likely to suffer from depression and
dementia.\[126\] Exciting new research dispels the long-held belief that
our brain cells age quickly; rather, it is the blood vessels that feed
our neurons that are

aging faster.\[127\] If you want to keep your brain healthy, your mind
sharp, and your mental health strong for as long as possible, you need
to protect your blood vessels. SPECT measures the brain's blood flow and
activity. Low blood flow on SPECT has been seen with depression,
suicide, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, attention deficit
disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD), traumatic
brain injury (TBI), hoarding, murder, substance abuse, seizure activity,
and more. Low blood flow is the number one brain imaging predictor that
a person will develop Alzheimer's disease.\[128\]

Low blood flow on SPECT has been seen with depression, suicide, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia, ADD/ADHD, substance abuse, hoarding, murder,
seizure activity, head trauma, and more. This is why I was so concerned
when I scanned my niece Alizé's brain when she was 13 and discovered
that it showed lower overall blood flow. To end mental illness with
Alizé and her sister, Amelie, I would have to teach her how to boost
blood flow, and she would have to get serious about caring for her
brain. As any parent knows, getting a teen to adopt new habits can be a
challenge. But showing Alizé a healthy brain scan and putting it next to
her own scan helped her see that her brain needed help and motivated her
to get on board with the Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS program. ALIZÉ'S
SPECT STUDY

Before

Low overall blood flow, especially for her age After

Improved overall

Less than a year later, we rescanned Alizé's brain, and it showed marked
improvement in overall blood flow after taking supplements and doing
hyperbaric oxygen therapy

(HBOT). Seeing the improvement helped her know she was on the right
track and gave her encouragement to stick with the program. My niece
Alizé and my grandfather are prime examples of how much the four circles
can come into play in blood flow. Biological: Having compromised blood
flow like Alizé, or a heart attack like my grandfather, is linked with a
higher risk for brain health/mental health issues. Psychological: In my
grandfather's case, he didn't know at the time that he could take action
to improve his blood flow and minimize his depression. But, as Alizé is
already learning, when you believe you have the power to change your
brain and change your life, you can improve blood flow to the brain and
reduce symptoms of mental illness. Social: Alizé grew up in an
environment that was contributing to lower blood flow in the brain. When
she came to live with me and my wife, however, we surrounded her with
people who live brain-healthy lives. It has inspired her to start
adopting healthier habits that are boosting blood flow to her brain.
Spiritual: For many people, like my grandfather, taking care of others
takes precedence over taking care of themselves. Making your own health
a priority may feel

selfish, but making sure you are happy, healthy, and energetic is the
key to being there for your family and friends. Our brain imaging
research has taught us that the number one strategy to support your
brain and mental health is to protect, nurture, and optimize your heart
and blood vessels. Anything that damages your blood vessels damages your
mind. Do you have any of the following risk factors for low blood flow
to the brain?

Blood Flow Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) 1. History
of a stroke,\[129\] which indicates blood vessels are already damaged or
vulnerable to trouble. 2. More than two cups of caffeinated drinks a
day, which constricts blood flow to the brain (social circle if you're
drinking it with friends or coworkers). 3. History of cardiovascular
disease, including coronary artery disease, heart attack, heart failure,
or heart arrhythmia.\[130\]

4. High low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in the blood,
particularly with a high content of small LDL particles (social circle
if, when eating with friends or family, you eat foods that negatively
impact LDL cholesterol). One caveat, which overenthusiastic
cardiologists will rarely tell you, is that lowering total cholesterol
levels below 160 mg/dL can increase the risk of depression and
aggression. The body actually needs cholesterol for certain vital
functions, so don't go too low.\[131\] 5. Prehypertension or
hypertension in midlife,\[132\] which decreases blood flow to the brain
(psychological circle if chronic stress is contributing to high blood
pressure). Low blood pressure in later life\[133\] also lessens blood
flow. 6. Erectile dysfunction.\[134\] If you have blood flow problems
anywhere, it likely means they are everywhere. 7. Sedentary lifestyle
and limited exercise, less than twice a week.\[135\] More than 90
percent of teenagers do not get the CDC's recommended level of exercise,
which could be one of the major reasons brain health/mental health
issues among teens have skyrocketed in the last 30 years.\[136\]

8. Prediabetes or diabetes (see chapter 14, "D Is for Diabesity"). High
blood sugar levels cause blood vessels to become brittle and more likely
to break, delaying healing and causing disease complications. 9. Smoking
or ingesting nicotine (see chapter 10, "T Is for Toxins"), which
constricts blood flow to the brain (social circle if you smoke with
friends). 10. Excessive alcohol use (see chapter 10, "T Is for Toxins"),
which lowers overall blood flow to the brain (social circle if you drink
in social situations). 11. Sleep apnea (see chapter 15, "S Is for
Sleep"), which lowers overall blood flow to the brain, but especially in
the areas that die first in Alzheimer's disease.

The number one strategy to keep your brain and mind healthy is to
protect, nurture, and optimize your heart and blood vessels. Anything
that damages them damages your mind.

Take a look at how the evil and benevolent rulers would influence blood
flow to increase or decrease mental illness.

BLOOD FLOW THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Tell people they must not
exercise, which decreases blood vessel flexibility and hurt brain
health. 2. Pass out video game consoles and online streaming services to
all subjects, stealing their time and attention so they can't find the
time to exercise. 3. Encourage schools to cut physical-education
programs from the curriculum. 4. Encourage a higher incidence of
hypertension and heart diseases, such as heart attacks (depression risk
is significantly elevated after a heart attack\[137\]), and hardening of
the arteries by Making cigarettes and marijuana widely available for a
low price (both decrease blood flow\[138\]). Putting fast food
restaurants on every street corner, allowing subjects to supersize meals
for just a few pennies, withholding calorie counts on menus so people
have no idea how much they are consuming, and giving away free desserts
with every meal--- because the population deserves it! Making coffee
shops plentiful (caffeine constricts blood flow to the brain) THE
BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Encourage exercise in schools, churches,
and the workplace. 2. Limit video games and screen time, so children and
adults will spend more time outdoors exercising. 3. Advocate annual
screening for any vascular issues and enthusiastically treat them early
when signs of trouble arise. 4. Make brain health education mandatory at
schools and businesses on the blood flow effects of caffeine, including
energy drinks, nicotine, and marijuana.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR BLOOD FLOW RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies

Here are the primary strategies that can help support your overall blood
flow and blood pressure. 1. Care about your blood vessels. They are
important to every other part of your body. 2. Avoid anything that
decreases brain blood flow. Examples include a sedentary lifestyle,
obesity,\[139\] more than one serving of caffeine a day,\[140\]
ingesting nicotine,\[141\] smoking marijuana,\[142\] and
dehydration.\[143\] When people stop smoking, anxiety, depression, and
stress levels are lower, quality of life and mood improves, and even the
dosages of some medications used to treat psychiatric issues can be
reduced.\[144\] Video gaming is also related to decreased blood flow in
the prefrontal cortex in both children and adults,\[145\] and playing
violent video games leads to lower perfusion to the anterior cingulate
cortex.\[146\] 3. Get medical help for anything that damages your blood
flow. Don't ignore or delay treating health problems you know you have,
such as coronary artery disease, heart arrhythmias, prediabetes and
diabetes, prehypertension and hypertension, insomnia, sleep apnea,
erectile dysfunction, and drug and alcohol abuse.

4. Practice natural strategies to support healthy blood pressure. In
addition to the other strategies on this list, these will help keep your
blood pressure healthy. Hydrate better! If you drink at least five
glasses of water a day, you could decrease your risk of
hypertension.\[147\] Eat mostly plants. Limit salt intake. Eat more
foods high in magnesium, such as avocados, nuts, and seeds, and
potassium, such as spinach and sweet potatoes. Incorporate foods that
lower blood pressure, such as beet juice, broccoli, celery, garlic,
chickpeas, and mushrooms. Limit alcohol, caffeine, fruit juices, and
sodas (including diet sodas). Sleep seven to eight hours a night, and if
you have sleep apnea, get it assessed and treated. 5. Take medication if
you need it. I prefer a natural approach to health problems, but high
blood pressure or excessively high cholesterol must be managed properly.
The thoughtful use of medicines, when combined with the above lifestyle
strategies, can be very helpful. 6. Engage regularly in behaviors that
enhance blood flow.

Spend 10 to 20 minutes a day in prayer or meditation.\[148\] Both prayer
and meditation have been shown to improve blood flow to the prefrontal
cortex, decrease anxiety, and improve mood. They are also both effective
stressmanagement tools. Build regular physical exercise into your
lifestyle (social circle if you exercise with friends). In a review of
research on more than 10,000 people, exercise was found to be similar in
effectiveness to antihypertensive medication. \[149\] The benefits of
exercise for brain health are lasting and impressive. Just ask Lena
Dunham, the creator of the hit HBO series Girls. She wrote on Instagram,
"Promised myself I would not let exercise be the first thing to go by
the wayside when I got busy with Girls Season 5 and here is why: It has
helped with my anxiety in ways I never dreamed possible. To those
struggling with anxiety, OCD, depression: I know it's mad annoying when
people tell you to exercise, and it took me about 16 medicated years to
listen. I'm glad I did." Dunham is right. Just 100 minutes a week of
exercise (that's just 20 minutes a day, five times a week), together
with a healthy diet, decreased brain age by nearly 10 years.\[150\]
Plus, regular physical exercise does the following:

Lowers the risk of developing depression (and that's by jogging for just
15 minutes a day).\[151\] Improves mood, anxiety, and even cognitive
health in patients with depression and schizophrenia.\[152\] Reduces
depression and anxiety in prisoners\[153\] and methamphetamine
abusers.\[154\] Improves anxiety, depression, and insomnia in
postmenopausal women\[155\] and breast cancer survivors.\[156\]
Increases the size of the hippocampus,\[157\] one of the brain's major
memory and mood centers. Protects the hippocampus from stressrelated
hormones, like cortisol,\[158\] which normally shrink it. Even leisurely
walking has been shown to increase the size of the hippocampus in
women.\[159\] Stimulates the production of growth factors, such as BDNF
(brain-derived neurotrophic factors), which improves neuroplasticity
(brain adaptability).\[160\] Stimulates "neurogenesis," the ability of
the brain to generate new neurons. In exercising laboratory rats,
research shows that they generate new neurons in the frontal lobe and
hippocampus, which survive for about four weeks and then die off unless
they are stimulated.\[161\] If you stimulate these new neurons through
mental or social interaction, they can then connect to other neurons and

become integrated into brain circuits that help maintain their functions
throughout your life. This is why people who go to the library or take
music lessons after a workout are smarter than those who work out and
then veg out. Improves cognitive flexibility\[162\] and is an effective
treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)\[163\] and
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).\[164\] Improves the heart's
ability to pump blood throughout the body and brain, which increases
oxygen and nutrient delivery. Boosts nitric oxide production and the
flexibility of blood vessels, which decreases the risk for high blood
pressure, stroke, and heart disease. Enhances insulin's ability to lower
high blood sugar levels, reducing the risk of diabetes. Helps you
maintain coordination, agility, and speed. Allows for greater
detoxification through sweat. Improves the quality of sleep. The
following four types of exercise are great for your brain. Of course,
you should check with your physician before starting any new exercise
routines. Burst training. This involves 30- to 60second bursts at
go-for-broke intensity followed by a few minutes of lower-intensity

exertion. Short burst training also helps raise endorphins, lift your
mood, and make you feel more energized. Strength training. Strength
training decreases anxiety and increases energy and mood.\[165\] I
recommend two 30- to 45minute weight-lifting sessions a week, one or two
days apart---one for the lower body, the other for the upper body.
Coordination activities. Dancing, pickleball, table tennis (the world's
best brain sport), and similar exercises that require coordination boost
the activity in the cerebellum. The cerebellum contains 50 percent of
the brain's neurons and controls your physical and thought coordination.
In a study from Taiwan,\[166\] table tennis was found to improve social
behaviors and executive function in children who have ADD/ADHD. Mindful
exercise. Exercises such as yoga, Pilates, and tai chi help anxiety and
depression and increase focus and energy, boosting your brain health. 7.
Undergo hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT). HBOT is a simple, noninvasive,
painless treatment with minimal side effects that uses the power of
oxygen to enhance the healing process and reduce inflammation. My
introduction to HBOT, which has been used for decades, came in the 1990s
courtesy of Michael Uszler, MD, a nuclear medicine physician,

who gave a lecture on it at UCLA. One of the original pioneers in using
brain SPECT imaging in the 1980s, Michael showed before-and-after SPECT
scans of his patients who had undergone HBOT. The scans revealed
remarkable improvement in blood flow and inspired me to introduce this
therapy into my own practice. Many of my patients who underwent HBOT,
especially those with low blood flow, experienced similar improvement.
How does HBOT work? HBOT provides people with concentrated oxygen in a
special pressurized chamber. This increased pressure allows the lungs to
take in more oxygen than usual, which is beneficial because oxygen is
critical to the healing process. As more oxygen enters the blood vessels
and tissues, it can boost production of growth factors and stem cells
that promote healing. Typically, it is only red blood cells that shuttle
oxygen throughout the body. With HBOT, oxygen dissolves into other
bodily fluids, such as plasma, cerebral spinal fluid, and lymph, which
can then transport it to areas where circulation is low or impaired. For
example, in strokes, vascular problems, and nonhealing wounds, adequate
amounts of oxygen are unable to reach the troubled areas, diminishing
the body's ability to heal. When extra oxygen is able to penetrate these
damaged regions, it speeds the recovery process. Researchers have found
that increased oxygen can promote healing after mild TBIs. A 2013 study
on 56 mild TBI patients with postconcussion syndrome showed that HBOT
improved cognitive and emotional

functioning and quality of life.\[167\] Other research has concluded
that HBOT enhances brain repair after TBI.\[168\] In 2011, Paul Harch,
MD, colleagues, and I published a study on 16 soldiers who had
experienced blast-induced TBIs and subsequent PTSD.\[169\] They were
studied with brain SPECT imaging and neuropsychological testing before
and after 40 sessions of HBOT. After treatment, our patients
demonstrated significant improvement in their symptoms; full-scale IQ (a
term for complete cognitive capacity; up 14.8 points); delayed and
working memory scores; tests of impulsivity, mood, anxiety; and
quality-of-life scores. Their SPECT scans showed remarkable overall
improvement in blood flow. Many of the NFL and NHL players we have
treated with HBOT at Amen Clinics also experienced benefits. HBOT has
been found beneficial for many other conditions as well. For example, a
2016 study showed HBOT improved both blood flow to the brain and
neuropsychiatric function in patients who had significant
neuropsychological issues caused by carbon monoxide poisoning.\[170\]
Research suggests HBOT can also be helpful for: Stroke\[171\]
Fibromyalgia\[172\] Lyme disease (as a helpful add-on treatment) \[173\]
Burns\[174\] Diabetic ulcers and complications\[175\]

Wound healing\[176\] Multiple sclerosis\[177\] Irritable bowel
disease\[178\] Post-surgical healing\[179\] Autism\[180\] Cerebral
palsy\[181\] 8. Take supplements with research-based evidence to help
maintain healthy blood pressure\[182\] and increase blood flow. A
nutraceutical is a vitamin, mineral, other nutrient, or standardized
herbal extract that has shown health benefits in well-controlled human
clinical trials. Ginkgo biloba: In controlled studies, this supplement
has helped cerebral blood flow,\[183\] memory,\[184\] and
neuropsychiatric symptoms, \[185\] including depression\[186\] and
anxiety. \[187\] Dose suggestion: 60--120 milligrams (mg) twice a day. I
recommend starting at the lower dose for several weeks and then
increasing to the higher dose to see which is best for you. Cocoa
flavanols\[188\] improve blood flow, support healthy blood
pressure,\[189\] and improve brain functions,\[190\] even in those who
haven't had enough sleep.\[191\] Being the grandson of a candy maker,
this finding made me happy. Dose suggestion: I recommend one piece of
sugar-free, dairy-free dark chocolate every day.

Omega-3 fatty acids can improve blood flow, \[192\] brain
function,\[193\] memory,\[194\] and mood;\[195\] as well as reduce
inflammation\[196\] and brain shrinkage from aging.\[197\] There are two
active compounds in omega-3s: EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA
(docosahexaenoic acid). You need both. Dose suggestion: For most of our
patients, I prefer 1,400 mg or more with a ratio of approximately 60/40
EPA-to-DHA. (Check out information on the Omega-3 Index in chapter 7,
which will let you know if you're on the right track toward Omega-3
protection.) Green tea catechins (GTCs) are good for blood flow,\[198\]
blood vessels, and blood pressure. \[199\] GTCs also improve
cholesterol\[200\] and help regulate blood sugar.\[201\] Research shows
that taking GTCs on a daily basis improves depression\[202\] and reduces
the risk of cognitive decline, especially in women and people with a
genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease.\[203\] Dose suggestion: I
recommend keeping the daily dosage to less than 720 mg. Resveratrol
boosts blood flow.\[204\] Dose suggestion: Research shows that a daily
dose of 75 mg is effective. In chapter 16, you'll find additional
recommendations and dosages for supplements that help the BRIGHT MINDS
risk factors and brain health/mental health problems.

Here are scans of a 40-year-old woman, Brooke, with ADHD. She had
significantly low blood flow to the front part of her brain. She did not
want to take medication, so she tried nutraceuticals, including the ones
listed above plus a multiple vitamin and fish oil. She felt remarkably
better, and you can see the improvement in her scans a month later.
BROOKE'S SPECT STUDY Before

Low blood flow to frontal lobes

After One Month on Nutraceuticals

Improved overall

BRIGHT MINDS: BLOOD FLOW STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE
MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your blood flow.
2. Engage in habits that damage your blood vessels and impair blood
flow. Limit exercise. Play video games and use streaming services to
distract you from exercising. Use cigarettes and marijuana. 3. Avoid the
strategies that enhance blood flow. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . .
AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your blood
flow. 2. Avoid anything that damages your blood vessels or hurts your
blood flow, such as nicotine, caffeine, and marijuana. 3. Engage
regularly in healthy habits that boost blood flow. Exercise at least 100
minutes each week. Take a walk every day. Limit video games and screen
time.

Screen for any vascular issues on a yearly basis and treat them early
when signs of trouble arise. Take nutraceuticals that increase blood
flow. Drink plenty of water.

Let's go back to my grandfather. If I could travel back in time, I would
encourage him to limit candy because sugar (as you'll see in chapter 14)
damages blood vessels and contributes to heart disease. Knowing that
heart disease is associated with depression, I would have scanned his
brain to see what was going on and started him on a comprehensive
treatment plan using the BRIGHT MINDS strategies and nutraceuticals to
boost his blood flow. I think it would have helped him continue to be
the happy, loving man he had been before his heart attack. And
ultimately, he might have lived longer. Sadly, it's too late for me to
help my grandfather, but he is one of the main reasons why I am so
passionate about ending mental illness so my nieces, Alizé and Amelie,
won't have to suffer.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Blood Flow Tiny Habit to Start Today I'll focus on
drinking more water---and remember that my brain and other bodily organs
are mostly water. I'll avoid caffeine and nicotine. I'll take up a
racquet sport. For a treat, I'll enjoy a small piece of sugar-free dark
chocolate.

As one of my supplements, I'll take ginkgo biloba standardized extract.
(The healthiest SPECT scans I see often belong to people who are taking
a standardized extract of this Chinese herb.) When eating, I'll consume
more foods that enhance blood flow. (You'll find many listed in chapter
18.)

\[126\] "CVD and Mental Health Disorders: Link Established, More
Research Needed," Cardiology Today, November 2015,
www.healio.com/cardiology/vascular-medicine/news/print/cardiologytoday/%7Bdfb3be16-c566-43d8-9ee0-fbe553b1c35c%7D/cvd-and-mentalhealth-disorders-link-established-more-research-needed.
\[127\] Kamen A. Tsvetanov et al., "The Effect of Ageing on fMRI:
Correction for the Confounding Effects of Vascular Reactivity Evaluated
by Joint fMRI and MEG in 335 Adults," Human Brain Mapping 36, no. 6
(June 2015): 2248--69. \[128\] Y. Iturria-Medina et al., "Early Role of
Vascular Dysregulation on Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Based on
Multifactorial Data-Driven Analysis," Nature Communications 7 (June 21,
2016): 11934. \[129\] Sebastian Köhler et al., "Depression, Vascular
Factors, and Risk of Dementia in Primary Care: A Retrospective Cohort
Study," Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 63, no. 4 (April
2015): 692--98. \[130\] Justin B. Ng et al., "Heart Disease as a Risk
Factor for Dementia," Clinical Epidemiology 5 (2013): 135--45. \[131\]
James M. Greenblatt, "The Implications of Low Cholesterol in Depression
and Suicide," Great Plains Laboratory, Inc. (November 16, 2015),
www.greatplainslaboratory.com/articles-1/2015/11/13/the-implications-of-lowcholesterol-in-depression-and-suicide.
\[132\] Sebastian Köhler et al., "Depression, Vascular Factors, and Risk
of Dementia in Primary Care: A Retrospective Cohort Study." E. Duron and
O. Hanon, "Vascular Risk Factors, Cognitive Decline, and Dementia,"
Vascular Health and Risk Management 4, no. 2 (2008): 363--81.

\[133\] Sean P. Kennelly et al., "Blood Pressure and the Risk for
Dementia: A Double Edged Sword," Ageing Research Reviews 8, no. 2 (April
2009): 61--70. \[134\] Chun-Ming Yang et al., "Increased Risk of
Dementia in Patients with Erectile Dysfunction: A Population-Based,
Propensity Score-Matched, Longitudinal Follow-Up Study," Medicine 94,
no. 24 (June 2015): e990. \[135\] J. Kulmala et al., "Association
between Mid- to Late Life Physical Fitness and Dementia: Evidence from
the CAIDE Study," Journal of Internal Medicine 276, no. 3 (September
2014): 296--307, Kay Deckers et al., "Target Risk Factors for Dementia
Prevention: A Systematic Review and Delphi Consensus Study on the
Evidence from Observational Studies," International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry 30, no. 3 (March 2015): 234--46. Robert P. Friedland et al.,
"Patients with Alzheimer's Disease Have Reduced Activities in Midlife
Compared with Healthy Control-Group Members," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98, no. 6
(March 13, 2001): 3440--45. \[136\] Kaigang Li et al., "Changes in
Moderate-to-Vigorous Physical Activity among Older Adolescents,"
Pediatrics 138, no. 4 (October 2016): e20161372. \[137\] "How Does
Depression Affect the Heart?" American Heart Association (June 2014),
www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-lifestyle/mental-health-andwellbeing/how-does-depression-affect-the-heart.
\[138\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Patterns of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
as a Function of Age throughout the Lifespan," Journal of Alzheimer's
Disease 65, no. 4 (2018): 1087--92. \[139\] Kristen C. Willeumier et
al., "Elevated BMI Is Associated with Decreased Blood Flow in the
Prefrontal Cortex Using SPECT Imaging in Healthy Adults," Obesity 19,
no. 5 (May 2011): 1095--97. \[140\] Merideth A. Addicott et al., "The
Effect of Daily Caffeine Use on Cerebral Blood Flow: How Much Caffeine
Can We Tolerate?" Human Brain Mapping 30, no. 10 (October 2009):
3102--14. \[141\] Edward F. Domino et al., "Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
and Plasma Nicotine after Smoking Tobacco Cigarettes," Progress in
Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 28, no. 2 (March
2004): 319--27. \[142\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Discriminative
Properties of Hippocampal Hypoperfusion in Marijuana Users Compared to
Healthy Controls: Implications for Marijuana Administration in
Alzheimer's Dementia," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 56, no. 1 (2017):
261--73. \[143\] Giuseppe Faraco et al., "Water Deprivation Induces
Neurovascular and Cognitive Dysfunction through Vasopressin-Induced
Oxidative Stress," Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 34, no.
5 (May 2014): 852--60. \[144\] "Stopping Smoking Is Good for Your Mental
Health," NHS UK, January 25, 2018,
www.nhs.uk/live-well/quit-smoking/stopping-smoking-mental-healthbenefits/.

\[145\] Yuan-Hwa Chou et al., "Effects of Video Game Playing on Cerebral
Blood Flow in Young Adults: A SPECT Study," Psychiatry Research 212, no.
1 (April 30, 2013): 65--72. \[146\] Goh Matsuda and Kazuo Hiraki,
"Sustained Decrease in Oxygenated Hemoglobin during Video Games in the
Dorsal Prefrontal Cortex: A NIRS Study of Children," Neuroimage 29, no.
3 (February 1, 2006): 706--11. \[147\] Jack James, "Critical Review of
Dietary Caffeine and Blood Pressure: A Relationship That Should Be Taken
More Seriously," Psychosomatic Medicine 66, no. 1 (January--February
2004): 63--71. \[148\] Andrew Newberg et al., "Cerebral Blood Flow
during Meditative Prayer: Preliminary Findings and Methodological
Issues," Perceptual and Motor Skills 97, no. 2 (October 2003): 625--30.
\[149\] Huseyin Naci et al., "How Does Exercise Treatment Compare with
Antihypertensive Medications? A Network Meta-Analysis of 391 Randomised
Controlled Trials Assessing Exercise and Medication Effects on Systolic
Blood Pressure," British Journal of Sports Medicine 53, no. 14 (July
2019): 859--69. \[150\] Victoria Allen, "Moderate Exercise Just Three
Times a Week and Eating Healthy Can Take 10 Years Off Your Brain Age,
Study Says," Daily Mail (December 19, 2018),
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-6514359/Moderateexercise-just-three-times-week-eating-healthy-10-years-brain-age.html.
\[151\] Karmel W. Choi et al., "Assessment of Bidirectional
Relationships between Physical Activity and Depression among Adults: A
2-Sample Mendelian Randomization Study," JAMA Psychiatry 76, no. 4
(April 1, 2019): 399--408. \[152\] Viola Oertel-Knöchel et al., "Effects
of Aerobic Exercise on Cognitive Performance and Individual
Psychopathology in Depressive and Schizophrenia Patients," European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 264, no. 7 (October
2014): 589--604. \[153\] Claudia Battaglia et al., "Participation in a
9-month Selected Physical Exercise Programme Enhances Psychological
Well-Being in a Prison Population," Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health
25, no. 5 (December 2015): 343--54. \[154\] Richard A. Rawson et al.,
"The Impact of Exercise on Depression and Anxiety Symptoms among
Abstinent Methamphetamine-Dependent Individuals in a Residential
Treatment Setting," Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 57 (October
2015): 36--40. \[155\] P. Abedi et al., "Effect of Pedometer-Based
Walking on Depression, Anxiety and Insomnia among Postmenopausal Women,"
Climacteric 18, no. 6 (2015): 841--45. \[156\] Laura Q. Rogers et al.,
"Effects of a Multicomponent Physical Activity Behavior Change
Intervention on Fatigue, Anxiety, and Depressive Symptomatology in
Breast Cancer Survivors: Randomized Trial," Psychooncology 26, no. 11
(November 2017): 1901--6.

\[157\] Lisanne F. ten Brinke et al., "Aerobic Exercise Increases
Hippocampal Volume in Older Women with Probable Mild Cognitive
Impairment: A 6-Month Randomised Controlled Trial," British Journal of
Sports Medicine 49, no. 4 (February 2015): 248--54. Caterina Rosano et
al., "Hippocampal Response to a 24-Month Physical Activity Intervention
in Sedentary Older Adults," American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 25,
no. 3 (November 15, 2016): 209--17. Maike M. Kleemeyer et al., "Changes
in Fitness Are Associated with Changes in Hippocampal Microstructure and
Hippocampal Volume among Older Adults," Neuroimage 131 (May 1, 2016):
155--61. F. G. Pajonk et al., "Hippocampal Plasticity in Response to
Exercise in Schizophrenia," Archives of General Psychiatry 67, no. 2
(February 2010): 133--43. \[158\] Kim M. Gerecke et al., "Exercise
Protects against Chronic Restraint StressInduced Oxidative Stress in the
Cortex and Hippocampus," Brain Research 1509 (May 6, 2013): 66--78.
\[159\] Vijay R. Varma et al., "Low-Intensity Daily Walking Activity Is
Associated with Hippocampal Volume in Older Adults," Hippocampus 25, no.
5 (May 2015): 605--15. \[160\] Francesca Calabrese et al.,
"Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor: A Bridge between Inflammation and
Neuroplasticity," Front Cell Neuroscience 8 (December 22, 2014): 430.
\[161\] Carl W. Cotman and N. C. Berchtold, "Exercise: A Behavioral
Intervention to Enhance Brain Health and Plasticity," Trends in
Neurosciences 25, no. 6 (June 2002): 295--301. William D. S. Killgore et
al., "Physical Exercise Habits Correlate with Gray Matter Volume of the
Hippocampus in Healthy Adult Humans," Scientific Reports 3 (December 12,
2013): 3457. \[162\] Cell Press, "Physical Activity May Leave the Brain
More Open to Change," ScienceDaily (December 7, 2015),
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/12/151207131508.htm. \[163\] Ana M.
Abrantes et al., "A Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial of Aerobic
Exercise as an Adjunct to OCD Treatment," General Hospital Psychiatry 49
(November 2017): 51--55. \[164\] Mathew G. Fetzner and G. J. Asmundson,
"Aerobic Exercise Reduces Symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A
Randomized Controlled Trial," Cognitive Behaviour Therapy 44, no. 4
(2015): 301--13. \[165\] R. Ryan Patel, "Weight-Lifting, Exercise, and
Mental Health," Ohio State University, October 20, 2017,
https://u.osu.edu/emotionalfitness/2017/10/20/weight-lifting-exercise-andmental-health/.

\[166\] Chien-Yu Pan et al., "A Racket-Sport Intervention Improves
Behavioral and Cognitive Performance in Children with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder," Research in Developmental
Disabilities 57 (October 2016): 1--10. \[167\] Rahav Boussi-Gross et
al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy Can Improve Post Concussion Syndrome
Years after Mild Traumatic Brain Injury---Randomized Prospective Trial,"
PLoS One 8, no. 11 (November 15, 2013): e79995. \[168\] Sigal Tal et
al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen May Induce Angiogenesis in Patients Suffering
from Prolonged Post-Concussion Syndrome Due to Traumatic Brain Injury,"
Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience 33, no. 6 (2015): 943--51.
\[169\] Paul G. Harch et al., "A Phase I Study of Low-Pressure
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy for Blast-Induced Post-Concussion Syndrome and
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder," Journal of Neurotrauma 29, no. 1
(January 1, 2012): 168--85. \[170\] Shao-Yuan Chen et al., "Reversible
Changes of Brain Perfusion SPECT for Carbon Monoxide Poisoning-Induced
Severe Akinetic Mutism," Clinical Nuclear Medicine 41, no. 5 (May 2016):
e221--27. \[171\] Shai Efrati et al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen Induces Late
Neuroplasticity in Post Stroke Patients---Randomized, Prospective
Trial," PLoS One 8, no. 1 (2013): e53716. \[172\] Shai Efrati et al.,
"Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy Can Diminish Fibromyalgia
Syndrome---Prospective Clinical Trial," PLoS One 10, no. 5 (May 26,
2015): e0127012. \[173\] Chien-Yu Huang et al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen
Therapy as an Effective Adjunctive Treatment for Chronic Lyme Disease,"
Journal of the Chinese Medical Association 77, no. 5 (May 2014):
269--71. \[174\] I-Han Chiang et al., "Adjunctive Hyperbaric Oxygen
Therapy in Severe Burns: Experience in Taiwan Formosa Water Park Dust
Explosion Disaster," Burns 43, no. 4 (June 2017): 852--57. \[175\] M.
Löndahl et al., "Relationship between Ulcer Healing after Hyperbaric
Oxygen Therapy and Transcutaneous Oximetry, Toe Blood Pressure and
Ankle-Brachial Index in Patients with Diabetes and Chronic Foot Ulcers,"
Diabetologia 54, no. 1 (January 2011): 65--68. \[176\] Anne M. Eskes et
al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy: Solution for Difficult to Heal Acute
Wounds? Systematic Review," World Journal of Surgery 35, no. 3 (March
2011): 535--42. Joshua J. Shaw et al., "Not Just Full of Hot Air:
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy Increases Survival in Cases of Necrotizing
Soft Tissue Infections," Surgical Infections 15, no. 3 (June 2014):
328--35. \[177\] Mina Taghizadeh Asl et al., "Brain Perfusion Imaging
with Voxel-Based Analysis in Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis
Patients with a Moderate to Severe Stage of Disease: A Boon for the
Workforce," BMC Neurology 16 (May 26, 2016): 79.

\[178\] P. S. Dulai et al., "Systematic Review: The Safety and Efficacy
of Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy for Inflammatory Bowel Disease," Alimentary
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 39, no. 11 (June 2014): 1266--75. \[179\]
David N. Teguh et al., "Early Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy for Reducing
Radiotherapy Side Effects: Early Results of a Randomized Trial in
Oropharyngeal and Nasopharyngeal Cancer," International Journal of
Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics 75, no. 3 (November 1, 2009):
711--16. Nico Schellart et al., "Hyperbaric Oxygen Treatment Improved
Neurophysiologic Performance in Brain Tumor Patients after Neurosurgery
and Radiotherapy: A Preliminary Report," Cancer 117, no. 15 (August 1,
2011): 3434--44. \[180\] Daniel A. Rossignol et al., "The Effects of
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy on Oxidative Stress, Inflammation, and
Symptoms in Children with Autism: An Open-Label Pilot Study," BMC
Pediatrics 7, no. 36 (November 16, 2007). Daniel A. Rossignol et al.,
"Hyperbaric Treatment for Children with Autism: A Multicenter,
Randomized, DoubleBlind, Controlled Trial," BMC Pediatrics 9, no. 21
(March 13, 2009). \[181\] Arun Mukherjee et al., "Intensive
Rehabilitation Combined with HBO2 Therapy in Children with Cerebral
Palsy: A Controlled Longitudinal Study," Undersea & Hyperbaric Medicine
41, no. 2 (March--April 2014): 77--85. \[182\] Claudio Borghi and Arrigo
F. G. Cicero, "Nutraceuticals with a Clinically Detectable Blood
Pressure-Lowering Effect: A Review of Available Randomized Clinical
Trials and Their Meta-Analyses," British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology 83, no. 1 (January 2017): 163--71. \[183\] Ameneh Mashayekh
et al., "Effects of Ginkgo biloba on Cerebral Blood Flow Assessed by
Quantitative MR Perfusion Imaging: A Pilot Study," Neuroradiology 53,
no. 3 (March 2011): 185--91. J. Kleijnen and P. Knipschild, "Ginkgo
biloba for Cerebral Insufficiency," British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology 34, no. 4 (October 1992): 352--58. F. Eckmann, "Cerebral
Insufficiency---Treatment with Ginkgo-biloba Extract. Time of Onset of
Effect in a Double-Blind Study with 60 Inpatients," Fortschritte der
Medizin 108, no. 29 (October 10, 1990): 557--60. \[184\] R. F. Santos et
al., "Cognitive Performance, SPECT, and Blood Viscosity in Elderly
Non-Demented People Using Ginkgo biloba," Pharmacopsychiatry 36, no. 4
(July 2003): 127--33. Joseph A. Mix and W. David Crews Jr., "A
Double-Blind, PlaceboControlled, Randomized Trial of Ginkgo biloba
Extract EGb 761® in a Sample of Cognitively Intact Older Adults:
Neuropsychological Findings," Human Psychopharmacology 17, no. 6 (August
2002): 267--77. \[185\] Horst Herrschaft et al., "Ginkgo Biloba Extract
EGb 761® in Dementia with Neuropsychiatric Features: A Randomised,
Placebo-Controlled Trial to Confirm the Efficacy and Safety of a Daily
Dose of 240 mg," Journal of Psychiatric Research 46, no. 6 (June 2012):
716--23.

\[186\] Chun-Xiao Dai et al., "Role of Ginkgo Biloba Extract as an
Adjunctive Treatment of Elderly Patients with Depression and on the
Expression of Serum S100B," Medicine 97, no. 39 (September 2018):
e12421. \[187\] Helmut Woelk et al., "Ginkgo Biloba Special Extract EGb
761® in Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Adjustment Disorder with
Anxious Mood: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial,"
Journal of Psychiatric Research 41, no. 6 (September 2007): 472--80.
\[188\] Daniel J. Lamport et al., "The Effect of Flavanol-Rich Cocoa on
Cerebral Perfusion in Healthy Older Adults during Conscious Resting
State: A Placebo Controlled, Crossover, Acute Trial," Psychopharmacology
232, no. 17 (September 2015): 3227--34. David T. Field et al.,
"Consumption of Cocoa Flavanols Results in an Acute Improvement in
Visual and Cognitive Functions," Physiology & Behavior 103, nos. 3--4
(June 2011): 255--60. S. T. Francis et al., "The Effect of Flavanol-Rich
Cocoa on the fMRI Response to a Cognitive Task in Healthy Young People,"
Journal of Cardiovascular Pharmacology 47, suppl 2:S215--20 (June 2006).
Farzaneh A. Sorond et al., "Neurovascular Coupling, Cerebral White
Matter Integrity, and Response to Cocoa in Older People," Neurology 81,
no. 10 (September 3, 2013): 904--9. \[189\] Karin Ried et al., "Effect
of Cocoa on Blood Pressure," Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 8
(August 15, 2012): CD008893. Karin Ried et al., "Does Chocolate Reduce
Blood Pressure? A MetaAnalysis," BMC Medicine 8, no. 39 (June 28, 2010).
\[190\] Giovambattista Desideri et al., "Benefits in Cognitive Function,
Blood Pressure, and Insulin Resistance through Cocoa Flavanol
Consumption in Elderly Subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment: The
Cocoa, Cognition, and Aging (CoCoA) Study," Hypertension 60, no. 3
(September 2012): 794--801. Daniela Mastroiacovo et al., "Cocoa Flavanol
Consumption Improves Cognitive Function, Blood Pressure Control, and
Metabolic Profile in Elderly Subjects: The Cocoa, Cognition, and Aging
(CoCoA) Study---A Randomized Controlled Trial," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 101, no. 3 (March 2015): 538--48. \[191\] Davide
Grassi et al., "Flavanol-Rich Chocolate Acutely Improves Arterial
Function and Working Memory Performance Counteracting the Effects of
Sleep Deprivation in Healthy Individuals," Journal of Hypertension 34,
no. 7 (July 2016): 1298--1308. \[192\] Mandy Oaklander, "5 Surprising
Ways to Help Your Memory," Time (June 10, 2015),
http://time.com/3915030/boost-memory-exercise/. Philippa A. Jackson et
al., "DHA-Rich Oil Modulates the Cerebral Haemodynamic Response to
Cognitive Tasks in Healthy Young Adults: A Near IR Spectroscopy Pilot
Study," British Journal of Nutrition 107, no. 8 (April 28, 2012):
1093--98.

Tae-Jin Song et al., "Low Levels of Plasma Omega 3-Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids Are Associated with Cerebral Small Vessel Diseases in Acute
Ischemic Stroke Patients," Nutrition Research 35, no. 5 (May 2015):
368--74. \[193\] A. Veronica Witte et al., "Long-Chain Omega-3 Fatty
Acids Improve Brain Function and Structure in Older Adults," Cerebral
Cortex 24, no. 11 (November 2014): 3059--68. \[194\] E. L. Boespflug et
al., "Fish Oil Supplementation Increases Event-Related Posterior
Cingulate Activation in Older Adults with Subjective Memory Impairment,"
Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging 20, no. 2 (February 2016): 161--69.
\[195\] Nina Hamazaki-Fujita et al., "Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and
Blood Circulation in the Forebrain during a Mental Arithmetic Task,"
Brain Research 1397 (June 23, 2011): 38--45. \[196\] Jennifer
Mildenberger et al., "N-3 PUFAs Induce Inflammatory Tolerance by
Formation of KEAP1-Containing SQSTM1/p62-Bodies and Activation of
NFE2L2," Autophagy 13, no. 10 (October 3, 2017): 1664--78. \[197\]
Fredrik Jernerén et al., "Brain Atrophy in Cognitively Impaired Elderly:
The Importance of Long-Chain ω-3 Fatty Acids and B Vitamin Status in a
Randomized Controlled Trial," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
102, no. 1 (July 2015): 215--21. \[198\] Emma L. Wightman et al.,
"Epigallocatechin Gallate, Cerebral Blood Flow Parameters, Cognitive
Performance and Mood in Healthy Humans: A DoubleBlind,
Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Investigation," Human Psychopharmacology
27, no. 2 (March 2012): 177--86. \[199\] Xiaoli Peng et al., "Effect of
Green Tea Consumption on Blood Pressure: A Meta-Analysis of 13
Randomized Controlled Trials," Scientific Reports 4 (September 1, 2014):
6251. \[200\] Xin-Xin Zheng et al., "Green Tea Intake Lowers Fasting
Serum Total and LDL Cholesterol in Adults: A Meta-Analysis of 14
Randomized Controlled Trials," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
94, no. 2 (August 2011): 601--10. \[201\] Xin-Xin Zheng et al., "Effects
of Green Tea Catechins with or without Caffeine on Glycemic Control in
Adults: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials," American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 97, no. 4 (April 2013): 750--62. \[202\]
Qiangye Zhang et al., "Effect of Green Tea on Reward Learning in Healthy
Individuals: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Pilot
Study," Nutrition Journal 12, no. 84 (June 18, 2013). \[203\] Qing-Ping
Ma et al., "Meta-Analysis of the Association between Tea Intake and the
Risk of Cognitive Disorders," PLoS One 11, no. 11 (November 8, 2016):
e0165861. L. Feng et al., "Tea Consumption Reduces the Incidence of
Neurocognitive Disorders: Findings from the Singapore Longitudinal Aging
Study," Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging 20, no. 10 (2016): 1002--9.

\[204\] David O. Kennedy et al., "Effects of Resveratrol on Cerebral
Blood Flow Variables and Cognitive Performance in Humans: A
Double-Blind, PlaceboControlled, Crossover Investigation," American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 91, no. 6 (June 2010): 1590--97. Rachel H.
X. Wong et al., "Acute Resveratrol Consumption Improves Neurovascular
Coupling Capacity in Adults with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus," Nutrients 8,
no. 7 (July 12, 2016): 425.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 6

R IS FOR RETIREMENT AND AGING WHEN YOU STOP LEARNING, YOUR BRAIN STARTS
DYING We don't stop playing because we grow old. We grow old because we
stop playing. G E O R G E B E R N A R D S H AW

BETTY

Betty was 94 when she first came to see me. I had seen three generations
of people in her family for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD): her son, grandson, and great-granddaughter. When I asked her why
she wanted to be evaluated, she said that she wanted to be able to
finish reading the paper in the morning, something she had never been
able to do. When Betty came back for her first followup visit after a
month on our program, she told me she had read her first book! It was a
joyous appointment. Several months later, she wondered aloud how her
life would have been different if she had addressed her attention and

impulse-control issues earlier in her life, yet she was grateful her
children, grandchildren, and greatgrandchildren would not have to suffer
as she had. Too often, elderly (let's say those over 70) people are
dismissed with brain health/mental health issues---such as ADD/ADHD,
depression, anxiety or memory issues---because they are older; but
research has found that no matter what your age, your brain can be
better if you put it in a healing environment. Brain imaging work at the
Amen Clinics has also clearly shown the gravity of age. As your skin
starts to sag and wrinkle and show other signs of aging, the same type
of process occurs in the brain. Following are three typical scans at 35,
55, and 85. TYPICAL AGING BRAIN SPECT SCANS

35 years old

55 years old

85 years old

Yet your brain doesn't have to deteriorate with age if you remain
diligent about your health for as long as you want to have a clear and
happy mind! Here is a scan of my grandmother Margaret when she was a
92-year-old, and she was cognitively sharp until the day she died at age
98. One

of her secrets of brain health was that she knitted her whole adult
life, which is an exercise that works out the cerebellum.

Grandmother

Scan at 92

In a study the Amen Clinics and others published in the Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease in 2018 on 62,454 SPECT scans, we presented the
overall pattern of brain aging and factors that accelerated it.\[205\]
For example, we showed that children have very active brains that tend
to settle down in activity around their mid-20s. From the mid-20s, brain
activity then tends to stay relatively stable until the 60s, when it
begins to decline, often due to poor vascular health and the other
BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. But this doesn't have to happen---there's
nothing inevitable about it. We have scanned many elderly patients and
found really healthy scans, mostly because they were serious about
taking care of themselves. Look at a typical aging pattern for the
posterior cingulate gyrus, an area critical to memory and mood, in the
graph below. ACTIVITY IN THE AGING POSTERIOR CINGULATE GYRUS (One of the
first areas that dies in Alzheimer's disease)

These were the factors that accelerated aging the most in our study in
order of importance: schizophrenia, marijuana abuse, bipolar disorder,
and ADD/ADHD, along with alcohol abuse, and smoking. Other studies show
that high iron levels in your blood\[206\] and red meat
consumption\[207\] are also associated with premature aging. The world's
population is on average becoming older, and age is the biggest risk
factor for Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia.\[208\]
According to the World Health Organization, between 2015 and 2050 the
percentage of people over 60 years will nearly double, from 12 percent
to 22 percent.\[209\] This is really challenging for individuals as well
as governments because as many as 10 percent of all people 65 years of
age and older have serious memory problems, and up to 50 percent of all
people 85

and older will be diagnosed with dementia. That means that if you are
fortunate enough to live to 85, you have a one in two chance of losing
your mind. Plus, the really bad news is that our research and the
scientific findings of others have shown that Alzheimer's disease and
other forms of dementia actually start in the brain decades before
people have any symptoms. For too many people, the golden years are
anything but golden. The older you get, the more serious you need to be
about the health of your brain. Other brain health/mental health issues
also worsen with age. The older you get, the more likely you are to
struggle with your memory, social isolation, hearing problems, and
overall cognitive function. As the brain deteriorates with age, it leads
to a greater risk of mood problems, anxiety, irritability, temper
flare-ups, and irrational behavior. Combine the lowered brain activity
with detrimental changes to the four circles---biological,
psychological, social, and spiritual---and it can accelerate brain
health/mental health issues. Let's look at how the four circles can
contribute to brain health/mental health issues in the aging brain:

Biological: If you're racked by pain and stiffness (especially if you
played football in high school like yours truly), it can make you feel
cranky and depressed. (Try fish oil, s-adenosyl methionine \[SAMe\], and
curcumins as I do to help pain.) If you have a medical condition, such
as cancer, it can sap the joy from your life. If you have failing
eyesight (Where did I put my glasses?), you may have a hard time
enjoying your favorite hobbies, like reading or knitting. If you're
experiencing hearing issues ("What?" is the most common word I seem to
say), you may begin feeling disconnected from your loved ones. As you'll
learn in

chapter 18, what you put into your body (i.e., food) also matters. For
example, consuming charred meats---think about those burgers or steaks
on the grill at summer barbecues---creates toxic chemicals called
glycotoxins that have been linked to memory problems and other cognitive
problems.\[210\] Psychological: You may become increasingly worried
about being either financially or physically dependent on others. You
may find that your thoughts are more focused on what's wrong with you
than on what's right. Social: The death of parents, siblings, or friends
can increase a sense of loneliness, which can have a major impact on
your mental well-being. Unfortunately, onethird of seniors between the
ages of 50 and 80 say they feel a lack of companionship, and 25 percent
of them feel socially isolated, according to a 2018 University of
Michigan poll.\[211\] Spiritual: Retiring from work may leave you
feeling as if you have no purpose in life. When you lack passion,
purpose, social contribution, faith, or a connection to God or something
greater than yourself, you are at a higher risk for developing brain
health/mental health issues. Depression is more common after retirement,
especially when retirees don't find a new source of purpose. In fact,
following an initial boost in health,

retirement increases your risk of clinical depression by 40 percent
while raising your chances of being diagnosed with a physical illness by
60 percent.\[212\] I saw some of these changes happening to one of my
uncles. As he aged, his behavior became downright embarrassing whenever
we went to dinner together. He had always been a bit impulsive, but
later in life he was rude to servers and often made inappropriate
comments. I could see his brain deteriorating before my eyes. Also, when
depression strikes in the elderly, it may well be one of the first signs
of dementia. Ultimately, when you stop learning, your brain starts
dying.

When you stop learning, your brain starts dying.

YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE OLDER TO HAVE THESE ISSUES Anyone who is in a job
that does not require ongoing learning is at a higher risk of memory
problems and brain health/mental health issues. Numerous studies show
that people who struggled in school, who learned to hate

learning, or who dropped out of school early also have a higher
incidence of cognitive problems and mental health challenges. If you
want to create a mental illness, never fully support children with
ADD/ADHD or learning disabilities. Every day of their lives that they
feel they are failing or that someone is disappointed in them ratchets
up chronic stress, which shrinks the hippocampus, a critically important
brain structure involved in memory, mood, and learning. My nieces were
at great risk for this because of their home situation before their
mother got help for her brain. Likewise, if you want to create a mental
illness, start your children in school too early. Research shows that
younger children in school are more likely to be diagnosed with ADD/ADHD
and treated with stimulant medication.\[213\] Research also shows that
purpose and social contribution across the lifespan have a surprising
pattern: They tend to peak when people are young (late adolescence/young
adulthood), then begin to wane during middle age and decline sharply
through late adulthood. \[214\] When purpose is absent or low, it
increases the risk of mental illnesses, particularly depression, and
decreases selfacceptance.\[215\] Likewise, you are more likely to
develop a mental illness if you have an "old mind-set," where you find
yourself saying things such as:

I'm too old for that. I don't have the energy for that. I just want to
be left alone. I'm going to die soon, so why bother changing my habits?

This is how I've done things for years, so why should I change now? I
can't give up . . . candy, muffins, wine, chips . . . you name it. I'd
rather deal with anxiety or get Alzheimer's disease.

Retirement/Aging Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) 1.
Increasing age, especially over 65. 2. Having a job that does not
require new learning. 3. Loneliness or social isolation. Humans are
social animals: Social connectivity is hardwired into our brains, and
when we are lonely and/or disconnected from others, it can have negative
consequences for us cognitively, emotionally, and physically.\[216\]
More than one in eight people report having no close friends.\[217\] The
loneliest among us experience cognitive decline 20 percent faster than
people who are connected to others, and loneliness has been associated
with depression, social anxiety, addictions, even hoarding.\[218\]
Loneliness peaks at several periods in life: during the late 20s,
mid-50s, and late 80s.\[219\] Loneliness does not mean being alone or
not having friends. It is subjective distress, meaning the discrepancy
between the social

relationships you have and the ones you want. The physical damage
associated with being lonely was found to be equivalent to 15 cigarettes
a day. 4. Retired without new learning endeavors or passion or purpose.
5. Too much or too little iron (blood test)---ferritin measures iron
stores in the blood. Get yours checked. Levels between 50 and 100
nanograms/mL are ideal. Levels below 50 ng/mL can cause problems, such
as anxiety, fatigue, restless legs, and ADD/ADHD. A 2015 study among
psychiatric patients found that more than 25 percent of them were also
suffering from anemia, with the condition being most common in people
with psychotic disorders, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
and bipolar disorder.\[220\] High levels (over 250 ng/mL) are associated
with iron overload and increase the risk of inflammation, heart disease
and neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
disease.\[221\] 6. Decline of neurotransmitters (brain chemicals), such
as serotonin, dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and
acetylcholine. As we age, we lose brain cells that produce these
important chemicals that help our neurons communicate effectively. Low
serotonin activity increases risk of depression;\[222\] low dopamine
increases risk of Parkinson's disease

and loss of motivation and pleasure;\[223\] low GABA increases the risk
of anxiety;\[224\] and low acetylcholine can affect learning and
memory.\[225\] Take a look at how the evil and benevolent rulers would
ensure that aging and retirement helped or perpetuated mental illness.

RETIREMENT/AGING THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Recommend everyone retire
early, stop learning new things, and watch all the television they want,
especially the news that focuses on violence, natural disasters, and
partisan politics that breeds anger and stress. 2. Let people watch as
many scary movies as they want or play violent video games, both of
which wear out the pleasure centers. 3. Encourage people to spend their
days in meaningless activities in isolation and demand that people spend
hours on social media every day, which increases the risk of depression
and obesity. 4. Start children in school too young. THE BENEVOLENT RULER
WOULD . . . 1. Encourage lifelong learning, purpose, and knitting. 2.
Discourage children from starting school too young. 3. Promote
cross-training in the workplace. 4. Limit television, social media, and
scary movies to keep the pleasure centers healthy. 5. Encourage regular
blood donation for those who have high iron blood levels. 6. Educate
people about the benefits of intermittent fasting. 7. Provide treatment
for ADD/ADHD and learning disabilities, so people would enjoy learning.
8. Mandate brain health education at schools and businesses, which would
highlight the positive effects of lifelong learning.

Despite the dire news about aging and your brain, you don't have to give
in to decline. Yes, you will age, but you can slow the process while
keeping your brain sharp, focused, and clear. Imagine entering the
latter part of your life with just as much mental capacity and energy as
you have now, if not more. It's possible.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR RETIREMENT/AGING RISK FACTORS (AND THE
FOUR CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

1.  Care! The older you get, the more serious you need to be. I turned
    65 this year, and I'm planning to have one of the healthiest brains
    when I reach my 90s. I often ask myself, "Do you want an old brain
    or a young one?" to stay motivated when I don't feel like working
    out or eating well. I recently saw a world-famous boxing champ who
    was struggling with his memory. After looking at his brain, I used
    the metaphor that he was in the "fight of his life." He was going to
    have to break up with Colonel Sanders, one of his great loves, if he
    was going to keep his memory healthy. He told me he would train
    diligently because "you ain't got nothing without your memory."
2.  Avoid anything that accelerates aging---such as no new learning,
    being in a job that does not require ongoing learning, high iron
    levels, smoking anything,

alcohol or marijuana abuse, standard American diet, loneliness, and a
lack of purpose. 3. Know your why for being healthy. Do you believe you
need to be healthy because God has a calling for you? Is it
independence? I love my four children, but honestly, I never want to
have to live with them. I never want to be a burden, and I do not want
them telling me what to eat or what to wear or worrying about taking my
driver's license from me. If that is true for you, then you need to be
serious about your health. 4. Exercise your brain with new learning.
Engage in lifelong learning to keep your brain strong. Take a cue from
actress Dame Judi Dench, who continues to act even though she is now in
her eighties. She told the Telegraph in 2015 that retired is the rudest
word in the dictionary. "I don't think age matters at all. What matters
is your determination not to give up and not to stop learning new
things."\[226\] The best mental exercises involve acquiring new
knowledge and doing things you haven't done before. Even if your daily
activities are complex, such as teaching coding, interpreting brain
scans, or engineering a new bridge, they won't challenge your brain as
much as new learning. Whenever the brain repeats an activity over and
over, it uses less and less energy each time to accomplish it. New

learning, such as a new hobby or game, establishes new connections,
which maintains and improves other brain areas that you use less often.
The parts of your brain that you use will grow, and the parts of your
brain that you do not use will atrophy, or shrink. This provides
guidance on how to exercise the brain. If you were to only play Scrabble
or do the Sunday crossword puzzle, you wouldn't get the full benefits
you want. That's like going to work out and only doing right bicep curls
and then leaving. See the graphic below for more ideas. BRAIN HEALTH
WORKOUTS BY REGION

5.  Balance your iron levels. Causes of too much iron include regular
    alcohol consumption, cooking in iron pans, foods fortified with
    iron, well water high in iron, or vitamin or mineral supplements
    with extra iron. Some people are genetically predisposed to absorb

too much iron from food. Donating blood can help you lower iron levels.
Green tea, rosemary\[227\], and curcumin may also help.\[228\] If you
are low in iron, supplement with iron but never take iron in combination
with other vitamins because it can make them toxic, and always take the
iron supplement a couple of hours away from other supplements. 6. Fast
intermittently. Fasting helps your brain stay healthy because it cleans
out the buildup of toxic proteins that damage neurons, reducing
inflammation and slowing down aging. A simple way to do a nightly 12- to
16-hour fast is to eat dinner at 7 p.m., for example, and not eat again
until 7 a.m. (or 11 a.m. for a longer fast). Even longer fasts of 24
hours can also be helpful. 7. Get connected. To reduce the risk of
loneliness and isolation, invest time with your family, church, or other
groups. Sign up for a class or meet new people, anything to stay
connected and build relationships. Research shows that caring for others
increases your life expectancy.\[229\] Grandparents who care for their
grandchildren, for example, live longer, on average, than grandparents
who do not. In one study, older people who volunteered over two years
actually increased the size of their hippocampus (involved in mood and
memory).\[230\]

8. Take nutraceuticals that are most useful to slow aging.
N-acetylcysteine (NAC). NAC has shown promising results in people with
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, OCD, and addictions.\[231\] It can also
decrease inflammation\[232\] and may help delay brain atrophy in
Alzheimer's disease.\[233\] Dose suggestion: The typical adult dose is
600-- 2,400 mg a day; more than 1,800 mg/day can upset your stomach. I
usually start patients at 600 mg twice a day. Huperzine A. This
remarkable compound, studied in China for nearly 20 years, improves the
cognitive impairment that is often seen in people with depression\[234\]
or schizophrenia, \[235\] as well as with several types of dementia.
\[236\] It can have adverse side effects such as gastrointestinal
issues, headaches, dizziness, and increased urination, as well as side
effects with certain medications. Caution: Huperzine A should only be
used with a doctor's supervision. Dose suggestion: The typical adult
dose is 50-- 100 micrograms (mcg) twice a day. Saffron. Recent clinical
trials have found that it helps for depression,\[237\] bipolar disorder,
and anxiety. As a potent antioxidant\[238\] and nerve protector,\[239\]
saffron enhances memory,\[240\] protects the hippocampus, boosts blood
flow\[241\] and acetylcholine,\[242\] and fights toxic buildup of the
proteins thought to cause dementia.\[243\]

Dose suggestion: The typical dose of saffron in trial is 30 mg a day of
standardized concentrates. The dose of the patented preparation of
saffron called Satiereal is 176.5 mg a day, and its potency is
comparable to that of 30 mg per day of other saffron concentrates. Sage.
In the 17th century, herbalist Nicholas Culpeper wrote that the herb
sage could "heal" the memory while "warming and quickening the senses."
Centuries later, research shows the brain-enhancing effects of sage
extracts\[244\] including potential relief from depression.\[245\] Dose
suggestion: The typical dose is 300--600 mg of dried sage leaf in
capsules or essential oil in doses of 25--50 microliters (mcL). Caution:
Those who have high blood pressure or seizure disorders should only use
it under the direction of their physicians. Phosphatidylserine (PS).
Clinical trials show that PS improves attention, learning, memory and
verbal skills in aging people with cognitive decline, and it is the best
documented nutraceutical for memory. Even people with Alzheimer's have
been found to benefit from taking PS. PS may also be effective in
controlling stress, as it has been found to reduce cortisol
levels,\[246\] and may reduce symptoms of ADD/ADHD in children.\[247\]
You can get PS from egg yolks, muscle meats, and organ meats. Dose
suggestion: The typical adult dose is 100-- 300 mg a day.

BRIGHT MINDS: RETIREMENT/AGING STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND
MAKE MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your aging
brain. 2. Engage in habits that accelerate brain aging. Don't treat
ADD/ADHD or learning disabilities so children learn to hate learning.
Have a job that requires no new learning. Retire early without a new
hobby, passion, or purpose in life. Don't think about why you want to
have a healthy brain. Live alone and isolate yourself from friends and
family. Don't check your iron level or treat abnormal levels. Focus on
all your aches and pains and other reasons why your life isn't as good
as it used to be. Adopt an "old mind-set." Watch a lot of TV, especially
news that focuses on violence, natural disasters, and partisan politics
that breeds anger. Spend hours on social media, which increases the risk
of depression and obesity. 3. Avoid the strategies that slow the brain
aging process. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES,
ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your brain at all ages. 2. Avoid
anything that prematurely ages your brain. 3. Engage regularly in
healthy habits that slow the aging process. Focus on learning new things
to keep your mind active, and engage in a variety of exercises that work
different brain regions. Cross-train at work to learn new skills. At
retirement age, continue working or volunteering, or find a new passion.
Know why you want to keep your brain healthy as you age. Consider
intermittent fasting to help clear the brain of toxic proteins that
damage neurons. Stay connected to family and friends, and engage in
church or other group activities to form bonds with others. Check your
iron level and treat it if it is abnormal. Maintain a youthful outlook
on life. Avoid watching too much distressing TV news. Limit the amount
of time you spend on social media.

Get treatment for ADD/ADHD or other learning disabilities so you will
enjoy learning. Consider nutraceuticals to optimize your brain health.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Retirement/Aging Tiny Habit to Start Today I'll
limit charred meats. I'll ask my doctor to check my ferritin (iron)
levels. If my iron is too high, I'll donate blood. I'll try a daily fast
for 12--16 hours. In my diet, I'll include potent antioxidants such as
blueberries, other berries, green tea, and cloves. To obtain the basic
nutrients my brain needs to generate energy and use it to power its
functions, I'll take a multiple vitamin-mineral supplement and
concentrated fish oil. I'll add acetylcholine-rich foods, such as
shrimp. I'll stay connected to others and volunteer to avoid loneliness
and isolation. I'll start or continue music training.\[248\] Today, I'll
start a daily habit of new learning.

\[205\] Daniel G. Amen et al., "Patterns of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow
as a Function of Age throughout the Lifespan," Journal of Alzheimer's
Disease 65, no. 4 (2018): 1087--92. \[206\] D. J. Hare et al., "Is
Early-Life Iron Exposure Critical in Neurodegeneration?" Nature Reviews
Neurology 11, no. 9 (September 2015): 536--44. \[207\] R. McClelland et
al., "Accelerated Ageing and Renal Dysfunction Links Lower Socioeconomic
Status and Dietary Phosphate Intake," Aging 8, no. 5 (May 2016):
1135--49. \[208\] L. E. Hebert et al., "Change in Risk of Alzheimer
Disease Over Time," Neurology 75, no. 9 (August 31, 2010): 786--91.
\[209\] "Mental Health of Older Adults," World Health Organization,
December 12, 2017,
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-of-olderadults.
\[210\] W. Cai et al., "Oral Glycotoxins Are a Modifiable Cause of
Dementia and the Metabolic Syndrome in Mice and Humans," Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111,
no. 13 (April 1, 2014): 4940--45. \[211\] "National Poll on Healthy
Aging," University of Michigan (March 2019),
ihpi.umich.edu/sites/default/files/2019-03/NPHA_Loneliness-Report_FINAL022619.pdf.
\[212\] Gabriel H. Sahlgren, "Work Longer, Live Healthier," IEA
discussion paper no. 46 (May 2013),
http://iea.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/files/Work%20Longer,%20Live
\_Healthier.pdf. \[213\] Kapil Sayal et al., "Relative Age within the
School Year and Diagnosis of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A
Nationwide Population-Based Study," Lancet Psychiatry 4, no. 11
(November 1, 2017): 868--75. \[214\] Corey L. M. Keyes, "Authentic
Purpose: The Spiritual Infrastructure of Life," Journal of Management,
Spirituality & Religion 8, no. 4 (November 2011): 281--97. \[215\] P. A.
Boyle, et al., "Effect of Purpose in Life on Risk of Incident Alzheimer
Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment in Community-Dwelling Older
Persons," Archives of General Psychiatry 67, no. 3 (March 2010):
304--10. \[216\] T. J. Holwerda et al., "Feelings of Loneliness, but Not
Social Isolation, Predict Dementia Onset: Results from the Amsterdam
Study of the Elderly (AMSTEL)," Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
Psychiatry 85, no. 2 (February 2014): 135--42. \[217\] "Loneliness on
the RISE: One in Eight People Have No Close Friends to Turn To,"
Express, March 1, 2017,
http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/773002/Onein-eight-people-faced-with-loneliness.

\[218\] Kira Asatryan, "4 Disorders That May Thrive on Loneliness,"
Psychology Today, July 23, 2015,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-artcloseness/201507/4-disorders-may-thrive-loneliness.
\[219\] E. E. Lee et al., "High Prevalence and Adverse Health Effects of
Loneliness in Community-Dwelling Adults across the Lifespan: Role of
Wisdom as a Protective Factor," International Psychogeriatrics
(published online December 18, 2018): 1--16. \[220\] S. Korkmaz et al.,
"Frequency of Anemia in Chronic Psychiatry Patients," Neuropsychiatric
Disease and Treatment 11 (October 22, 2015): 2737--41. \[221\] Joseph
Mercola, "Iron: This Life-Saving Mineral Found to Actually Increase
Senility in Many," Mercola, July 19, 2012,
http://articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2012/07/19/excess-ironleads-to-alzheimers.aspx#\_edn1.
D. J. Hare et al., "Is Early-Life Iron Exposure Critical in
Neurodegeneration?" A. C. Leskovjan et al., "Increased Brain Iron
Coincides with Early Plaque Formation in a Mouse Model of Alzheimer's
Disease," Neuroimage 55, no. 1 (March 1, 2011): 32--38. \[222\] C. C.
Meltzer et al., "Serotonin in Aging, Late-Life Depression, and
Alzheimer's Disease: The Emerging Role of Functional Imaging,"
Neuropsychopharmacology 18, no. 6 (June 1998): 407--30. \[223\] S. E.
Hemby et al., "Neuron-Specific Age-Related Decreases in Dopamine
Receptor Subtype mRNAs," Journal of Comparative Neurology 456, no. 2
(February 3, 2003): 176--83. Jean-Claude Dreher et al., "Age-Related
Changes in Midbrain Dopaminergic Regulation of the Human Reward System,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 105, no. 39 (September 30, 2008): 15,106--11. \[224\] Thomas
McNeill and Michael Jakowec, "Neurotransmitters: GABA and Glutamate,"
Medicine Encyclopedia (2019),
http://medicine.jrank.org/pages/1225/Neurotransmitters-GABAglutamate.html.
\[225\] J. L. Muir, "Acetylcholine, Aging, and Alzheimer's Disease,"
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 56, no. 4 (April 1997):
687--96. \[226\] John Hiscock, "Judi Dench Interview: 'Retirement Is a
Rude Word,'" Telegraph, February 21, 2015,
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/filmnews/11420407/Judi-Dench-interview-second-exotic-marigold-hotel.html.
\[227\] S. Samman et al., "Green Tea or Rosemary Extract Added to Foods
Reduces Nonheme-Iron Absorption," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
73, no. 3 (March 2001): 607--12. \[228\] Y. Jiao et al., "Iron Chelation
in the Biological Activity of Curcumin," Free Radical Biology and
Medicine 40, no. 7 (April 1, 2006): 1152--60.

\[229\] Sonja Hilbrand et al., "Caregiving within and beyond the Family
Is Associated with Lower Mortality for the Caregiver: A Prospective
Study," Evolution and Human Behavior 38, no. 3 (May 2017): 397--403.
\[230\] M. C. Carlson et al., "Impact of the Baltimore Experience Corps
Trial on Cortical and Hippocampal Volumes," Alzheimer's and Dementia 11,
no. 11 (November 2015): 1340--48. \[231\] O. Dean et al.,
"N-acetylcysteine in Psychiatry: Current Therapeutic Evidence and
Potential Mechanisms of Action," Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience
36, no. 2 (March 2011): 78--86. \[232\] Ibid. \[233\] J. C. Adair et
al., "Controlled Trial of N-acetylcysteine for Patients with Probable
Alzheimer's Disease," Neurology 57, no. 8 (October 23, 2001): 1515--17.
W. R. Shankle et al., "CerefolinNAC Therapy of Hyperhomocysteinemia
Delays Cortical and White Matter Atrophy in Alzheimer's Disease and
Cerebrovascular Disease," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 54, no. 3
(October 4, 2016): 1073--84. \[234\] Wei Zheng et al., "Huperzine A for
Treatment of Cognitive Impairment in Major Depressive Disorder: A
Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials," Shanghai Archives of
Psychiatry 28, no. 2 (April 25, 2016): 64--71. \[235\] Wei Zheng et al.,
"Adjunctive Huperzine A for Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Human Psychopharmacology 31, no. 4
(July 2016): 286--95. \[236\] B. S. Wang et al., "Efficacy and Safety of
Natural Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitor Huperzine A in the Treatment of
Alzheimer's Disease: An Updated Meta-Analysis," Journal of Neural
Transmission 116, no. 4 (April 2009): 457-- 65. \[237\] H. A. Hausenblas
et al., "Saffron (Crocus sativus L.) and Major Depressive Disorder: A
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials," Journal of Integrative
Medicine 11, no. 6 (November 2013): 377--83. \[238\] M. A. Papandreou et
al., "Inhibitory Activity on Amyloid-Beta Aggregation and Antioxidant
Properties of Crocus sativus Stigmas Extract and Its Crocin
Constituents," Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54, no. 23
(November 15, 2006): 8762--68. \[239\] Shinji Soeda et al.,
"Neuroprotective Activities of Saffron and Crocin" in The Benefits of
Natural Products for Neurogenerative Diseases: Advances in Neurobiology,
vol. 12, eds. M. Mohamed Essa, Akbar Mohammed, and Gilles Guillemin (New
York: Springer, 2016), 275--92. \[240\] M. Tsolaki et al., "Efficacy and
Safety of Crocus sativus L. in Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment:
One Year Single-Blind Randomized, with Parallel Groups, Clinical Trial,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 54, no. 1 (July 2016): 129--33.

S. Akhondzadeh et al., "A 22-Week, Multicenter, Randomized, DoubleBlind
Controlled Trial of Crocus sativus in the Treatment of Mild-to-Moderate
Alzheimer's Disease," Psychopharmacology 207, no. 4 (January 2010):
637-- 43. S. Akhondzadeh et al., "Saffron in the Treatment of Patients
with Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's Disease: A 16-Week, Randomized and
PlaceboControlled Trial," Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics
35, no. 5 (October 2010): 581--88. M. Farokhnia et al., "Comparing the
Efficacy and Safety of Crocus sativus L. with Memantine in Patients with
Moderate to Severe Alzheimer's Disease: A Double-Blind Randomized
Clinical Trial," Human Psychopharmacology 29, no. 4 (July 2014):
351--59. \[241\] E. Tamaddonfard et al., "Crocin Improved Learning and
Memory Impairments in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats," Iranian
Journal of Basic Medical Sciences 16, no. 1 (January 2013): 91--100.
\[242\] G. D. Geromichalos et al., "Saffron as a Source of Novel
Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors: Molecular Docking and In Vitro
Enzymatic Studies," Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 60, no.
24 (June 2012): 6131--38. \[243\] Sabrina Morelli et al., "Neuronal
Membrane Bioreactor as a Tool for Testing Crocin Neuroprotective Effect
in Alzheimer's Disease," Chemical Engineering Journal 305 (December
2016): 69--78. M. Rashedinia et al., "Protective Effect of Crocin on
Crolein-Induced Tau Phosphorylation in the Rat Brain," Acta
Neurobiologiae Experimentalis 75, no. 2 (2015): 208--19. \[244\] N. T.
Tildesley et al., "Salvia lavandulaefolia (Spanish Sage) Enhances Memory
in Healthy Young Volunteers," Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 75,
no. 3 (June 2003): 669--74. A. B. Scholey et al., "An Extract of Salvia
(Sage) with Anticholinesterase Properties Improves Memory and Attention
in Healthy Older Volunteers," Psychopharmacology 198, no. 1 (May 2008):
127--39. D. O. Kennedy et al., "Monoterpenoid Extract of Sage (Salvia
lavandulaefolia) with Cholinesterase Inhibiting Properties Improves
Cognitive Performance and Mood in Healthy Adults," Journal of
Psychopharmacology 25, no. 8 (August 2011): 1088--100. \[245\] Mohsen
Hamidpour et al., "Chemistry, Pharmacology, and Medicinal Property of
Sage (Salvia) to Prevent and Cure Illnesses Such as Obesity, Diabetes,
Depression, Dementia, Lupus, Autism, Heart Disease, and Cancer," Journal
of Traditional and Complementary Medicine 4, no. 2 (2014): 82--88.
\[246\] J. Hellhammer et al., "Effects of Soy Lecithin Phosphatidic Acid
and Phosphatidylserine Complex (PAS) on the Endocrine and Psychological
Responses to Mental Stress," Stress 7, no. 2 (June 2004): 119--26.

\[247\] S. Hirayama et al., "The Effect of Phosphatidylserine
Administration on Memory and Symptoms of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Clinical
Trial," Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics (April 2014): 27 Suppl
2: 284--91. I. Manor et al., "The Effect of Phosphatidylserine
Containing Omega3 Fatty-Acids on Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder Symptoms in Children: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial,
Followed by an Open-Label Extension," European Psychiatry 27, no. 5
(July 2012): 335--42. \[248\] Marcus Herdener et al., "Musical Training
Induces Functional Plasticity in Human Hippocampus," Journal of
Neuroscience 30, no. 4 (January 2010): 1377--84. B. R. Zendel et al.,
"Neuroplastic Effects of Music Lessons on Hippocampal Volume in Children
with Congenital Hypothyroidism," Neuroreport 24, no. 17 (December 4,
2013): 947--50. M. S. Oechslin et al., "Hippocampal Volume Predicts
Fluid Intelligence in Musically Trained People," Hippocampus 23, no. 7
(July 2013): 552--58.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 7

I IS FOR INFLAMMATION QUENCHING THE FIRE WITHIN Reduce inflammation to
treat the root of many issues. If your gut isn't working right it can
cause so many other issues. JAY W O O D M A N

LYNN

Lynn, 53, was looking forward to marrying the love of her life when her
fiancé, Will, had a heart attack one evening and died in her arms. She
was devastated and suffered with intense grief that would not go away.
It eventually drove her to come to see me. She complained of depression,
panic attacks, shortness of breath, insomnia, and crushing chest pain,
which her primary doctor said was a well-known sign of grief and a
"broken heart." Lynn was referred to me by her sister, Debbie, who had
seen me years earlier for an anxiety disorder. I had also seen Debbie's
daughter and sonin-law.

When I saw Lynn, the grief was palpable. I could see why it was easy to
assume it was just "normal" grief, but we put her through our usual
process. I ordered a SPECT scan, which showed overall decreased blood
flow to her brain and premature aging. She was also obese, and her
screening lab tests showed that her blood marker for inflammation,
Creactive protein (CRP), was dramatically elevated at 78 mg/L (normal is
less than 1.0 mg/L), and that she had low thyroid, low testosterone, and
a high fasting blood sugar level. I immediately sent her to a
cardiologist, who told us she had a 95 percent blockage in three of her
coronary arteries. She underwent coronary artery bypass surgery the next
week, which helped alleviate her chest pain. Then, together, we worked
to eliminate all of her BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. Within six months,
her mood brightened, the grief lessened, her inflammation markers went
back into the normal range, she was down 30 pounds, and her follow-up
scan was improved. LYNN'S SCAN BEFORE TREATMENT

Overall low activity (common with heart disease and inflammation)

AFTER TREATMENT

Overall improved blood flow and activity

The word inflammation comes from the Latin inflammare, meaning "to set
on fire." Inflammation is your body's natural way of coping with an
injury or foreign invader, such as a splinter, virus, or bacterial
infection. When you are injured or develop an infection, your body's
natural defense mechanism jumps into action: Blood vessels dilate so
blood can rush to the troubled area, and your immune system's army of
white blood cells (plus substances they produce) hurry to the scene to
handle the situation---like firefighters to a fire. The affected area
becomes swollen, warm, red, and painful as your immune system launches
an assault to destroy foreign substances and initiate the healing
process. Usually, after a few hours or a few days, the immune response
downshifts back to neutral, and the inflammation subsides. This
critically important bodily process is intended to help keep you
healthy. You would never want to completely eliminate inflammation
because it would leave you vulnerable to infections and unable to heal
from injuries. In some people, however, the inflammatory response gets
stuck on "high" mode and doesn't subside. Or it mistakes healthy tissue
for a foreign invader and begins attacking it (like "friendly fire").
When inflammation becomes chronic, it is like having a constant,
low-level fire in your body that damages your organs and tissue.
Persistent inflammation, as in Lynn's case, has been linked to a host of
physical ailments, including heart disease, cancer, arthritis, pain
syndromes, and gastrointestinal disorders. In fact, chronic degenerative
conditions like these represent the number one health threat worldwide,
according to the World Health Organization. And inflammation is often
one of the main causes of disease.

If you have been treated for a brain health/mental health issue without
success, it may be time to look at inflammation as a possible root
cause.

What does chronic inflammation have to do with brain health/mental
health issues? Just as it can ravage your body, it can also damage your
brain and mind. It has been associated with a wide range of neurological
and psychiatric illnesses, including depression, bipolar disorder,
obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD), schizophrenia, personality
disorders, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease. \[249\] High
levels of inflammation have also been associated with decreased
motivation\[250\] and suicidal behavior,\[251\] along with activation of
parts of the brain that feel social rejection, fear, and threats.\[252\]
If you have been treated for a brain health/mental health issue without
success, it may be time to look at inflammation as a possible root
cause.\[253\] For example, did you know that depression is a primary
side effect of drugs that purposefully increase inflammation, such as
vaccinations or interferon, which is used to treat hepatitis or certain
types of cancer? On the flip side, some anti-inflammatory medications,
such as aspirin and ibuprofen,\[254\] and nutraceuticals, such as
omega-3 fatty acids and curcumin, have been found to decrease depression
in people who have evidence of persistent inflammation.

Depression is a primary side effect of drugs that increase inflammation;
and anti-inflammatory supplements, such as curcumin and omega-3 fatty
acids, decrease depression. Because of the link between inflammation and
brain health/mental health issues, it's important to be aware of the
many risk factors that may trigger or promote inflammation---injury and
infection aren't the only ones! Here are ways to know if you likely have
persistent inflammation as a risk factor.

Inflammation Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) 1. High
C-reactive protein (blood test): A healthy range is between 0.0 and 1.0
mg/L. 2. High homocysteine (blood test): Associated with inflammation,
hardening and narrowing of the arteries, and an increased risk of heart
attacks, strokes, blood clots, and possibly Alzheimer's disease. The
level should be less than 8 micromoles/liter. 3. Low levels of vitamin D
4. Environmental toxins

5. Smoking (biological because it damages the body, psychological
because you may smoke to selfmedicate, social because you may smoke in
social situations, and spiritual because you need to find the why to
quit) 6. Excessive alcohol (psychological because you may drink to
self-medicate, social because you may drink in social situations, and
spiritual because you need to find the why to limit your intake) 7.
Chronic stress 8. Childhood trauma\[255\] 9. Gum disease 10. Obesity,
especially belly fat (biological because poor food choices and obesity
are pro-inflammatory, psychological because you may eat to
self-medicate, social because you may overeat or make bad food choices
in social situations, and spiritual because you need to find the why to
take control of your eating) 11. Prediabetes or diabetes

12. Insomnia, especially in shift workers (psychological circle if
stressful thoughts keep you up at night) 13. Excessive exercise
(psychological circle if you exercise obsessively, plus social circle if
you overexercise because your friends do) 14. Proinflammatory foods
Sugar High-glycemic, low-fiber foods that quickly turn to sugar (bread,
pasta, potatoes, and rice) Trans fats Excessive omega-6 fatty acids from
corn, soy, and vegetable oils Artificial sweeteners Gluten 15. Low
Omega-3 Index (a drop of blood): measures the total amount of omega-3
fatty acids EPA and DHA in red blood cells, which, as it turns out,
directly reflects their levels in the brain. A low Omega-3 Index
increases the risk of cognitive decline by as much as 77 percent.\[256\]
Aim for an Omega-3 Index level above 8 percent. 16. Leaky gut and/or
unhealthy microbiome

The remainder of this chapter will focus primarily on two of the most
common causes of inflammation: leaky gut and/or an unhealthy microbiome
and a low Omega-3 Index.

THE GUT-INFLAMMATION-BRAIN CONNECTION The gut---your gastrointestinal
tract (GI)---is often called the second brain because it is lined with
about 100 million neurons. That's more neurons than you have in your
spinal cord or in your peripheral nervous system. This nerve tissue is
in direct communication with the brain inside your skull, which is why
you get butterflies before a big job interview or feel queasy when
you're upset. Emotional and psychological pain---anxiety, depression,
stress, and grief---are often also expressed with gut distress. You have
about 30 feet of tubing (including your stomach) that goes from your
mouth to the other end. It is lined with a single layer of cells with
tight junctions that protects it from foreign invaders and allows you to
digest food in an efficient way. Big trouble happens when the cell
junctions widen and the lining becomes excessively porous, a condition
known as leaky gut.

The gut lining is only a single cell layer thick. Anything that causes
the cell junctions to widen or become porous allows toxins into your
body that can cause inflammation.

Leaky gut is associated with brain problems, including mood and anxiety
disorders,\[257\] attention deficit disorder/attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD),\[258\] Parkinson's, and
Alzheimer's.\[259\] Leaky gut is also linked to chronic inflammation,
along with a host of other issues from autoimmune diseases\[260\] (such
as lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and multiple
sclerosis) and digestive issues (gas, bloating, constipation, and
diarrhea) to seasonal allergies and skin problems (acne and
rosacea).\[261\]

INSIDE YOUR GUT: GOOD BUGS VERSUS BAD BUGS

Considering all the neurons in your GI tract and the direct
communication it has with the brain, the health of your gut is tightly
linked to the health of your brain and mind. In large part, the health
of your gut depends on bugs. That's right, your GI tract is host to an
estimated 100 trillion microorganisms (bacteria, yeast, and others),
about 10 times the total number of cells in the rest of the human body.
This community of "bugs" is collectively known as the microbiome. Some
of these bugs are beneficial to your health and well-being while others
are harmful. And in a classic good guys versus bad guys scenario, they
are all trying to wrestle for control of your microbiome. When the ratio
of good bugs to bad bugs is about 85 percent good guys to 15 percent
troublemakers, it creates a healthy gut. When the ratio is tipped the
other way, the bad bugs cause trouble that can lead to a leaky gut, as
well as physical and mental problems. Keeping your gut microbiome in
proper balance is essential to your mental health.\[262\] The microbiome
plays a vital role in protecting your gut lining, digestion, nutrient
absorption, and the synthesis of vitamins (K, B12) and
neurotransmitters, such as serotonin. Your microbiome is involved in
detoxification and helps manage inflammation, immunity, appetite, and
blood sugar levels. There is evidence that friendly gut bacteria deter
invading troublemakers, such as E-coli bacteria, and help you withstand
stress.\[263\]

Keeping your gut microbiome in proper balance is essential to your
mental health.

However, if the good bugs are deficient---whether it's due to a poor
diet, such as consuming too much sugar, which feeds yeast overgrowth
(bad bugs); excessive use of antibiotics (even as far back as childhood)
that killed good bacteria; or being born by cesarean section and missing
out on being swathed in all the good bugs in the birth canal--- you are
more likely to feel anxious, stressed, depressed, and tired.

What Decreases the Good Bugs? Medications (antibiotics, oral
contraceptives, proton pump inhibitors, steroids, NSAIDS) Low levels of
omega-3 fatty acids Stress Sugar and high fructose corn syrup Artificial
sweeteners Gluten Allergies to the environment or food Insomnia
(especially among soldiers and those involved in shift work) Toxins
(antimicrobial chemicals in soaps; pesticides; heavy metals) Intestinal
infections (H. pylori, parasites, Candida) Low levels of vitamin D
Radiation/chemotherapy

Excessive high-intensity exercise Excessive alcohol\[264\]

Let's take a closer look at how medications, and in particular
antibiotics, can affect the bugs in your gut. Antibiotics are intended
to kill the harmful bacteria that make you sick, but at the same time,
they also harm some of the good bacteria in your gut. In some people,
overuse of antibiotics can deplete the population of good bugs and tip
the ratio in favor of the bad bugs. In a 2016 study,\[265\] mice that
were given antibiotics showed decreased gut bacteria, which lowered the
number of white blood cells that communicate among the gut, brain, and
immune system. Surprisingly, the antibiotics stopped the growth of new
cells in the hippocampus and impaired memory. Remember, the hippocampus
is also involved in mood regulation. Probiotics and exercise reversed
the trouble in the hippocampus.

Antibiotics stop the growth of new cells in the hippocampus and impair
memory. The hippocampus is involved in mood regulation. Chronic use of
antibiotics in childhood can affect the rest of your life. Probiotics
and exercise reverse the trouble in the hippocampus.

What may surprise you is that the greatest danger from antibiotics does
not come from those prescribed by your doctor but, rather, from the
foods you eat. An estimated 70 percent of the antibiotics used in the
United States are given to livestock, and the prevalence of these drugs
in conventionally raised meats and dairy has the potential to throw off
the balance of good to bad bacteria in the gut. This is why it is
critical to eat antibiotic- and hormone-free meats whenever possible. In
short, you need to take care of your gut, or your brain could be in big
trouble.

OMEGA-3 FATTY ACIDS: LOWER INFLAMMATION AND BOOST BRAIN HEALTH/MENTAL
HEALTH Having low levels of the omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA in your
bloodstream is associated with inflammation.\[266\] It's also one of the
leading preventable causes of death, according to researchers at the
Harvard School of Public Health.\[267\] Low levels of EPA and DHA are
also linked to Depression and bipolar disorder\[268\] Suicidal
behavior\[269\] ADD/ADHD\[270\] Cognitive impairment and dementia\[271\]
Obesity\[272\] Heart disease\[273\] Did you know that most people are
low in the omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA? Chances are you are too,
unless you make it a point to eat fatty fish (which can be high in
mercury and other toxins) on a regular basis or you take a high-quality
omega-3 fatty acid EPA plus DHA supplement.

At Amen Clinics in 2016, we tested the omega-3 fatty acids levels of 50
consecutive patients who were not taking fish oil (the most commonly
used source of EPA and DHA) and found that 49 had suboptimal levels. In
another study,\[274\] our research team correlated the SPECT scans of
130 patients with their EPA and DHA levels and found those with the
lowest levels had lower blood flow (the number one predictor of future
brain problems) in the right hippocampus and posterior cingulate (one of
the first areas to die in Alzheimer's disease), among other areas. On
cognitive testing, we also found low omega-3s correlated with decreased
scores in mood.\[275\] Increasing scientific evidence points to a
connection between cognitive function, mental health, and the omega-3
fatty acids EPA and DHA, and taking fish oil rich in EPA and DHA may
help ease symptoms of depression.\[276\] One 20year study involving
3,317 men and women found that people---especially women---with the
highest consumption of EPA and DHA were less likely to have symptoms of
depression.\[277\] And some experts suggest these effects are thanks to
the anti-inflammatory properties of omega-3s. \[278\] Additional brain
health/mental health benefits of omega3 EPA and DHA include increased
attention in people with ADD/ADHD,\[279\] reduced stress, and a lower
risk for psychosis.\[280\] And at Amen Clinics, when we put a group of
retired football players on highly concentrated fish oil supplements,
many of them were able to decrease or completely eliminate their pain
medications. Take a look at how the evil and benevolent rulers would
promote or prevent inflammation throughout society.

Low fish intake, processed foods, and a leaky gut can increase
inflammation and brain health/mental health challenges.

INFLAMMATION THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Increase availability and
marketing of processed foods loaded with corn and soy products and
refined oils (high in omega-6 fatty acids that promote inflammation). 2.
Increase chronic stress by encouraging subjects to watch hateful
political talk shows for hours a day, where the negative news and
conflicts dominate headlines. 3. Promote inflammation by limiting
availability of sustainable fatty fish. 4. Increase use of pesticides
and spray crops with potentially dangerous glyphosates. 5. Fool
population into thinking alcohol is a health food and dictate everyone
must drink two glasses of wine a day. 6. Promote the belief that being
busy is a valid substitute for a deeper sense of purpose. 7. Ban
flossing. 8. Prohibit probiotic and prebiotic foods, and discourage
anything that supports the good bugs in the gut. 9. Mandate antibiotics
at the first sign of sniffles or coughs for children and adults, killing
off beneficial gut bacteria. 10. Increase sugar-laden foods
(proinflammatory) and encourage food manufacturers to add hidden sugars
into their products to wipe out good bugs in the gut. THE BENEVOLENT
RULER WOULD . . . 1. Regularly test subjects for CRP, homocysteine, and
the Omega-3 index. 2. Limit unnecessary antibiotic therapy, pesticides,
processed foods, and sugar.

3. Promote diets loaded with organic colorful vegetables and prebiotic
and probiotic foods. 4. Encourage healthy stress management and rest. 5.
Make probiotic (live bacteria of the good gut variety) or prebiotic
(dietary fiber that feeds the good bugs) nutraceuticals available to
everyone. 6. Encourage healthy fish consumption (see
www.seafoodwatch.org) and pass out high-quality omega-3 nutraceuticals.
7. Teach about inflammation in schools, especially how important
flossing and gum health are to the brain.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR INFLAMMATION RISK (AND THE FOUR CIRCLES
THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Care about your level of inflammation and ask your
doctor to test for it on a regular basis with CRP, homocysteine, and the
Omega-3 Index. CRP levels are important for other reasons too. Exciting
research points to CRP levels as a way to help determine which
antidepressant medication will be most effective in people with major
depression.\[281\] 2. Avoid anything that increases inflammation, such
as leaky gut, low omega-3 fatty acid levels, excessive omega-6 intake,
and gum disease. 3. Engage regularly in habits that lower inflammation.

Consumer prebiotics (dietary fiber that promotes good bugs). These
include apples, beans, cabbage, psyllium, artichokes, onions, leeks,
asparagus, squash, and root veggies, such as sweet potatoes, yams,
jicama, beets, carrots, and turnips (social circle because your friends
and family influence what you eat). Add probiotics with either probiotic
supplements (see below) or fermented foods that contain live bacteria:
kefir, kombucha, and unsweetened yogurt (goat or coconut); kimchi,
pickled fruits and vegetables, and sauerkraut. Be cautious about taking
antibiotics. If you have had a number of antibiotics in the past, then
probiotics and a healthy diet are essential to maintaining brain health.
Reduce homocysteine. B vitamins---especially B6, B12, and
folate---reduce high levels of homocysteine. They also support brain
health and can reduce the amount of brain shrinkage by up to 90
percent.\[282\] Take care of your gums. This is an easy one. Avoid
periodontal (gum) disease, which is a risk factor for depression and
dementia,\[283\] by brushing your teeth twice a day, flossing daily, and
getting regular dental cleanings.

4. Take nutraceuticals that lower inflammation (social circle because
your friends and family influence what you eat). Rarely do I meet
patients who do not need to lower inflammation. It is a risk factor for
nearly everyone. The following supplements help lower your inflammation
and rebuild your microbiome: Probiotics: These have been shown in
clinical studies to decrease homocysteine and inflammation.\[284\] They
were found to be even more effective when given with prebiotics.\[285\]
Prebiotics support and promote the growth of probiotics. Look for
products that contain both Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains.
The number of probiotics in a supplement is less important than the
quality of the strains. Dose suggestion: The probiotic I often recommend
was found to be effective at 3 billion live organisms a day. Folate,
vitamin B6, vitamin B12, and betaine: I recommend that my patients with
high homocysteine levels take these supplements. Folate Dose suggestion:
800 micrograms (mcg) a day as methyl folate, which is the body's
naturally most active form as opposed to folic acid, which is synthetic
Vitamin B6

Dose suggestion: 20 mg a day as pyridoxine hydrochloride or as
pyridoxal-5-phosphate (both are well absorbed and utilized) Vitamin B12
Dose suggestion: 500 mcg a day as methyl cobalamin; hydroxocobalamin is
also safe. Both are preferable to cyanocobalamin, a widely sold form
that contains potentially toxic cyanide. Betaine (trimethylglycine) Dose
suggestion: 1,000--3,000 mg a day; this substance is naturally present
in our cells and very useful as a methyl backup. Curcumin: This is a
collective name for the three active "curcuminoids" from turmeric root
(used in making curries), which have potent antiinflammatory effects.
More than 7,000 published articles have revealed the benefits of
curcumin, including powerful anti-inflammatory properties, as well as
antioxidant, blood sugar regulation, and anti-cancer activities.\[286\]
However, be aware that curcuminoids are very poorly absorbed when taken
by themselves. Look for preparations that are more absorbable, such as
the one made by Longvida, which is proven to have high absorption. Dose
suggestion: I recommend 500--2,000 mg a day of a highly bioavailable
curcumin supplement. Omega-3: The omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA can
reduce inflammation,\[287\] anxiety, \[288\] and depression;\[289\]
increase blood flow;

\[290\] mood,\[291\] working memory,\[292\] and executive
function;\[293\] and slow brain atrophy. \[294\] Your body has very
limited capacity to produce EPA and DHA, meaning you have to get most of
your supply from foods or supplements. Plants make a type of omega-3
fatty acid called alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) that your body can convert
into EPA and DHA, but it isn't very efficient. The best dietary source
of EPA and DHA is cold-water fish, including salmon, sardines, trout,
tuna, mackerel, herring, and halibut. However, it's important to choose
fish that won't poison you with mercury, PCBs, or dioxins. Choose wild
rather than farm-raised fish, and do your best to ensure it is free of
toxic contamination. The safest and most efficient way to increase your
Omega-3 Index is to take highly concentrated, high-quality fish oil
supplements that provide at least 1,000 mg of EPA and DHA per day.

BRIGHT MINDS: INFLAMMATION STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE
MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about inflammation. 2.
Engage in habits that promote inflammation. Eat processed foods and
those filled with trans fats. Choose produce that's been sprayed with
pesticides. Opt for meat, eggs, and other foods that come from animals
treated with hormones and antibiotics. Eat sugar or artificial
sweeteners at every meal. Drink two or more glasses of alcohol a day.
Let stress dominate your days.

Neglect your dental health and floss infrequently or not at all. Don't
check your CRP, homocysteine, or Omega-3 Index levels. 3. Avoid the
strategies that calm inflammation. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND
KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about inflammation. 2.
Avoid anything that increases inflammation. 3. Engage regularly in
healthy habits that turn down the fire within. Avoid processed foods and
trans fats. Choose organic produce. Eat foods that are hormone- and
antibiotic-free. Limit sugar and artificial sweeteners in your diet.
Limit alcohol consumption. Practice stress management. Floss your teeth
daily, and visit your dentist for regular check-ups. Ask your doctor to
test your CRP, homocysteine, and Omega-3 Index levels. Take vitamins and
supplements that have anti-inflammatory properties.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Inflammation Tiny Habit to Start Today When I
finish brushing my teeth before bed, I will floss. When I make dinner, I
will put more green leafy vegetables on my plate. When I go to the
doctor for my annual checkup, I will ask to have my CRP, homocysteine,
and Omega-3 Index levels checked.

When I go to the grocery store, I will shop on the outside of the aisles
to avoid processed foods. When I eat, I will limit omega-6 rich foods
(corn, soy, refined oils, and processed foods). When I plan my menus, I
will include more omega-3 rich foods (fish, avocados, walnuts). When I
take my supplements each day, I will include an omega-3 supplement,
vitamins B6 and B12, and methylfolate. When I make my shopping list, I
will put prebiotic foods at the top of the list so I don't forget them.
When I eat breakfast, I will include probiotic foods and/or supplements.

\[249\] G. Fond, "Inflammation in Psychiatric Disorders," European
Psychiatry 29, no. 8 (November 2014): 551--52. A. H. Miller et al.,
"Therapeutic Implications of Brain-Immune Interactions: Treatment in
Translation," Neuropsychopharmacology 42, no. 1 (January 2017): 334--59.
\[250\] J. C. Felger et al., "Inflammation Is Associated with Decreased
Functional Connectivity within Corticostriatal Reward Circuitry in
Depression," Molecular Psychiatry 21, no. 10 (October 2016): 1358--65.
\[251\] L. Brundin et al., "Role of Inflammation in Suicide: From
Mechanisms to Treatment," Neuropsychopharmacology 42, no. 1 (January
2017): 271--83.

\[252\] George M. Slavich et al., "Neural Sensitivity to Social
Rejection Is Associated with Inflammatory Responses to Social Stress,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 107, no. 33 (August 17, 2010): 14817--22. \[253\] C. L. Raison
et al., "A Randomized Controlled Trial of the Tumor Necrosis Factor
Antagonist Infliximab for Treatment-Resistant Depression: The Role of
Baseline Inflammatory Biomarkers," JAMA Psychiatry 70, no. 1 (January
2013): 31--41. \[254\] O. Köhler et al., "Inflammation and Depression:
Combined Use of Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors and NSAIDs or
Paracetamol and Psychiatric Outcomes," Brain and Behavior 5, no. 8
(August 2015): e00338, doi: 10.1002/brb3.338. R. L. Iyengar et al.,
"NSAIDs Are Associated with Lower Depression Scores in Patients with
Osteoarthritis," American Journal of Medicine 126, no. 11 (November
2013): 1017.e11-8. \[255\] P. H. Wirtz and R. von Känel, "Psychological
Stress, Inflammation, and Coronary Heart Disease," Current Cardiology
Reports 19, no. 11 (September 2017): 111. \[256\] K. Lukaschek et al.,
"Cognitive Impairment Is Associated with a Low Omega3 Index in the
Elderly: Results from the KORA-Age Study," Dementia and Geriatric
Cognitive Disorders 42, nos. 3--4 (2016): 236--45. \[257\] Megan Clapp
et al., "Gut Microbiota's Effect on Mental Health: The Gut-Brain Axis,"
Clinical Practice 7, no. 4 (September 15, 2017): 987. \[258\] Jennifer
Lea Reynolds, "Is There a Connection between Gut Health and ADHD?" U.S.
News & World Report, September 8, 2017,
https://health.usnews.com/health-care/patient-advice/articles/2017-09-08/isthere-a-connection-between-gut-health-and-adhd.
\[259\] C. Jiang et al., "The Gut Microbiota and Alzheimer's Disease,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 58, no. 1 (2017): 1--15, doi:
10.3233/JAD-161141. C. A. Köhler et al., "The Gut-Brain Axis, Including
the Microbiome, Leaky Gut and Bacterial Translocation: Mechanisms and
Pathophysiological Role in Alzheimer's Disease," Current Pharmaceutical
Design 22, no. 40 (2016): 6152--66. \[260\] Qinghui Mu et al., "Leaky
Gut as a Danger Signal for Autoimmune Diseases," Frontiers in Immunology
8 (May 23, 2017): 598. \[261\] Iman Salem et al., "The Gut Microbiome as
a Major Regulator of the Gut-Skin Axis," Frontiers in Microbiology 9
(July 10, 2018): 1459. \[262\] A. C. Logan and M. Katzman, "Major
Depressive Disorder: Probiotics May Be an Adjuvant Therapy," Medical
Hypotheses 64, no. 3 (2005): 533--38. \[263\] A. Kato-Kataoka et al.,
"Fermented Milk Containing Lactobacillus casei Strain Shirota Prevents
the Onset of Physical Symptoms in Medical Students under Academic
Examination Stress," Beneficial Microbes 7, no. 2 (2016): 153--56.

\[264\] Y. Wang et al., "Effects of Alcohol on Intestinal Epithelial
Barrier Permeability and Expression of Tight Junction-Associated
Proteins," Molecular Medicine Reports 9, no. 6 (June 2014): 2352--56.
\[265\] L. Möhle et al., "Ly6C(hi) Monocytes Provide a Link between
AntibioticInduced Changes in Gut Microbiota and Adult Hippocampal
Neurogenesis," Cell Reports 15, no. 9 (May 31, 2016): 1945--56. \[266\]
T. A. Mori and L. J. Beilin, "Omega-3 Fatty Acids and Inflammation,"
Current Atherosclerosis Reports 6, no. 6 (November 2004): 461--67. D.
Moertl et al., "Dose-Dependent Effects of Omega-3-Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids on Systolic Left Ventricular Function, Endothelial Function, and
Markers of Inflammation in Chronic Heart Failure of Nonischemic Origin:
A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, 3-Arm Study," American Heart Journal
161, no. 5 (May 2011): 915.e1-9, doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.02.011. J. G.
Devassy et al., "Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Oxylipins in
Neuroinflammation and Management of Alzheimer Disease," Advances in
Nutrition 7, no. 5 (September 15, 2016): 905--16. \[267\] "Smoking, High
Blood Pressure and Being Overweight Top Three Preventable Causes of
Death in the U.S.," Harvard School of Public Health, April 27, 2009,
www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/press-releases/smoking-high-blood-pressureoverweight-preventable-causes-death-us/.
\[268\] E. Messamore et al., "Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Recurrent
Mood Disorders: Phenomenology, Mechanisms, and Clinical Application,"
Progress in Lipid Research 66 (April 2017): 1--13, doi:
10.1016/j.plipres.2017.01.001. J. Sarris et al., "Omega-3 for Bipolar
Disorder: Meta-Analyses of Use in Mania and Bipolar Depression," Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry 73, no. 1 (January 2012): 81--86, doi:
10.4088/JCP.10r06710. R. J. Mocking et al., "Meta-Analysis and
Meta-Regression of Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Supplementation
for Major Depressive Disorder," Translational Psychiatry 6, (March 15,
2016). \[269\] J. R. Hibbeln and R. V. Gow, "The Potential for Military
Diets to Reduce Depression, Suicide, and Impulsive Aggression: A Review
of Current Evidence for Omega-3 and Omega-6 Fatty Acids," Military
Medicine 179, supplement 11 (November 2014): 117--28. M. Huan et al.,
"Suicide Attempt and n-3 Fatty Acid Levels in Red Blood Cells: A Case
Control Study in China," Biological Psychiatry 56, no. 7 (October 1,
2004): 490--96. M. E. Sublette et al., "Omega-3 Polyunsaturated
Essential Fatty Acid Status as a Predictor of Future Suicide Risk,"
American Journal of Psychiatry 163, no. 6 (June 2006): 1100--1102. M. D.
Lewis et al., "Suicide Deaths of Active-Duty US Military and Omega3
Fatty-Acid Status: A Case-Control Comparison," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 72, no. 12 (December 2011): 1585--90.

\[270\] C. M. Milte et al., "Increased Erythrocyte Eicosapentaenoic Acid
and Docosahexaenoic Acid Are Associated with Improved Attention and
Behavior in Children with ADHD in a Randomized Controlled Three-Way
Crossover Trial," Journal of Attention Disorders 19, no. 11 (November
2015): 954--64. M. H. Bloch and A. Qawasmi, "Omega-3 Fatty Acid
Supplementation for the Treatment of Children with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Symptomatology: Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry 50, no. 10 (October 2011): 991--1000. \[271\] Y.
Zhang et al., "Intakes of Fish and Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and
Mild-toSevere Cognitive Impairment Risks: A Dose-Response Meta-Analysis
of 21 Cohort Studies," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 103, no. 2
(February 2016): 330--40. T. A. D'Ascoli et al., "Association between
Serum Long-Chain Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Cognitive
Performance in Elderly Men and Women: The Kuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease
Risk Factor Study," European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 70, no. 8
(August 2016): 970--75. \[272\] C. Couet et al., "Effect of Dietary Fish
Oil on Body Fat Mass and Basal Fat Oxidation in Healthy Adults,"
International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders 21, no.
8 (August 1997): 637--43. J. D. Buckley and P. R. Howe, "Anti-Obesity
Effects of Long-Chain Omega3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids," Obesity
Reviews 10, no. 6 (November 2009): 648--59. \[273\] C. von Schacky, "The
Omega-3 Index as a Risk Factor for Cardiovascular Diseases,"
Prostaglandins & Other Lipid Mediators 96, nos. 1--4 (November 2011):
94--98. S. P. Whelton et al., "Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies on
Fish Intake and Coronary Heart Disease, American Journal of Cardiology
93, no. 9 (May 1, 2004): 1119--23. \[274\] Daniel G. Amen et al.,
"Quantitative Erythrocyte Omega-3 EPA Plus DHA Levels Are Related to
Higher Regional Cerebral Blood Flow on Brain SPECT," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 58, no. 4 (2017): 1189--99. \[275\] Daniel G. Amen,
Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017), 101. \[276\] R. J.
Mocking et al., "Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression of Omega-3
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Supplementation for Major Depressive
Disorder." \[277\] L. A. Colangelo et al., "Higher Dietary Intake of
Long-Chain Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Is Inversely Associated
with Depressive Symptoms in Women," Nutrition 25, no. 10 (October 2009):
1011--19. \[278\] Giuseppe Grosso et al., "Omega-3 Fatty Acids and
Depression: Scientific Evidence and Biological Mechanisms," Oxidative
Medicine and Cellular Longevity (March 18, 2014). \[279\] E. Derbyshire,
"Do Omega-3/6 Fatty Acids Have a Therapeutic Role in Children and Young
People with ADHD?" Journal of Lipids (2017).

\[280\] G. P. Amminger et al., "Long-Chain Omega-3 Fatty Acids for
Indicated Prevention of Psychotic Disorders: A Randomized,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Archives of General Psychiatry 67, no. 2
(February 2010): 146--54. \[281\] M. K. Jha et al., "Can C-Reactive
Protein Inform Antidepressant Medication Selection in Depressed
Outpatients? Findings from the CO-MED Trial," Psychoneuroendocrinology
78 (April 2017): 105--13. \[282\] G. Douaud et al., "Preventing
Alzheimer's Disease-Related Gray Matter Atrophy by B-Vitamin Treatment,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 110, no. 23 (June 4, 2013): 9523--28. \[283\] J. A. Gil-Montoya
et al., "Is Periodontitis a Risk Factor for Cognitive Impairment and
Dementia? A Case-Control Study," Journal of Periodontology 86, no. 2
(February 2015): 244--53. J. Luo et al., "Association between Tooth Loss
and Cognitive Function among 3063 Chinese Older Adults: A
Community-Based Study," PLOS One 10, no. 3 (March 24, 2015). \[284\] Z.
Asemi et al., "Effects of Daily Consumption of Probiotic Yoghurt on
Inflammatory Factors in Pregnant Women: A Randomized Controlled Trial,"
Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 14, no. 8 (April 15, 2011):
476--82. L. Valentini et al., "Impact of Personalized Diet and Probiotic
Supplementation on Inflammation, Nutritional Parameters and Intestinal
Microbiota---The 'RISTOMED Project': Randomized Controlled Trial in
Healthy Older People," Clinical Nutrition 34, no. 4 (August 2015):
593--602. S. K. Hegazy and M. M. El-Bedewy, "Effect of Probiotics on
ProInflammatory Cytokines and NF-kappaB Activation in Ulcerative
Colitis," World Journal of Gastroenterology 16, no. 33 (September 7,
2010): 4145--51. E. J. Giamarellos-Bourboulis et al., "Pro- and
Synbiotics to Control Inflammation and Infection in Patients with
Multiple Injuries," Journal of Trauma 67, no. 4 (October 2009): 815--21.
D. Viramontes-Hörner et al., "Effect of a Symbiotic Gel (Lactobacillus
acidophilus + Bifidobacterium lactis + Inulin) on Presence and Severity
of Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Hemodialysis Patients," Journal of Renal
Nutrition 25, no. 3 (May 2015): 284--91. J. Villar-García et al.,
"Effect of Probiotics (Saccharomyces boulardii) on Microbial
Translocation and Inflammation in HIV-Treated Patients: A DoubleBlind,
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndromes 68, no. 3 (March 1, 2015): 256--63. A. Toiviainen
et al., "Impact of Orally Administered Lozenges with Lactobacillus
rhamnosus GG and Bifidobacterium animalis Subsp. Lactis BB12 on the
Number of Salivary Mutans Streptococci, Amount of Plaque, Gingival
Inflammation and the Oral Microbiome in Healthy Adults," Clinical Oral
Investigations 19, no. 1 (January 2015): 77--83.

S. J. Spaiser et al., "Lactobacillus gasseri KS-13, Bifidobacterium
bifidum G9-1, and Bifidobacterium longum MM-2 Ingestion Induces a Less
Inflammatory Cytokine Profile and a Potentially Beneficial Shift in Gut
Microbiota in Older Adults: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Study," Journal of the American College of
Nutrition 34, no. 6 (2015): 459--69. A. K. Szkaradkiewicz et al.,
"Effect of Oral Administration Involving a Probiotic Strain of
Lactobacillus reuteri on Pro-Inflammatory Cytokine Response in Patients
with Chronic Periodontitis," Archivum Immunologiae et Therapiae
Experimentalis (Warszawa) 62, no. 6 (December 2014): 495--500. Z. H.
Liu, "The Effects of Perioperative Probiotic Treatment on Serum Zonulin
Concentration and Subsequent Postoperative Infectious Complications
after Colorectal Cancer Surgery: A Double-Center and DoubleBlind
Randomized Clinical Trial," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 97,
no. 1 (January 2013): 117--26. \[285\] H. Rajkumar et al., "Effect of
Probiotic Lactobacillus salivarius UBL S22 and Prebiotic
Fructo-oligosaccharide on Serum Lipids, Inflammatory Markers, Insulin
Sensitivity, and Gut Bacteria in Healthy Young Volunteers: A Randomized
Controlled Single-Blind Pilot Study," Journal of Cardiovascular
Pharmacolology and Therapeutics 20, no. 3 (May 2015): 289--98. \[286\]
S. Ghosh et al., "The Beneficial Role of Curcumin on Inflammation,
Diabetes and Neurodegenerative Disease: A Recent Update," Food and
Chemical Toxicology 83 (September 2015): 111--24. \[287\] J Mildenberger
et al. "N-3 PUFAs Induce Inflammatory Tolerance by Formation of
KEAP1-Containing SQSTM1/p62-bodies and Activation of NFE2L2," Autophagy
13, no. 10 (August 2017): 1664--78. \[288\] J. K. Kiecolt-Glaser et al.,
"Omega-3 Supplementation Lowers Inflammation and Anxiety in Medical
Students: A Randomized Controlled Trial," Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
25, no. 8 (November 2011): 1725--34. \[289\] R. J. Mocking et al.,
"Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression of Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid
Supplementation for Major Depressive Disorder." \[290\] Mandy Oaklander,
"5 Surprising Ways to Help Your Memory," Time.com, June 10, 2015,
time.com/3915030/boost-memory-exercise/. P. A. Jackson et al., "DHA-Rich
Oil Modulates the Cerebral Haemodynamic Response to Cognitive Tasks in
Healthy Young Adults: A Near IR Spectroscopy Pilot Study," British
Journal of Nutrition 107, no. 8 (April 2012): 1093--98. T. J. Song et
al., "Low Levels of Plasma Omega 3-Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Are
Associated with Cerebral Small Vessel Diseases in Acute Ischemic Stroke
Patients," Nutrition Research 35, no. 5 (May 2015): 368--74. \[291\] N.
Hamazaki-Fujita et al., "Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Blood
Circulation in the Forebrain during a Mental Arithmetic Task," Brain
Research (June 23, 2011): 38--45.

\[292\] E. L. Boespflug et al., "Fish Oil Supplementation Increases
Event-Related Posterior Cingulate Activation in Older Adults with
Subjective Memory Impairment," Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging
20, no. 2 (February 2016): 161--69. \[293\] A. V. Witte et al.,
"Long-Chain Omega-3 Fatty Acids Improve Brain Function and Structure in
Older Adults," Cerebral Cortex 24, no. 11 (November 2014): 3059--68.
\[294\] F. Jernerén et al., "Brain Atrophy in Cognitively Impaired
Elderly: The Importance of Long-Chain ω-3 Fatty Acids and B Vitamin
Status in a Randomized Controlled Trial," American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 102, no. 1 (July 2015): 215--21.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 8

G IS FOR GENETICS KNOW YOUR VULNERABILITIES, BUT YOUR HISTORY IS NOT
YOUR DESTINY The individual nature of a single cell can be compared to
that of a manuscript. Each cell inherits the same first draft. Over
time, words are scratched out and others are added; genes are silenced
or activated. Different qualities or phrases are emphasized; and a
unique novel is born from an otherwise standard script. Humans derive
their individuality from epigenomes, which are triggered by chance
events, like injuries, smells, infections, or falling in love. S I D D H
A RT H A M U K H E R J E E , T H E G E N E : A N I N T I M AT E H I S T
O RY

EMMY

Emmy, our nine-year-old granddaughter, started having intense seizures
when she was just five months old. In one day, she had 160 of them. I
was lecturing in Boston when my daughter texted me videos of the
seizures where it looked as if Emmy was being electrocuted. Emmy was
diagnosed with infantile spasms (later shown to be caused

by a very rare genetic disorder, Koolen-de Vries Syndrome), which is
associated with seizures, heart disease, and developmental delays. The
neurologist gave us the grim news that Emmy might never walk and had a
30 percent chance of dying before the age of three. He wanted to put her
on a medicine that was \$26,000 a dose and loaded with side effects,
including wiping out her immune system. I asked about trying the
ketogenic diet, which has been found to be helpful for many children
with seizure disorders. Her doctor laughed at me and told me it didn't
have any science supporting its use. My wife, Tana, later told me she
knew the relationship had gone sour when I asked the doctor if he knew
how to read. "You're kidding me," I said. "It has more than 75 studies
showing it decreases seizure frequency in children, with some children
becoming seizure free. The studies were done at a little place in
Baltimore called Johns Hopkins. You've heard of Johns Hopkins?" I was
frustrated. The doctor said if we wanted to try the ketogenic diet, he
would not be Emmy's doctor. "You're fired," I replied. "How did you get
through medical school without learning about informed consent? You're
supposed to give us reasonable options, and we decide what to do,
remember?" I then called the ketogenic clinic at Oregon Health & Science
University and talked to their director, who told us the diet was an
option for Emmy. Within three months on the diet, her seizures subsided,
and by age three, Emmy was walking to preschool.\[295\] It was through
Emmy and many children like her I learned that although genes may
increase your risk for brain health/mental health illness they can often
be modified by smart, targeted interventions.

Although genes may increase your vulnerability to brain health/mental
health trouble, they can often be modified by smart, targeted
interventions.

If you have family members with brain health/mental health challenges,
such as anxiety disorders, obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD),
depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, addictions, attention
deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD),
Alzheimer's disease, or Parkinson's, you have a higher risk of having
them too. Studies on identical twins and within families have shown the
high genetic nature of many brain health/mental health issues.

FAMILIAL RISK OF PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS\[296\] Identical Twins Siblings
General Population Autism

69%

6%

0.6%

Schizophrenia

50%

9%

0.9%

Bipolar Disorder

40%

5%

1%

Depression

44%

20%

6%

Anxiety Disorder

40%

25%

6%

ADHD

66%

36%

5--15%

Yet having a genetic risk is not a death sentence; it should be a
wake-up call for you to know your vulnerabilities and get serious about
taking care of your brain. As you can see in the chart above, identical
twins, who have identical

genes, are just as likely not to develop the same conditions as their
twin when it comes to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression, and
anxiety disorders. Genes load the gun; your behavior and environment
pull the trigger.

Genes load the gun; your behavior and environment pull the trigger.

The Lincoln Legacy Abraham Lincoln's family tree is loaded with brain
health/mental health issues. His mother, Nancy Lincoln, was described as
sad, and his father often got the "blues" with strange spells where he
wanted to be alone. His paternal great uncle told a court he had a
"deranged mind." His uncle Mordecai Lincoln had severe mood swings,
which got worse with heavy drinking. Mordecai's three sons struggled
with depression, and one of them swung between depression and mania. One
of Abraham Lincoln's first cousins had a daughter, Mary Jane Lincoln,
who was committed to the Illinois State Hospital for the Insane. During
her trial, the jury concluded, "The disease is with her hereditary,"
meaning that mental illness ran in her family. \[297\] It is clear that
Abraham Lincoln suffered with periods of depression, even voicing
suicidal thoughts. Yet, at the same time, in many ways, he was the
epitome of mental health and was able to keep the United States together
during its darkest days. His genes were not his destiny.

GENETICS AND THE FOUR CIRCLES

You may think that genetics are purely biological, but they can impact
all four circles and, likewise, all four circles can influence your
genes, as well as those of your children, grandchildren, and
beyond---just as my nieces, Alizé and Amelie, were at risk because of
their family history. Biological: Humans are made up of 23 pairs of
chromosomes---one set from each parent---that are found in their DNA in
the nuclei of their cells. All humans share 99.99 percent of their
genetic code with other humans (so much for feeling special). We share
about 98 percent with chimpanzees, about 60 percent with bananas, and
about 33 percent with yeast. A gene is a very small part of a chromosome
that codes for making different proteins, which in turn make up your
cells and, ultimately, you. A lucky person has just the right number of
chromosomes and genes. When the number of chromosomes is wrong, when
there are extra or defective genes, or when there are certain gene
variants, you become more susceptible to issues. For example, heart
disease and obesity run in my family, but I do not have either because I
don't give in to the behaviors that make them more likely.
Psychological: Too many people believe the false notion that they are
condemned to have diabetes, obesity, hypertension, bipolar disorder,
depression, or Alzheimer's disease because of their genetic family
history. This leads them to develop a defeatist attitude and bad habits
that make it likely to be so.

Social: Many people adopt their families' unhealthy behaviors, which
increases their risk of developing the brain/mental illnesses for which
they have a genetic predisposition. Spiritual: If you don't have a
strong purpose in life, you are less likely to know why you want to turn
off those genetic vulnerabilities.

HOW PSYCHIATRIC ISSUES IN YOUR FAMILY MAKE YOU MORE SUSCEPTIBLE TO
TROUBLE 1. You have the genetic vulnerability. 2. You are more likely to
have experienced lasting stress because of the psychiatric challenges in
your family. For example, children who grow up with stress or abuse from
a parent or relative are significantly more likely to experience lasting
anxiety or depression. 3. The stress of the illnesses in prior
generations changed your genes to become more vulnerable to trouble.
Stress, poor diets, environmental toxins, and prenatal nutrition in
earlier generations actually changed their genes (epigenetics) to be
more likely to express trouble.

4. If your family members self-medicate with bad habits, you are likely
to pick up those same behaviors, which increases your risk of brain
health/mental health issues. 5. If your family doesn't care enough about
their own health or about your well-being to change their behavior, it
can be harder for you to learn to love yourself enough to adopt a
healthier lifestyle. The more of these factors you have, the higher your
risk. Think of it this way: When my daughters, Breanne, Kaitlyn, and
Chloe, and granddaughters, Emmy and Haven, were born, they were born
with all of the eggs in their ovaries they will ever have. They were all
influenced by their mother's habits and my habits. In turn, their habits
will turn on or off certain genes that will make illness more or less
likely in them and, subsequently, in their babies and grandbabies.
Similarly, my nieces, Alizé and Amelie, were born with genes that were
influenced by the habits of their parents and grandparents. To end
mental illness in Alizé and Amelie and their future children and
grandchildren, they need to focus on brain health in an attempt to turn
off any of those genes that increased their vulnerability to psychiatric
issues.

Genes are not a death sentence; they should be a wake-up call for you to
know your risks and work hard to prevent them.

YOUR ANXIETY MAY BE FROM ANOTHER TIME In fascinating but disturbing
research, fear has been shown to be passed down through generations. You
may be afraid of something and have absolutely no idea why. Researchers
Brian Dias and Kerry Ressler from Emory University made mice afraid of a
cherry blossom scent by shocking them whenever the smell was in the
air.\[298\] In scientific circles, this is called classical fear
conditioning, and this result came as no surprise. What was startling,
however, was the fact that the rodents' offspring and even the following
generation were also afraid of the scent of cherry blossoms, even though
they were never exposed to the shocks. The fear was actually transmitted
epigenetically. The implications of this research are wide-reaching.
Emotions like fear, anxiety, and perhaps even hatred may have ancestral
origins. If you are afraid of something and have no idea why, go back
through your genealogy and look for any clues that the fear may actually
have nothing to do with your own experience. Prior-generation stress has
also been associated with depression, antisocial behaviors, and memory
impairment. Fortunately, it seems that stress in

your ancestors can go both ways; another study suggested
prior-generation stress can help animals learn to better cope with
stress.\[299\]

GENETIC RISKS FOR BRAIN HEALTH ISSUES Family history of neurological
illnesses Family history of psychiatric illnesses, including addictions
Not being serious about health, despite family history Epigenetic
factors, such as poor diet, environmental toxins, unresolved emotional
trauma, and so on Would it be any surprise how an evil or benevolent
ruler would use your genetics against you or to help you?

GENETICS THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Tell people who have a family
history of brain health/mental health illnesses not to worry about
taking care of their health because there is nothing they can do about
it. 2. Adopt "Live It Up While You Can" as the nation's public health
slogan. 3. Tell subjects there's no point in dealing with their
emotional baggage because once they are dead, they are finished. THE
BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Inform the population that genes are not
everything and learn from the misguided eugenics movement of the 19th
and 20th centuries. 2. Educate the population to know their genetic
risks and vulnerabilities by having families tell accurate stories of
their ancestors and be serious about prevention as soon as possible. 3.
Encourage people to be serious about healthy BRIGHT MINDS lifestyle
habits and develop public service programs to let people know about
epigenetics.

4. Remind people that their behavior is not just about them; it is about
generations of them.

SOME GUIDING GENETIC PRINCIPLES 1. Genes do not cause illnesses. They
make proteins, which have specific functions. The translation process
from gene to functional protein is controlled and regulated by other
genes and by the availability of nutrients that come from the diet. 2.
Few medical illnesses are caused by a malfunction of a single gene. 3.
Very rarely is any brain health/mental health disorder caused by a
single gene. More often, multiple genes are involved. 4. Even though we
are born with all the genes we'll ever have; their expression is
influenced by all of the four circles (biological, psychological,
social, and spiritual) and BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. This process is
called epigenetics. It is rarely your genes by themselves that cause
trouble. Nature and nurture always work together to create who we are
and how we feel. 5. Small genetic abnormalities are more common in those
with autism, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and nicotine dependence
than in healthy people. \[300\] 6. Genetic testing is still in its
infancy but will likely play an important role in the future of brain
health/mental health. For now, genetic testing cannot give a brain
health/mental health diagnosis, but it may give clues

about vulnerabilities, which medications or supplements may help, and
how you metabolize certain medications. For example, if you are of Asian
ancestry and your doctor is considering the mood stabilizer
carbamazepine (Tegretol), the genetic marker HLA-B\*1502 should be
tested because it substantially increases the risk of developing serious
side effects.\[301\] Genetic testing is beyond the scope of this book,
but I want to give you a sense of a few of the genes researchers believe
may have some practical application to brain health. There is not a
consensus about these findings among scientists, so be cautious in how
you interpret this information. Some terminology can help: Every person
has two copies of each gene, one from their mother and one from their
father. Genotype is the array of genes an individual has. A nonideal
variant contains one or two copies of affected genes, also called
alleles. Alleles are the variations of any one specific gene. The
genetic markers below are simply markers of genetic predisposition.
Dietary, environmental, and epigenetic factors often modify the
influence of these markers on a person's health. Having a positive
marker does not necessarily mean that an action needs to be taken.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR GENETIC RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Care about your genes and know your vulnerability. If
you have genetic risk factors or a family history of brain health/mental
health issues, get an early screening for the genes listed above.
Genomind (www.genomind.com) and Genesight (www.genesight.com) are two
companies our clinicians use at Amen Clinics. Questionnaires to screen
for brain health/mental health issues, cognitive testing, and possibly
brain SPECT imaging may be helpful. 2. Avoid any risk factors that
accelerate disease for your genetics (social circle if you do these
activities with friends). Here's an example: Any child who wants to play
a contact sport with a likelihood of concussions (football, soccer,
hockey, horseback riding, etc.) should be screened for the APOE e4 gene.
Its presence increases the risk of cognitive decline and dementia later
in life tenfold\![302\] If they have an APOE e4 gene, they should
consider noncontact sports, such as golf, tennis, table tennis,
cross-country running, track, and dance. 3. Engage in regular healthy
habits to decrease the expression of problem-promoting genes. Be serious
about prevention as soon as possible and attack all 11 of the BRIGHT
MINDS risk factors. If you have brain health/mental health issues in
your

family, you should want to be vigilant about brain health. It could make
all the difference for you and your family. Studies have shown a lower
risk of dementia in people with one or two of the APOE e4 genes if they
had higher education levels and participated in leisure activities like
sports or hobbies that involved new learning.\[303\] They also did
better if their blood flow and vascular risk factors, such as
hypertension, smoking, or heart problems, were low. 4. Take
nutraceuticals related to any genetic variants you may have. Refer to
the chart in appendix B, and work with an integrative practitioner to
determine your risks.

DO YOU WANT A BETTER BRAIN 11 YEARS FROM NOW? One of my all-time
favorite stories involves my friend Leeza Gibbons. Leeza has been a
television personality for decades, having appeared as a correspondent
and cohost of Entertainment Tonight for 16 years and then hosting her
own daytime talk show, where we met. Her grandmother and mother died
with Alzheimer's disease, and she was terrified she would get it as
well. During a stressful time, she came to one of our clinics when she
was 51, and her scan was not healthy, which, given her family history,
was very concerning. But Leeza didn't allow the news to depress her;
rather, it motivated her to follow the strategies in this book

to enhance her brain. When I scanned her 11 years later, it was
remarkably better. You are not stuck with the brain you have; you can
make it better, even 11 years later. LEEZA AND DR. AMEN

Leeza, Age 51 SPECT Scan

Low blood flow to areas vulnerable to Alzheimer's

Age 62

Improved overall

BRIGHT MINDS: GENETICS STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Believe your genes are your destiny.
2. Engage in habits that turn on genetic vulnerabilities. Adopt your
family's poor eating habits. Self-medicate with substances like alcohol,
cigarettes, and sugar. Ignore stress management techniques. Don't deal
with the emotional trauma from living with family members with
psychiatric illness. Don't seek to understand how your genetics may make
you more vulnerable to brain health/mental health issues. Think that
your behaviors affect no one but yourself. 3. Avoid the strategies that
turn off genetic vulnerabilities. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND
KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Believe your behavior can
turn on or turn off the genes that increase your vulnerability for brain
health/mental health issues. 2. Avoid anything that turns on genetic
vulnerabilities.

3. Engage regularly in healthy habits that turn off genetic
vulnerabilities. Consume a BRIGHT MINDS diet. Address all your BRIGHT
MINDS risk factors to deal with any brain health/mental health issues.
Practice prayer, meditation, or other ways to cope with stress. Work on
addressing past emotional trauma so you do not have to spread it to
future generations. If you already did, help those generations get help.
Consider genetic testing to identify any vulnerabilities. Remember that
your behavior is not just about you; it's about generations of you.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Genetics Tiny Habit to Start Today If there are
brain health/mental health issues in my family, I will consider early
screening. If there is a family history of psychiatric problems in my
family, I will remember that my behavior and environment can turn on or
off the genes that increase my chances for brain/mental illness. When I
suspect I may have a brain health/mental health issue, I will consider
testing my genetic vulnerabilities. If I have the APO E4 gene, I will
avoid contact sports and other head trauma risks. When I make lifestyle
choices, I will remember that my choices affect not only me, but also my
children, my grandchildren, and future generations.

\[295\] Daniel G. Amen and Tana Amen, The Brain Warrior's Way (New York:
New American Library, 2016), 31. \[296\] Rosaline J. Neuman et al.,
"Latent Class Analysis of ADHD and Comorbid Symptoms in a Population
Sample of Adolescent Female Twins," Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry 42, no. 7 (October 2001): 933--42. Cori Bargmann, "Overview
of Genes and Behavior," YouTube, November 1, 2013,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=4qhrnOP8euI&feature=youtu.be. \[297\] Joshua
Wolf Shenk, Lincoln's Melancholy (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2005), 80.
\[298\] Brian G. Dias and Kerry J. Ressler, "Parental Olfactory
Experience Influences Behavior and Neural Structure in Subsequent
Generations," Nature Neuroscience 17, no. 1 (2014): 89--96. \[299\]
Katharina Gapp et al., "Early Life Stress in Fathers Improves
Behavioural Flexibility in Their Offspring," Nature Communications 5,
no. 5466 (2014). \[300\] Michael J. Gandal et al., "Shared Molecular
Neuropathology across Major Psychiatric Disorders Parallels Polygenic
Overlap," Science 359, no. 6376 (February 9, 2018)): 693--97, doi:
10.1126/science.aad6469. D. B. Hancock et al., "Genome-Wide Association
Study across European and African American Ancestries Identifies a SNP
in DNMT3B Contributing to Nicotine Dependence," Molecular Psychiatry 23,
no. 9 (September 2018): 1911--19. \[301\] U. Amstutz et al.,
"Recommendations for HLA-B*15:02 and HLA-A*31:01 Genetic Testing to
Reduce the Risk of Carbamazepine-Induced Hypersensitivity Reactions,"
Epilepsia 55, no. 4 (April 2014): 496--506. doi: 10.1111/epi.12564.
\[302\] M. X. Tang et al., "Effect of Age, Ethnicity, and Head Injury on
the Association between APOE Genotypes and Alzheimer's Disease," Annals
of New York Academy of Sciences 802 (December 16, 1996): 6--15. \[303\]
S. T. Cheng, "Cognitive Reserve and the Prevention of Dementia: The Role
of Physical and Cognitive Activities," Current Psychiatry Reports 18,
no. 9 (September 2016): 85, doi:10.1007/s11920-016-0721-2.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9

H IS FOR HEAD TRAUMA THE SILENT EPIDEMIC THAT UNDERLIES MANY MENTAL
ILLNESSES After at least five concussions, SPECT and hyperbaric oxygen
therapy helped my brain get back to normal. H A L L- O F - FA M E N F L
Q U A RT E R B AC K J O E N A M AT H \[ 3 0 4 \]

GARY

On December 4, 1988, Gary Busey was involved in a nearfatal motorcycle
accident, striking his head on a curb. The Academy Award-nominated
actor, who had been appearing on screen since 1971, was not wearing a
helmet and suffered massive head injuries. Surgeons opened up his scalp,
drilled holes through his skull, and scraped the temporal side of his
brain. The brain surgery was deemed a success, the scars on his scalp
sealed over, and he underwent occupational and speech therapy. Gary
thought he was healed, but for 30 years, the traumatic brain injury
(TBI) inside his skull went untreated. After the accident, the rising
star tumbled into freefall. He suffered explosive

outbursts (many of them caught on camera in reality TV shows), was
arrested on battery charges, overdosed on cocaine, and went to rehab. In
2008, he met his future wife, Steffanie Sampson. At first, she found him
charismatic. "Sometimes he's ultimately charming and appears caring,"
she said "and then sometimes he's just in your face like a bull in a
china shop. It's weird." Over the years, she became so worn out she felt
like she couldn't put up with his erratic behavior anymore and
threatened to leave if he didn't do something about it. In order to save
his relationship, Gary agreed to get help, and that's when he came to
see me. When we scanned his brain, it showed very low activity in parts
of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and temporal lobes---areas involved in
judgment, forethought, empathy, impulse control, and anger management.
When Gary and Steffanie saw the scans, they were stunned. Gary had
thought he had fully recovered from the accident. In taking Gary's
history, we learned that the motorcycle accident was only one of many
things affecting his brain. He likely had attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as a child; he played tackle football in
high school and college; he smoked cigars; he abused cocaine and smoked
marijuana; and when he had cancer of the sinuses, he had radiation that
affected the brain. All of this chipped away at his brain reserve,
leading to a breaking point. Now we're fixing Gary's brain (see the
chart below). In the first few months of treatment with our BRIGHT MINDS
program, he has cut out marijuana, cigars, and sodas. He has increased
his water intake; he is eating healthy, organic, nutrient-dense foods;
he's having hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) treatments and is taking
supplements. He's even lost weight. I'm excited to see how much more of
a

change it will make in Gary's life. I know you are not stuck with the
brain you have. You can make it better, and Gary and I are proving it.
BRIGHT MINDS

GARY'S RISK FACTORS

INTERVENTIONS

Blood Flow

Low blood flow on SPECT

Exercise, BRIGHT MINDS diet, omega-3 EPA and DHA, ginkgo

Retirement/Aging

Age 75

New learning

Inflammation

High CRP, low Omega-3 Index

BRIGHT MINDS diet

Head Trauma

Motorcycle accident, playing tackle football

HBOT, neurofeedback, nutraceuticals

Toxins

Drug use, cigar smoking

Stop using drugs, stop smoking

Mind Storms

Temper flares

Stress management tools

Immunity/Infections

Low vitamin D level

Vitamin D

Neurohormone Issues

Low testosterone

Testosterone replacement

Diabesity

High blood-sugar levels

Eliminate sugar and sodas, BRIGHT MINDS diet, exercise, targeted
nutraceuticals

Sleep

Insomnia

Sleep strategies

Genetics

GARY'S SPECT SCAN BEFORE

Overall low activity, especially to frontal and temporal lobes

As you have seen throughout this book, your brain is at the heart of
what makes you who you are. When it works right, you work right; and
when it is troubled for whatever reason, you are much more likely to
have trouble in your life. Many people think the brain is rubbery and
fixed within the skull, but it isn't. As I've taught for decades, your
brain is soft, about the consistency of soft butter, tofu, or custard
---somewhere between egg whites and gelatin. It floats in cerebrospinal
fluid and is housed in a very hard skull that has many sharp bony ridges
(see next page). As such, it is easily damaged. In this chapter, we are
focusing on physical trauma to the brain (biological circle). Whiplash,
jarring motions (think shaken baby syndrome), blast injuries, and blows
to the head can cause the brain to slosh around, slamming into the hard
ridges inside the skull. Here is what happens in the brain after
physical trauma: Bruising

Broken blood vessels and bleeding Increased pressure Lack of oxygen
Damage to nerve cell connections Ripping open of brain cells that spill
out proteins like "tau" that cause inflammatory reactions On top of
that, your pituitary gland (which regulates your hormones) sits in a
vulnerable part of your skull, so it is often hurt in head injuries,
causing major hormonal imbalances. A LOOK INSIDE THE SKULL

Looking down from the top, you can see the protective bony ridges, which
can damage your soft brain in an accident or injury.

According to the CDC,\[305\] more than 2 million new head injuries occur
in the United States every year. That means over the last 40 years, more
than 80 million people have sustained head injuries. And the number of
concussions is also rising, especially among children. From

2010 to 2015, concussion diagnoses jumped 43 percent among the general
population. For young people from 10 to 19 years of age, however,
concussion diagnoses skyrocketed 71 percent.\[306\] We have to do a much
better job of preventing TBIs as well as repairing the brain whenever
they occur. Common causes of head injuries include: Falls---falling out
of bed, slipping in the bath or shower, falling down steps, or falling
off ladders Motor vehicle--related collisions---involving cars,
motorcycles, or bicycles; also, accidents where pedestrians are
involved. Violence---caused by gunshot wounds, assaults, domestic
violence, or child abuse Sports injuries---besides football, they are
common in soccer, boxing, baseball, lacrosse, skateboarding, hockey,
cycling, basketball, and other high-impact or extreme sports Explosive
blasts and other combat injuries\[307\] At Amen Clinics, we see patients
with head injuries from all of these causes. In particular, we have been
studying the association between football and brain injuries for several
years. When I first started looking at scans, I saw Pop Warner and high
school players between the ages of 8 and 18 with clear evidence of TBIs.
I was horrified. And then I saw college players whose brains showed even
more damage. In the past decade, I've met with many active and former
NFL players whose scans were even worse. I was heartened when President
Barack Obama and LeBron James both said they would not let their
children play tackle football. I took it as a sign that this principle
is beginning to become part of our cultural fabric. However, this
message

isn't hitting the population equally. A 2019 article in the Atlantic
reported that white boys in upper-income communities are ditching
football for other sports while black boys in lower-income neighborhoods
are still flocking to football. In a study of 50,000 students from 8th
grade to 12th grade, 44 percent of black boys reported playing tackle
football compared with 29 percent of white boys.\[308\] We need to do a
better job of getting the message out to all parents and young people
that tackle football and other contact sports can have devastating
lasting effects on their lives.

Tackle football and other contact sports can have devastating lasting
effects on your life.

Since 2000, more than 350,000 military veterans have had TBIs.\[309\]
Those injuries mean the Iraq and Afghanistan wars will likely have
consequences for the next 70 years because these veterans will have an
increased risk for brain health/mental health issues. And as you have
seen, the impact of those TBIs will spread beyond the veterans
themselves and affect their children and the generations after that. To
put an end to this, they need our BRIGHT MINDS approach more than ever
and to stand against the cultural norms that dismiss head trauma as a
serious issue.

HEAD TRAUMA THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Allow children to hit soccer
balls with their heads; play tackle football; ski or ride bicycles
without helmets; ride large horses; play hockey; and engage in other
high-risk behaviors. 2. Encourage players on a team (especially the
better ones) to go back into the game as quickly as possible after
suffering a concussion. 3. Put fluorescent lights in all classrooms and
workspaces to increase symptoms of anxiety, irritability, depression, or
decreased concentration related to Irlen syndrome. THE BENEVOLENT RULER
WOULD . . . 1. Encourage the population to love their brains and the
brains of their children and protect them at all costs. 2. Ban children
and teenagers from hitting soccer balls with their head or engaging in
high-risk activities. Children and teens cannot give informed consent
admitting they know and accept the risks of head injuries. Often parents
approve of behaviors where they are unaware of the risks. 3. Consider
delaying teens getting their driver's licenses by a year to help cut
down on motor vehicle accidents and head injuries.

HEAD INJURY AND MENTAL ILLNESS Research shows that head injuries
increase the risk of: Depression\[310\] Anxiety and panic
disorders\[311\] Psychosis\[312\] Post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD)\[313\] Suicide\[314\] Drug and alcohol abuse\[315\]
ADD/ADHD\[316\] Learning problems\[317\] Borderline and antisocial
personality disorders\[318\] Dementia\[319\] Aggression\[320\]

Homelessness\[321\] Victimization\[322\] Loss of or changes in sense of
smell or taste\[323\] Head trauma may also increase the risk of
incarceration. \[324\] In the United States, 25 to 87 percent of inmates
say they have suffered a TBI compared with 10 to 38 percent of the
general population.\[325\] And the latest statistics from the Bureau of
Justice Statistics show that 181,500 veterans are incarcerated.\[326\]
In our database of tens of thousands of patients, 40 percent had a
significant brain injury before they came to see us. When people ask me
what the single most important lesson I've learned from looking at more
than 170,000 brain scans is, I reply, "Mild traumatic brain injury is a
major cause of psychiatric problems, and very few people know it." I
hate the terms mild traumatic brain injury and mild concussions because
they imply these injuries don't cause lasting damage, which is often not
the case at all. Anyone who has played a contact sport likely has
experienced many subconcussive blows, which jostled the brain but did
not cause immediate symptoms. The famous boxer Joe Louis (1914--1981) is
quoted as saying, "It's not the big hits that cause dementia, but rather
it is the thousands of little hits."

Head trauma is a major cause of psychiatric illness, and very few people
know it because most mental health professionals never look at the
brains of their patients, nor do they check the hormones of the brain.

It is important to note that many people forget they've had a
significant head injury in the past. At Amen Clinics, we routinely ask
patients several times whether they have had a head injury. Our intake
paperwork asks the question "Have you ever had a head injury?" The
historian, who gathers patients' histories before they see the
physician, asks them again about head injuries. The computer testing we
have patients complete asks a third time about head injuries. If I see
no, no, no as answers, I ask again. If I get a fourth no, I will then
say, "Are you sure? Have you ever fallen out of a tree, fallen off a
fence, or dived into a shallow pool? Did you play contact sports? Have
you ever been in a car accident?" I'm constantly amazed at how many
people think their head injuries were too insignificant to mention. For
others, they simply do not remember the incident because amnesia is a
common occurrence in head traumas. When asked the question for the fifth
time, one patient put his hand on his forehead and said, "Oh, yeah! When
I was five years old, I fell out of a second-story window." Likewise, I
have had other patients forget they went through windshields, fell out
of moving vehicles, or were knocked unconscious when they fell off their
bicycles. Consider YouTube superstar Logan Paul. The controversial
internet personality, who is known for his wild, risk-taking pranks and
dangerous stunts, has gained more than 15 million followers. But he has
also amassed some harsh critics and was named one of the most hated
celebrities of 2018. Some people demanded he be banned from YouTube
after he posted an insensitive video of a corpse hanging in a Japanese
forest where people go to die by suicide. Logan came to see me to find
out why he makes so many bad decisions, why he lacks empathy, and why he
is incapable of maintaining a committed relationship. "I

want to figure out why I think and act the way I do," he said in a video
about his visit to Amen Clinics. "I'm a bit of a hooligan, a
troublemaker." As I do with all our patients, I asked him if he had ever
experienced head trauma. He told me about a trampoline accident that had
fractured his skull when he was in seventh grade. I asked him if there
was any other trauma, and he said no. But a few hours later, he revealed
something else. Logan shared that he had also been a linebacker and
running back on his high school football team. "I was always getting hit
in the head," he admitted. He didn't think of that as "trauma," though.
Logan's brain SPECT scan showed low blood flow and abnormal activity in
key areas of his PFC. His history of repetitive head trauma from
football combined with the trampoline accident was the main reason
behind his bad decisions, lack of empathy, and trouble with
relationships. One of the saddest professional encounters I had was with
a mother after I wrote a column on head trauma in the Daily Republic,
the local newspaper where I lived in Northern California during the
1990s. A week or so after it appeared, a mother came to see me. She told
me that her 20-year-old daughter had killed herself several months
earlier, and she was grief stricken over the unbelievable turn of events
in her life. "She was the most ideal child a mother could have," she
said. "She did great in school. She was polite, cooperative, and a joy
to have around. Then it all changed. Two years ago, she had a bicycle
accident. She accidentally hit a branch in the street and was flipped
over the handlebars, landing on the left side of her face. She was
unconscious when an onlooker got to her, but shortly thereafter she came
to. Nothing was the same after that. She was moody, angry, easily set
off. She started to

complain of 'bad thoughts' in her head. I took her to see a therapist,
but it didn't seem to help. One evening, I heard a loud noise out front.
She had shot and killed herself on our front lawn."

Head Trauma Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) 1. One or
more head injuries 2. Contact sports with concussions 3. Contact sports
with subconcussive blows 4. Irlen syndrome

Unrecognized Irlen Syndrome Leads to Mental Illness Irlen syndrome is a
visual processing problem, where certain colors of the light spectrum
irritate the brain. It runs in families and is common after TBIs. Anyone
experiencing symptoms of anxiety, irritability, depression, or decreased
concentration should be screened for it. Common symptoms include light
sensitivity; being bothered by glare, sunlight, headlights, or
streetlights strain or fatigue with computer use fatigue, headaches,
mood changes, restlessness, or an inability to stay focused with bright
or fluorescent lights

trouble reading words that are on white, glossy paper words or letters
shifting, shaking, blurring, moving, running together, disappearing, or
becoming difficult to perceive while reading difficulty reading music
feeling tense, tired, sleepy, or even getting headaches with reading
problems judging distance and difficulty with such things as escalators,
stairs, ball sports, driving, or coordination migraine headaches You can
learn more about Irlen syndrome at www.irlen.com.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR HEAD TRAUMA RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Love your brain, and find out if you have had a
concussion or head injury (psychological circle because you need to
recognize what constitutes head trauma). Think back (or ask your mom).
Did you ever . . . Fall out of a tree or down stairs? Fall off a horse
or roof? Dive into a shallow pool? Fall off a fence head first? Have a
car accident (as a driver or passenger)? Have a whiplash accident? Have
a work-related head injury? Hit your head on a ball, the ground, or
someone else's helmet in sports?

Suffer a concussion playing sports?\[327\] 2. Avoid any future head
injuries by protecting your head. This is worth repeating over and over:
Protect your head. It contains your brain, which runs everything in your
life. Seems obvious, right? Yet we let little children hit soccer balls
with their heads and do dangerous gymnastic routines. Explosive new
research shows that professional soccer players have a 300 to 500
percent increased risk of dementia.\[328\] People cheer at high school
football games when the opposing quarterback is knocked out of the game
with a vicious hit to his head. Many fans love the fights in hockey so
much that the NHL has not yet considered eliminating them from the
game.\[329\] I, too, was a crazy football fan. I played football in high
school and for fun on weekends; I was a passionate Los Angeles Rams and
Washington Redskins fan. The Redskins won the Super Bowl when I lived
near Washington, DC, where I was doing my psychiatric residency at the
Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Football had been part of my life, and
nothing in my medical training caused me to question my devotion to
it--- until I started to look at the brain and could clearly see the
damage it was doing to people's brains and their lives. Only engage in
high-risk activities if you don't care about the rest of your life.
Other sports besides football can also be problematic, including hockey,
soccer,\[330\] horseback riding, auto racing, skiing,

and others. Wear your seat belt and, as you age, protect yourself from
falls, which is one of the greatest risk factors for head injuries. 3.
Actively engage in repairing any past head injuries (psychological
circle because you need to believe that you can heal your brain). If you
have had a head injury, the appropriate treatment can help if you are
serious about doing the right things for your brain, providing the
support it needs, and attacking all of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. I
believe the secret to our success with our patients with TBIs is that we
use a BRIGHT MINDS approach in all areas, including nutraceuticals.
Other treatments include neurofeedback and HBOT, which are detailed
below. Neurofeedback: Using your mind to control your physiology for
better brain health/mental health. Did you know that you can control
your hand temperature, heart rate, and even brain waves with your mind?
Or that in doing so, you can reduce the symptoms of TBI, stress,
anxiety, depression, and more? Your mind is more powerful than you know.
I first began learning about therapies that involve using the mind to
control our physiology back in the 1980s. In 1987, I took a ten-day
training course in a treatment technique called biofeedback that uses
technology to measure heart rate, breathing rate, brain wave patterns,
hand temperature, sweat gland activity, and muscle tension. The basic
concept is simple---once you

know your heart rate or breathing patterns, for example, you can learn
to use mental exercises and focused attention to control them. You can
learn to slow your heart rate, warm your hands, decrease sweat gland
activity, and so on. That same year, I was assigned to be the chief
psychiatrist at Fort Irwin in the Mojave Desert, where army soldiers
were training to fight the Russians. Among the soldiers in that isolated
desert, there was a high incidence of stress, depression, anxiety
disorders, drug abuse, and domestic violence. In an effort to help them,
I used biofeedback to help them change their own physiology and reduce
their stress. As I taught people about this method, I developed a
consistent internal thought in dealing with my patients: "Teach them
skills to manage their emotions and mind; don't just give them pills."
As fascinating and helpful as biofeedback was, the part of the training
course I took that really changed the trajectory of my psychiatric
career was a technique called neurofeedback--- also called brainwave or
EEG biofeedback. While many psychiatrists at that time still considered
the brain to be a "black box," the professors in this course showed it
was possible to look at brain wave signatures and teach patients how to
manipulate them. It turned my view of treatment upside down and paved
the way for me to become interested in looking at the brain with SPECT
scans. It was in that series of lectures that I first got the idea that
would become the

signature statement of my professional life: "You are not stuck with the
brain you have; you can change it! You can change your brain and your
life." When I introduced neurofeedback to the soldiers at Fort Irwin, I
saw firsthand how it helped them decrease their impulsivity and anxiety
and improve their attention, learning, and mood. Now, more than 30 years
later, there are more than 1,000 scientific studies showing that
neurofeedback can help a wide variety of mental health and brain-related
conditions, such as TBI\[331\] Depression\[332\] ADD/ADHD\[333\]
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)\[334\] Addiction\[335\] Memory in
healthy people\[336\] Memory post-stroke\[337\] Epilepsy\[338\]
Pain\[339\] Balance in Parkinson's patients\[340\]

Skills, not just pills.

Brain Wave Basics What are brain waves? When masses of neurons
communicate with each other, the electrical activity that's transmitted
creates brain waves. The most common brain wave patterns are:

delta waves (1--4 cycles per second)---very slow brain waves, seen
mostly during sleep; high in TBI and poor memory states theta waves
(5--7 cycles per second)---slow brain waves, seen during creativity,
daydreaming, and twilight states; higher in ADD/ADHD, impulsivity, poor
memory, and brain fog states alpha waves (8--12 cycles per
second)---brain waves seen during relaxed states beta waves (13--20
cycles per second)---fast brain waves seen during focused, thinking,
analytic states; higher in anxiety states high beta waves (21--40 cycles
per second)---fast brain waves seen during intense concentration or
anxiety gamma waves (\>40 cycles per second)---very fast brain waves,
often seen during meditation and creative states

Neurofeedback is a computer-based interactive therapy that uses video
games to help people regulate their brain wave states. For example, at
Amen Clinics, patients sit in front of a computer monitor and play a
biofeedback game. If they increase the "beta" activity or decrease the
"theta" activity, the game continues. However, if the player is unable
to maintain the desired brain wave state, the game stops. People find
the activity fun, and they gradually learn to achieve a healthier brain
wave pattern. Retraining the brain to maintain a more optimal brain wave
state takes time, however,

and people often require 20 to 60 sessions before being able to recreate
the results on their own. Many people find that the benefits are worth
it. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT)---see chapter 5, "B Is for Blood
Flow." 4. Get your hormones tested, including thyroid, DHEA, and
testosterone. Remember that your pituitary gland often gets injured
during head trauma. Hormones are often low in people who have sustained
head injuries. (For more information, see chapter 13, "N Is for
Neurohormone Issues.") 5. Consider getting a functional imaging study,
such as SPECT or QEEG, if you are struggling with your behavior or
memory. 6. Take nutraceuticals that are essential to help support the
brain's healing process. Multivitamin/mineral complex---a high dose
supplement, with higher doses of vitamins B6, B12, folate, and D for
nutrient support. Omega-3 fatty acids---highly concentrated and
purified, two grams of total EPA+DHA. Dr. Michael Lewis's book When
Brains Collide details how omega-3 fatty acids can facilitate healing
after a concussion and relieve symptoms without medication.\[341\]

A combination of ginkgo (to support blood flow), acetyl-L-carnitine (to
support mitochondrial energy), huperzine A (to support acetylcholine),
N-acetylcysteine, alpha-lipoic acid (for antioxidant support), and
phosphatidylserine (for nerve cell membrane support).

BRIGHT MINDS: HEAD TRAUMA STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE
MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Deny that brain injuries are
likely to cause mental health issues. 2. Engage in habits that increase
your risk for head trauma. Play contact sports. Never wear a helmet
while skiing, biking, riding a motorcycle, etc. Play soccer and head
soccer balls repeatedly. Participate in high-risk adventure
activities---free climbing, bungee jumping, etc. Climb trees and ladders
and go on the roof. Dive into the ocean or pool without knowing the
depth of the water. Don't wear a seat belt. Drive too fast and text
while driving. Text while walking. Don't practice balance exercises as
you age. 3. Avoid the strategies that protect your brain. STEPS TO END
MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1.
Acknowledge that brain injuries could be causing mental health issues
and actively repair past head trauma. 2. Avoid anything that increases
your risk for head trauma. 3. Engage regularly in healthy habits that
protect your brain. Avoid contact sports. Avoid high-risk activities.
Don't climb trees or ladders or go on the roof. Don't dive headfirst
into any body of water. Always wear a seat belt in the car. Always wear
a helmet when skiing or riding a bike.

Don't text while driving or walking. Consider neurofeedback, HBOT, and
nutraceuticals. Practice balance exercises, especially as you age.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Head Trauma Tiny Habit to Start Today When I get
in the car, I will fasten my seat belt. When I go into the house, I will
limit the number of packages I carry at one time to minimize the risk of
falling. When I go skiing or biking, I will put on a helmet. When I must
go up on the roof, I will make sure it is absolutely safe. When I walk
or drive, I will slow down and pay attention to my surroundings. When I
walk or drive, I will put my phone out of sight so I cannot text. When I
go downstairs, I will hold the handrail. When (and if) I experience a
head trauma, I will check my hormones and optimize any that are low.

\[304\] Joe Namuth, interview by Howard Stern, "How Joe Namath Reversed
His Own Brain Damage Caused by Football," The Howard Stern Show, June
24, 2019, www.youtube.com/watch?v=s7nxU3QadIA&feature=youtu.be. \[305\]
"Traumatic Brain Injury and Concussion," Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, March 3, 2019,
www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/get_the_facts.html. \[306\] Blue Cross
Blue Shield, "The Health of America Report: The Steep Rise in Concussion
Diagnoses in the U.S.," September 27, 2016,
https://www.bcbs.com/the-health-of-america/reports/the-steep-riseconcussion-diagnoses-the-us.
\[307\] Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017),
124--25. \[308\] Alana Semuels, "The White Flight from Football,"
Atlantic, February 1, 2019,
www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2019/02/football-white-flight-racialdivide/581623/.
\[309\] "DoD Worldwide Numbers for TBI," Defense and Veterans Brain
Injury Center, July 7, 2019,
http://dvbic.dcoe.mil/dod-worldwide-numbers-tbi. \[310\] A. L. Zaninotto
et al., "Updates and Current Perspectives of Psychiatric Assessments
after Traumatic Brain Injury: A Systematic Review," Frontiers in
Psychiatry 7 (June 14, 2016): 95. \[311\] R. J. Schachar et al., "Mental
Health Implications of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) in Children and
Youth," Journal of Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
24, no. 2, (Fall 2015) : 100--108. \[312\] Daryl and Daniel C. Fujii,
"Psychotic Disorder Due to Traumatic Brain Injury: Analysis of Case
Studies in the Literature," Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences 24, no. 3 (Summer 2012): 278--89. \[313\] G. J. McHugo et
al., "The Prevalence of Traumatic Brain Injury among People With
Co-Occurring Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders," Journal of Head
Trauma Rehabilitation 32, no. 3 (May/June 2017) : E65--E74. \[314\]
Jessica L. Mackelprang et al., "Adverse Outcomes among Homeless
Adolescents and Young Adults Who Report a History of Traumatic Brain
Injury," American Journal of Public Health 104, no. 10 (October 2014):
1986-- 92. \[315\] Ibid. \[316\] Schachar et al., "Mental Health
Implications of Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI)." \[317\] R.
Lajiness-O'Neill et al., "Memory and Learning in Pediatric Traumatic
Brain Injury: A Review and Examination of Moderators of Outcome,"
Applied Neuropsychology 17, no. 2 (April 2010): 83--92. \[318\] G. J.
McHugo et al., "The Prevalence of Traumatic Brain Injury among People
with Co-Occurring Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders," Journal of
Head Trauma Rehabilitation 32, no. 3 (May/June 2017): E65--E74. \[319\]
R. C. Gardner et al., "Dementia Risk after Traumatic Brain Injury vs
Nonbrain Trauma: The Role of Age and Severity," JAMA Neurology 17, no.
12 (December 2014): 1490--97.

\[320\] V. Rao et al., "Aggression after Traumatic Brain Injury:
Prevalence and Correlates," Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences 21, no. 4 (2009): 420--29. \[321\] J. Topolovec-Vranic et
al., "Traumatic Brain Injury among People Who Are Homeless: A Systematic
Review," BMC Public Health 12 (December 2012): 1059. \[322\]
Mackelprang, "Adverse Outcomes among Homeless Adolescents," 1986--92.
\[323\] P. J. Schechter and R. I. Henkin, "Abnormalities of Taste and
Smell after Head Trauma," Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
Psychiatry 35, no. 7 (1974): 802--10. \[324\] "One in Four Prisoners
Have Suffered Traumatic Brain Injury, Study Finds," Glasgow Live,
January 18, 2019,
www.glasgowlive.co.uk/news/glasgownews/one-four-prisoners-suffered-traumatic-15695721.
\[325\] Brian Im et al., "TBI and Incarceration," American Psychological
Association, December 2014,
www.apa.org/pi/disability/resources/publications/newsletter/2014/12/incarcera
tion. \[326\] Jennifer Bronson et al., "Veterans in Prison and Jail,
2011--2012," Bureau of Justice Statistics, December 7, 2015,
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm? ty=pbdetail&iid=5479. \[327\] I ask all
my patients these questions and referenced them in Memory Rescue, 134.
\[328\] Daniel F. Mackay et al., "Neurodegenerative Disease Mortality
among Former Professional Soccer Players," New England Journal of
Medicine (October 21, 2019), https://doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1908483. \[329\]
"Fighting in Ice Hockey," Wikipedia, June 12, 2019,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fighting_in_ice_hockey. \[330\] H. Ling et al.,
"Mixed Pathologies Including Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy Account
for Dementia in Retired Association Football (Soccer) Players," Acta
Neuropathologica 133, no. 3 (March 2017): 337--352. \[331\] T. Surmeli
et al., "Quantitative EEG Neurometric Analysis-Guided Neurofeedback
Treatment in Postconcussion Syndrome (PCS): Forty Cases. How Is
Neurometric Analysis Important for the Treatment of PCS and as a
Biomarker?" Clinical EEG and Neuroscience 48, no. 3 (June 27, 2016):
217--30. \[332\] E. J. Cheon et al., "The Efficacy of Neurofeedback in
Patients with Major Depressive Disorder: An Open Labeled Prospective
Study," Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback 41, no. 1 (March 2016):
103--10. \[333\] V. Meisel et al., "Neurofeedback and Standard
Pharmacological Intervention in ADHD: A Randomized Controlled Trial with
Six-month Follow-up," Biological Psychology 94, no. 1 (September 2013):
12--21. \[334\] J. Kopřivová et al., "Prediction of Treatment Response
and the Effect of Independent Component Neurofeedback in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Randomized, Sham-Controlled,
Double-Blind Study," Neuropsychobiology 67,

no. 4 (2013): 210--23. \[335\] R. Rostami and F. Dehghani-Arani,
"Neurofeedback Training as a New Method in Treatment of Crystal
Methamphetamine Dependent Patients: A Preliminary Study," Applied
Psychophysiological Biofeedback 40, no. 3 (September 2015): 151--61.
\[336\] J. Guez et al., "Influence of Electroencephalography
Neurofeedback Training on Episodic Memory: A Randomized,
Sham-Controlled, Double-Blind Study," Memory 23, no. 5 (2015): 683--94.
S. Xiong et al., "Working Memory Training Using EEG Neurofeedback in
Normal Young Adults," Bio-Medical Materials and Engineering 24, no. 6
(2014): 3637--44. J. R. Wang and S. Hsieh, "Neurofeedback Training
Improves Attention and Working Memory Performance," Clinical
Neurophysiology 124, no. 12 (December 2013): 2406--20. \[337\] S. E.
Kober et al., "Specific Effects of EEG Based Neurofeedback Training on
Memory Functions in Post-Stroke Victims," Journal of NeuroEngineering
and Rehabilitation 12 (December 2015): 107. \[338\] P. Kubik et al.,
"Neurofeedback Therapy Influence on Clinical Status and Some EEG
Parameters in Children with Localized Epilepsy," Przegl Lek 73, no. 3
(2016): 157--60. \[339\] M. P. Jensen et al. "Use of Neurofeedback to
Enhance Response to Hypnotic Analgesia in Individuals with Multiple
Sclerosis," International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis
64, no 1 (2016): 1--23. \[340\] A. Azarpaikan et al., "Neurofeedback and
Physical Balance in Parkinson's Patients," Gait & Posture 40, no. 1
(2014): 177--81. \[341\] Michael D. Lewis, When Brains Collide: What
Every Athlete and Parent Should Know about the Prevention and Treatment
of Concussions and Head Injuries (n.p.: Lioncrest Publishing, 2016).

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 10

T IS FOR TOXINS DETOX YOUR MIND AND BODY Toxicity is the primary driver
of disease. D R. J O S E P H P I Z Z O R N O , N P , T H E T OX I N S O
LU T I O N

STEVEN

Steven, 32, was a firefighter who suffered from depression, brain fog,
and symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) when he first came
to see me. I had already seen his brother for learning issues at school,
his father for jobrelated anxiety, and his stepmother for depression.
All of them had mentioned to me their concern for Steven, especially
after learning about the connection between brain health and mental
health. Firefighters are exposed to environmental toxins, head trauma,
and emotional trauma. Steven initially asked me, "How can I deal with
the trauma? I wish I could forget what my eyes have seen, from children
being burned to losing whole families in car crashes and fires." His
scan showed signs of PTSD, with his emotional brain working way too
hard, plus he also had evidence of toxic exposure, likely from breathing
in carbon

monoxide and the poisonous chemicals often released by burning
furniture. This toxic look is very common among the many firefighters we
have seen. Seeing his scan caused Steven to get serious about brain
health. Within six months, he felt much better and his brain was
healthier. STEVEN'S SPECT SCANS BEFORE AND AFTER TREATMENT

Toxic: overall low blood flow

Healthier overall

Steven isn't alone. The dangerous professions of firefighters, police
officers, first responders, and other everyday heroes subject those
workers to long-lasting negative impact on their brain function. They
are exposed to environmental toxins such as carbon monoxide, benzene,
asbestos, and diesel exhaust; head injuries; and emotional trauma.
Studies show an elevated risk of PTSD, depression, heavy drinking, and
suicide in first responders.\[342\] Unfortunately, they are less likely
to seek help because of the stigma associated with having a mental
illness, fearing they will be labeled as weak or unfit for duty. Their
professions have convinced them that they are superheroes and nothing
could or should get to them.\[343\]

TOXINS AND THE BRAIN

Your brain is the most metabolically active organ in your body. As such,
it is vulnerable to damage from toxins. Toxins are one of the major
causes of brain health/mental health issues that traditional
psychiatrists almost completely ignore. During my first decade as a
psychiatrist I ignored them too. But when I started our work with brain
SPECT imaging, I quickly began to see toxic patterns on patients who
were not substance abusers. Uh-oh, I thought to myself, there is much
more to my patients' problem than I have considered. I wonder, how many
people with toxic exposure have I missed?

Toxins are one of the major causes of brain health/mental health issues
that traditional psychiatrists almost completely ignore. Environmental
toxins impact nearly every aspect of your body and can damage the brain,
leading to a variety of physical and psychiatric symptoms. On the
physical side, issues can include autoimmune diseases, diabetes, cancer,
fatigue, numbness, tingling, tremors, allergies, abdominal pain,
diarrhea, smelly stools, bad breath, weight issues, skin rashes, sweats,
and more. From a psychiatric standpoint, exposure to toxins can increase
the risk of depression, suicide, attention deficit disorder/attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD), learning problems, memory
problems, brain fog, autism, temper outbursts, psychotic behavior, and
dementia. Our biological systems get rid of toxins (through the gut,
liver, kidneys, and skin), but when those natural detoxification
processes are overwhelmed, we can experience brain fog, fatigue, and
even life-threatening illnesses. And it can certainly disrupt our mental
health.

TEN WAYS TOXINS POISON YOUR BRAIN AND CONTRIBUTE TO MENTAL ILLNESS 1.
Reduce cerebral blood flow, which on SPECT scans has been associated
with depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, ADD/ADHD, and more. As
you learned in chapter 5, low blood flow is the number one brain-imaging
predictor that a person will develop Alzheimer's disease.\[344\] 2.
Disrupt the endocrine system, interfering with hormone production,
causing serious imbalances, and increasing the risk of depression,
anxiety, and panic attacks. 3. Impair the immune system, increasing your
risk of autoimmune disorders and cancer, as well as anxiety, depression,
and even psychosis. 4. Disrupt the gut microbiome, resulting in leaky
gut and accompanying problems, such as mood and anxiety disorders,
ADD/ADHD, Parkinson's, and Alzheimer's. 5. Increase the likelihood of
developing diabetes and obesity, since as toxic load rises, so does
risk. Toxins are also called diabesogens and obesogens because they
contribute to diabetes and obesity, which raise the risk for anxiety,
depression, and Alzheimer's disease. 6. Damage DNA, which can accelerate
aging of the brain and lead to problems with mood, anxiety,
irritability, temper, and irrational behavior, as well as memory.

7. Impair enzyme systems, which disrupts many biological processes, such
as the ability to produce energy and fight free radicals. 8. Harm
organs, including the digestive tract, liver, kidneys, and brain. This
damage reduces your detoxification system's ability to do its job,
creating an even greater buildup of toxins. 9. Alter gene expression,
possibly turning on harmful gene variants and/or turning off beneficial
ones. 10. Damage cell membranes and disrupt communication between cells.

How Toxic Is Your Brain? Toxins Exposure Quiz Over the years, our clinic
has developed a checklist to help patients determine how much contact
they may have had with harmful substances. By answering the questions
below, you can begin to determine your own risk ---and begin taking
steps to combat that exposure. 1. Do you smoke, or are you around
secondhand smoke? 2. Do you smoke marijuana? 3. Do you use conventional
cleaning products and inadvertently breathe the fumes? 4. Have you been
exposed to carbon monoxide? 5. Do you travel on planes more than six
times a year? 6. Do you pump your own gas or breathe automobile exhaust?
7. Do you live in an area with moderate to high air pollution?\[345\] 8.
Have you lived or worked in a building that had water damage and mold in
it? 9. Do you come in contact with flame-resistant clothing or carpet,
or with furnishings sprayed with chemicals to prevent stains? 10. Do you
spray your garden, farm, or orchard with pesticides or live near an area
with pesticides?\[346\] 11. Do you paint indoors without ventilation?
12. Do you have more than four glasses of alcohol a week?

13. Do you regularly eat processed or fast foods? 14. Do you regularly
eat conventionally raised produce, meat, or dairy, or farm-raised fish?
15. Do you eat large (i.e., mercury-contaminated) fish, such as
swordfish? 16. Do you eat nonorganic fruits and vegetables on a regular
basis? 17. Do you consume foods with artificial colors or sweeteners,
such as diet sodas, or use artificial sweeteners, such as aspartame
(NutraSweet), sucralose (Splenda), or saccharin (Sweet'N Low)? 18. Do
you use more than two health and/or beauty products per day? (Most
people never read the labels or understand how many chemicals are
included.) 19. Do you live in a house that contains lead pipes or copper
plumbing soldered with lead (built prior to 1978)? 20. Do you wear
lipstick or kiss someone with lipstick made with lead? (Sixty percent of
the lipstick sold in the United States has lead in it. \[347\]) 21. Do
you have mercury amalgam fillings? How many? 22. Do you work in a job
where you are exposed to environmental toxins, such as firefighting,
painting, welding, longshoreman? 23. Have you had general anesthesia?
How many times?\[348\]

TOXINS THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Repeal laws that ensure clean air,
clean water, and safe buildings. 2. Ignore companies that dump toxic
waste. 3. Promote chemically laden foods. 4. Highlight research that
touts the health benefits of alcohol and marijuana. 5. Encourage teens
to start smoking cannabis, because it has been found to increase the
risk of depression and suicide later in life. One study found that using
the drug as a teen contributes to mental illness in over 500,000 people
in adulthood.\[349\] 6. Disallow labeling of the ingredients in personal
care products, so people wouldn't have to worry about the chemicals they
are putting on their bodies. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1.
Strengthen laws that ensure clean air, clean water, and safe buildings.

2. Penalize companies that dump toxic waste. 3. Expose the dangers of
chemical-laden foods. 4. Highlight research that reveals how alcohol and
marijuana affect brain health. 5. Discourage tweens and teens from
smoking cannabis. 6. Require truthful labeling of all ingredients in
personal care products, so people can make an informed decision about
what they are putting on their bodies.

HOW MODERN SOCIETY IS POISONING THE BRAIN AND CONTRIBUTING TO MENTAL
ILLNESS Every single day, we are exposed to a host of chemicals,
pesticides, fumes, and products that poison the human brain. Common
toxins in the air we breathe, the foods we eat, and the products we rub
on our skin are absorbed into our bodies via our lungs, digestive
system, and pores and can eventually impact the brain. The more exposure
you have to these everyday toxins, the more you are putting your brain
at risk and increasing your chances of brain health/mental health
issues. Look at the following lists and check how many toxic substances
you may have been exposed to, either currently or in the past. You can't
avoid toxins, but you can limit your exposure and boost your natural
ability to detoxify. Detoxifying your world will help you and everyone
in your household, including children. My nieces, Alizé and Amelie,
don't need to increase their risk factors. So we do everything we can to
clean up our environment.

The more exposure you have to these everyday toxins, the more you are
putting your brain at risk and increasing your chances of brain
health/mental health issues.

Common Toxins . . . THAT CAN BE INHALED\[350\] Air pollution Asbestos
Automobile exhaust Aviation fumes Carbon monoxide Cigarette smoke,
secondhand smoke, marijuana smoke Cleaning chemicals Fireplace fumes
Fire retardant fumes Fire toxins (inhaled by first responders fighting
fires) Gasoline fumes Mold Paint and solvent fumes Pesticide or
herbicide residues near farms (also backyard applications) Welding,
soldering fumes

THAT CAN BE INGESTED OR ABSORBED THROUGH THE SKIN\[351\] Apples sprayed
with diphenylamine, which makes them shiny but breaks down into
cancer-causing nitrosamines,\[352\] associated with Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's\[353\] Artificial food dyes, preservatives, and sweeteners
BPA (or bisphenol A; found in plastics, food and drink containers,
dental sealants, and the coating of cash-register receipts) Chemotherapy

General anesthesia in some patients Heavy metals, such as Mercury: in
"silver" dental fillings (50 percent mercury) and contaminated fish.
(The Environmental Protection Agency recommends pregnant women eat fish
no more than twice a week and avoid the big four: king mackerel,
swordfish, shark, and tilefish. Also limit grouper and albacore tuna.)
Lead: in paint, pipes, airline fuel, and lipstick (see pages 187--188)
Cadmium: in cigarettes; soils treated with synthetic fertilizers; and
industrial and hazardous waste sites. It is highly toxic and accumulates
in the liver and kidneys and damages your ability to detoxify. It is
linked to osteoporosis, heart disease, cancer and diabetes. Once it is
in your body, it takes 16 years to get rid of just half of it! Excessive
alcohol Foods manufactured with plastic equipment, leaking plasticizers
Health and beauty products (see chart on pages 190--191) Herbicides such
as glyphosate---for example, Roundup (used in genetically modified
crops)---disrupt the body's endocrine or hormonal system, affecting both
testosterone and estrogen,\[354\] and raise the risk of cancer by 41
percent.\[355\] Herbicides may also damage DNA, making cells age faster
and increasing their susceptibility to cancer. Many medications, such as
benzodiazepines (for anxiety, insomnia) or narcotic pain medications
Marijuana MSG (monosodium glutamate) PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls)
(see "Gone but Not Forgotten" on page 193) Pesticides---such as
organochlorines and organophosphates (neurotoxins)---stimulate enzymes
that turn calories into fat, where toxins are stored. Those in the top 5
percent of organophosphate exposure have a 650 percent increase in
dementia.\[356\] Polluted or tainted water (including lead and arsenic)
Silicone breast implants that leaked

COMMON TOXINS AT THE ROOT OF MENTAL ILLNESS

As a psychiatrist, I have seen many patients with depression, brain fog,
anxiety, poor memory and concentration, word confusion, headaches,
vertigo, and cravings who all had the same thing in common: exposure to
toxins. Here are eight of the most common toxic issues we see at Amen
Clinics.

1.  Alcohol: not a health food Some large-scale studies have found that
    light-to-moderate alcohol use may benefit the heart and
    brain.\[357\] But I see alcohol from a different point of view. I
    worked as an ambulance driver and in emergency rooms where I
    witnessed the tragedy of lives lost due to drunk driving. As a
    psychiatrist for nearly 40 years, I have met with many patients
    whose lives and families have been wrecked by alcohol abuse. And as
    a brain imaging expert, I have seen thousands of SPECT scans of
    "moderate" drinkers, whose brains look terrible, and the scans of
    alcohol abusers that look even worse. When it comes to the brain,
    alcohol is not necessarily the health food it's reported to be.
    Alcohol can harm your cognitive function and psychological
    well-being, and alcohol abuse can contribute to mental illness. For
    example, did you know that people who drink every day have smaller
    brains? \[358\] When it comes to the brain, size matters! Heavy
    alcohol use can alter neurotransmitter and hormonal systems that are
    involved in mood and anxiety disorders. \[359\] And did you know
    that compared to nondrinkers and light drinkers, moderate-to-heavy
    drinkers increase their risk of dementia by 57 percent---and develop
    it earlier?\[360\] Alcohol can also decrease judgment and
    decision-making skills and increase cravings. And because alcohol
    lowers blood flow to the cerebellum, an amazing part of the brain

that is associated with physical movement, it can make you less
coordinated. In the United States, there are 30 million children of
alcoholics, and many of them suffer from PTSD as a result of growing up
in an unpredictable, abusive alcoholic home. Excessive alcohol use is
also a major cause of divorce, incarceration, and financial problems,
which can contribute to sadness, anxiety, and despair. Alcohol is listed
as the seventh leading preventable cause of death and is related to
seven different types of cancer.\[361\] Why do nurses rub alcohol on
your skin before they give you a shot or insert an IV needle? To kill
bacteria. What is the reason alcohol is used to preserve dead specimens?
To kill all the cells and tissues in the specimen. This should make you
wonder what alcohol is doing to your gut. If you want a better brain,
less is more. For people who want to drink and who do not have a history
of addiction in their families, I recommend no more than two to four
normal-size drinks a week. BRAIN SPECT SCAN OF HEAVY ALCOHOL USE

Overall low activity

2.  Marijuana: reason for caution A growing number of states are
    legalizing marijuana for medical and recreational use, which has
    boosted the interest in the drug as a potential therapy for physical
    and mental health issues. Some research suggests it may have some
    benefit for people dealing with depression, anxiety, and
    PTSD;\[362\] however, other studies have found that marijuana can
    have a negative impact on mental health. In 2016, we published the
    largest brain imaging study on marijuana users, showing the overall
    decreased blood flow of 982 users compared to a healthy
    group.\[363\] Blood flow was decreased the most in the right
    hippocampus, which is often involved with Alzheimer's disease and
    all types of memory loss. A 2019 review of 11 studies involving more
    than 23,000 people found that using cannabis as an adolescent
    increased the risk of developing depression and suicidal thoughts or
    suicide attempts in young adulthood. \[364\] Other research shows
    marijuana impairs short-term memory, contributes to learning and
    attention problems,

reduces focus and coordination, and increases the risk for psychosis. In
fact, a 2019 study in The Lancet Psychiatry found that potent cannabis
may be associated with 10 percent of new cases of psychosis.\[365\]

3.  Smoking/vaping: more toxic than you thought Cigarettes are some of
    the most toxic substances around. According to the American Lung
    Association, as cigarettes burn they create about 7,000 chemicals,
    many of which are poisonous. Here are just 10 of the toxins found in
    cigarettes: TOXINS

ALSO FOUND IN . . .

Acetic acid

Hair dye

Ammonia

Cleaning products

Arsenic

Rat poison

Benzene

Rubber cement

Butane

Lighter fluid

Cadmium

Battery acid

Formaldehyde

Embalming fluid

Methanol

Rocket fuel

Tar

Road materials

Toluene

Paint

It's common knowledge that the tobacco industry has promoted smoking
despite its serious negative health effects. But what you may not know
is that it has also promoted the use of its products within psychiatric
settings and has funded research suggesting people with schizophrenia
can benefit from self-medicating with cigarettes.\[366\] Today, as many
as 80 percent of people with schizophrenia smoke.\[367\] They aren't
alone. People

with brain health/mental health or substance abuse issues are more
likely to smoke cigarettes than the general population. In fact, they
smoke nearly 40 percent of all cigarettes, according to the CDC.\[368\]
Although smoking rates have been going down for years, rates of vaping
e-cigarettes are on the rise. A 2018 report involving more than 40,000
teens nationwide showed that more than 20 percent of twelfth graders
said they had vaped nicotine in the previous month. That's twice the
number who had reported vaping in 2017. And 11 percent of eighth graders
admit vaping nicotine in the past year.\[369\] The rate of young people
vaping is rising so rapidly that in 2018, the US surgeon general called
e-cigarette vaping among youth an epidemic.\[370\] Cigarettes---tobacco
and marijuana---as well as vaping nicotine and caffeine delivery systems
cause you to inhale into your lungs a host of fine and ultrafine toxic
junk that can also penetrate your brain. Does size matter? Yes! The
smaller the particle you inhale, the greater its ability to cause
inflammatory reactions and damage your brain. I wanted to see what
vaping caffeine does to the brain, so for an episode of The Dr. Oz Show,
I scanned Dr. Oz before and after he vaped. The results weren't pretty.
After vaping, his scans showed increased activity in the occipital lobes
(the area that makes you notice someone attractive) and decreased
activity in the frontal lobes (the area that puts on the brakes to
prevent bad behavior). This seems like a prescription for divorce!

4.  Mold: a mental illness creator One of the first lessons I learned
    from our brain imaging work is that many everyday things are toxic
    to brain function---and one of the worst is mold. Take it from

Bulletproof Coffee CEO Dave Asprey. He had been struggling with focus
and memory and was barely able to pass his classes at Wharton. Then, in
2003, after reading my book Change Your Brain, Change Your Life, he got
a brain SPECT scan. He says it changed everything in his life. It turned
out that Dave had been exposed to toxic mold in his home. His health
dramatically improved after following specific healing protocols, and he
went on to produce Moldy: The Toxic Mold Movie (watch it online at
https://moldymovie.com).\[371\]

COMMON TOXIC MOLDS MOLD VARIETY

DESCRIPTION AND CONSEQUENCE

Ochratoxin A

Foodborne mold; causes cancer

Aflatoxins

Foodborne mold; causes cancer, can stunt growth in children

Fumonisins

Contaminant in maize as well as wheat and other cereals; implicated in
neural tube defects and stunted growth\[372\]

Zearalenone and other Fusarium mycotoxins

Crop contaminants; disrupts hormone balance (estrogenic)\[373\]

Aspergillus

Found indoors and outside; especially concerning in children\[374\]

Tricothecene, "black mold"

Crop contaminants that can also grow in damp indoor environments;
inhibits protein synthesis; extremely dangerous to skin, kidneys, liver,
and more\[375\]

Another patient, George, 32, came to see us complaining of anxiety,
brain fog, memory problems, and sleep disturbance. From the detailed
history we collected, it became clear that George's symptoms began when
he moved back home from college into his parents' basement apartment.
Mold diagnostic testing revealed George had

high levels of mold toxins in his body. Only after seeing these lab
results did George remember that the basement had flooded on several
occasions.\[376\] We recommended that George remove himself immediately
from the moldy environment, which is the first step for anyone with mold
toxicity. Next, we began treatment consisting of binding agents and
other medications, such as antifungals, as well as metabolic support
supplements. With proper treatment and remediation of the mold problem,
George's symptoms improved. He did not need psychiatric medications; he
simply needed an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment. If no one
had checked him for mold toxins, he probably would have been diagnosed
with one or more mental illnesses and treated (unsuccessfully) with
psychiatric medications. He could have gone years with worsening
symptoms.

Six Common Symptoms of Mold Exposure Unexplained muscle problems Brain
fog, memory problems Difficulty focusing Numbness or "pins and needles"
feeling Digestive issues Breathing problems (chronic cough, sinus
problems, wheezing)

5.  Lead: a clear and present danger

Lead harms the brain, and lead exposure is associated with lower IQ,
speech problems, cancer, cardiovascular problems, arthritis, seizures,
headaches, anemia, kidney disease, a metallic taste, and death from all
causes. Lead exposure is also related to a variety of mental health
issues. In children, it has been associated with ADD/ADHD,\[377\]
learning problems, irritability, aggression, fearfulness, antisocial
behavior, and more.\[378\] It has also been linked to adult-onset
schizophrenia.\[379\] In a 2010 study with nearly 2,000 young adults
with low levels of lead exposure, higher blood levels of lead was
associated with an increased risk of depression and panic disorder. The
researchers concluded that even at levels generally considered safe,
lead exposure could negatively affect mental health.\[380\] The US
government used to report that a "safe" level of lead in the bloodstream
was less than 60 μg/dL (micrograms per deciliter). The current "safe"
level is under 10 μg/dL, and in July 2012, the CDC reported that the
range of 5.0-- 10.0 μg/dL is highly risky for children. Many scientists
say that any level of lead is unsafe. Depending on your age, you may
recall that the government dictated that lead be removed from gasoline
and paint. Strangely, this didn't apply to small aircraft aviation fuel.
At the Amen Clinics, we scanned 100 pilots and saw significant brain
toxicity in twothirds of them. We suspected it was caused by lead and
other toxins that they are exposed to when they fly. In regard to paint,
any house painted white before 1978 has high levels of lead, and once it
chips or peels, it exposes those in the home to lead. And houses built
or remodeled before 1984 likely have lead in the pipe solder. One of the
most widely used cosmetics---lipstick---still contains lead since no
regulation has required that lead be removed from it. Lead was found in
60 percent of national

brands.\[381\] In 2013, researchers at the University of California,
Berkeley, found lead in 24 of 32 lip products tested. Many of the
products contained high levels of eight other metals, including cadmium
and chromium.\[382\]

To avoid buying and ingesting leadcontaminated lip products, know your
lipstick brands and go to www.safecosmetics.org to learn more.

6.  General anesthesia: the risk surgeons don't warn you about\[383\] I
    first became aware of the potentially toxic risk of general
    anesthesia\[384\] when one of my patients called me in tears after
    having knee surgery. She told me she felt as if she had brain fog
    and was afraid she was developing Alzheimer's disease. I had already
    done a SPECT scan on her, so I rescanned her to see if her brain had
    changed. On the new scan, her brain looked toxic. Her frontal and
    temporal lobes, which are both involved in memory and attention,
    looked dramatically worse. Something had negatively affected her
    brain after that first scan. With the BRIGHT MINDS approach in this
    book, she was able to clear the brain fog and regain her memory.
    Some scientific studies show no lasting negative effects and others
    show toxic effects from general anesthesia, but two recent studies
    are notable. In one, children who had undergone general anesthesia
    before the age of four had

lower IQ, diminished language comprehension, and decreased gray matter
in the back of their brains.\[385\] Also, a before-and-after SPECT study
of patients who underwent coronary artery bypass surgery showed that 68
percent had diminished blood flow, which was linked to decreased verbal
and visual memory six months later.\[386\] As you've seen in this book,
low blood flow is one of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors that can
contribute to mental illness. If you have to undergo surgery, I
recommend local or spinal anesthesia whenever possible. If that is not
an option, make sure you do everything you can to optimize your brain
before going under the knife.

If you have to undergo surgery, I recommend local or spinal anesthesia
whenever possible. If that is not an option, make sure you do everything
you can to optimize your brain before going under the knife.

One of my treasured assistants, Karen, who is beloved by our patients,
discovered she had an aortic aneurysm. We had a prior SPECT scan, one
shortly after her aneurysm surgery, and then one after she worked hard
to rehabilitate her brain. No doubt, the surgery had a very negative
impact on her brain and mind, but that was recoverable with the right
BRIGHT MINDS program.

KAREN'S SPECT SCANS BEFORE, AFTER AORTIC ANEURYSM SURGERY, AFTER BRIGHT
MINDS

Before

Overall lower blood flow after surgery

After rehabilitation

7.  Chemotherapy and heavy metals: stealing your mind At Amen Clinics,
    we see many patients who have treated cancer with chemotherapy.
    Chemotherapy kills cancer cells, but it unfortunately can kill
    healthy brain cells too.\[387\] High exposure to heavy metals (e.g.,
    arsenic, mercury, iron, and aluminum) can also lead to memory
    problems. I recommend asking your physician to screen you for heavy
    metals, especially if you know you've been exposed to any.
8.  Personal care products: the ugly side of health and beauty aids How
    many personal care and cosmetic products do you use each day? If
    you're like the average American woman, you apply about 12 products,
    or like the average man, about six. \[388\] According to Statista,
    the cosmetics, perfume, and other toilet preparations industry is
    expected to spend close to \$19 billion on advertising in 2019 to
    encourage us to use more of these everyday items.\[389\] But the
    chemicals in

these products are easily absorbed through your pores and can be
transported to every organ in your body, including your brain. This
means while trying to look better on the outside, you could be poisoning
yourself on the inside and increasing your risk for brain health/mental
health issues. The risk from these items is real. In 2016, Johnson &
Johnson was ordered to pay \$72 million to the family of a woman whose
death from ovarian cancer was associated with the daily use of Johnson's
Baby Powder among other company products.\[390\] If you have symptoms
associated with brain health/mental health issues, I highly recommend
that you ditch personal care products with harmful ingredients to
lighten your toxic load. The Environmental Working Group's Skin Deep
database (http://www.ewg.org/skindeep/) can help. It offers information
on many products with toxic ingredients and suggests healthier
alternatives. The following chart lists chemicals commonly found in
personal care products---along with a brief description of the damage
they can do, and is from The Toxin Solution, an exceptional book by
Joseph Pizzorno, ND, a founder of Bastyr University.

What goes on your body goes in your body.

COMMON CHEMICALS FOUND IN HEALTH AND BEAUTY AIDS CHEMICAL

PURPOSE

TOXICITY

Acrylates

Artificial nails

Neurotoxins\[391\]

Aluminum

Antiperspirant

Potential connection to Alzheimer's disease\[392\]

Formaldehyde

Shampoos, nail polish, hair gel, nail and eyelash glue, body wash, color
cosmetics

Cancer,\[393\] allergic reactions\[394\]

Fragrance

Shampoos, liquid baby soap, nail polish, glues, hair smoothing, body
wash, color cosmetics

Cancer, endocrine disruption, allergic reactions

Oxybenzone

Sunscreen

Hormone disruption, lowers sperm count, skin allergies

Parabens

Preservative, fragrance in cosmetics (eye shadow, foundation, mascara),
shampoos, conditioners, lotions, facial/body cleansers

Hormone issues, breast cancer,\[395\] developmental problems in kids,
reproductive problems, allergies

Phthalates (banned in Europe)

Fragrances in cosmetics Also used in plasticizers (plastic wrap,
packaging)

Hormone disruption; \[396\] lower IQ;\[397\] decreases BDNF in
males,\[398\] which helps neurons grow and connect

Polyethylene glycols (PEGs)

Create suds in shampoos, bubble baths, liquid soap

Cancer,\[399\] birth defects,\[400\] hair loss, allergies

Triclosan

Antimicrobial cleanser, toothpaste

Hormone disruption, \[401\] harmful to the microbiome\[402\]

Lead

Lipstick (kiss of death)

Neurotoxin, damage to

hippocampus and prefrontal cortex\[403\] Source: Dr. Joseph Pizzorno,
ND, The Toxin Solution. Used with permission.

9.  Household items: when home sweet home becomes "home toxic home" Many
    of the common items in your home may harbor potentially harmful
    chemicals, and tackling DIY home projects can increase your exposure
    to toxic substances. For example, carpeting, flame-retardant bedding
    and furniture, flooring, and paints can have high concentrations of
    chemicals. In 2019, researchers from Duke University presented
    evidence showing that children who grow up in homes with a
    flame-retardant sofa had six times more polybrominated diphenyl
    ethers (PBDEs) in their blood serum.\[404\] These chemicals have
    been associated with neurodevelopmental delays, interference with
    the endocrine system, thyroid disruption, obesity, cancer, and other
    conditions.

Pamela: The Surprising Source of Her Depression, Migraines, and Memory
Problems Before coming to Amen Clinics, Pamela would spend most of each
day in bed:

My kids would go out; I'd be lying in bed and missing out on everything.
I would have migraines. I was down to 116 pounds. I couldn't eat; I

couldn't think; I had memory loss. I couldn't finish a sentence. I
couldn't come up with a word. There were times I couldn't even remember
my children's names. Nobody could give me a reason for that. This just
wasn't the person I was before. I was vibrant. I was a successful
businesswoman. I had it all together and then all of a sudden, I was
falling apart and everything was getting progressively worse. . . . I
tried everything. You name it, I've tried it . . . but more things would
keep happening. Something else would add to my list of illnesses. I'd
end up getting depressed, because it didn't seem like anybody really
understood. I was on 21 prescription medications, because that's all
they would give me. "Well, if you feel this, that's not working. Well,
here, I'll add this drug to you, and I'll add that drug to you." I felt
that somewhere out there, there had to be an answer, and I just had to
find the answer. A lot of times, some of these doctors would tell me it
was in my head. I'm thinking, No, this is physical. I can't breathe.
I've got migraines. These are not mental issues. These are all physical
problems. . . .

When I started having these memory issues, at that point, I thought, You
know what, I need to go to Amen Clinics. When I went to Dr. \[Muneer\]
Ali, I walked in with my 21 prescriptions: my 11 in the morning and my
10 in the evening. He said, "Oh, we're not doing that anymore." He got
rid of all of my prescriptions but five of them. Pamela spent three days
at the Amen Clinic in Atlanta, where the staff took a thorough history
and SPECT scans, and did extensive laboratory testing. Dr. Ali found a
genetic abnormality that made it harder for Pamela to fight off viruses.
Pamela also discovered she had Lyme. When Dr. Ali found out that Pamela
had a leaky roof, he did a mold test, which came back positive for black
mold, one of the worst kinds. The Lyme and mold explained a great deal
about her symptoms.

When I walked in here, I was so sick, and I do not look like I do now.
I've got a smile, and I'm sitting up. I have energy, and I'm completing
my sentences. . . . I can remember everything. It's like a rebirth. I
wanted to be a better mom for my kids. That was my goal.

Disturbing Fact: One of the most effective ways for a woman to decrease
her toxic load is through breastfeeding, which decreases breast cancer
risk. \[405\] Unfortunately, the baby gets the brunt of it.

Gone but not Forgotten: PCBs and Their Lingering Effects on Brain/Mental
Health Polychlorinated biphenyls, better known as PCBs, were industrial
chemicals used in electrical products and appliances. Though they were
banned in 1979, they don't break down well so they are still pervasive
in our water, soil, and air. And because of this, they continue to cause
problems. A 2014 study found that people with higher levels of
work-related exposure to PCBs had an increased risk for developing
depression.\[406\] Other studies show possible links to changes in the
brain associated with autism, ADD/ADHD, schizophrenia, and learning
problems.\[407\] PCBs also inhibit the workings of the thyroid, so you
feel tired all the time. In addition, PCBs can build up in the fatty
tissue of fish that live in contaminated rivers or coastal areas. Eating
those fish cause a build-up of PCBs in your fatty tissue as well. Limit
your exposure by trimming the skin and fat from raw and cooked fish and
avoid fried fish.

CHECKUP FOR TOXIN ISSUES Your detoxification organs include your gut,
liver, kidneys, and skin. To operate as intended, they must be healthy.
Your liver, for instance, filters blood to identify and hold toxins. Its
enzyme systems break them down, and the liver produces bile to excrete
them. Your liver has finite toxinprocessing capacity, which means it is
highly vulnerable to toxic overload. Your kidneys filter all your blood
60 times per day. Because kidney function decreases with age---about 50
percent from age 20 to 85---your support is critical.\[408\] Chapter 7
offers ways to check up on your gut. For the other organs, keep reading.

Note: If you have limited resources, skip the expensive lab tests and
spend your money on high-quality, detoxifying food.

Lab tests LIVER FUNCTION

ALT (SGPT)---normal range: 7--56 units per liter (U/L) AST
(SGOT)---normal range: 5--40 U/L Bilirubin---normal range: 0.2--1.2
mg/dL Zinc---normal range: 60--110 mcg/dL (low zinc will limit
detoxification in the liver) If liver function tests are high, check for
excessive sugar and simple carbohydrate intake, alcohol use/abuse,
hepatitis or medications that raise liver enzymes, such as acetaminophen
(Tylenol). KIDNEY FUNCTION

BUN---normal range: 7--20 mg/dL Creatinine---normal range: 0.5--1.2
mg/dL SKIN

Check for rashes, acne, and rosacea---may be signs of detoxification
problems

If mold is suspected TGF Beta-1---This blood test measures a protein
found throughout the body that plays a role in immune system function
and is often high in mold exposure (also called

mycotoxin exposure). It can also be raised because of certain
infections, such as Lyme disease. The normal level is below 2,380; 0 is
optimal. Mold exposure can raise this to greater than 15,000. Real Time
Labs mycotoxin test (http://www.realtimelab.com/home)

If heavy metals are suspected Hair sample and urinary "challenge" tests
are common---for these urine tests, a chelating agent is administered
prior to collecting the specimen

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR TOXINS RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies You can reduce your toxic load with three simple
strategies: 1. Care about your detoxification organs. 2. Avoid toxins as
much as possible: Quit smoking (social circle if you smoke because
others are doing it, psychological circle because you have to believe
you can quit, and spiritual circle because you have to know why you want
to quit). Hypnosis, nicotine patches, or the medication bupropion can
help you quit.

Address drug and/or alcohol abuse. What are the underlying causes of why
you use? Determine if something such as anxiety or depression is leading
you to self-medicate with drugs or alcohol. I recommend going off
marijuana completely. (See explanation for social, psychological, and
spiritual circles at the end of "Quit smoking" section above.) Gradually
replace "silver" dental fillings. Do not get any new silver amalgams;
ask for ceramic fillings. Remove amalgam fillings as soon as possible,
but not all at once because of the risk of releasing toxins into the
bloodstream. Do just one or two at a time. Avoid aluminum and Teflon
cookware. Buy and store foods in glass jars when possible; plastic
containers may contain phthalates and BPAs. Never reheat foods in
plastic containers. 3. Reduce toxin-contaminated foods in your diet
(social circle because your friends and family influence your eating
habits). Go organic (and always wash your produce). When a family
switched to organic food for two weeks, a study found that the
pesticides levels in their urine went down by 95 percent.\[409\] Another
study revealed that children who ate conventionally grown foods had
neurotoxic pesticide levels nine times higher than those

who ate organic.\[410\] The Environmental Working Group publishes an
annual list of the foods that have the highest/lowest pesticide levels;
check it out at the EWG website (www.ewg.org). Always read food labels.
If you do not know what an ingredient is, don't eat it or put it on your
body. Here are chemicals, additives, and preservatives to avoid:
Potassium bromate---carcinogenic BHA, BHT---linked to tumors Sodium
benzoate---may damage DNA Sodium nitrate---linked to cancer Tartrazine
dye (makes cheese yellow)---linked to asthma Monosodium glutamate
(MSG)---linked to seizures and heart issues. (MSG is also called
glutamic acid, hydrolyzed protein, autolyzed protein, autolyzed yeast
extract, and textured protein.) Red Dye #40 Artificial
sweeteners---Aspartame (blue packets) and saccharin (pink packets) are
both linked to obesity,\[411\] diabetes,\[412\] and cancer.\[413\]
Sucralose (yellow packets) has the potential of direct toxic effects. It
may also induce glucose intolerance by disrupting gut health.\[414\]

Ignore the word natural on labels. It means nothing. (After all, arsenic
and cyanide are natural.) Limit or eliminate produce grown with
pesticides and herbicides; dairy raised with hormones and antibiotics;
meats raised with hormones, antibiotics, or grain-fed; and farmraised
fish that is grain-fed or includes PCBs. Avoid processed meats, such as
bacon and deli meats (they contain nitrosamines, which cause the liver
to produce fats that are toxic to the brain). Drink no more than two to
four normal-size alcoholic drinks a week; choose wine and beer over aged
liquors. Do a food detox. For two weeks, eliminate: \[415\] Processed
foods Glutens (found in flour, triticale, triticum, semolina, durum,
Kamut, wheat, rye, and barley, this substance can increase gut
permeability---even in people who are not sensitive to them.) Dairy
Nonorganic beef and chicken (to avoid hormones, antibiotics, and
arsenic) Farm-raised fish

"Dirty Dozen" produce items, designated by the EWG (go to
https://www.ewg.org/foodnews/summary.php ) Soy (high levels of arsenic,
cadmium; 96 percent in United States is genetically modified) Artificial
sweeteners Alcohol and recreational drugs Water that has not been
purified or proven to be clean 4. Purify your air. Have your home tested
for mold, and eliminate it whether or not you have any symptoms. Avoid
burning wood fires in fireplaces; they release toxic compounds.
Regularly swap out the filters on your heating and cooling systems. 5.
Reduce your use of unsafe health and beauty aids.\[416\] Do a bathroom
cleanse. Download the Think Dirty app (www.thinkdirtyapp.com), which
rates products on a scale of 1--10 (10 = the most toxic), and scan all
the products in your bathroom. If you love yourself, throw out toxic

products. After downloading this app, I threw away more than 70 percent
of the products in my bathroom. Use natural products without fragrance
that are low in chemicals and free of phthalates. This can really make a
difference: 100 teenage girls who avoided these chemicals for just three
days had significantly lower toxins in their urine.\[417\] These
products may be more expensive in the short run, but they will be
cheaper in the long run as you will spend less money on doctors and
medicine. 6. Really clean the house. Install carbon monoxide alarms and
nonradioactive smoke alarms. Clean with fragrance-free, chemical-free,
natural household cleansers. Clean, dust, and vacuum regularly. Do not
Scotchgard anything in the home. Periodically check for black mold in
any part of your home that is exposed to water (e.g., under sinks).
Limit volatile organic compounds (VOCs) at home by using VOC-free
cleaning products, noor low-VOC bedding materials made from natural
products, low-VOC paints, and throw rugs instead of new carpeting.

7. Engage in habits to strengthen your detoxification systems. Support
your gut. (See chapter 7, "I is for Inflammation.") Add fiber and
fiber-rich foods, which bind to toxins and help your gastrointestinal
system get rid of them. In the past, humans ate 100-- 150 grams of fiber
a day. Americans now eat an average of 15 grams.\[418\] Women should
consume at least 25 grams; men, 30 grams. Support your liver. Limit
alcohol and eat brassicas (detoxifying vegetables, such as brussels
sprouts, cabbage, broccoli, and cauliflower). Take the nutraceuticals
that support your liver. N-acetylcysteine (NAC)---NAC raises blood,
liver, cellular, and mitochondrial levels of cysteine and the
superantioxidant glutathione. It also helps decrease the toxicity of
chemotherapeutic drugs and antibiotics. \[419\] Dose suggestion: 600 mg
twice a day Vitamin C Dose suggestion: 1,000 mg twice a day Artichoke
extract---significantly increases bile excretion from the liver for two
to three hours.\[420\]

Dose suggestion: 500 mg twice a day Support your kidneys. Drink three to
four quarts of clean water a day. "The solution to pollution is
dilution." Water helps flush toxins from your kidneys. Filter your water
with charcoal or reverse osmosis. Check the purity of your local water
supply with this EPA link: https://ofmpub.epa.gov/apex/safewater/f?
p=136:102. Take the nutraceuticals that support your kidneys. Magnesium
glycinate, citrate or malate Dose suggestion: 200 mg twice a day Ginkgo
biloba extract---increases blood flow to brain and kidneys\[421\] and
helps protect against glyphosates.\[422\] Dose suggestion: 60--120 mg
twice a day Support your skin. Your skin is the largest organ in your
body.\[423\] It reflects the health of your brain. Work up a sweat
during exercise. Sweating naturally cleanses your system. The
concentration of most toxins---including arsenic, cadmium, lead, and
mercury---is 2 to 10 times higher in sweat than in blood, which
indicates that the body is effectively using sweating as a significant
detoxification

process.\[424\] The more you sweat with exercise,\[425\] the more you
increase glutathione production, one of the most important
detoxifiers;\[426\] protect against PCB exposure;\[427\] and eliminate
phthalates\[428\] and BPA;\[429\] plus it keeps your skin healthy. Take
a sauna. Research shows that saunas lower toxins in firefighters.\[430\]
In a followup study over 20 years, the findings revealed an inverse
relationship between sauna bathing and serious memory problems. Men who
only had one sauna session per week versus those who had two to seven
saunas were, respectively, 22 percent or 66 percent less likely to have
dementia.\[431\] In other research, those who had frequent sauna baths
also had a lower incidence of sudden cardiac death and death from all
causes, \[432\] reduced depression;\[433\] increased endorphins,\[434\]
testosterone, and growth hormone; and lowered cortisol\[435\] and blood
sugar.\[436\] When you take a sauna, sweat profusely for 20 to 30
minutes.\[437\] Take the nutraceuticals that support your skin. Vitamin
D Dose suggestion: 2,000 IUs a day or more, depending on your level
Vitamin E

Dose suggestion: 60 mg of mixed tocopherols Omega-3 fatty acids Dose
suggestion: 1,400 mg or more with a ratio of approximately 60/40 EPA to
DHA

BRIGHT MINDS: TOXINS STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your detoxification
organs. 2. Engage in habits that increase your exposure to toxins. Smoke
cigarettes, use marijuana, and drink excessive amounts of alcohol. Eat
pesticide-laden foods. Consume processed foods with chemicals,
additives, and preservatives. Eat meat and dairy treated with hormones
and antibiotics. Eat fish containing PCBs. Use plastic food containers
and reheat food in them. Don't bother thinking about how much water you
drink. Expose yourself to mold. Routinely light a fire in the fireplace
at home. Don't change the filters of your heating and cooling systems.
Use cleaning products and personal care products with chemicals and
fragrances. 3. Avoid the strategies that strengthen your detoxification
systems. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND
AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your detoxification organs. 2. Avoid
toxins as much as possible. 3. Engage in habits to strengthen your
detoxification systems. Quit smoking, stop using marijuana, and limit
alcohol to two to four glasses a week. Remove "silver" dental fillings.
Reduce your consumption of toxin-contaminated foods.

Choose organic foods when possible. Always wash your fruits and
vegetables. Avoid processed foods and those with chemical ingredients.
Choose meat and dairy that is antibiotic and hormone-free. Drink three
to four quarts of clean water a day. Check your home for mold and
eliminate it. Do a bathroom cleanse to eliminate unsafe cleaning and
personal care products. Support your gut (see chapter 7, "I is for
Inflammation"). Exercise to work up a sweat and detoxify your skin.
Consider nutraceuticals to support your liver, kidneys, and skin.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Toxins Tiny Habit to Start Today When I go grocery
shopping, I will buy organic whenever possible. When pumping gas, I will
not stand at the pump and breathe in any fumes. When I visit friends and
family, I will avoid secondhand smoke. When I drink alcohol, I will
limit my intake to no more than two to four glasses a week. When I take
my supplements, I will include Nacetyl-cysteine (NAC). When I make
meals, I will include brassicas for their detoxifying ability. When I go
shopping, I will avoid handling cash register receipts (the BPA in their
plastic coating can get through your skin).

When I drink, I won't use plastic straws. When I go to the store, I will
not buy anything with MSG, artificial dyes, or preservatives. When I am
about to buy or use a cleaning or personal care product, I will scan it
first on an app like Think Dirty or Healthy Living (ewg.org) and will
not use any that contain toxins.

\[342\] Ian H. Stanley et al., "A Systematic Review of Suicidal Thoughts
and Behaviors among Police Officers, Firefighters, EMTs, and
Paramedics," Clinical Psychology Review 44 (March 2016): 25--44. Samuel
B. Harvey et al., "The Mental Health of Fire-Fighters: An Examination of
the Impact of Repeated Trauma Exposure," Australian and New Zealand
Journal of Psychiatry 50, no. 7 (July 2016): 649--58. \[343\] Melanie A.
Hom et al., "Mental Health Service Use among Firefighters with Suicidal
Thoughts and Behaviors," Psychiatric Services 67, no. 6 (June 1, 2016):
688--91. \[344\] Yasser Iturria-Medina et al., "Early Role of Vascular
Dysregulation on LateOnset Alzheimer's Disease Based on Multifactorial
Data-Driven Analysis," Nature Communications 7 (June 21, 2016): 11934.
\[345\] Eric Emerson et al., "Risk of Exposure to Air Pollution among
British Children with and without Intellectual Disabilities," Journal of
Intellectual Disability Research 63, no. 2 (February 2019): 161--67.
\[346\] Tesifon Parrón et al., "Association between Environmental
Exposure to Pesticides and Neurodegenerative Diseases," Toxicology and
Applied Pharmacology 256, no. 3 (November 1, 2011): 379--85. \[347\]
"Don't Pucker Up: Lead in Lipstick," Campaign for Safe Cosmetics,
October 12, 2007,
http://www.safecosmetics.org/about-us/media/news-coverage/dontpucker-up-lead-in-lipstick/.
\[348\] This quiz also appears in Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol
Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017).

\[349\] Gabriella Gobbi et al., "Association of Cannabis Use in
Adolescence and Risk of Depression, Anxiety, and Suicidality in Young
Adulthood: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis," JAMA Psychiatry 76,
no. 4 (April 2019), 426--34. \[350\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 145--46.
\[351\] Ibid., 144--45. \[352\] Curt T. DellaValle et al., "Dietary
Nitrate and Nitrite Intake and Risk of Colorectal Cancer in the Shanghai
Women's Health Study," International Journal of Cancer 134, no. 12 (June
15, 2014): 2917--26. \[353\] Kim Harley, "The Health Costs of Beauty:
EDCs in Personal Care Products and the HERMOSA Study," Collaborative on
Health and the Environment, March 22, 2016,
www.healthandenvironment.org/partnership_calls/18271. Suzanne M. de la
Monte et al., "Epidemilogical Trends Strongly Suggest Exposures as
Etiologic Agents in the Pathogenesis of Sporadic Alzheimer's Disease,
Diabetes Mellitus, and Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 17, no. 3 (2009): 519--29. \[354\] Céline Gasnier et
al., "Glyphosate-Based Herbicides Are Toxic and Endocrine Disruptors in
Human Cell Lines," Toxicology 262, no. 3 (August 21, 2009): 184--91.
\[355\] Luoping Zhang et al., "Exposure to Glyphosate-Based Herbicides
and Risk for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma: A Meta-analysis and Supporting
Evidence," Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation Research 781
(July--September 2019): 186--206. \[356\] Ki-Su Kim et al.,
"Associations between Organochlorine Pesticides and Cognition in U.S.
Elders: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999--2002,"
Environment International 75 (February 2015): 87--92. \[357\] Kaarin J.
Anstey et al., "Alcohol Consumption as a Risk Factor for Dementia and
Cognitive Decline: Meta-analysis of Prospective Studies," American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 17, no. 7 (July 2009): 542--55. Ruth
Peters et al., "Alcohol, Dementia and Cognitive Decline in the Elderly:
A Systematic Review," Age and Ageing 37, no. 5 (September 2008):
505--12. Edward Neafsey and Michael A. Collins, "Moderate Alcohol
Consumption and Cognitive Risk," Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment
7 (2011): 465-- 84. \[358\] Jingzhong Ding et al., "Alcohol Intake and
Cerebral Abnormalities on Magnetic Resonance Imaging in a
Community-Based Population of MiddleAged Adults: The Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study," Stroke 35, no. 1 (January 2004):
16--21. \[359\] George F. Koob, "Neurobiology of Addiction: Toward the
Development of New Therapies," Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 909 (2000): 170--85. \[360\] Elizabeth P. Handing et al.,
"Midlife Alcohol Consumption and Risk of Dementia over 43 Years of
Follow-Up: A Population-Based Study from the Swedish Twin Registry,"
Journals of Gerontology: Series A 70, no. 10 (October

2015): 1248--54. \[361\] Jennie Connor, "Alcohol Consumption as a Cause
of Cancer," Addiction 112, no. 2 (February 2017): 222--28. \[362\] Zach
Walsh et al., "Medical Cannabis and Mental Health: A Guided Systematic
Review," Clinical Psychology Review 51 (February 2017): 15--29. \[363\]
Daniel G. Amen et al., "Discriminative Properties of Hippocampal
Hypoperfusion in Marijuana Users Compared to Healthy Controls:
Implications for Marijuana Administration in Alzheimer's Dementia,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 56, no. 1 (2017): 261--73. \[364\] Gobbi
et al., "Association of Cannabis Use in Adolescence," 426--34. \[365\]
Marta Di Forti et al., "The Contribution of Cannabis Use to Variation in
the Incidence of Psychotic Disorder across Europe (EU-GEI): A
Multicentre CaseControl Study," Lancet Psychiatry 6, no. 5 (May 2019):
427--36. \[366\] Judith Prochaska et al., "Tobacco Use among Individuals
with Schizophrenia: What Role Has the Tobacco Industry Played?"
Schizophrenia Bulletin 34, no. 3 (May 2008): 555--67. Used with
permission, \[367\] Prochaska et al., "Tobacco Use among Individuals
with Schizophrenia," 555-- 67. \[368\] "Tobacco Use among Adults with
Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorders," Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, last reviewed January 14, 2019,
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/disparities/mental-illness-substanceuse/index.htm.
\[369\] "Teens Using Vaping Devices in Record Numbers," National
Institute on Drug Abuse, December 17, 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/newsreleases/2018/12/teens-using-vaping-devices-in-record-numbers.
\[370\] "Surgeon General's Advisory on E-cigarette Use among Youth,"
Office of the US Surgeon General, 2018,
https://ecigarettes.surgeongeneral.gov/documents/surgeon-generals-advisory-on-ecigarette-use-among-youth-2018.pdf.
\[371\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 152. \[372\] World Health Organization,
"Fumonisins," Food Safety Digest series, Department of Food Safety and
Zoonoses, February 2018,
https://www.who.int/foodsafety/FSDigest_Fumonisins_EN.pdf. \[373\]
Silvia W. Gratz, Neil Havis, and Fiona Burnett, "Fusarium Mycotoxin
Contamination in the Human Food Chain," New Food, September 1, 2015,
https://www.newfoodmagazine.com/article/19318/fusarium-mycotoxincontamination-in-the-human-food-chain/.
\[374\] "About Aspergillosis," Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, last reviewed January 2, 2019,
https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/aspergillosis/definition.html.
\[375\] Susan P. McCormick et al., "Trichothecenes: From Simple to
Complex Mycotoxins," Toxins 3, no. 7 (July 2011): 802--14. \[376\] Amen,
Memory Rescue, 152--53.

\[377\] James S. Brown Jr., "Introduction: An Update on Psychiatric
Effects of Toxic Exposures," Psychiatric Times 33, no. 9 (October 1,
2016). \[378\] Amanda Habermann, "Lead Poisoning's Harmful Impact on
Physical and Mental Health," Sovereign Health, February 20, 2016,
https://www.sovhealth.com/health-and-wellness/lead-poisonings-harmfulimpact-on-physical-and-mental-health/.
\[379\] Brown, "Update on Psychiatric Effects of Toxic Exposures."
\[380\] Maryse F. Bouchard et al., "Blood Lead Levels and Major
Depressive Disorder, Panic Disorder, and Generalized Anxiety Disorder in
US Young Adults," Archives of General Psychiatry 66, no. 12 (December
2009): 1313-- 19. \[381\] "Don't Pucker Up," Campaign for Safe
Cosmetics. \[382\] Sa Liu, Sally Katharine Hammond, and Ann
Rojas-Cheatham, "Concentrations and Potential Health Risks of Metals in
Lip Products," Environmental Health Perspectives 121, no. 6 (June 2013):
705--10. \[383\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 153. \[384\] Edward A. Bittner,
Yun Yue, and Zhongcong Xie, "Brief Review: Anesthetic Neurotoxicity in
the Elderly, Cognitive Dysfunction and Alzheimer's Disease," Canadian
Journal of Anesthesia 58, no. 2 (February 2011): 216--23. Chia-Wen Chen
et al., "Increased Risk of Dementia in People with Previous Exposure to
General Anesthesia: A Nationwide Population-Based Case-Control Study,"
Alzheimer's and Dementia 10, no. 2 (March 2014): 196-- 204. \[385\]
Barynia Backeljauw et al., "Cognition and Brain Structure following
Early Childhood Surgery with Anesthesia," Pediatrics 136, no. 1 (July
2015): e1--12. \[386\] N. Efimova et al., "Changes in Cerebral Blood
Flow and Cognitive Function in Patients Undergoing Coronary Bypass
Surgery with Cardiopulmonary Bypass," Kardiologiia 55, no. 6 (June
2015): 40--46. \[387\] University of Rochester Medical Center,
"Chemotherapy's Damage to the Brain Detailed," ScienceDaily, April 22,
2008, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/04/080422103947.htm.
\[388\] Harley, "Health Costs of Beauty." \[389\] A. Guttmann,
"Advertising Spending in the Perfumes, Cosmetics, and Other Toilet
Preparations Industry in the United States from 2010 to 2019 (in Million
U.S. Dollars)," Statista, last edited November 29, 2018,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/470467/perfumes-cosmetics-and-othertoilet-preparations-industry-ad-spend-usa/.
\[390\] Stacy Malkan, "Johnson & Johnson Is Just the Tip of the Toxic
Iceberg," Time, March 2, 2016,
https://time.com/4239561/johnson-and-johnson-toxicingredients/. \[391\]
Gina L. LoSasso, Lisa J. Rapport, and Bradley Axelrod,
"Neuropsychological Symptoms Associated with Low-Level Exposure to
Solvents and (Meth)Acrylates among Nail Technicians," Neuropsychiatry,
Neuropsychology,

and Behavioral Neurology 14, no. 3 (July--September 2001): 183--89.
\[392\] Masahiro Kawahara and Midori Kato-Negishi, "Link between
Aluminum and the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease: The Integration of
the Aluminum and Amyloid Cascade Hypotheses," International Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 2011 (March 8, 2011): 276393. Samantha Davenward et
al., "Silicon-Rich Mineral Water as a Noninvasive Test of the 'Aluminum
Hypothesis' in Alzheimer's Disease," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 33,
no. 2 (2013): 423--30. S. Maya et al., "Multifaceted Effects of
Aluminium in Neurodegenerative Diseases: A Review," Biomedicine and
Pharmacotherapy 83 (October 2016): 746--54. Trond Peder Flaten,
"Aluminium as a Risk Factor in Alzheimer's Disease, with Emphasis on
Drinking Water," Brain Research Bulletin 55, no. 2 (May 15, 2001):
187--96. \[393\] Michael Fenech, Armen Nersesyan, and Siegfried
Knasmueller, "A Systematic Review of the Association between
Occupational Exposure to Formaldehyde and Effects on Chromosomal DNA
Damage Measured Using the Cytokinesis-Block Micronucleus Assay in
Lymphocytes," Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation Research 770, part A
(October--December 2016): 46--57. \[394\] Ann Pontén and Magnus Bruze,
"Formaldehyde," Dermatitis 26, no. 1 (January/February 2015): 3--6.
\[395\] Philippa D. Darbre and Philip W. Harvey, "Parabens Can Enable
Hallmarks and Characteristics of Cancer in Human Breast Epithelial
Cells: A Review of the Literature with Reference to New Exposure Data
and Regulatory Status," Journal of Applied Toxicology 34, no. 9
(September 2014): 925--38. \[396\] Pinar Erkekoglu and Belma
Kocer-Gumusel, "Genotoxicity of Phthalates," Toxicology Mechanisms and
Methods 24, no. 9 (December 2014): 616--26. \[397\] Pam Factor-Litvak et
al., "Persistent Associations between Maternal Prenatal Exposure to
Phthalates on Child IQ at Age 7 Years," PLOS One 9, no. 12 (December 10,
2014): e114003. \[398\] Catherine A. Smith and Matthew R. Holahan,
"Reduced Hippocampal Dendritic Spine Density and BDNF Expression
following Acute Postnatal Exposure to Di(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate in Male
Long Evans Rats," PLOS One 9, no. 10 (October 8, 2014): e109522. \[399\]
Carcinogenic Potency Project, "Ethylene Glycol," U.S. National Library
of Medicine, last updated October 3, 2007,
https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cpdb/chempages/ETHYLENE%20GLYCOL.html.
\[400\] Allyson E. Kennedy et al., "E-cigarette Aerosol Exposure Can
Cause Craniofacial Defects in Xenopus laevis Embryos and Mammalian
Neural Crest Cells," PLOS One 12, no. 9 (September 28, 2017): e0185729.

\[401\] "Five Things to Know about Triclosan," U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, last reviewed May 16, 2019,
https://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm205999.htm. Marta
Axelstad et al., "Triclosan Exposure Reduces Thyroxine Levels in
Pregnant and Lactating Rat Dams and in Directly Exposed Offspring," Food
and Chemical Toxicology 59 (September 2013): 534--40. \[402\] Alyson L.
Yee and Jack A. Gilbert, "MICROBIOME. Is Triclosan Harming Your
Microbiome?" Science 353, no. 6297 (July 22, 2016): 348--49. \[403\]
Kang-sheng Liu et al., "Neurotoxicity and Biomarkers of Lead Exposure: A
Review," Chinese Medical Sciences Journal 28, no. 3 (September 2013):
178-- 88. \[404\] Duke University, "Children Carry Evidence of Toxins
from Home Flooring and Furniture," EurekAlert! American Association for
the Advancement of Science (Heather M. Stapleton et al., "Children's
Exposure to Chemicals Emitted from the Home Environment," presented at
AAAS annual meeting, February 17, 2019),
https://eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2019-02/du-cce021419.php. \[405\]
Joseph Pizzorno, The Toxin Solution: How Hidden Poisons in the Air,
Water, Food, and Products We Use Are Destroying Our Health---And What We
Can Do to Fix It (New York: HarperOne, 2018). \[406\] Petra M. Gaum et
al., "Prevalence and Incidence Rates of Mental Syndromes after
Occupational Exposure to Polychlorinated Biphenyls," International
Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 217, no. 7 (May 27, 2014):
765-- 74. \[407\] Dongren Yang et al., "Developmental Exposure to
Polychlorinated Biphenyls Interferes with Experience-Dependent Dendritic
Plasticity and Ryanodine Receptor Expression in Weanling Rats,"
Environmental Health Perspectives 117, no. 3 (March 2009): 426--35.
Montserrat Samsó et al., "Coordinated Movement of Cytoplasmic and
Transmembrane Domains of RyR1 upon Gating," PLOS Biology 7, no. 4 (April
2009): e1000085. \[408\] Lynda Ann Frassetto, Ralph Curtis Morris Jr.,
and Antonio Sebastian, "Effect of Age on Blood Acid-Base Composition in
Adult Humans: Role of Age-Related Renal Functional Decline," American
Journal of Physiology---Renal Physiology 271, no. 6 (December 1996):
F1114--22. \[409\] Alena Hall, "What Happened after One Family Went
Organic for Just Two Weeks," HuffPost Life, May 14, 2015,
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/theorganic-effect_n_7244000. \[410\]
Cynthia L. Curl, Richard A. Fenske, and Kai Elgethun, "Organophosphorus
Pesticide Exposure of Urban and Suburban Preschool Children with Organic
and Conventional Diets," Environmental Health Perspectives 111, no. 3
(March 2003): 377--82.

\[411\] Wahyu Wulaningsih et al., "Investigating Nutrition and Lifestyle
Factors as Determinants of Abdominal Obesity: An Environment-Wide
Study," International Journal of Obesity 41, no. 2 (February 2017):
340--47. \[412\] Sharon P. G. Fowler, "Low-Calorie Sweetener Use and
Energy Balance: Results from Experimental Studies in Animals, and
Large-Scale Prospective Studies in Humans," Physiology and Behavior 164,
part B (October 1, 2016): 517--23. \[413\] Moreno Paolini et al.,
"Aspartame, a Bittersweet Pill," Carcinogenesis 38, no. 12 (December
2017): 1249--50. Morando Soffritti et al., "The Carcinogenic Effects of
Aspartame: The Urgent Need for Regulatory Re-evaluation," American
Journal of Industrial Medicine 57, no. 4 (April 2014): 383--97. \[414\]
Jodi E. Nettleton, Raylene A. Reimer, and Jane Shearer, "Reshaping the
Gut Microbiota: Impact of Low Calorie Sweeteners and the Link to Insulin
Resistance?" Physiology and Behavior 164, part B (October 1, 2016):
488--93. Jotham Suez et al., "Artificial Sweeteners Induce Glucose
Intolerance by Altering the Gut Microbiota," Nature 514, no. 7521
(October 9, 2014): 181--86. \[415\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 160. \[416\]
Ibid., 160--61. \[417\] Sarah Yang, "Teen Girls See Big Drop in Chemical
Exposure with Switch in Cosmetics," Berkeley News, March 7, 2016,
https://news.berkeley.edu/2016/03/07/cosmetics-chemicals/. \[418\] Dana
Edwin King, Arch G. Mainous, and Carol A. Lambourne, "Trends in Dietary
Fiber Intake in the United States, 1999--2008," Journal of the Academy
of Nutrition and Dietetics 112, no. 5 (May 2012): 642--48. \[419\]
Robert J. Flanagan and T. J. Meridith, "Use of N-acetylcysteine in
Clinical Toxicology," American Journal of Medicine 91, no. 3, suppl. 3
(September 30, 1991): S131--39. \[420\] Reinhold Kirchhoff et al.,
"Increase in Choleresis by Means of Artichoke Extract," Phytomedicine 1,
no. 2 (September 1994): 107--15. \[421\] Suzan M. Mansour et al.,
"Ginkgo Biloba Extract (EGb 761) Normalizes Hypertension in 2K, 1C
Hypertensive Rats: Role of Antioxidant Mechanisms, ACE Inhibiting
Activity and Improvement of Endothelial Dysfunction," Phytomedicine 18,
nos. 8--9 (June 15, 2011): 641--47. \[422\] Kültiğin Cavuşoğlu et al.,
"Protective Effect of Ginkgo Biloba L. Leaf Extract against Glyphosate
Toxicity in Swiss Albino Mice," Journal of Medicinal Food 14, no. 10
(October 2011): 1263--72. \[423\] Shi-Sheng Zhou et al., "The Skin
Function: A Factor of Anti-Metabolic Syndrome," Diabetology and
Metabolic Syndrome 4, no. 1 (April 26, 2012): 15. \[424\] Margaret E.
Sears, Kathleen J. Kerr, and Riina I. Bray, "Arsenic, Cadmium, Lead, and
Mercury in Sweat: A Systematic Review," Journal of Environmental and
Public Health 2012 (2012): 184745.

Stephen J. Genuis et al., "Blood, Urine, and Sweat (BUS) Study:
Monitoring and Elimination of Bioaccumulated Toxic Elements," Archives
of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 61, no. 2 (August 2011):
344-- 57. \[425\] Margaret E. Sears and Stephen J. Genuis,
"Environmental Determinants of Chronic Disease and Medical Approaches:
Recognition, Avoidance, Supportive Therapy, and Detoxification," Journal
of Environmental and Public Health 2012 (2012): 356798. \[426\] H. Lew
and A. Quintanilha, "Effects of Endurance Training and Exercise on
Tissue Antioxidative Capacity and Acetaminophen Detoxification,"
European Journal of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics 16, no. 1
(January--March 1991): 59--68. Chandan K. Sen, "Glutathione Homeostasis
in Response to Exercise Training and Nutritional Supplements," Molecular
and Cellular Biochemistry 196, nos. 1--2 (June 1999): 31--42. \[427\]
Margaret O. Murphy et al., "Exercise Protects against PCB-Induced
Inflammation and Associated Cardiovascular Risk Factors," Environmental
Science and Pollution Research 23, no. 3 (February 2016): 2201--11.
\[428\] Stephen J. Genuis et al., "Human Elimination of Phthalate
Compounds: Blood, Urine, and Sweat (BUS) Study," Scientific World
Journal 2012 (2012): 615068. \[429\] Stephen J. Genuis et al., "Human
Excretion of Bisphenol A: Blood, Urine, and Sweat (BUS) Study," Journal
of Environmental and Public Health 2012 (2012): 185731. \[430\] Kaye H.
Kilburn, Raphael H. Warsaw, and Megan G. Shields, "Neurobehavioral
Dysfunction in Firemen Exposed to Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs):
Possible Improvement after Detoxification," Archives of Environmental
Health 44, no. 6 (1989): 345--50. \[431\] Tanjaniina Laukkanen et al.,
"Sauna Bathing Is Inversely Associated with Dementia and Alzheimer's
Disease in Middle-Aged Finnish Men," Age and Ageing 46, no. 2 (March 1,
2017): 245--49. \[432\] Tanjaniina Laukkanen et al., "Association
between Sauna Bathing and Fatal Cardiovascular and All-Cause Mortality
Events," JAMA Internal Medicine 175, no. 4 (April 2015): 542--48.
\[433\] Kelli F. Koltyn et al., "Changes in Mood State following
Whole-Body Hyperthermia," International Journal of Hyperthermia 8, no. 3
(May/June 1992): 305--7. \[434\] K. Kukkonen-Harjula and K. Kauppinen,
"How the Sauna Affects the Endocrine System," Annals of Clinical
Research 20, no. 4 (1988): 262--66. D. Jezová et al., "Rise in Plasma
Beta-endorphin and ACTH in Response to Hyperthermia in Sauna," Hormone
and Metabolic Research 17, no. 12 (December 1985): 693--94.

\[435\] K. Kukkonen-Harjula et al., "Haemodynamic and Hormonal Responses
to Heat Exposure in a Finnish Sauna Bath," European Journal of Applied
Physiology and Occupational Physiology 58, no. 5 (1989): 543--50.
\[436\] Satoshi Kokura et al., "Whole Body Hyperthermia Improves
Obesity-Induced Insulin Resistance in Diabetic Mice," International
Journal of Hyperthermia 23, no. 3 (May 2007): 259--65. \[437\] Laukkanen
et al., Association between "Sauna Bathing and Fatal Cardiovascular and
All-Cause Mortality Events," 542--48.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 11

M IS FOR MIND STORMS SOOTHING THE ABNORMAL ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY THAT
DRIVES MOOD SWINGS, ANXIETY, AND AGGRESSION There was always one instant
just before the epileptic fit . . . when suddenly in the midst of
sadness, spiritual darkness and oppression, his brain seemed momentarily
to catch fire, and in an extraordinary rush, all his vital forces were
at their highest tension. The sense of life, the consciousness of self,
were multiplied almost ten times at these moments which lasted no longer
than a flash of lightning. His mind and his heart were flooded with
extraordinary light; all his uneasiness, all his doubts, all his
anxieties were relieved at once; they were all resolved in a lofty calm,
full of serene, harmonious joy and hope, full of reason and ultimate
meaning. But these moments, these flashes, were only a premonition of
that final second (it was never more than a second) with which the fit
began. F YO D O R D O S T O E V S KY ( W H O S U F F E R E D W I T H T E
M P O RA L LO B E E P I L E P S Y ) , T H E I D I O T

I walked into my California clinic one day, and my office manager
quickly pulled me aside and said, "Daniel, you have to see Tommy." I let
her know that I already had 14 people on my schedule. But she just
dismissed me and said, "Daniel, you need to see Tommy. He's really cute.
He's nine

years old. He's from Orlando, Florida. And he's read your book Change
Your Brain, Change Your Life." Okay, a nineyear-old who read my book?
Now I was paying attention. I found Tommy in one of the other doctor's
offices, and when the young boy saw me, he yelled, "Hey, you're Dr.
Amen!" What he said next absolutely floored me. "Dr. Amen, I have a left
temporal lobe problem." "Really?" I asked. "How do you know?" He said he
had taken the checklist in the book. "I have a really bad temper, and
you write that people who have bad tempers often have temporal lobe
problems." He was right. Then he added, "And I used to see ghosts." I
asked him what he meant, and he said, "I used to see these green things
float in front of my eyes. I thought they were ghosts, and they would
scare me until I read your book and realized they were just illusions
that people with temporal lobe problems get." Then he looked at me with
his big, beautiful blue eyes and said, "Last year, to get rid of the bad
thoughts in my head, I tried to kill myself." The thought of this sweet
young boy trying to kill himself because he thought he was seeing
monsters broke my heart. But he was right. People who have temporal lobe
problems do tend to have dark, evil, awful thoughts; I think of them as
mind storms. And sadly, they often try to kill themselves. Tommy
completely blew me away. I asked him if he had seen his scan yet, and he
said no. "Want to?" I asked. "Oh, yeah!" he replied. So I took him and
his parents to the imaging center, and when I showed him his scan, it
was very clear that he had a left temporal lobe abnormality. TOMMY'S
SURFACE SPECT SCAN

Decreased activity left temporal lobe

"See, I was right," he said. A nine-year-old had accurately predicted
what his own brain scan would look like. When he was able to confirm
that his mind storms were actually just temporal lobe problems, it gave
him hope that we could help him get rid of those bad illusions. That's
where the power is in this---you can figure out your brain health/mental
health issues even without being scanned. In my mind, that's so exciting
and powerful, leading to what's most important---you getting well.

TIM AND WENDY

Since 51 percent of the population will have a mental health issue at
some point in life,\[438\] I often say during lectures that "normal" is
a myth. It is more normal to have an issue

than to not have an issue. "Normal" is a setting on your dryer or a city
in Illinois. I once gave a lecture in Normal, Illinois. It was fun to go
to the Normal grocery store, be interviewed on the Normal radio station,
and finally meet Normal people. Since I'm from California, that was a
treat. Yet I found the Normal people there actually had the same
problems I had seen everywhere else. At the lecture, I met a
psychologist, Wendy, who told me her husband, Tim, was really
struggling. He had been arrested for domestic violence, and Wendy was on
the verge of divorcing him, which was breaking her heart. She loved him
and knew something was the matter with his brain, even though her own
therapist said he had a personality disorder and she should leave as
soon as possible. So Wendy and Tim flew to California to see me. Tim was
54 years old and told me he struggled with memory problems, depression,
and irritability. He also frequently saw shadows out of the corner of
his eyes and heard an annoying buzzing sound, for which his doctor could
not find a cause. His temper flare-ups just seemed to come out of the
blue. "The littlest things set me off. Then I feel terribly guilty," he
said, crying. "If she leaves me, I don't know what I will do, even
though I understand why everyone tells her she should go. Please help me
stop these rage attacks." When Tim was six years old, he fell out of a
second-story window. He didn't remember if he lost consciousness, and
his parents were no longer alive to ask. As a child, he had learning
problems and had gone to the principal's office a lot for fighting. He
had tried antidepressant medications, psychotherapy, and couples
counseling, but they didn't help. His brain SPECT study showed
significantly low activity in his prefrontal cortex (PFC) and left
temporal lobe. Low

PFC activity often is associated with poor forethought and impulse
control. Abnormal activity in the temporal lobes, especially the left
side, is associated with mood instability, irritability, learning and
memory problems, illusions (such as seeing shadows and hearing buzzing),
and rage for little to no reason. It can cause storms of activity in the
brain that hijack the mind. As a young psychiatrist, I was inspired by
the story of the late Jack Dreyfus, the financier who founded the
successful Dreyfus Fund. In his 1981 book, A Remarkable Medicine Has
Been Overlooked, he told the story of how, despite his fame and fortune,
he awakened in terror and fell into a deep depression that conventional
treatments didn't help. He sensed electricity in his body that
intensified his feelings of fear, anger, and anxiety, and it reminded
him of epileptics he had seen. He asked his doctor if he could try the
anti-seizure medication phenytoin (Dilantin), and within a day of taking
it, his symptoms of emotional distress began to dissipate. In his book,
he wrote, "A few days later my need for psychotherapy was gone."\[439\]
Dreyfus went on to spend \$60 million of his own money to study the
usefulness of Dilantin for a variety of "mental health" conditions, such
as anxiety, violence, and mood swings. When I first learned about brain
SPECT in 1991, one of its primary uses was in evaluating seizure
disorders. When patients were having seizures, there was increased
activity on SPECT; in between seizures, there was decreased activity.
Neurosurgeons often used SPECT to know where to operate on patients with
uncontrollable seizures. I thought of Jack's story while working with
Wendy and Tim. On the anti-seizure medication lamotrigine (Lamictal) to
stabilize Tim's left temporal lobe, then a stimulant to activate his
PFC, along with neurofeedback and our other

BRIGHT MINDS strategies, Tim's rage attacks stopped, his memory
improved, and his relationship with Wendy became the best it had been in
20 years. Wendy later told me that our work together completely changed
how she worked with her own clients. TIM'S SURFACE SPECT SCAN

Decreased PFC and left temporal lobe activity (arrow)

THE WORLD'S MOST POWERFUL HYBRID ELECTROCHEMICAL ENGINE Your brain is
the world's most powerful hybrid electrochemical engine. It uses
electricity and neurotransmitters to help you think, feel, and act.
Electricity (the flow of charged ions) is constantly moving throughout
your body, causing your heart to beat and your muscles to

contract. Yet nowhere is electricity better documented than in the
roughly 100 billion biological wires (neurons) in your brain. A neuron's
main job is to generate an electrical signal called an action potential,
which occurs if it is sufficiently "excited" by other nerve cells. The
action potential of a single neuron is like a tiny lightning bolt---this
is part of the reason why neuroscientists talk about neurons "firing"
when they're active---and it may stimulate many other neurons. The
stimulated neurons can then generate their own action potentials, which
travel to and stimulate still more neurons, creating a coordinated
network that performs a specific brain function. Action potentials race
down axons at about 60 miles per hour. The signals can travel this
quickly because, as the human brain develops from childhood to
adulthood, axons are wrapped and insulated by a special fatty substance
called myelin that enhances transmission speeds. Axons that are not
insulated by myelin, either by design or disease, transmit signals 10
times slower. ACTION POTENTIAL

A neuron's main job is to generate an electrical signal called an action
potential, which occurs if it is sufficiently "excited" by other nerve
cells.

The Actors in Your Brain An axon branches thousands of times, with each
branch forming an electrical or chemical contact, called a synapse, to
another neuron. The synaptic space is the tiny area between connecting
neurons. At the end of each of the axon's many branches is a
mushroom-shaped terminal, which contains molecules called
neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters can excite or quiet (inhibit) other
neurons. Each neuron makes a single type of neurotransmitter, such as
glutamate, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), dopamine, norepinephrine,
serotonin, acetylcholine, or histamine. The primary excitatory
neurotransmitter, glutamate, is released by 75 percent of all neurons in
the brain, and the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, is
released by about 20 percent of all neurons in the brain. When the
action potential reaches the end of the axon, it stimulates the release
of thousands of neurotransmitter molecules into the synaptic space. The
neurotransmitters float across this space, and some of them will bind to
receptors on the receiving ends of neurons and may stimulate or inhibit
action in the receiving neurons. All of this electrical activity is
taking place inside your skull on a millisecond-by-millisecond basis.
And it needs to occur precisely for optimal brain functioning and good
mental health.

HOW DISEASES IMPAIR BRAIN FUNCTION Some diseases of the brain start by
damaging the brain's wiring or impairing the ability to create the right
amount of electricity. In a sort of Goldilocks scenario, too much
electricity or too little electricity can be a problem. It needs to be
just right. Brain trouble can occur because of Fewer synapses in a
network, which is common in depression or a lack of mental or physical
exercise Fewer neurons in a network, which happens in Alzheimer's
disease Impaired generation of action potentials, which can happen if
you have three or more alcoholic drinks at a time Damage to neurons that
slow the speed of action potentials, common in head trauma or strokes
Excessive electrical activity, seen in seizure disorders Abnormal
electrical activity not only can change the activity of the brain, but
can also change the mind and cause mind storms that can be associated
with temper outbursts, depression, suicidal thoughts, panic attacks,
distractibility, and confusion. As far back as 1907,\[440\] Emil
Kraepelin discussed interictal dysphoric disorder (IDD)---ictal refers
to seizure states; interictal means between seizures. He observed
depressive symptoms mixed with euphoric moods, irritability, fear, and
anxiety as well as with intense fatigue, pain, and insomnia in patients
with untreated epilepsy.

Abnormal electrical activity can not only change the activity of the
brain, but it can also change your mind and cause mind storms that can
be associated with temper outbursts, depression, suicidal thoughts,
panic attacks, distractibility, and confusion.

Mind Storms Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) Seizures
or history of seizures Periods of spaciness or confusion Frequent
complaints that things look, sound, taste, smell, or feel "funny"
Sudden, repeated fear or anger Irritability that tends to build,
explode, and then recede, often leaving one feeling tired after a rage
Periods of panic and/or fear for no specific reason Visual or auditory
changes, such as seeing shadows or hearing muffled sounds Frequent
periods of déjà vu (feelings of being somewhere you have been before)

Mild paranoia Headaches or abdominal pain of uncertain origin The
tactics of an evil ruler to promote mind storms are simple. THE EVIL
RULER WOULD . . . Discourage the population from getting brain scans or
other diagnostic tests to see if their psychiatric symptoms are being
caused by abnormal electrical activity. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . .
Encourage people to get brain scans or other diagnostic tests to
determine if abnormal electrical activity may be at the root of symptoms
of mental illness.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR MIND STORMS RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Care about how your brain cells fire and talk to each
other. 2. Avoid anything that increases mind storms. Are there lifestyle
or food choices that make seizures or mind storms more likely? Yes,
there are many, including: Stress Tiredness

Lack of sleep Forgetting medications Hyperventilating Alcohol and drug
abuse Low or high blood sugar states Missing meals Premenstrual syndrome
(PMS) Illnesses Pain Video games for vulnerable brains Excessive screen
time Unrecognized Irlen syndrome (see page 167 in chapter 9, "H Is for
Head Trauma") 3. Be aware of the triggering effect of certain foods,
food colors, and food preservatives--- especially sugar, MSG, aspartame,
and Red Dye #40 ---on mind storms (social because your family and
friends influence what you eat). For example, one of my patients became
violent whenever he ate foods prepared with monosodium glutamate (MSG).
When we scanned his brain after ingesting MSG, we saw that his brain had
changed into a pattern more consistent with our aggressive patients.
This is important: MSG doesn't have to be labeled unless it is a single
food additive. It can be disguised by being added in with other
ingredients and not disclosed. It is commonly hidden in bouillon, soy
protein isolate, vegetable protein isolate, and whey protein isolate.
Note that anytime the words yeast extract appear, it is actually MSG.

When Trey was seven years old, his parents noticed that whenever he ate
something bright red or drank a red Slurpee, he had various tics and
strange neurological affectations, and his behavior became more
aggressive and hostile. He would cry easily and storm off in a huff or
throw things. His mother tried to minimize these foods in his diet, but
he would often get them at school: Cheetos, Doritos, fruit punch, Red
Vines, lollipops, and so on. What she didn't realize was that many of
the "healthy" foods she was serving him at home---strawberry yogurt,
whole-grain strawberry bars, and even canned pasta sauce and
ketchup---contained an ingredient common to those other snack foods: a
dye called Red #40. When Trey reached the age of 14, his folks brought
him to the Amen Clinics to confirm their suspicion that he was reacting
to this food additive. His brain SPECT scan showed remarkable overall
increased activity (mind storms) with exposure to Red Dye #40. After
seeing the impact this common food coloring had on their son, Trey's
parents became vigilant about reading every nutrition label closely and
stayed away from the offending item. By staying away from Red Dye #40,
Trey stabilized his moods and behaviors and became a kind, sweet,
helpful young man. TREY'S BASELINE ACTIVE SPECT

Mild increased activity

RED DYE #40 ACTIVE SPECT

Dramatic increased activity with Red Dye #40

4. Be cautious with video games and flashing lights. If you have a
vulnerable brain, avoid flashing lights and excessive video game
playing. I've had a number of patients who have had seizures while
playing video games even though they did not have prior seizures, and
others who became violent or highly emotional from video game play. It
is a phenomenon called photophobic seizures, which happened to 685
children in Japan on December 16, 1997, while they were watching a
Pokémon animated series.\[441\] In the show, the animators used a rare
rapid strobing technique that flashed red and blue lights to make an
explosion look especially cool. Suddenly, children across Japan passed
out, had blurred vision, felt dizzy or nauseous, had seizures, or
experienced temporary blindness. The incident, which became known in
Japan as Pokémon Shock, was a disaster for children's animation in
Japan, and Pokémon and Nintendo stocks took a hit.\[442\] Other patients
of mine have become violent after playing video games. Granted, these
cases may be extreme, but I cannot see much good that comes from playing
these games for hours a day, and I believe they have the potential for
harm. My best advice at this point is be careful and limit screen time
and video game exposure to no more than one hour a day. 5. Engage in
behaviors that decrease mind storms.

Spend time in prayer or meditation every day. I mentioned this in
chapter 5 to help improve blood flow; these practices also help manage
stress. Take antiseizure medications: At Amen Clinics, we use
antiseizure medications, when appropriate, to calm the mind storms of
our patients. We tend to use Lamotrigine and valproic acid for bipolar
disorder Lamotrigine for resistant depression Gabapentin for social
anxiety, irritability, insomnia, and pain Pregabalin for pain
Oxcarbazepine for irritability and moodiness Topiramate for binge eating
disorders and migraines It's also important to note that prescribing
treatment and medications in the right order is critical for healing.
For example, for some people with mind storms, we start with antiseizure
medications, then recommend a ketogenic diet (see below), then proceed
with other therapies. Doing it the other way around may not have been as
effective.

The ketogenic diet: This diet has been used in treatment-resistant
epilepsy since the 1920s. It cuts seizure frequency in children by more
than 50 percent.\[443\] There are a number of studies showing it may
also be helpful for mood stabilization.\[444\] One of my patients who
had a severe case of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) noticed her
moods were significantly better on the diet. Right before her period,
her brain showed severe overactivity, which lessened considerably on the
diet. The ketogenic diet can be challenging to maintain, but when it
works it can be powerfully effective. The main idea is for you to get
more calories from protein and fat and significantly less from
carbohydrates. You cut back on carbohydrates that are easy to digest,
like sugar, soda, pastries, and white bread---you should do this anyway.
When you eat less than 50 grams of carbohydrates a day, your body runs
out of blood sugars and eventually (usually after three to four days)
starts to break down protein and fat for energy. This is called ketosis.
People use this diet most often to lose weight because it takes more
calories to convert fat into energy than it does to convert
carbohydrates, and it helps you feel fuller longer, but it has also been
shown to help seizures, diabetes,\[445\] acne,\[446\] and even some
forms of cancer.\[447\]

Neurofeedback: Neurofeedback can help calm electrical activity in the
brain by training you to gain control of your brain waves through
selfregulation. See chapter 9 "H Is for Head Trauma" for details. 6. Get
seven to eight hours of sleep each night (social because your work,
family, or friends may influence how late you stay up or get up). See
chapter 15, "S Is for Sleep." 7. Take nutraceuticals that help calm or
control the excitability of the brain. Work with your physician to
determine which one is best for you and the right dose. Magnesium has a
calming effect on neuronal function, is involved in more than 300
biochemical reactions in your body, is vital for your body to make
energy, and plays a key role in blood sugar regulation. Low magnesium is
associated with seizures, inflammation, diabetes, anxiety, and
depression.\[448\] With the standard American diet, 68 percent of
Americans do not consume enough magnesium. Some researchers believe that
supplementing magnesium can decrease seizure frequency,\[449\] and
others have shown it is helpful for severe stress,\[450\] migraines,
depression, chronic pain, anxiety, and strokes.\[451\] The mineral is
found in green leafy vegetables, such as spinach, kale, and Swiss

chard; legumes; nuts; and seeds. In general, foods that contain dietary
fiber provide magnesium. Dose suggestion: The typical adult dose is 50--
400 mg a day. GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is an amino acid that helps
to regulate brain excitability and calms overfiring in the brain. GABA
and GABA enhancers, such as the anticonvulsant gabapentin and L-theanine
(found in green tea), function to inhibit the excessive firing of
neurons, which results in a feeling of calmness and more self-control.
Low levels of GABA have been found in many mental health disorders,
including anxiety and some forms of depression. Rather than overeating
or drinking or using drugs to calm your anxiety, natural ways to boost
GABA may help. I often recommend GABA supplements. Researchers report
that GABA does not cross the blood brain barrier (a network of blood
vessels that protect the brain), but the studies are
contradictory,\[452\] with some showing an increase in alpha brain waves
(which indicate a relaxed state).\[453\] Nonetheless, GABA still has a
calming influence on the brain imaging studies we have done. Dose
suggestion: The typical recommended dosage ranges from 100 to 1,500 mg
daily for adults and from 50 to 750 mg daily for children. For best
effect, GABA should be taken in two or three doses a day.

BRIGHT MINDS: MIND STORMS STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE
MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about how your brain
cells fire with one another. 2. Engage in habits that increase your risk
for mind storms. Live a stress-filled life. Skimp on sleep. Abuse drugs
and alcohol. Consume a diet high in sugar and skip meals. Eat foods
containing Red Dye #40, MSG, and other food additives Don't address
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or chronic pain. Play video games for hours
on end. Use fluorescent lights 3. Avoid the strategies that decrease
your risk for mind storms. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about the electrical activity
in your brain. 2. Avoid anything that increases your risk for mind
storms. 3. Engage regularly in healthy habits that decrease the risk for
mind storms and treat them when necessary. Practice stress-management
techniques. Get seven to eight hours of sleep each night. Eliminate
drugs and limit alcohol. Consider a ketogenic diet. Seek treatment for
PMS or chronic pain conditions. Limit video games. Consider
neurofeedback and nutraceuticals to calm overfiring in the brain. Take
antiseizure medication, if necessary.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Mind Storms Tiny Habit to Start Today

When I feel stressed, I will use stress relief techniques like deep
breathing and meditation to calm these feelings. When I go shopping, I
will avoid foods with a lot of sugar as well as those with dyes and
preservatives. When I play video games, I will limit it to one hour per
day. When it gets close to bedtime, I will follow a sleep routine to
help me fall asleep faster. When I eat, I will consider adopting a
ketogenic diet.

\[438\] Ronald C. Kessler et al., "Prevalence, Severity, and Comorbidity
of 12-Month DSM-IV Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication," Archives of General Psychiatry 62, no. 6 (June 2005):
617--27. \[439\] Jack Dreyfus, A Remarkable Medicine Has Been Overlooked
(New York: Dreyfus Medical Foundation, 1992). \[440\] Emil Kraepelin and
A. Ross Diefendorf, Clinical Psychiatry (New York: Macmillan, 1907;
Delmar, NY: Scholars' Facsimiles and Reprints, 1981). \[441\] Luke
Plunkett, "The Banned Pokémon Episode That Gave Children Seizures,"
Kotaku, October 20, 2015,
https://kotaku.com/the-banned-pokemon-episodethat-gave-children-seizures-5757570.
\[442\] Ibid. \[443\] Kirsty Martin et al., "Ketogenic Diet and Other
Dietary Treatments for Epilepsy," Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, no. 2 (February 9, 2016): CD001903.

\[444\] Emmanuelle C. Bostock, Kenneth C. Kirby, and Bruce V. Taylor,
"The Current Status of the Ketogenic Diet in Psychiatry," Frontiers in
Psychiatry 8 (March 20, 2017): 43. Elisa Brietzke et al., "Ketogenic
Diet as a Metabolic Therapy for Mood Disorders: Evidence and
Developments," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 94 (November
2018): 11--16. James R. Phelps, Susan V. Siemers, and Rif S. El-Mallakh,
"The Ketogenic Diet for Type II Bipolar Disorder," Neurocase 19, no. 5
(2013): 423--26. \[445\] Laura R. Saslow et al., "An Online Intervention
Comparing a Very LowCarbohydrate Ketogenic Diet and Lifestyle
Recommendations versus a Plate Method Diet in Overweight Individuals
with Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomized Controlled Trial," Journal of Medical
Internet Research 19, no. 2 (February 13, 2017): e36. \[446\] Antonio
Paoli et al., "Nutrition and Acne: Therapeutic Potential of Ketogenic
Diets," Skin Pharmacology and Physiology 25, no. 3 (2012): 111--17.
\[447\] Daniela D. Weber, Sepideh Aminzadeh-Gohari, and Barbara Kofler,
"Ketogenic Diet in Cancer Therapy," Aging 10, no. 2 (February 11, 2018):
164--65. \[448\] Javad Anjom-Shoae et al., "The Association between
Dietary Intake of Magnesium and Psychiatric Disorders among Iranian
Adults: A Cross-Sectional Study," British Journal of Nutrition 120, no.
6 (September 2018): 693--702. \[449\] Alan W. Yuen and Josemir Sander,
"Can Magnesium Supplementation Reduce Seizures in People with Epilepsy?
A Hypothesis," Epilepsy Research 100, nos. 1--2 (June 2012): 152--56.
\[450\] Etienne Pouteau et al., "Superiority of Magnesium and Vitamin B6
over Magnesium Alone on Severe Stress in Healthy Adults with Low
Magnesemia: A Randomized, Single-Blind Clinical Trial," PLOS One 13, no.
12 (December 18, 2018): e0208454. \[451\] Anna E. Kirkland, Gabrielle L.
Sarlo, and Kathleen F. Holton, "The Role of Magnesium in Neurological
Disorders," Nutrients 10, no. 6 (June 6, 2018): e730. Emily K. Tarleton
et al., "Role of Magnesium Supplementation in the Treatment of
Depression: A Randomized Clinical Trial," PLOS One 12, no. 6 (June 27,
2017): e0180067. \[452\] Evert Boonstra et al., "Neurotransmitters as
Food Supplements: The Effects of GABA on Brain and Behavior," Frontiers
in Psychology 6 (2015): 1520. \[453\] A. M. Abdou et al., "Relaxation
and Immunity Enhancement Effects of Gamma-aminobutyric Acid (GABA)
Administration in Humans," BioFactors 26, no. 3 (2006): 201--8.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 12

I IS FOR IMMUNITY AND INFECTIONS ATTACKED FROM INSIDE AND OUT Whenever
the immune system deals successfully with an infection, it emerges from
the experience stronger and better able to confront similar threats in
the future. Our immune competence develops in combat. If, at the first
sign of infection, you always jump in with antibiotics, you do not give
the system a chance to test itself and grow stronger. ANDREW WEIL

JUAN

Juan, 22, was struggling in his studies at the University of Wisconsin,
where he was a pre-law student. His family was from Spain, and they had
sent many of their family members and friends to our clinic after I
first treated the grandfather for depression years before. Juan had been
diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as a
child and had been taking stimulant medication from the time he was 10
years old. He said his medicine

helped him focus, but it also made him more irritable, impatient, and
moody. He was in danger of failing, even though he tested with a high
IQ. He had recently become depressed and had entertained suicidal
thoughts for the first time in his life. As a young boy, Juan was easily
distracted, had difficulty remaining seated, and struggled with
following instructions. He remembers sitting in class one day and
running out of the room when he saw a bird fly by the window. Once he
started taking Ritalin, he was much better able to remain focused, but
his mother recalls that once the medication wore out of his system in
the evenings, Juan became irritable and agitated. His family described
him as having a grumpy personality, especially when taking the
medication. When he was an adolescent, he drank heavily, but the alcohol
made him aggressive, so he stopped drinking. During his last semester at
school, his anxiety heightened when he realized he might not pass
several of his classes. He started worrying more and having difficulty
sleeping. He was prescribed Xanax to help him through this stressful
time, and it was helpful for sleep, but it also caused memory problems.
His SPECT scan showed overall low activity at rest, in a toxic pattern
that was very unusual for someone so young, and it improved with
concentration, which is the opposite of what we typically see with
people who have ADD/ADHD. We were left asking why his resting SPECT scan
looked so bad. The different possibilities were drug and alcohol use,
which he denied (we know addicts lie, so we tested him), an
environmental toxin, such as mold or carbon monoxide poisoning, a past
history of a loss of oxygen (from near drowning or a heart attack, which
he did not have), severely low thyroid function or anemia, or an
infectious disease

process. On an infectious-disease panel, we discovered that Juan had
been exposed to multiple past infections, including Lyme, Epstein Barr
virus, Toxoplasma gondii, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and human herpesvirus 6
(HHV-6). Being exposed to Lyme and HHV-6 decreases immune system
function, making Juan more susceptible to other infections. His thyroid
function was also low. Once we treated Juan for the infections and his
immune system strengthened, his mood, temper, focus, and grades
improved. He no longer needed the stimulant medication and recently
graduated with his law degree. JUAN'S SURFACE SPECT SCAN AT REST

Overall low activity (looks toxic)

SURFACE SPECT SCAN WITH CONCENTRATION

Overall improved (opposite of typical ADD/ADHD)

SPECT scans taught us that when brain health/mental health issues are
not improving with standard treatment, it is critical to consider immune
system issues and infections. In 30 years, I believe there will be a
subspecialty in psychiatry dedicated specifically to these issues.

IMMUNITY: YOUR BODY'S NATURAL PROTECTION SYSTEM Immunity is your body's
natural protection system, and it carries out two primary
functions---defense and tolerance. Your immune system defends against
external invaders--- think bacteria, viruses, and parasites---and it
patrols your body for internal troublemakers, such as cancer cells. It
also regulates your level of tolerance to potential environmental
triggers, such as allergens (including pollen, bee stings, grasses,
wheat, peanuts, soy, and corn).\[454\] When your immune system performs
these two functions optimally, it

helps keep you healthy. However, when your defenses don't do their job,
or your body's tolerance level is too low or becomes overwhelmed, it
makes you more vulnerable to infections, cancer, and autoimmune
disorders, as well as increasing your risk for depression, anxiety, and
even psychosis. Your immune system performs its important mission in
four ways: Identifies external invaders, internal cells, or tissues that
are misbehaving Recruits your white blood cells to attack the bad guys
Tags and decimates external and internal problems Remembers invaders and
troublemakers in case they return

THE FOUR PRIMARY IMMUNE SYSTEM FUNCTIONS\[455\] Defense against external
environment Defense against internal environment If it fails, you get an
infection.

If it fails, you get cancer.

Tolerance against external environment

Tolerance against internal environment

If it fails, you get allergies.

If it fails, you get an autoimmune disease.

Immune disorders fall into five categories, all of which impact your
brain health/mental health: 1. Immunodeficiency disorders: These
disorders can either be present from birth or result from an illness,
such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or acquired autoimmune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS), which damages your immune system. People
with

HIV are twice as likely to experience depression, and they also have an
increased risk of anxiety and cognitive disorders, including
dementia.\[456\] 2. Allergies: When your immune system views neutral
environmental "visitors," such as pollen or pet dander, as enemies, it
can lead to allergies, asthma, eczema, or even life-threatening
consequences. In a 2018 study including more than 186,000 people, those
with asthma, hay fever, and eczema were 66 percent more likely to
develop psychiatric disorders compared with those without
allergies.\[457\] And asthma has been shown to increase the risk of
dementia by 30 percent.\[458\] 3. Cancers of the immune system: Leukemia
and lymphomas are the most common forms of cancer affecting the immune
system. Cancer of any kind has long been associated with detrimental
changes in emotional health, and research shows that cancer patients are
more likely to have a mental health issue than people without the
disease.\[459\] In fact, as many as 25 percent of cancer patients have
clinical depression.\[460\] 4. Autoimmune disorders: When your immune
system mistakes your own internal tissues for troublemakers and attacks
them, it can create an autoimmune disorder. I typically refer to this as
"friendly fire." 5. Persistent infections: When you experience recurring
infections, it may be an indicator of a compromised immune system.

This chapter will go into greater detail about autoimmune disorders and
infections, which have been associated with an increased risk for many
different brain health/mental health issues. They will make people more
likely to be unfocused, depressed, or anxious.

AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS: THE INCREASED RISK FOR BRAIN ILLNESS/MENTAL
ILLNESS When the body's immune system is impaired, it can turn on you
and attack and destroy your own healthy tissues by mistake, resulting in
an autoimmune disorder. There are more than 100 different autoimmune
disorders---including multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, Hashimoto's
thyroiditis, and type 1 diabetes---affecting 80 million Americans. More
than 75 percent of those suffering from an autoimmune disease are
women.\[461\] Lady Gaga, who suffers from fibromyalgia, is one of them.
In 2019, while accepting an award from the Screen Actors Guild-American
Federation of Television and Radio Artists Foundation, she said the
chronic pain she felt was also accompanied by "panic attacks, acute
trauma responses, and debilitating mental spirals that have included
suicidal ideation and masochistic behavior."\[462\] She called mental
health issues "a crisis of epic proportions" and advocated that the
foundation implement a mental health program for actors. As in Lady
Gaga's case, many autoimmune illnesses are linked with psychiatric
issues. For example, having an autoimmune disease is associated with an
increased risk for:

Mood disorders (45 percent increased risk)\[463\] Schizophrenia (45
percent increased risk)\[464\] Bipolar disorder\[465\] ADD/ADHD\[466\]
Dementia, including Alzheimer's disease\[467\] Researchers are still
trying to pinpoint the exact causes of autoimmune disorders, but many
factors can play a role in their development, which I wrote about in
Memory Rescue: Leaky gut (see chapter 7, "I Is for Inflammation")
Environmental allergens---pollen, dust mites, mold Food
allergens---dairy, eggs, fish, shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts, wheat, and
soybeans are the top eight, according to the FDA Toxins (see chapter 10,
"T Is for Toxins") Obesity (see chapter 14, "D Is for Diabesity") Head
trauma (see chapter 9, "H Is for Head Trauma") Lack of exercise or
excessive exercise Poor diet (see chapter 18, "Food Made Insanely
Simple") Nutrient deficiencies Stress Sleep disorders (see chapter 15,
"S Is for Sleep") Hidden infections (see section on infections on the
following page) The traditional treatment protocol for autoimmune
disorders centers on suppressing the immune system with strong
medications, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
corticosteroids, or anticancer drugs like methotrexate. A doctor might
give you one medicine to treat arthritis and another one for Crohn's
disease, but this isn't the best approach, according to my friend and

colleague Mark Hyman, MD, director of the Center for Functional Medicine
at the Cleveland Clinic. He says it is a mistake to think of these
illnesses as separate conditions. In his view, it makes more sense to
address all of them as one single disorder---your immune system
attacking itself. If you suffer from any autoimmune disorder, he
believes the first question to ask yourself is: What is making my immune
system so angry at me? In my view, the best approach to get your immune
system to stop attacking your body and start cooperating with it is to
address all of your BRIGHT MINDS risk factors discussed in this
book.\[468\]

INFECTIOUS DISEASES: INFECTING THE BRAIN, TOO Infectious illnesses,
including Lyme disease, Streptococcus (strep throat), toxoplasmosis,
syphilis, Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori), HIV/AIDS, herpes, and others,
are a major cause of psychiatric and cognitive problems that few medical
professionals recognize. In a large study from Denmark, researchers
correlated infectious diseases in children with a significant increase
in psychiatric problems later in life.\[469\] Another study from Denmark
followed more than 3.5 million people, not necessarily children, and
found that hospitalization for any infection increased the risk for
later mood disorders by 62 percent.\[470\] Back in 1991, when I first
began using SPECT scans in my practice, I saw many patients who had been
diagnosed with conditions like chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) and
fibromyalgia. Sadly, they were often made to feel that their illness was
"all in their head" and were regarded by healthcare professionals as
"psychiatric patients." The medical

community was either blaming their condition on stress or basically
labeling them as "hysterical" and referring them to me. (It's very
frustrating when doctors can't determine what's causing a person's
condition, so they simply categorize them as "psychiatric." Hey, I
think, that's my job!). Many of these patients' scans looked terrible
(see the next scan), showing overall low blood flow caused by
undiagnosed infections. Of course, these patients would seem hysterical,
sad, irritable, or stressed! The organ of their behavior---the
brain---was being damaged by an infection.\[471\] Clinical evidence now
shows that CFS is an infectious disease,\[472\] and I hope more
physicians will start testing for infections. CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME
BRAIN SPECT SCAN

Overall low activity

Scientists have speculated that syphilis changed the course of
history,\[473\] believing that Christopher Columbus and his sailing crew
brought it with them to Europe. Thereafter, a number of notable rulers,
musicians, and literary greats (King Charles VIII, Queen Mary I,
Catherine the Great, Paul I, Vladimir Lenin) contracted it. Syphilis has
been linked to psychological effects and a condition called
neurosyphilis that can trigger psychiatric symptoms.\[474\]

Your vulnerability to illness depends on many factors---the strength of
your immune system, the level of exposure, stress, and daily habits.
Addressing your BRIGHT MINDS risk factors can strengthen your immune
system to reduce your risk.

In 2016, 33 scientists from around the world came together to write an
editorial in the Journal of Alzheimer's Disease,\[475\] suggesting the
medical community was overlooking infectious diseases as a root cause of
many memory problems and dementia. Drawing on findings from more than
100 studies, they claimed that significant stress or anything else that
suppresses the immune system can activate viruses that were dormant in
the brain. Of course, exposure to infectious diseases doesn't mean you
will get sick. Your vulnerability to illness depends on many factors---
the strength of your immune system, the level of exposure,

stress, and daily habits. Addressing your BRIGHT MINDS risk factors can
strengthen your immune system to reduce your risk. In the following
section, you will see some of the most common infectious diseases we see
at Amen Clinics that create psychiatric symptoms.

Infectious illnesses are a major cause of mental health issues that few
medical professionals recognize.

LYME DISEASE: THE TICK THAT CAN CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS ADRIANNA

Adrianna, age 16, was a healthy, beautiful, honor-roll student when she
went with her family on vacation to Yosemite National Park. When they
arrived at their cabin, they were surrounded by six deer. It was a
beautiful moment. Ten days later, Adrianna became agitated and started
having auditory hallucinations. Her parents sought help for Adrianna who
was admitted to a psychiatric hospital and prescribed antipsychotic
medications, which didn't help. The next three months were a torturous
road of 25 doctors and multiple medications---all at a cost of tens of
thousands of dollars. Adrianna had become a shadow of her former self. A

doctor at Stanford University told her mother, "Your daughter will be
schizophrenic for the rest of her life and will need medication for as
long as she lives." Unwilling to accept that diagnosis and desperate for
a different path forward for her daughter, her mother, Deb, found my
book Change Your Brain, Change Your Life and brought Adrianna to our
clinic in Northern California for a scan. It showed evidence of
inflammation with areas of unusually high activity. It caused us to look
deeper at the potential causes of her symptoms, such as an infection or
autoimmune system disorder. It turned out Adrianna had Lyme disease, an
infection caused by deer ticks. Treatment with antibiotics helped her
get her life back. She subsequently graduated from Pepperdine University
and then Queen Mary University of London with a master's degree in
international human resource management. Now, she is living a happy
life. Nearly every day around noon, I get a text from Deb asking how she
can pray for me. SCHIZOPHRENIA VERSUS LYME\[476\]

Source: J. S. Brown Jr., "Geographic Correlation of Schizophrenia to
Ticks and Tick-Borne Encephalitis," Schizophrenia

Bulletin 20, no. 4 (1994), 755--75; used with permission

In an amazing twist of fate, Adrianna's uncle had been committed to Napa
State Hospital for 27 years for paranoid schizophrenia. It turned out he
also had Lyme disease, which was only discovered after Adrianna's mother
had to

fight the hospital administration to have him released so he could be
tested. Treating Lyme for her brother did not get rid of his
hallucinations, but on a small dose of the antipsychotic medication
clozapine he has been able to live with his family and is doing well as
a free man. Subsequently, Deb has referred countless people to us to be
tested for brain infections when their behaviors were off. Like
Adrianna, hundreds of people have come to the Amen Clinics with mental
health issues that weren't responding to treatment and tested positive
for Lyme disease. Many of them had been infected years or even decades
previously, but nobody had ever thought to test them for infectious
diseases. With the proper treatment, their symptoms improved
significantly. In 2017, scientists from Australia and China reviewed
eight clinical trials using the antibiotic minocycline, also used to
treat Lyme disease, as an add-on treatment for schizophrenia, concluding
it was significantly helpful for both positive symptoms (such as
delusions, hallucinations, and agitation) and negative symptoms
(decreased motivation, social withdrawal, and lethargy).\[477\] For more
evidence about the connection between infectious diseases and mental
health, look at the two maps on the previous page. In the top image, you
will see the highest incidence of schizophrenia in the United States,
and in the bottom image, you will see the greatest risk for Lyme
disease. It doesn't take an expert cartographer to see that the maps are
nearly identical. In a "lifelong" psychotic illness, it is important to
rule out infectious diseases and autoimmune disorders as causes of brain
health/mental health symptoms.

TOXOPLASMA GONDII: IS YOUR CAT MAKING YOU CRAZY? \[478\] Pop quiz: What
do cats have in common with the following? Alzheimer's disease Anxiety
Bipolar disorder Depression Impulsive behavior Schizophrenia Suicidal
thoughts Answer: Toxoplasma gondii Did you know that more than 40
million Americans may be infected by this tiny single-celled parasite
that is often carried in cats and shed in their feces?\[479\] This
infection, called toxoplasmosis, has a strong association with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder,\[480\] anxiety and
depression,\[481\] as well as impulsive behavior and suicidal thoughts.
It has also been linked to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease,
autoimmune disorders, cancer, and heart disease.\[482\] If a pregnant
woman becomes infected, she can pass the infection to her developing
fetus, which can lead to brain damage or blindness at birth, or mental
disabilities later in life. Science writer Ed Yong recounts a most
unusual love story in an unforgettable TED talk:

Toxo infects a wide variety of mammals, but it can only sexually
reproduce in a cat. . . . If Toxo gets into a rat or a mouse, it turns
the rodent into a catseeking missile. If the infected rat smells the
delightful odor of cat piss, it runs toward the source of the smell
rather than the more sensible direction of away. The cat eats the rat.
Toxo gets to have sex. It's a classic tale of Eat, Prey, Love. . . .
Toxo releases an enzyme that makes dopamine, a substance involved in
reward and motivation. We know it targets certain parts of a rodent's
brain, including those involved in sexual arousal. When you realize that
a tiny parasite can control its host's behavior, it makes you wonder
just how much control over our behavior we really have.\[483\]

TOXOPLASMA GONDII

PANS, PANDAS, AND THE MIND

Most people know why it is important to treat strep throat. Left
untreated, it can cause rheumatic heart disease and congestive heart
failure. In the early 1990s, scientists from the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) reported it could also cause new-onset OCD and
Tourette's (a tic disorder) in children and teenagers. The new disorder
was called pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated
with streptococcal infections (PANDAS).

HENRY

When Henry, 10, came to see me, he was on three psychiatric medications
for anxiety, depression, ADHD, and Tourette's. His parents, who were
going through a divorce, initially blamed his symptoms on the family
stress, but his grandfather had been a patient at our clinic in New
York, and he encouraged them to bring Henry to us. Henry's scan showed
overall increased activity in a pattern that made me think his brain was
inflamed. Further testing showed he had both Lyme disease and PANDAS. A
year after treatment with antibiotics and a brain-healthy lifestyle, his
father told me Henry picked up four grade levels of learning and was a
completely new child off all psychiatric medications. HENRY'S ACTIVE
SPECT SCAN

Overall increased activity, looking inflamed

Subsequent to PANDAS, neuroscientists realized other infectious agents,
besides strep, could also cause emotional trouble, and they labeled the
condition PANS (pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiatric syndrome). Their
clinical presentation is almost identical. According to Dr. Susan Swedo
at NIMH, "Parents will describe children with PANS as overcome by a
'ferocious' onset of obsessive thoughts, compulsive rituals, and
overwhelming fears. Clinicians should consider PANS when children or
adolescents present with such acute-onset of OCD or eating restrictions
in the absence of a clear link to strep." PANS can be caused by numerous
infections, including Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), mycoplasma
pneumonia, herpes simplex, common cold, influenza, and other
viruses.\[484\] In an important study from Denmark,\[485\] patients who
had infections, even those who did not require hospitalization, had a
higher incidence of schizophrenia and depression. The researchers did
not know if the infections

attacking brain tissue were causing the mental health issues or the fact
that they had taken antibiotics that changed the gut's microbiome had
put people at higher risk of trouble.

FUNGAL INFECTIONS: AN ITCH YOU CAN'T IGNORE The human body plays host to
many types of fungi, including yeasts called Candida. One of the most
common fungi is Candida albicans, which typically resides in small
amounts in the gut microbiome and mouth. The good bugs (bacteria) in
your gut usually keep C. albicans levels in check. However, some people
with weakened immune systems can experience an overgrowth of the
fungus--- especially in warm, moist areas like the genitals or mouth---
leading to a fungal infection called candidiasis that causes burning and
itching (such as a vaginal yeast infection). These obvious symptoms may
not be the only consequences of fungal infections. Emerging research
shows a connection between these infections and brain health/mental
health disorders. A 2016 study from researchers at Johns Hopkins
revealed that Candida yeast infections are more prevalent in men with
bipolar disorder or schizophrenia compared with men who don't have these
conditions. And among women with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia,
those with fungal infections performed worse on memory tests than women
who had no history of the infections.\[486\] One of the study authors,
Emily Severance, PhD, says, "Most Candida infections can be treated in
their early stages, and clinicians should make it a point to look out
for these infections in their patients with mental illness."\[487\]

Fungal infections can impact brain health in other ways. New research on
mice shows Candida infections can also contribute to memory loss and
brain changes similar to those seen in Alzheimer's disease.\[488\] In
this 2019 study, mice that were infected with the yeast infection showed
reduced spatial memory, but after the infection was treated, their
spatial memory returned to normal. The researchers also found that C.
albicans can cross the blood brain barrier and impact the brain's immune
cells, producing a sort of brain infection they suggest may play a role
in the development of neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, and MS. What makes you more vulnerable to fungal
infections? Weakened immune system Taking immunosuppressant medication
Taking antibiotics or oral contraceptives High alcohol intake Consuming
a diet high in sugar and refined carbohydrates Consuming a lot of
fermented foods High stress levels Uncontrolled diabetes Mercury
toxicity If you've got an itch in places where you shouldn't, get it
checked out and treated right away.

Immunity and Infections Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They
Represent)

Autoimmune disorders, such as MS, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, Crohn's disease, psoriasis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and
type 1 diabetes Unidentified infections, such as Lyme disease,
toxoplasmosis, syphilis, H. pylori, HIV/AIDS, herpes, PANDAS (or PANS),
Candida infections, and others Low vitamin D level Asthma and hay fever
Allergies to gluten, dairy, peanuts, corn, soy, and other foods and
substances (psychological circle because you feel as if you "love" these
foods, and social circle because you want to eat what everybody else is
eating) THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Disallow throat cultures for
people with sore throats and never allow health-care professionals to
test vitamin D levels. 2. Encourage the consumption of common allergenic
foods---such as gluten, dairy, corn, and soy---that can trigger
autoimmune responses. 3. Tell people to change the cat litter no more
than once a week and promote hiking on trails where deer ticks are
plentiful. 4. Promote unprotected sex. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . .
. 1. Encourage people with sore throats to get a throat culture and
mandate that physicians routinely test patients' vitamin D levels. 2.
Discourage people from consuming potential allergens---gluten, soy,
corn, and dairy---that can trigger autoimmune responses. Encourage food
manufacturers to reduce their use of these substances in packaged foods.

3. Let cat owners know it's important to change the cat litter on a
daily basis, and advise hikers to avoid trails where deer ticks can be
found. 4. Inform the public about the risks of unprotected sex.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR IMMUNITY AND INFECTIONS RISK FACTORS
(AND THE FOUR CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Love and care about your immune system. It is critical
to your survival. 2. Know your personal history, and check the health of
your immune system. A pattern of allergies, asthma, rashes, or repeated
infections could mean your immune system is at risk. The following blood
tests can reveal the state of your immune system: Complete blood count
(CBC) with differential looks at your white blood cells, which are
necessary to fight infections. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
measures inflammation, which is high in autoimmune disorders.
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)---antibodies fight infection, but ANAs
often attack your body's tissues. ANAs are often high in autoimmune

disorders. Vitamin D---your body converts vitamin D into a hormone that
regulates your organs. Only about 25 percent of the US population has
healthy levels of vitamin D.\[489\] The blood test to get:
25-hydroxyvitamin D level. A normal level is 30-- 100 ng/mL (nanograms
per milliliter); optimal is 50--100 ng/mL. Get tested for common
infections. At the Amen Clinics, we do additional testing through
Medical Diagnostic Laboratories (mdlab.com) when we see evidence of
infections on SPECT scans. Given that most people reading The End of
Mental Illness won't have the benefit of a SPECT scan, if your mind or a
loved one's is not getting better with standard treatment, consider
testing for infectious diseases that commonly affect the mind, such
as:\[490\] Lyme-Borrelia burgdorferi\[491\] (the spirochete that causes
Lyme) HIV/AIDS\[492\] Syphilis\[493\] Herpes simplex 1 and 2\[494\]
Cytomegalovirus\[495\] Epstein Barr virus\[496\] Herpes 6 (HHV6)
Toxoplasma gondii\[497\] H. pylori\[498\] Chlamydia pneumoniae\[499\]
Candidiasis

Consult with an integrative medical provider to diagnose and treat any
immune system issues or infections. 3. Avoid allergens and infections as
much as possible. Go on an elimination diet for 30 days. Cut out sugar,
gluten, dairy, corn, soy, artificial colors, additives, and
preservatives to see if you feel better. Avoid sources of toxoplasmosis:
If you have a cat, change the litter box daily and wear gloves and a
mask. The parasite in the feces only becomes infectious after one to
five days. Cover children's sandboxes to protect them from stray cats.
Help your cat stay healthy by keeping it indoors and feed it dry or
canned cat food, not raw meat. Avoid stray cats or kittens as they are
more likely to be infected. Wear gloves when you garden or handle soil
and wash your hands thoroughly afterwards. Do not eat raw or undercooked
meat and avoid raw cured meat, especially lamb, pork, and beef, which
can harbor toxoplasmosis.

Wash kitchen utensils thoroughly after preparing meat. Do not drink
unpasteurized milk as it may contain toxoplasmosis parasites. 4. Engage
in immune-enhancing habits. Boost your vitamin D level. See "The
Immunity Vitamin" on page 234. Lower your stress (psychological circle
and social circle because the people you spend time with either increase
or reduce your stress levels). Stress hurts your immune system and
increases the risk of autoimmune diseases.\[500\] One of my favorite
immunity-boosting, stressmanagement techniques is laughter.\[501\] "A
cheerful heart is good medicine" (Proverbs 17:22). Watching comedies can
be healing, literally. Other techniques to soothe stress include
diaphragmatic breathing, prayer or meditation, listening to calming
music, warming your hands with your mind, hypnosis and guided imagery,
and flooding your five senses with positivity. You can read much more
about these techniques in my book Feel Better Fast and Make It Last. 5.
Take nutraceuticals that boost your immunity and stave off infections. I
recommend that everyone start taking a multivitamin and omega-3 fatty
acids and optimize their vitamin D levels.

Beyond that, work with an integrative practitioner to determine the
other supplements from the following list that will improve your
immunity. Therapeutic mushrooms: The unique and diverse compounds in
these fungi, not found in other plants, have been found to have
immunityenhancing effects.\[502\] Studies report they also have
antioxidant, antitumor, antivirus, antiinflammatory, and antidiabetic
properties.\[503\] I recommend eating and cooking with mushrooms (see
below) as well as taking them as supplements. Among the most researched
are: Lion's mane---improves mood\[504\] and memory in patients with mild
cognitive impairment (MCI)\[505\] Shiitake---improves immunity and
decreases inflammatory markers\[506\]

Reishi---anti-inflammatory, immunity enhancing, and mood
promoting\[507\] Cordyceps---a favorite among athletes because it
increases ATP production as well as strength, and endurance, and it has
antiaging effects\[508\] Enhance your immune system to fight infections
with these nutrients:\[509\] Aged garlic\[510\] Anthocyanins---fruit and
vegetable extracts, blueberries, cranberries, grapes\[511\]

Echinacea\[512\] Probiotics\[513\] Vitamin C\[514\] Vitamin
D\[515\]---see "The Immunity Vitamin" below Vitamin E\[516\] Zinc\[517\]

The Immunity Vitamin Often referred to as the "sunshine vitamin,"
vitamin D is actually a hormone that should be called the "immunity
vitamin" thanks to its positive effects on the immune system.\[518\] It
also plays an essential role in overall brain health, mood, memory,
weight, and other important bodily processes. Low levels of vitamin D
have been associated with approximately 200 conditions, including brain
health/mental health issues (depression, autism, and psychosis),
autoimmune diseases (MS, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetes), as well as
heart disease, cancer, and obesity.\[519\] The link between vitamin D
and mental health is strong, and more than half of psychiatric
inpatients are deficient in vitamin D.\[520\] Low vitamin D has also
been associated with memory problems and dementia.\[521\] A growing body
of research supports the possible role of vitamin D in protecting
against autoimmune diseases, depression, cognitive function, and
more.\[522\] A 2008 study followed 441 overweight and obese adults with
depression for one year. The individuals who took vitamin D (20,000 IU
or 40,000 IU per week) reported a significant decrease in their
symptoms, but those who took a placebo did not see such
improvement.\[523\] In a Swiss study, people who took vitamin D over a
month had a significant drop in fatigue.\[524\] At Amen Clinics, we test
the vitamin D levels of all of our patients, and a staggering number of
them have low levels. A report that looked at vitamin D levels for
American adults in 1988--1994 compared with 2001--2004 showed that our
levels are dropping. The percentage of people with levels of 30 ng/mL or
more fell from 45 percent to 23 percent.\[525\] This means that three
out of four Americans have low levels of this important vitamin. In
part,

this is due to the fact that we are spending more time indoors and using
more sunscreen when we're outdoors. The following groups are more likely
to experience vitamin D deficiency:\[526\] Older adults People with
darker skin (which reduces ability to make vitamin D from sunlight)
People with limited sun exposure (think northern latitudes) People
taking certain medications, such as antihypertensives, antidiabetics, or
benzodiazepines\[527\] People with fat malabsorption syndrome, which can
occur with liver disease, cystic fibrosis, and Crohn's disease People
who are obese or who have undergone gastric bypass surgery

BRIGHT MINDS: IMMUNITY AND INFECTIONS STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . .
. AND MAKE MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your
immune system. 2. Engage in habits that damage your immune system and
increase your risk for infections. Ignore your allergies, skin rashes,
or recurring infections. Don't pay attention to the allergens in your
environment. Consume a diet high in sugar, gluten, dairy, and other
allergens. Let stress rule your life. Don't get screened for vitamin D
levels or for possible infections. 3. Avoid the strategies that
strengthen your immune system. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND
KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your immune
system. 2. Avoid things that impair your immune system. 3. Engage in
habits to strengthen your immune system and minimize your risk for
infections. Know your history of asthma, eczema, and past infections.
Eliminate allergens from your home. Avoid eating foods with allergens
like sugar, gluten, dairy, corn, soy, artificial colors, additives, and
preservatives. Add immunity-enhancing mushrooms to your diet.

Practice stress management techniques. Get screened for possible
infections. Check your vitamin D levels and optimize them if they are
low. Empty the cat litter box every day.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Immunity and Infections Tiny Habit to Start Today
When I experience treatment-resistant anxiety or depression, I will get
tested for exposure to infectious diseases. When I am not responding to
traditional treatment, I will do an elimination diet for a month to see
if I have food allergies that might be damaging my immune system. When I
go hiking, I will avoid areas where deer ticks are common. I will wear
long sleeves and pants, and I will check my body for ticks after a hike.
When I go to the doctor for my annual physical, I will ask him or her to
check my vitamin D level. When I take my daily supplements, I will add
extra vitamin C. When I cook, I will occasionally add shiitake mushrooms
to my meal.

When I go out, I will limit my alcohol consumption because drinking
excessive alcohol can upset the gut microbiome,\[528\] which is critical
to immunity. When I want to give my immune system a natural boost, I
will watch a comedy or go to a comedy club. If I have a cat, I'll keep
it indoors and change the litter box on a daily basis.

\[454\] Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017),
185--86. \[455\] Ibid. \[456\] "HIV/AIDS and Mental Health," National
Institute of Mental Health, last revised November 2016,
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/hivaids/index.shtml. \[457\]
Nian-Sheng Tzeng et al., "Increased Risk of Psychiatric Disorders in
Allergic Diseases: A Nationwide, Population-Based, Cohort Study,"
Frontiers in Psychiatry 9 (April 24, 2018): 133. \[458\] Yi-Hao Peng et
al., "Adult Asthma Increases Dementia Risk: A Nationwide Cohort Study,"
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 69, no. 2 (February 2015):
123--28. Minna Rusanen et al., "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
and Asthma and the Risk of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A
Population Based CAIDE Study," Current Alzheimer Research 10, no. 5
(June 2013): 549--55. \[459\] Ora Nakash et al., "Comorbidity of Common
Mental Disorders with Cancer and Their Treatment Gap: Findings from the
World Mental Health Surveys," Psycho-Oncology 23, no. 1 (January 2014):
40--51. \[460\] William F. Pirl, "Evidence Report on the Occurrence,
Assessment, and Treatment of Depression in Cancer Patients," JNCI
Monographs 2004, no. 32 (July 2004): 32--39.

\[461\] "Women & Autoimmunity," American Autoimmune Related Diseases
Association, accessed August 15, 2019,
https://www.aarda.org/who-wehelp/patients/women-and-autoimmunity/.
\[462\] Marc Malkin, "Lady Gaga Opens Up about Her 'Mental Health
Crisis,'" Variety, November 9, 2018,
https://variety.com/2018/scene/news/lady-gagamental-health-struggles-1203023093/.
\[463\] Michael E. Benros et al., "Autoimmune Diseases and Severe
Infections as Risk Factors for Mood Disorders: A Nationwide Study," JAMA
Psychiatry 70, no. 8 (August 2013): 812--20. Gianluca Bagnato et al.,
"Comparation of Levels of Anxiety and Depression in Patients with
Autoimmune and Chronic-Degenerative Rheumatic: Preliminary Data,"
Reumatismo (Italian) 58, no. 3 (July--September 2006): 206--11. \[464\]
William W. Eaton et al., "Association of Schizophrenia and Autoimmune
Diseases: Linkage of Danish National Registers," American Journal of
Psychiatry 163, no. 3 (March 2006): 521--28. \[465\] Joshua D. Rosenblat
and Roger S. McIntyre, "Bipolar Disorder and Immune Dysfunction:
Epidemiological Findings, Proposed Pathophysiology and Clinical
Implications," Brain Sciences 7, no. 11 (October 30, 2017): e144.
\[466\] Philip Rising Nielsen, Michael Eriksen Benros, and Søren
Dalsgaard, "Associations between Autoimmune Diseases and
AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Nationwide Study," Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 56, no. 3 (March
2017): 234-- 40.e1. \[467\] Clare J. Wotton and Michael J. Goldacre,
"Associations between Specific Autoimmune Diseases and Subsequent
Dementia: Retrospective RecordLinkage Cohort Study, UK," Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health 71, no. 6 (June 2017): 576--83.
\[468\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 188. \[469\] Ole Köhler-Forsberg et al., "A
Nationwide Study in Denmark of the Association between Treated
Infections and the Subsequent Risk of Treated Mental Disorders in
Children and Adolescents," JAMA Psychiatry 76, no. 3 (March 2019):
271--79. \[470\] Michael E. Benros et al., "Autoimmune Diseases and
Severe Infections as Risk Factors for Mood Disorders: A Nationwide
Study," JAMA Psychiatry 70, no. 8 (August 2013): 812--20. \[471\] Amen,
Memory Rescue, 189. \[472\] R. A. Underhill, "Myalgic Encephalomyelitis,
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: An Infectious Disease," Medical Hypotheses 85,
no. 6 (December 2015): 765--73. \[473\] Z. Marinković and S. Dukić,
"Historical and Medical Review of SyphilisAfflicted Army Leaders, Rulers
and Statesmen," Medicinski Pregled 64, nos. 7-- 8 (July/August 2011):
423--27.

\[474\] Lucas Lonardoni Crozatti et al., "Atypical Behavioral and
Psychiatric Symptoms: Neurosyphilis Should Always Be Considered,"
Autopsy Case Reports 5, no. 3 (July--September 2015): 43--47. \[475\]
Ruth F. Itzhaki et al., "Microbes and Alzheimer's Disease," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 51, no. 4 (2016): 979--84. \[476\] James S. Brown
Jr., "Geographic Correlation of Schizophrenia to Ticks and Tick-Borne
Encephalitis," Schizophrenia Bulletin 20, no. 4 (1994): 755--75; used
with permission. \[477\] Ying Qiang Xiang et al., "Adjunctive
Minocycline for Schizophrenia: A Metaanalysis of Randomized Controlled
Trials," European Neuropsychopharmacology 27, no. 1 (January 2017):
8--18. \[478\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 192. \[479\] "Toxoplasmosis
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)," Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, last reviewed September 28, 2018,
https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/gen_info/faqs.html. \[480\]
Claudia Del Grande et al., "Is Toxoplasma gondii a Trigger of Bipolar
Disorder?" Pathogens 6, no. 1 (March 2017): e3. \[481\] Jaana Suvisaari
et al., "Toxoplasma gondii Infection and Common Mental Disorders in the
Finnish General Population," Journal of Affective Disorders 223
(December 1, 2017): 20--25. \[482\] C. J. Carter, "Toxoplasmosis and
Polygenic Disease Susceptibility Genes: Extensive Toxoplasma gondii
Host/Pathogen Interactome Enrichment in Nine Psychiatric or Neurological
Disorders," Journal of Pathogens 2013 (2013): 965046. \[483\] Ed Yong,
"Zombie Roaches and Other Parasite Tales," TED Talk, March 2014, video,
13:02,
https://www.ted.com/talks/ed_yong_suicidal_wasps_zombie_roaches_and_oth
er_tales_of_parasites. \[484\] "What Is PANS?" Moleculera Labs, accessed
August 16, 2019, https://www.moleculeralabs.com/what-is-pans/ \[485\] O.
Köhler et al., "Infections and Exposure to Anti-infective Agents and the
Risk of Severe Mental Disorders: A Nationwide Study," Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica 135, no. 2 (February 2017): 97--105. \[486\] Emily G.
Severance et al., "Candida albicans Exposures, Sex Specificity and
Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder," npj
Schizophrenia 2 (May 4, 2016): 16018. \[487\] Emily Severance, quoted at
"Yeast Infection Linked to Mental Illness," Johns Hopkins Medicine, May
4, 2016,
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/news/media/releases/yeast_infection_linked
\_to_mental_illness. \[488\] Yifan Wu et al., "Microglia and Amyloid
Precursor Protein Coordinate Control of Transient Candida Cerebritis
with Memory Deficits," Nature Communications 10, no. 1 (January 4,
2019): 58.

\[489\] Adit A. Ginde, Mark C. Liu, and Carlos A. Camargo Jr.,
"Demographic Differences and Trends of Vitamin D Insufficiency in the US
Population, 1988-- 2004," Archives of Internal Medicine 169, no. 6
(March 23, 2009): 626--32. \[490\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 194. \[491\]
Frederic Blanc et al., "Lyme Neuroborreliosis and Dementia," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 41, no. 4 (2014): 1087--93. \[492\] Justin C.
McArthur, "HIV Dementia: An Evolving Disease," Journal of
Neuroimmunology 157, nos. 1--2 (December 2004): 3--10. \[493\] Judith
Miklossy, "Historic Evidence to Support a Causal Relationship between
Spirochetal Infections and Alzheimer's Disease," Frontiers in Aging
Neuroscience 7 (April 16, 2015): 46. \[494\] Steven A. Harris and
Elizabeth A. Harris, "Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 and Other Pathogens
Are Key Causative Factors in Sporadic Alzheimer's Disease," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 48, no. 2 (2015): 319--53. Ariah J. Steel and Guy D.
Eslick, "Herpes Viruses Increase the Risk of Alzheimer's Disease: A
Meta-Analysis," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 47, no. 2 (2015):
351--64. \[495\] Lisa L. Barnes et al., "Cytomegalovirus Infection and
Risk of Alzheimer Disease in Older Black and White Individuals," Journal
of Infectious Diseases 211, no. 2 (January 15, 2015): 230--37. \[496\]
S. M. Shim et al., "Elevated Epstein-Barr Virus Antibody Level Is
Associated with Cognitive Decline in the Korean Elderly," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 55, no. 1 (2017): 293--301. \[497\] Mahmoud
Mahami-Oskouei et al., "Toxoplasmosis and Alzheimer: Can Toxoplasma
gondii Really Be Introduced as a Risk Factor in Etiology of Alzheimer?"
Parasitology Research 115, no. 8 (August 2016): 3169--74. \[498\] Tali
Shindler-Itskovitch et al., "A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
the Association between Helicobacterpylori Infection and Dementia,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 52, no. 4 (2016): 1431--42. \[499\] Priya
Maheshwari and Guy D. Eslick, "Bacterial Infection and Alzheimer's
Disease: A Meta-analysis," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 43, no. 3
(2015): 957--66. \[500\] Brunetta Porcelli et al., "Association between
Stressful Life Events and Autoimmune Diseases: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis of Retrospective Case-Control Studies," Autoimmunity
Reviews 15, no. 4 (April 2016): 325--34. A. Matos-Santos et al.,
"Relationship between the Number and Impact of Stressful Life Events and
the Onset of Graves' Disease and Toxic Nodular Goitre," Clinical
Endocrinology (Oxford) 55, no. 1 (July 2001): 15--19. David C. Mohr et
al., "Association between Stressful Life Events and Exacerbation in
Multiple Sclerosis: A Meta-analysis," BMJ 328 (March 27, 2004): 731.

\[501\] Lee S. Berk et al., "Modulation of Neuroimmune Parameters during
the Eustress of Humor-Associated Mirthful Laughter," Alternative
Therapies in Health and Medicine 7, no. 2 (March 2001): 62--72, 74--76.
Kyung Hee Ryu, Hye Sook Shin, and Eun Young Yang, "Effects of Laughter
Therapy on Immune Responses in Postpartum Women," Journal of Alternative
and Complementary Medicine 21, no. 12 (December 2015): 781--88. Norman
Cousins, "Anatomy of an Illness (as Perceived by the Patient)," New
England Journal of Medicine 295, no. 26 (December 23, 1976): 1458--63.
\[502\] S. P. Wasser, "Medicinal Mushrooms as a Source of Antitumor and
Immunomodulating Polysaccharides," Applied Microbiology and
Biotechnology 60, no. 3 (November 2002): 258--74. \[503\] Peter Roupas
et al., "The Role of Edible Mushrooms in Health: Evaluation of the
Evidence," Journal of Functional Foods 4, no. 4 (October 2012):
687--709. Seema Patel and Arun Goyal, "Recent Developments in Mushrooms
as Anti-cancer Therapeutics: A Review," 3 Biotech 2, no. 1 (March 2012):
1--15. Lu Ren, Conrad Perera, and Yacine Hemar, "Antitumor Activity of
Mushroom Polysaccharides: A Review," Food and Function 3, no. 11
(November 2012): 1118--30. Dhanushka Gunawardena et al.,
"Anti-inflammatory Effects of Five Commercially Available Mushroom
Species Determined in Lipopolysaccharide and Interferon-γ Activated
Murine Macrophages," Food Chemistry 148 (April 1, 2014): 92--96. \[504\]
Mayumi Nagano et al., "Reduction of Depression and Anxiety by 4 Weeks
Hericium erinaceus Intake," Biomedical Research 31, no. 4 (August 2010):
231--37. \[505\] Koichiro Mori et al., "Improving Effects of the
Mushroom Yamabushitake (Hericium erinaceus) on Mild Cognitive
Impairment: A Double-Blind PlaceboControlled Clinical Trial,"
Phytotherapy Research 23, no. 3 (March 2009): 367-- 72. \[506\]
Xiaoshuang Dai et al., "Consuming Lentinula edodes (Shiitake) Mushrooms
Daily Improves Human Immunity: A Randomized Dietary Intervention in
Healthy Young Adults," Journal of the American College of Nutrition 34,
no. 6 (2015): 478--87. Mary Jo Feeney et al., "Mushrooms and Health
Summit Proceedings," Journal of Nutrition 144, no. 7 (July 2014):
1128S--36S. J. M. Gaullier et al., "Supplementation with a Soluble
β-glucan Exported from Shiitake Medicinal Mushroom, Lentinus edodes
(Berk.) Singer Mycelium: A Crossover, Placebo-Controlled Study in
Healthy Elderly," International Journal of Medicinal Mushrooms 13, no. 4
(2011): 319--26. \[507\] B. S. Sanodiya et al., "Ganoderma lucidum: A
Potent Pharmacological Macrofungus," Current Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology 10, no. 8 (December 2009): 717--42.

Hong Zhao et al., "Spore Powder of Ganoderma lucidum Improves
Cancer-Related Fatigue in Breast Cancer Patients Undergoing Endocrine
Therapy: A Pilot Clinical Trial," Evidence-Based Complementary and
Alternative Medicine 2012 (2012): 809614. \[508\] Xing-Tai Li et al.,
"Protective Effects on Mitochondria and Anti-aging Activity of
Polysaccharides from Cultivated Fruiting Bodies of Cordyceps militaris,"
American Journal of Chinese Medicine 38, no. 6 (2010): 1093--106.
\[509\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 197. \[510\] Susan S. Percival, "Aged
Garlic Extract Modifies Human Immunity," Journal of Nutrition 146, no. 2
(February 2016): 433S--36S. Craig S. Charron et al., "A Single Meal
Containing Raw, Crushed Garlic Influences Expression of Immunity- and
Cancer-Related Genes in Whole Blood of Humans," Journal of Nutrition
145, no. 11 (November 2015): 2448--55. \[511\] Cheryl A. Rowe et al.,
"Regular Consumption of Concord Grape Juice Benefits Human Immunity,"
Journal of Medicinal Food 14, nos. 1--2 (January/February 2011): 69--78.
Susan J. Zunino, "Type 2 Diabetes and Glycemic Response to Grapes or
Grape Products," Journal of Nutrition 139, no. 9 (September 2009):
1794S-- 1800S. M. P. Nantz et al., "Immunity and Antioxidant Capacity in
Humans Is Enhanced by Consumption of a Dried, Encapsulated Fruit and
Vegetable Juice Concentrate," Journal of Nutrition 136, no. 10 (October
2006): 2606--610. \[512\] Marlies Karsch-Völk et al., "Echinacea for
Preventing and Treating the Common Cold," Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, no. 2 (February 20, 2014): CD000530. Keith I. Block
and Mark N. Mead, "Immune System Effects of Echinacea, Ginseng, and
Astragalus: A Review," Integrative Cancer Therapies 2, no. 3 (September
2003): 247--67. \[513\] Angélica T. Vieira, Mauro M. Teixeira, and
Flaviano S. Martins, "The Role of Probiotics and Prebiotics in Inducing
Gut Immunity," Frontiers in Immunology 4 (December 12, 2013): 445. Rohit
Sharma et al., "Dietary Supplementation of Milk Fermented with Probiotic
Lactobacillus fermentum Enhances Systemic Immune Response and
Antioxidant Capacity in Aging Mice," Nutrition Research (New York) 34,
no. 11 (November 2014): 968--81. \[514\] Chad Robertson, "The Link
between Vitamin C and Optimal Immunity," Life Extension magazine,
November 2015,
https://www.lifeextension.com/magazine/2015/11/the-link-between-vitamin-cand-optimal-immunity/page-01.
M. de la Fuente et al., "Immune Function in Aged Women Is Improved by
Ingestion of Vitamins C and E," Canadian Journal of Physiology and
Pharmacology 76, no. 4 (1998): 373--80.

\[515\] J. Rodrigo Mora, Makoto Iwata, and Ulrich H. von Andrian,
"Vitamin Effects on the Immune System: Vitamins A and D Take Centre
Stage," Nature Reviews Immunology 8, no. 9 (September 2008): 685--98.
Cynthia Aranow, "Vitamin D and the Immune System," Journal of
Investigative Medicine 59, no. 6 (August 2011): 881--86. Oregon State
University, "Key Feature of Immune System Survived in Humans, Other
Primates for 60 Million Years," EurekAlert! American Association for the
Advancement of Science, August 18, 2009,
https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2009-08/osu-kfo081809.php.
Mitsuyoshi Urashima et al., "Randomized Trial of Vitamin D
Supplementation to Prevent Seasonal Influenza A in Schoolchildren,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 91, no. 5 (May 2010): 1255--60.
\[516\] Satoru Moriguchi and Mikako Muraga, "Vitamin E and Immunity,"
Vitamins and Hormones 59 (2000): 305--36. \[517\] Junaidah B. Barnett et
al., "Effect of Zinc Supplementation on Serum Zinc Concentration and T
cell Proliferation in Nursing Home Elderly: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 103,
no. 3 (March 2016): 942--51. Laura Kahmann et al., "Effect of Improved
Zinc Status on T helper Cell Activation and TH1/TH2 Ratio in Healthy
Elderly Individuals," Biogerontology 7, nos. 5--6 (October--December
2006): 429--35. Ananda S. Prasad et al., "Effect of Zinc Supplementation
on Incidence of Infections and Hospital Admissions in Sickle Cell
Disease (SCD)," American Journal of Hematology 61, no. 3 (July 1999):
194--202. \[518\] Jorge Correale, María Célica Ysrraelit, and María Inés
Gaitán, "Immunomodulatory Effects of Vitamin D in Multiple Sclerosis,"
Brain 132, part 5 (May 2009): 1146--60. \[519\] See "835 Abstracts with
Vitamin D Research," Vitamin D, GreenMedInfo, accessed August 16, 2019,
https://www.greenmedinfo.com/substance/vitamin-d. \[520\] Herbert W.
Harris et al., "Vitamin D Deficiency and Psychiatric Illness," Current
Psychiatry 12, no. 4 (April 2013): 18--27. \[521\] Paul Knekt et al.,
"Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D Concentration and Risk of Dementia,"
Epidemiology (Cambridge, MA) 25, no. 6 (November 2014): 799-- 804.
\[522\] Rathish Nair and Arun Maseeh, "Vitamin D: The 'Sunshine'
Vitamin," Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapeutics 3, no. 2
(April--June 2012): 118-- 26. \[523\] R. Jorde et al., "Effects of
Vitamin D Supplementation on Symptoms of Depression in Overweight and
Obese Subjects: Randomized Double Blind Trial," Journal of Internal
Medicine 264, no. 6 (December 2008): 599--609.

\[524\] Albina Nowak et al., "Effect of Vitamin D3 on Self-Perceived
Fatigue: A Double-Blind Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial," Medicine
(Baltimore) 95, no. 52 (December 2016): e5353. \[525\] Adit A. Ginde,
Mark C. Liu, and Carlos A. Camargo Jr., "Demographic Differences and
Trends of Vitamin D Insufficiency in the US Population, 1988-- 2004,"
Archives of Internal Medicine 169, no. 6 (2009): 626--32. \[526\] Amen,
Memory Rescue, 198--99. \[527\] E. Sohl et al., "The Impact of
Medication on Vitamin D Status in Older Individuals," European Journal
of Endocrinology 166, no. 3 (March 2012): 477-- 85. \[528\] Phillip A.
Engen et al., "The Gastrointestinal Microbiome: Alcohol Effects on the
Composition of Intestinal Microbiota," Alcohol Research: Current Reviews
37, no. 2 (2015): 223--36.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 13

N IS FOR NEUROHORMONE ISSUES MIRACLE GROW FOR YOUR MIND Many marriages
break up over hormonal imbalance, which is truly sad because it comes
from a lack of understanding. When hormones are put back in balance . .
. a woman or man resumes their normal life of feeling good and having
days filled with quality. S UZ A N N E S O M E R S

JENNY

Jenny, 42, was struggling in her marriage. She was anxious, tired,
irritable, depressed, and couldn't sleep. Two years prior to seeing us,
she had started drinking more wine, which upset her husband. She
struggled with a low libido, which was not helping her marriage, and she
was frequently volatile with the children, which made her husband
incredibly frustrated. Her primary care doctor put her on Lexapro (a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor \[SSRI\]) for depression, Xanax
(a benzodiazepine) for anxiety, and

Ambien for sleep, but none of the medication was making her feel better.
She and her husband came together to the clinic. To this point, no one
had tested her hormones; her thyroid (energy), testosterone (libido,
mood, and strength), and progesterone (a sense of calmness) were all
low. Most people do not know that progesterone drops ten years before
women go into menopause. By replacing her hormones, we were able to take
Jenny off all of her medications, and her relationships at home improved
within a matter of months. When the hormones that affect your brain
(neurohormones) are off, you are off. Many of the symptoms associated
with hormonal imbalances are similar to those seen in brain
health/mental health issues. If nobody checks your hormone levels, which
is what happened to Jenny, you will never know the root cause of your
issues and may be diagnosed with a mental illness. But when your
hormones are the problem, no amount of psychiatric medications will get
you right. In the following chart, you'll see common complaints from
patients with hormonal problems and how they can be mistaken for mental
illnesses. HORMONAL IMBALANCE COMPLAINTS

CAN BE MISTAKEN FOR . . .

"I'm anxious."

Anxiety

"I'm sad all the time."

Depression

"I just don't feel like myself."

Depression

"My brain is foggy."

Dementia

"My memory is worse than ever."

Dementia

"Everything in my body hurts."

Pain disorder

"I can't stay asleep."

Depression, anxiety

"I'm not interested in sex." "I just yelled at my kids for no reason."

Depression Intermittent explosive disorder

"I feel as if I am going to crawl out of my skin."

Panic attacks, anxiety

"I am hungry all the time." "I'm hearing things." "I can't concentrate."

Binge-eating disorder Psychosis Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

Hormones are chemical messengers produced in the body that control and
regulate the activity of certain cells or organs. Neurohormones have an
important impact on the brain. When they are healthy, you tend to feel
young and energetic. When they are out of balance, you feel older, may
experience symptoms similar to those associated with mental health
issues, and become more vulnerable to brain health/mental health
conditions like anxiety, depression, and even psychosis. Dr. Mark
Gordon, medical director for Millennium Health Centers and author of
Traumatic Brain Injury: A Clinical Approach to Diagnosis and Treatment,
says, "Hormones influence every one of the mood disorders."\[529\] In
his view, "the absolute or relative loss of neurohormones or sudden and
precipitous change in their relative balance can lead to alterations in
how we react and how we manage our mental well-being."\[530\] Basically,
when your neurohormones are out of balance, you can experience two types
of problems that collectively affect all four circles: 1. Distressing
symptoms that can alter the way you think, the way you feel, and the way
you behave, which can impact how you view your purpose in life

2. Heightened risk of brain health/mental health issues, such as
depression, panic attacks, or Alzheimer's, as well as physical
illnesses, such as heart disease, diabetes, and certain cancers
Communication between the brain and hormones goes both ways. The brain
sends out signals that instruct the body's glands to produce and release
hormones; and hormones from within the body send messages back to the
brain that influence its activity. When thyroid activity is low, for
example, brain activity is typically low as well. That's why an
underactive thyroid often leads to depression, irritability, and brain
fog.

SEVEN NEUROHORMONES THAT INFLUENCE BRAIN HEALTH/MENTAL HEALTH The human
body produces hundreds of hormones, but for the purposes of this book, I
am going to limit the discussion to the following seven neurohormones
that have the most direct influence on brain health/mental health:
Thyroid---regulates energy and mood Cortisol---helps to manage stress
and anxiety DHEA---fights stress and depression; decreases brain
inflammation Estrogen and progesterone---when balanced, promote stable
moods Testosterone---affects mood, motivation, sexuality, and strength
Insulin---balances blood sugar (insulin is covered in chapter 14 "D Is
for Diabesity")

Thyroid: how imbalances can create depression, anxiety, and cognitive
impairment The thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland located in
your lower neck. Despite its diminutive size, it plays a powerful role
in keeping your brain and body healthy. This gland produces three main
thyroid hormones---thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), T3, and T4---that
are among the most influential in your body, regulating how it uses
energy. It also has a strong impact on the brain because it controls the
production of many neurotransmitters, such as dopamine, serotonin, and
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). All of the thyroid hormones must be
produced in the proper balance to maintain optimal brain and body
function. Problems occur when thyroid dysfunction causes the gland to
produce too little hormone (hypothyroidism) or too much hormone
(hyperthyroidism). The symptoms of thyroid dysfunction can be mistaken
for psychiatric illnesses\[531\] and can increase the risk for
brain/mental issues. The link between thyroid dysfunction and mental
well-being has been recognized for about 200 years. In 1825, physician
Caleb Parry reported a higher prevalence of "nervous affectations" in
people with thyroid disorders.\[532\] And by 1969, researchers were
already reporting that depression can be one of the first signs of
thyroid disorder.\[533\] Since then, researchers have also found links
between thyroid dysfunction and schizophrenia, bipolar disorder,
borderline personality disorder, and other psychiatric illnesses.\[534\]
In some cases, depression can be one of the first signs of thyroid
disorder.

Hypothyroidism: When the thyroid is underactive, it does not produce
enough of the hormones you need to keep your body's processes humming at
optimum speed. Approximately 5 out of every 100 people ages 12 and older
in the United States suffer from hypothyroidism.\[535\] Insufficient
thyroid hormone can make you feel sluggish, as if you just want to stay
in bed all day with a bowl of ice cream. All of your body's
processes---from your heartbeat to your bowel function to your brain
activity---operate at a slower pace. SPECT scans of people with
hypothyroidism show overall decreased brain activity, which often leads
to depression, cognitive impairment, anxiety, and brain fog. \[536\] Low
thyroid and depression have been linked in more than 430,000 scientific
articles. Research shows this thyroid condition can also lead to
attention problems and even psychosis.\[537\] Memory problems are
present in more than 80 percent of people with low-grade hypothyroidism,
and thyroid dysfunction is directly linked to one-third of all
depressions.\[538\] Hyperthyroidism: An overactive thyroid produces too
much hormone, making everything in your body work too fast. It can feel
as if you're in hyper-drive---you feel jittery and edgy, as though
you've had way too much caffeine.\[539\] It is associated with anxiety,
depression, restlessness, and psychosis and affects about one in every
100 people in the United States.\[540\]

BRAIN HEALTH/MENTAL HEALTH SYMPTOMS OF THYROID DYSFUNCTION UNDERACTIVE
THYROID\*\[541\] OVERACTIVE THYROID\[542\] Fatigue

Sleeplessness; restlessness

Difficulty concentrating

Anxiety

Memory problems

Irritability

Depression

Racing thoughts

Attentional problems

Difficulty concentrating

Psychosis

Memory problems Depression Mania Psychosis

\*Note: Even if your thyroid is producing low to normal thyroid levels,
you can still have symptoms of what's called subclinical hypothyroidism,
which can be treated to help you feel better.

What causes thyroid disorders? The most common cause of hypothyroidism
is Hashimoto's disease, and the most common cause of hyperthyroidism is
Graves' disease. Both are autoimmune disorders, which means that the
body is attacking itself. This may be due to leaky gut syndrome, a
build-up of environmental toxins within the body, or food allergies
(especially to gluten and dairy products), among many other things.
Because of this, many health-care professionals consider the thyroid
gland to be a type of "canary in the coal mine," alerting us to the
possible presence of ingested toxins.\[543\]

Cortisol and DHEA: the stress connection to brain health/mental health
issues The adrenal glands, located above your kidneys, play a vital role
in how your body reacts to stress. When acute stress hits, the adrenals
release a cascade of hormones, including adrenaline, DHEA, and cortisol
as part of your "fight-or-flight response." Imagine you're hiking on a
mountain trail when you come face-to-face with a bear. Instantly, your
adrenals

start pumping out adrenaline and the other hormones, your heartbeat and
breathing quicken, and your muscles tense up. This is all part of a
survival mechanism intended to give you the jolt of energy you need to
fight off the bear or sprint to safety. When you've successfully avoided
getting mauled by the bear and are at a safe distance, your body's
processes return to normal---your muscles relax, your heartbeat and
breathing slow to their usual rate, and your adrenals cut back on stress
hormone production. In today's society, however, we're faced with
nonstop daily stressors that can keep us in a perpetual state of high
alert. Money problems, work stress, packed schedules, fear about the
future---they can cause our adrenals to spew out high levels of stress
hormones on a near-constant basis. When stress becomes chronic, the
cocktail of harmful chemicals that come with it can overwhelm our bodies
and contribute to brain health/mental health issues. When cortisol
levels get stuck on high, it also causes a spike in blood sugar and
insulin levels. This leads to detrimental changes in the brain,
including a drop in the calming neurotransmitter serotonin, leading to a
range of mental health issues. Researchers from the University of
California, Berkeley, found that chronic stress generates other
disruptive changes in the brain that contribute to a higher incidence of
brain health/mental health disorders later in life.\[544\] In
particular, chronic stress produces more white matter and fewer neurons
(gray matter) than normal, skewing their balance and interfering with
communication within the brain.\[545\] Ultimately, high levels of
cortisol increase the likelihood of developing lasting psychiatric
conditions, such as anxiety, depression, or post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD).\[546\] Early exposure to stress in childhood increases
the risk for

anxiety-related disorders later in life. For years, scientists have
noticed an association between depression and high levels of cortisol,
but they didn't know if it was a case of cause and effect, and if so,
which one came first. Research from 2006 concluded that it is long-term
exposure to cortisol that actually contributes to depression and its
symptoms. \[547\] And if you are already suffering from a mood disorder,
recurring stress tends to worsen symptoms. In a 2017 review of existing
research on the link between stress and anxiety and depression, the
authors concluded that stress "could play a very detrimental role in our
mental health. It should be curbed in the beginning in order to prevent
its serious consequences."\[548\] Chronic exposure to stress hormones
impacts your brain and body in other ways. It can kill cells in your
memory center, the hippocampus, especially when DHEA is also low.
\[549\] DHEA levels typically peak in your 20s and gradually decline
with each passing decade. When you reach midlife, about age 40, your
body is likely producing only half as much of the hormone as before.
Falling levels of DHEA have been linked to depression, fatigue, and a
case of the "blahs"---feeling less than your best. Untreated chronic
stress is also associated with detrimental effects on many of the BRIGHT
MINDS risk factors: Digestive issues (see chapter 7, "I Is for
Inflammation") Increased food cravings and belly fat (see chapter 14, "D
Is for Diabesity") Greater risk of cardiovascular disease (see chapter
5, "B Is for Blood Flow) Increased risk of diabetes (see chapter 14, "D
Is for Diabesity")

Higher levels of inflammation (see chapter 7, "I Is for Inflammation")
Weakened immune system (see chapter 12, "I Is for Immunity and
Infections") Disrupted sleep (see chapter 15, "S Is for Sleep")
Unrelenting stress that lasts for months and years overtaxes your system
and can lead to a condition known as adrenal fatigue, which means your
body no longer has the resources necessary to handle everyday stressors.
It leaves you feeling exhausted but also interferes with sleep, throwing
you into a vicious cycle that drains your energy and leaves you even
more vulnerable to brain health/mental health disorders.

Common Signs of Adrenal Fatigue\[550\] Decreased ability to withstand
stress Morning and afternoon fatigue, lack of stamina High blood
pressure and rapid heartbeat Abdominal fat that doesn't go away, no
matter what you do Mental fog with poor memory and difficulty
concentrating Low sex drive Cravings for sweets or salty foods Dizziness
when getting up from a seated or prone position Signs of premature aging
Lowered resistance to infection Poor wound healing

Estrogen and Progesterone: When Brain Health/Mental Health Hangs in the
Balance

ESTROGEN: THE MOOD MODULATOR

Estrogen and progesterone are the primary hormones involved in a woman's
menstrual cycle. These sex hormones influence many bodily processes,
including the skeletal and cardiovascular systems, as well as many brain
functions. Although we typically associate estrogen and progesterone
with females, these hormones are present in men, too, only in much
smaller amounts---unless they have a lot of belly fat, which converts
healthy testosterone into unhealthy, cancer-promoting forms of estrogen
(in lectures, I often ask why we have so many pregnant men in our
society . . . guys, it's time to deliver the baby!).\[551\] During a
woman's typical 28-day menstrual cycle, estrogen and progesterone rise
and fall. When hormones are balanced, estrogen gently rises and falls
twice during a cycle, while progesterone rises and falls once. The chart
below shows the cycle of estradiol, one of the key forms of estrogen,
and progesterone. Note that Day 1 in this chart refers to the first day
of a woman's period.

Estrogen affects the brain and your mental well-being in many ways,
including:

Influencing production of neurotransmitters, such as serotonin,
dopamine, and GABA, which regulate moods, as well as glutamate, which is
involved in memory and learning\[552\] Modulating activity in the
hippocampus, the brain region that is critical for healthy moods and
memory\[553\] When estrogen levels are healthy and balanced, it helps
optimize neurotransmitter production and brain function so you feel good
all month long. Too much estrogen in relation to progesterone, however,
can lead to a condition called estrogen dominance. This causes the
gentle monthly hormonal rise and fall to turn into a series of intense
spikes and dramatic drop-offs that disrupt important brain processes and
make you anxious and irritable. It can also decrease progesterone and
GABA, leading to sleep deprivation and all the unpleasant symptoms
associated with it. Too little estrogen leads to feeling depressed and
confused. The loss of estrogen also hinders critical thinking,
short-term memory, and other cognitive functions. These problems can
worsen during perimenopause when estrogen levels can fluctuate wildly
and during menopause when the hormone drops and stays low (more on this
below). The female body produces three kinds of estrogen: estrone (E1),
estradiol (E2) and estriol (E3). (Men produce only E1 and E2.) The
health of your liver, gut, and adrenals determines which types of
estrogen hormones your body produces. This is yet another reason why
addressing all of your BRIGHT MINDS risk factors is critical to your
body's systems and your brain health/mental health. Estrone (E1), the
main estrogen produced in women's bodies after menopause, plays a role
in breast and uterine cancer. Women make all three estrogens plus

progesterone, but the levels of E2, E3, and progesterone drop
drastically after menopause, which means women lose the
health-protective effects. That's why most breast cancer cases occur
postmenopause. Obese women are at higher risk because the fat turns
healthy testosterone and estradiol into estrone.\[554\] Other factors
that increase estrone production include taking the antacid cimetidine
or birth control pills, hypothyroidism, smoking, pesticide exposure, and
the consumption of excess sugar and alcohol, which could explain the
link between alcohol intake and breast cancer.\[555\] Estradiol (E2),
the strongest estrogen, supports healthy moods and cognitive function.
The ovaries produce estradiol, which protects bone density, growth
hormone production, and cardiovascular function; keeps blood from
getting sticky; and improves the lipid profile. Too much estradiol is
linked with estrogen-related cancers, but too little can contribute to
osteoporosis, heart disease, dementia, and other diseases of aging.
Estriol (E3) protects breast and vaginal tissue, the urinary tract, and
bone density. Estriol also helps to reduce hot flashes in women. One
compelling study showed women with multiple sclerosis (MS) who took
estriol reversed brain lesions.\[556\]

COMMON SYMPTOMS OF ESTROGEN IMBALANCES\[557\] ESTROGEN DOMINANCE

LOW ESTROGEN

Mood swings, depression

Mood changes, depression, weepiness

Fatigue

Fatigue

Sluggish metabolism

Heart palpitations

Low libido

Osteoporosis

Headaches or migraines

Painful intercourse

Brain fog, memory loss

Brain fog, memory loss, focus problems

Weight gain, especially in the belly and hips

Weight gain

Thyroid dysfunction

Bladder incontinence and infections

Sleep disturbances

Sleep disturbances

Fibrocystic breasts

Pain

Bloating

Hot flashes

Vaginal or oral yeast (thrush) Heavy bleeding Carbohydrate cravings
PROGESTERONE: NATURE'S ANTI-ANXIETY PILL

Progesterone is the other major hormone in a woman's monthly cycle. This
hormone's primary job is to build up the lining of the uterus in
anticipation of pregnancy. If a healthy fertilized egg does not implant,
progesterone levels fall, the uterine lining is shed during
menstruation, and the cycle begins again. Like estrogen, however,
progesterone influences more than just a woman's reproductive system. It
has a high concentration of receptors in the brain. Progesterone affects
the brain in the following ways: Supports GABA, which helps the brain
relax Protects the nerves Supports the myelin that "insulates" and
protects neurons

I have always called progesterone the "relaxation hormone." When it is
in balance with estrogen, it calms you, brings feelings of peacefulness,
and promotes sleep. It has also been shown to reduce inflammation and
counteract damage from brain injuries, which makes it important for the
head trauma and inflammation BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. For the first
two weeks of the menstrual cycle, progesterone hovers at low levels. It
begins climbing during the second half of the cycle, rising and falling
along with estrogen. When hormones are balanced, women may notice only a
slight shift in mood throughout the month. But when hormones are out of
whack or when the relaxation hormone drops too dramatically, calmness
can give way to irritability, anxiety, depression, sleepless nights, and
brain fog. For some women, when progesterone and estrogen plummet right
before menstruation starts, mood stability goes out the window.
Progesterone levels increase during pregnancy, which is why pregnant
women often feel so good and have that enviable glow. Some women who
have extremes in hormones or moods, in fact, feel so much better thanks
to the bump in progesterone that they will deliberately get pregnant
multiple times in order to enhance their moods.

Common Symptoms of Low Progesterone\[558\] Anxiety/depression Trouble
sleeping Fibrocystic breasts Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

Premenstrual headaches Postpartum depression Bone loss In a woman's late
30s and 40s, major fluctuations in progesterone can make her feel
anxious and out of sorts. A progesterone cream can often be very helpful
when used under the care of an experienced health-care provider (see
below).

The Pill's Surprising (and Scary) Side Effects Millions of women take
oral contraceptive pills (OCPs), which contain synthetic hormones. If
you are taking them, you should be aware of what they do to your
hormonal system and the side effects that come with them. OCPs hijack
your cyclical hormonal process, replacing it with a steady supply of low
levels of synthetic estrogen and progesterone. You may already know that
OCPs have been shown to cause problems with blood pressure and blood
clots and increase the incidence of strokes, especially if you smoke or
have a history of migraine headaches.\[559\] But did you know that OCPs
also affect your brain? Research shows that taking the pill causes
structural changes in the brain, alters neurotransmitter function, and
messes with mood regulation. \[560\] Scientists from Denmark found that
women ages 15 to 34 taking OCPs were 23 percent more likely to start
taking antidepressants for the first time than non-OCP users.\[561\] In
fact, bouts of depression have been reported by 16 to 56 percent of
women on OCPs, which deplete serotonin.\[562\] Oral contraceptives also
put you at greater risk for autoimmune diseases,\[563\] elevate cortisol
levels,\[564\] and lower levels of testosterone\[565\] (yes, women
produce and need testosterone; more on testosterone to follow), which
can decrease your sex drive. And low-testosterone problems can remain
even after stopping OCPs, putting you at increased risk for long-term
sexual and brain health/mental health problems.\[566\] Synthetic birth
control can also disrupt the gut microbiome\[567\] and interfere with
the absorption of essential vitamins and minerals, which can lead to
deficiencies. If you are taking OCPs, supplement your diet with B
vitamins (folate, B6, and B12), vitamin E, and magnesium. If you are
experiencing mental health symptoms, you may want to ask, is it mental
illness or is it the pill? Stopping OCPs isn't necessarily a quick-fix
solution. Some women experience a rash of symptoms---including mood
swings, anxiety, and depression---in the months following cessation of
hormonal birth control. Some hormonal experts have started calling this
effect "post-birth-control syndrome."

PERIMENOPAUSE AND MENOPAUSE: A VULNERABLE TRANSITION PERIOD

As women reach their 30s or 40s, hormones begin to fluctuate as their
bodies prepare to exit the baby-making business. It doesn't happen
overnight. For up to a decade before entering menopause (when the
menstrual cycle ends completely), a woman will go through a transition
period called perimenopause. Most women may not think about this
transition until they get hit with hot flashes and night sweats, the
most common (and annoying) symptoms. By the time hot flashes arrive,
however, women have probably been in perimenopause for up to 10 years.
This transition can be difficult and is often when women start taking
psychiatric medications for the first time. With age, a woman's hormonal
symphony works less efficiently, leading to estrogen spikes and crashes.
The result may be severe PMS symptoms, mood swings, feelings of anxiety,
crying spells, or depression. On top of that, short-term memory suffers.
With lower estrogen, women can become more sensitive to pain. To stay on
top of the changes, a woman should check her hormone levels at about age
35 to establish a baseline, and then recheck them every two to three
years. Intervening earlier in the process can help you avoid a lot of
problems. Technically, menopause is the one-year mark after the last
menstrual period. Since estrogen and progesterone have fallen to very
low levels, women no longer benefit from their protective qualities and
are more vulnerable to conditions such as depression, Alzheimer's
disease, osteoporosis, heart disease, and stroke. When estrogen levels
go low, so does blood flow to the brain, which is

associated with depression, anxiety, insomnia, weight gain, and problems
with concentration and memory. It is even more critical during this time
to take brain health seriously, as the reserve in your brain has
declined.\[568\]

It is even more critical during menopause to take brain health
seriously, as the reserve in your brain has declined.

Testosterone: Moods, Motivation, and More Most people associate
testosterone with men. It's true that this vital hormone drives the
development of the male brain and is responsible for the deep voice,
facial hair, and many other features we associate with maleness. But
women produce and need testosterone too (just as men have some
estrogen), just in smaller amounts. In both men and women, testosterone
helps protect the nervous system and wards off depression, cognitive
impairment, and Alzheimer's disease. It also seems to protect cells from
inflammation, which some researchers believe is why men (who naturally
have more of the hormone) are less susceptible than women to
inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and asthma,
and even why men suffer less from depression. \[569\] Testosterone
levels peak in a man's late teens and remain strong throughout the 20s,
but from age 30 on, they gradually decline. Optimal levels of the
hormone promote

brain health, energy, strength, motivation, and sex drive. The aging
process, however, can leave some men with low testosterone levels that
have been shown to increase symptoms of anxiety and depression\[570\]
and a host of other issues.

Common Symptoms of Low Testosterone Moodiness Depression Anxiety
Difficulty concentrating Lack of motivation Low libido Fatigue Trouble
sleeping Erection problems Increased body fat and reduced lean muscle
(see chapter 14, "D Is for Diabesity") Low bone density Hot flashes Hair
loss Aging isn't the only thing that leads to low testosterone. In some
people, head trauma shuts down production of certain neurohormones and
results in the loss of testosterone. See the list on pages 254--255 for
additional factors.

Just as low testosterone can be a problem, excessively high levels can
cause trouble too. High testosterone levels are associated with lower
empathy and a high sex drive, which could be the prescription for having
an affair, getting divorced, losing half your net worth, and visiting
your children every other weekend.\[571\]

WHAT INCREASES THE RISK FOR NEUROHORMONAL ISSUES? A high-sugar diet,
head trauma, inflammation, and environmental toxins can damage the
production of all of your neurohormones and increase the risk of brain
health/mental health issues. One of the big lessons we learned from our
work with professional football players was that many of them also had
very low hormone levels. It was odd to hear these large, strong men
complain of low energy, poor concentration, and a lack of libido. The
pituitary gland sits in a bony area of the skull called the sella
turcica, making it easily damaged, especially in whiplash injuries.

Head trauma is a major cause of hormone disruption, but few
professionals recognize or treat it. Would you be surprised to see how
an evil ruler would mess with our hormones and keep everyone out of
balance? THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . . 1. Damage neurohormones by
subjecting people to chronic stress and having them live in overcrowded
cities, feeding them processed foods with a high-sugar content, and
encouraging high-risk behaviors that easily damage the pituitary gland.
2. Flood our environment and our homes with pesticides, plastics, and
other products that act as endocrine disruptors. 3. Discourage
health-care providers from testing thyroid, cortisol, DHEA, estrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, human growth hormone, and insulin levels. 4.
Make policies allowing insurance companies to avoid reimbursing patients
for these tests and to deny claims for hormone treatment. THE BENEVOLENT
RULER WOULD . . . 1. Protect neurohormone production by reducing chronic
stress, encouraging schools and work cafeterias to serve brain-healthy
foods, and discouraging high-risk behaviors.

2. Limit the use of pesticides on crops, outlaw the most toxic
pesticides, reduce the use of plastics, and limit products that are
endocrine disruptors. 3. Encourage the medical community to include
testing for thyroid, cortisol, DHEA, estrogen, progesterone,
testosterone, human growth hormone, and insulin levels during check-ups.
4. Require insurance companies to provide reimbursements for these tests
as well as for treatment of hormonal imbalances.

Neurohormone Deficiency Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They
Represent) Abnormal levels of thyroid, cortisol, DHEA, estrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, human growth hormone, and insulin Factors
that inhibit thyroid production:\[572\] Excess stress and cortisol
production Deficiencies in vitamins B12 and B9, iron, ferritin, iodine,
or selenium Deficient protein; excess sugar Chronic illness Compromised
liver or kidney function Cadmium, mercury, lead toxicity Herbicides,
pesticides Oral contraceptives; excessive estrogen production Factors
that contribute to estrogen dominance: Chronic stress and elevated
cortisol levels Exposure to environmental toxins Weakened immune system

Obesity Diet high in sugar and refined carbohydrates Factors that
contribute to low estrogen: Perimenopause and menopause Thyroid
dysfunction Excessive exercise Eating disorders Low body weight
Low-functioning pituitary gland Premature ovarian failure Congenital
conditions Chemotherapy Factors that contribute to low progesterone:
Underactive thyroid Taking antidepressants Chronic stress Deficiencies
in vitamins A, B6, C, or zinc A diet high in sugar and refined
carbohydrates Factors that contribute to low testosterone: Belly fat
High stress Too much sugar, processed foods, and insulin Low zinc
Alcohol consumption Head trauma

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR NEUROHORMONE RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Care about your hormones and test them on a regular
basis. (See chapter 17 on important health numbers.) 2. Limit anything
that hurts your hormones (psychological circle because you have to
believe that you can change your habits, and social circle because
friends and family influence your habits). To keep your hormones
healthy, avoid smoking (which lowers the age of menopause),\[573\]
chronic stress, processed food, too much sugar, unhealthy fats, wheat,
and obesity.\[574\] Limit caffeine and alcohol. 3. Steer clear of
"endocrine disrupters" (psychological circle because you need to change
how you think about convenience, pricing, and your own value). In
chapter 10, I addressed how toxins can contribute to brain health/mental
health issues. The reason is that many toxins, such as pesticides, are
known to cause hormonal imbalances and interfere with the body's natural
hormone systems, leading to all kinds of health problems.\[575\] Other
endocrine disruptors that can wreak havoc with your

hormones include some personal care products, flame retardants, and
more. (See chapter 10 for more on how to avoid these chemicals.) 4.
Boost your healthy hormones. To optimize your hormones, engage in these
healthy behaviors: exercise, lift weights, get adequate sleep, eat a
healthy diet, and manage your stress. 5. Use hormone supplements and
medication wisely. For women, go bioidentical when possible because it
is the most natural form with generally fewer side effects. Bioidentical
hormones are derived from natural sources, such as plant estrogens, and
are chemically identical to those produced in the body. The hormones
used in traditional replacement therapy are typically derived from horse
urine as well as other synthetic substances. 6. Take nutraceuticals that
will help support your endocrine system. Work with a physician to
determine which ones are best for you, depending on your hormone levels.
L-tyrosine supports thyroid function. Dose suggestion: 500--1,000 mg a
day Zinc helps support healthy testosterone levels. Dose suggestion: 25
mg a day

DHEA\[576\] is available over the counter but is best done under the
supervision of your healthcare professional. I typically start patients
with 10 mg and go up from there. DHEA is usually well tolerated but
unwanted side effects, like acne and facial hair, may occur due to
DHEA's tendency to increase testosterone levels. These can be avoided by
using a specific metabolite of DHEA called 7-keto-DHEA that's more
expensive but may be preferable in some cases. Dose suggestion: 25--50
mg Diindolylmethane (DIM)\[577\] is a phytochemical found in cruciferous
vegetables like broccoli and cauliflower. It shifts estrogen metabolism
to favor the friendly or harmless estrogen metabolites.\[578\] DIM can
significantly increase the urinary excretion of the "bad" estrogens in
as little as four weeks.\[579\] Dose suggestion: 75--300 mg per day
Pregnenolone is a precursor hormone that plays a key role in the healthy
production of many of the body's neurohormones, including estrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, and cortisol. In supplement form, it has
been found to improve depressive symptoms in bipolar disorder,\[580\]
may reduce symptoms of schizophrenia,\[581\] and may improve memory.
\[582\] Dose suggestion: 10--50 mg per day (check with your health-care
professional)

Calcium D-glucarate\[583\] is a natural compound found in fruits and
vegetables like apples, brussels sprouts, broccoli, and cabbage. Calcium
D-glucarate inhibits the enzyme that contributes to breast, prostate,
and colon cancers. It also reduces the reabsorption of estrogen from the
digestive tract. Dose suggestion: 500--1,500 mg per day Probiotics help
maintain a healthy microbiome and, in turn, healthy hormone levels.

Key Vitamins, Minerals, and Herbs for Hormone Balance\[584\] To support
multiple (or all) hormones Multivitamin/mineral complex Omega-3 fatty
acids EPA and DHA Probiotics for gut health Estrogen (females)
DIM---100--200 mg a day Calcium D-glucarate---500 mg a day Plant
phytoestrogens, including black cohosh---20--80 mg twice daily Evening
primrose oil---500 mg twice a day Progesterone (females)
Chasteberry---160--400 mg a day Testosterone DHEA---need determined by
lab testing Zinc---20--30 mg daily Thyroid Zinc---20--40 mg daily
L-tyrosine---500 mg two to three times a day Iodine---up to 150 mcg a
day

Sensoril ashwagandha extract---250--500 mg once or twice a day Cortisol
L-theanine---200 mg two or three times a day Relora---a combination of
Magnolia officialis and Phellodendron amurense, 750 mg one or two times
a day Sensoril ashwagandha---250 mg one or two times a day DHEA
DHEA---need determined by lab testing 7-Keto-DHEA---need determined by
lab testing

BRIGHT MINDS: NEUROHORMONE ISSUES STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . .
AND MAKE MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your
hormones. 2. Engage in habits that promote hormone imbalances and
endocrine disruption. Consume a diet high in sugar, refined
carbohydrates, unhealthy fats, and gluten. Guzzle coffee and other
caffeinated drinks throughout the day. Take up smoking. Skimp on sleep.
Drink more than a few glasses of alcohol each week. Overexercise by
spending hours doing cardio each day. Let your weight go until you
become obese. Let chronic stress rule your life. Expose yourself to
environmental toxins and "endocrine disruptors." 3. Avoid the strategies
that protect your hormones. STEPS TO END MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP
MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1. Care about your hormones. 2.
Avoid anything that hurts your hormone function. 3. Engage regularly in
healthy habits that promote healthy hormones. Starting at age 35, check
your hormone levels on an annual basis, or more often if you have
imbalances.

Get regular exercise without overdoing it. Lift weights to build and
maintain lean muscle. Aim for seven to eight hours of sleep each night.
Follow the BRIGHT MINDS diet (see chapter 18). Practice
stress-management techniques. Limit your exposure to endocrine
disruptors. If you require hormonal supplementation, opt for
bio-identical hormones when possible.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Neurohormone Issues Tiny Habit to Start Today When
I turn 35, I will get my hormones tested to establish a baseline. When I
shop, I will avoid hormone disruptors, such as BPAs, phthalates,
parabens, and pesticides. When I buy eggs, beef, chicken, or other
animal proteins, I will avoid products raised with hormones or
antibiotics. When I eat my meals, I will add more fiber (to help my body
flush out unhealthy forms of estrogen). When I work out, I will lift
weights to boost my testosterone levels naturally. When I want something
sweet, I will choose fruit instead of sugary snacks.

When I take my supplements, I will include zinc to help support healthy
testosterone levels. When I take my vitamins, I will include
cortisolreducing supplements, such as ashwagandha, which also supports
thyroid function. (For women) When my bloodwork shows my estrogen level
is too high, I will avoid eating estrogenic foods like soy and will add
cruciferous vegetables like broccoli and brussels sprouts to help filter
excess estrogen from my system. (For women) When I am suffering from
hormonal imbalances, I will consider bioidentical hormone replacement.

\[529\] Mark L. Gordon, Traumatic Brain Injury: A Clinical Approach to
Diagnosis and Treatment (Los Angeles: Millennium Health Centers, 2016).
\[530\] Mark L. Gordon, "ISNR Keynote Speaker Mark L. Gordon 2015,"
Andrew Marr, December 25, 2016, video, 1:00:12,
https://www.youtube.com/watch? v=Q_Uu-soMavQ&feature=youtu.be. \[531\]
J. McGaffee, M. A. Barnes, and S. Lippmann, "Psychiatric Presentations
of Hypothyroidism," American Family Physician 23, no. 5 (May 1, 1981):
129--33. \[532\] Thomas W. Heinrich and Garth Grahm, "Hypothyroidism
Presenting as Psychosis: Myxedema Madness Revisited," Primary Care
Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 5, no. 6 (December
2003): 260--66. \[533\] P. C. Whybrow, A. J. Prange Jr., and C. R.
Treadway, "Mental Changes Accompanying Thyroid Gland Dysfunction: A
Reappraisal Using Objective Psychological Measurement," Archives of
General Psychiatry 20, no. 1 (1969):

48--63. \[534\] Thomas D. Geracioti Jr., "Identifying Hypothyroidism's
Psychiatric Presentations," Current Psychiatry 5, no. 11 (November
2006): 98--117. Nadine Correia Santos et al., "Revisiting Thyroid
Hormones in Schizophrenia," Journal of Thyroid Research 2012 (2012):
569147. \[535\] Jeffrey Garber, et al., "Clinical Practice Guidelines
for Hypothyroidism in Adults: Cosponsored by the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid Association,"
Endocrine Practice 18, no. 6 (November 2012): 988--1028. \[536\] Daniel
G. Amen, Unleash the Power of the Female Brain (New York: Harmony Books,
2013), 122. \[537\] Heinrich and Grahm, "Hypothyroidism Presenting as
Psychosis," 260--66. \[538\] John J. Haggerty Jr., Dwight L. Evans,
Arthur J. Prange Jr., "Organic Brain Syndrome Associated with Marginal
Hypothyroidism," American Journal of Psychiatry 143, no. 6 (June 1986):
785--86. \[539\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 124. \[540\] "Hyperthyroidism
(Overactive Thyroid)," National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, August 2016,
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/endocrinediseases/hyperthyroidism.
\[541\] "Thyroid Deficiency and Mental Health," Harvard Health
Publishing, Harvard Medical School, May 2007,
http://www.health.harvard.edu/diseases-andconditions/thyroid-deficiency-and-mental-health.
Mirella P. Hage and Sami T. Azar, "The Link between Thyroid Function and
Depression," Journal of Thyroid Research 2012 (2012): 590648. \[542\] G.
Marian et al., "Hyperthyroidism---Cause of Depression and Psychosis: A
Case Report," Journal of Medicine and Life 2, no. 4 (October--December
2009): 440--42. \[543\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 123. \[544\] S. Chetty
et al., "Stress and Glucocorticoids Promote Oligodendrogenesis in the
Adult Hippocampus," Molecular Psychiatry 19, no. 12 (December 2014):
1275--83. \[545\] Ibid. \[546\] Camilla A. M. Glad et al., "Reduced DNA
Methylation and Psychopathology following Endogenous
Hypercortisolism---A Genome-Wide Study," Scientific Reports 7 (2017):
44445. \[547\] Paul Ardayfio and Kwang-Soo Kim, "Anxiogenic-Like Effect
of Chronic Corticosterone in the Light--Dark Emergence Task in Mice,"
Behavioral Neuroscience 120, no. 2 (2006): 249--56. \[548\] Sarah Khan
and Rafeeq Alam Khan, "Chronic Stress Leads to Anxiety and Depression,"
Annals of Psychiatry and Mental Health 5, no. 1 (January 2017): 1091.
\[549\] Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017),
208.

\[550\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 131. \[551\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 210.
\[552\] Claudia Barth, Arno Villringer, and Julia Sacher, "Sex Hormones
Affect Neurotransmitters and Shape the Adult Female Brain during
Hormonal Transition Periods," Frontiers in Neuroscience 9 (2015): 37.
\[553\] Linda A. Bean, Lara Ianov, and Thomas C. Foster, "Estrogen
Receptors, the Hippocampus, and Memory," Neuroscientist 20, no. 5
(October 2014): 534-- 45. \[554\] Laila Adly et al., "Serum
Concentrations of Estrogens, Sex Hormone-Binding Globulin, and Androgens
and Risk of Breast Cancer in Postmenopausal Women," International
Journal of Cancer 119, no. 10 (November 15, 2006): 2402--7. \[555\]
Silvia Deandrea et al., "Alcohol and Breast Cancer Risk Defined by
Estrogen and Progesterone Receptor Status: A Case-Control Study," Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention 17, no. 8 (August 2008):
2025--28. \[556\] Samantha S. Solden et al., "Immune Modulation in
Multiple Sclerosis Patients Treated with the Pregnancy Hormone Estriol,"
Journal of Immunology 171, no. 11 (December 1, 2003): 6267--74. \[557\]
Amen, Unleash the Power, 95--96. \[558\] Ibid., 102. \[559\] Loyola
University Health System, "Increased Stroke Risk from Birth Control
Pills, Review Finds," ScienceDaily, October 27, 2009,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/10/091026152820.htm. \[560\]
Belinda A. Pletzer and Hubert H. Kerschbaum, "50 Years of Hormonal
Contraception---Time to Find Out, What It Does to Our Brain," Frontiers
in Neuroscience 8 (August 21, 2014): 256. \[561\] Charlotte Weissel
Skovlund et al., "Association of Hormonal Contraception with
Depression," JAMA Psychiatry 73, no. 11 (November 2016): 1154--62.
\[562\] G. B. Slap, "Oral Contraceptives and Depression: Impact,
Prevalence and Cause," Journal of Adolescent Health Care 2, no. 11
(September 1981): 53--64. \[563\] William V. Williams, "Hormonal
Contraception and the Development of Autoimmunity: A Review of the
Literature," Linacre Quarterly 84, no. 3 (August 2017): 275--95. \[564\]
Johannes Hertel et al., "Evidence for Stress-Like Alterations in the
HPA-Axis in Women Taking Oral Contraceptives," Scientific Reports 7, no.
1 (October 26, 2017): 14111. \[565\] Y. Zimmerman et al., "The Effect of
Combined Oral Contraception on Testosterone Levels in Healthy Women: A
Systematic Review and Metaanalysis," Human Reproduction Update 20, no. 1
(January/February 2014): 76--105. \[566\] Claudia Panzer et al., "Impact
of Oral Contraceptives on Sex HormoneBinding Globulin and Androgen
Levels: A Retrospective Study in Women with Sexual Dysfunction," Journal
of Sexual Medicine 3, no. 1 (January 2006): 104--

13. \[567\] Hamed Khalili, "Risk of Inflammatory Bowel Disease with Oral
Contraceptives and Menopausal Hormone Therapy: Current Evidence and
Future Directions," Drug Safety 39, no. 3 (March 2016): 193--97. \[568\]
Amen, Unleash the Power, 115. \[569\] Carlo Pergola et al.,
"Testosterone Suppresses Phospholipase D, Causing Sex Differences in
Leukotriene Biosynthesis in Human Monocytes," FASEB Journal 25, no. 10
(October 2011): 3377--87. Amen, Unleash the Power, 106. \[570\] Linnea
Hergot Berglund et al., "Testosterone Levels and Psychological Health
Status in Men from a General Population: The Tromsø Study," Aging Male
14, no. 1 (March 2011): 37--41. \[571\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 216.
\[572\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 127--28. \[573\] Lu Sun et al.,
"Meta-Analysis Suggests That Smoking Is Associated with an Increased
Risk of Early Natural Menopause," Menopause (New York) 19, no. 2
(February 2012): 126--32. \[574\] Ana M. Fernández-Alonso et al.,
"Obesity Is Related to Increased Menopausal Symptoms among Spanish
Women," Menopause International 16, no. 3 (September 2010): 105--10.
\[575\] Reini W. Bretveld et al., "Pesticide Exposure: The Hormonal
Function of the Female Reproductive System Disrupted?" Reproductive
Biology and Endocrinology 4 (May 31, 2006): 30. \[576\] Amen, Memory
Rescue, 220. \[577\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 99. \[578\] Thomas T. Y.
Wang et al., "Estrogen Receptor Alpha as a Target for Indole-3Carbinol,"
Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry 17, no. 10 (October 2006): 659-- 64.
\[579\] Gregory A. Reed et al., "A Phase I Study of Indole-3-Carbinol in
Women: Tolerability and Effects," Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
Prevention 14, no. 8 (2005): 1953--60. \[580\] E. Sherwood Brown et al.,
"A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Pregnenolone
for Bipolar Depression," Neuropsychopharmacology 39, no. 12 (November
2014): 2867--73. \[581\] C. E. Marx et al., "Pregnenolone as a Novel
Therapeutic Candidate in Schizophrenia: Emerging Preclinical and
Clinical Evidence," Neuroscience 191 (September 15, 2011): 78--90.
\[582\] Nicole Ducharme et al., "Brain Distribution and Behavioral
Effects of Progesterone and Pregnenolone after Intranasal or Intravenous
Administration," European Journal of Pharmacology 641, nos. 2--3
(September 1, 2010): 128--34. \[583\] Amen, Unleash the Power, 99.

\[584\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 221.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 14

D IS FOR DIABESITY REVERSE THE EPIDEMIC THAT'S DESTROYING BRAINS, MINDS,
AND BODIES As your weight goes up, the size and function of your brain
go down.\[585\] CY R U S RA J I , M D , P H D , A S S I S TA N T P R O F
E S S O R O F RA D I O LO GY , WA S H I N GT O N U N I V E R S I T Y

My wife and I saw you on Facebook and decided to give your program a
try. We knew we had to make some changes for our family. My wife has
Hashimoto's disease \[neurohormones\]. My daughter has polycystic
ovarian syndrome \[neurohormones\] and struggled with moodiness, and I
had not felt great about myself in a long time. We made a commitment as
a family to do what you said and give it two weeks. If it hadn't been
for my wife pushing us, I would have quit. I admit we struggled with
cravings for the first few days. After one week the cravings were gone!
In fact, real food started to taste delicious. I was surprised how much
the flavor was magnified in a carrot. I never noticed before. After two
weeks on the program, we couldn't have been happier. We all felt
fantastic and had each lost between 10 and 12 pounds \[diabesity\] and
no

longer thought about quitting. Each week on the program gets better and
better, and we feel more energetic \[blood flow\] than ever! In fact, I
can't remember the last time I have ever felt this wonderful. I lost 20
pounds after four weeks. People tell me that my skin looks great. I am
more confident, more energetic, and I sleep so much better. Now we are
all mentoring our family and friends to live this way. Both my wife and
daughter had struggled with weight loss in the past in spite of
exercising twice a day at times. My wife has lost 24 pounds since she
started eating this way, and her skin is also more vibrant. My
18-year-old daughter has lost 22 pounds and feels happier and much more
confident. As soon as they started eating according to your food rules,
they were able to exercise a fraction of the time and get more results.
What you eat matters! One of the amazing things we've noticed is how
many other people ask us for help after seeing our family's
transformation. My mother, who lives with us after suffering several
strokes \[blood flow\], is now eating this way. Her moods and energy are
much better. She is more social and no longer isolates herself to her
room as much. My mother-in-law, who suffers from fibromyalgia
\[immunity/infection\], also reports less pain and is able to walk more
easily. Even our two younger sons, who don't seem to have much interest
in learning about our new lifestyle yet, are eating better without even
realizing it because

we no longer have junk food in the house. We know this will have a
long-term effect on their health. As a family we are healthier and
happier. Several of my coworkers noticed the changes and have started
the program. Now they are asking me a ton of questions. When you feel
good, you look better. I even walk differently, and I think people
notice. It's hard not to share what you learn when the changes are so
obvious. ---Bobby L. Diabesity is having high blood sugar and/or being
overweight or obese. In the United States, it has become an epidemic
that continues to get worse, with half the population affected by
prediabetes (36 percent) or diabetes (14 percent),\[586\] 70 percent
considered overweight, and 40 percent falling into the obese category.
The annual medical costs of obesity alone top more than \$150 billion.
\[587\] Diabesity is destroying brains, minds, and bodies, and it's
robbing our children and grandchildren of their future. They will not be
able to afford the tsunami of illness that is headed their way unless we
get serious and do something about it. The increase in diabesity is one
of the main reasons brain health/mental health issues are increasing.
Both high blood sugar and being overweight take a toll on the brain and
mind and negatively impact the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. Excess fat on
your body is not your friend. Obesity is detrimental to brain
health/mental health and is associated with a greater risk of
depression, bipolar disorder, panic disorder, agoraphobia (fear of going
out), and addictions. \[588\] Untreated attention deficit
disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD),\[589\]
lower self-esteem,

and poor body image\[590\] are also associated with being
overweight.\[591\] Among women, increased body mass index (BMI) is also
linked to a rise in suicidal thoughts.\[592\] Being overweight or obese
also impacts your BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. For example, it has been
associated with a smaller brain and decreased blood flow to the
brain.\[593\] It produces chemicals that increase inflammation, store
toxins, and disrupt hormonal function. It also makes you more
susceptible to developing sleep problems, such as sleep apnea.\[594\]
High blood sugar is associated with a smaller hippocampus, the
seahorse-shaped structure in your temporal lobes associated with mood,
learning, and memory. Anxiety and depression are two to three times
higher in patients with Type 2 diabetes than in the general
population.\[595\] High blood sugar causes blood vessels to become
brittle and break, delays healing, increases the risk of stroke, and
causes overall lower blood flow in the brain. In fact, diabetes has been
linked to decreased blood flow on SPECT scans.\[596\] On top of that,
high blood sugar and diabetes are also associated with increased
inflammation; Alzheimer's disease; strokes, heart disease, hypertension;
and accelerated aging.\[597\] People with diabetes are also at greater
risk for eating disorders, such as binge eating.\[598\] Having diabetes
during pregnancy significantly increases the risk of psychosis in the
children (auditory and visual hallucinations).\[599\] All of the four
circles play a role in the diabesity connection to brain health/mental
health:

Biological: Diabesity impacts many of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors and
vice versa, creating a vicious loop of internal dysfunction that
conspires to keep the weight on and create brain health/mental health
issues. Psychological: Diabesity can make you feel bad about yourself
and cause you to think you were destined to have weight and blood sugar
problems. This type of thinking makes you more likely to perpetuate the
habits that leads to being overweight and to ignore other contributing
BRIGHT MINDS factors, such as environmental toxins, inflammation, and
neurohormonal issues. This mind-set makes you less likely to take action
and change your behavior. Social: You could be fueling diabesity by
eating unhealthy meals with your family at home, alcohol-filled happy
hours with coworkers, and by using sweets as a coping mechanism to deal
with stress in your relationships. Spiritual: If you lack purpose in
life, you may not see why it's important to achieve a healthy weight and
healthy blood sugar levels. By the way that our culture promotes
unhealthy food choices and indulgence, you would think an evil ruler has
gotten a hold of us and is behind all our weight issues and the diabetes
epidemic. THE EVIL RULER WOULD . . .

1. Demand that high-sugar desserts be served with all school lunches as
a way to boost inattention among children. 2. Encourage companies to put
out candy bowls and doughnuts in the break room to raise the risk of
diabesity. 3. Fool people into viewing sweet desserts (which spike blood
sugar and contribute to anxiety and other mental health symptoms) as a
"reward" for good behavior or a job well done. 4. Allow unhealthy,
artificially flavor-enhanced foods and drinks to be aggressively
marketed as desirable (think Coke's "Open Happiness" slogan). In fact,
the evil ruler would encourage professional athletes and coaches to
visibly drink Coke, Pepsi, or Gatorade (all filled with sugar,
artificial colors, and preservatives) on the sidelines of games as a way
of marketing these products to children and teens. 5. Tell people that
diabetes isn't that bad and discourage making any lifestyle changes
because there are drugs they can take for it. 6. Blame genetics for the
obesity epidemic, saying there's nothing people can do about it. THE
BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Limit sugar-laden snacks and desserts in
school lunches to promote stable blood sugar levels and healthy weight.
2. Encourage corporations to serve brain-healthy snacks to employees to
prevent diabesity. 3. Tell the truth that drinking and eating foods that
make you fat and diabetic is not a smart way to celebrate. 4. Prevent
food and beverage manufacturers from easily marketing products that
increase the risk for diabesity. 5. Educate people about the
consequences of diabetes and encourage lifestyle changes---exercise and
diet---to regulate blood sugar levels. 6. Inform people that their DNA
is not their destiny. Their daily habits can influence their genes, and
it is within their power to control their weight.

As your weight goes up, the size and function of the brain goes down;
which should scare the fat off everyone.

INSULIN AND THE BLOOD SUGARMOOD CONNECTION In chapter 14, you learned
about six of the neurohormones that influence your brain health/mental
health. Here, I'll show you how the seventh neurohormone, insulin, is
related to diabesity and your mental well-being. In the body, the
hormone insulin is involved in regulating blood sugar levels. Your
body's cells need sugar (glucose) for energy, but they can't absorb it
directly from your bloodstream. That's where insulin comes in. Released
by the pancreas when you eat carbohydrates, insulin is like a key that
unlocks cell membranes so they can get the glucose they need from the
foods you eat. Now, not all carbohydrates are created equal. Complex
carbohydrates (such as vegetables, quinoa, and fruits) help keep insulin
working effectively and stabilize blood sugar levels. However, simple
sugars (such as cookies, candies, and sodas) as well as highly processed
carbohydrates (such as bread, pasta, and crackers) require the pancreas
to pump out large amounts of insulin and can cause blood sugar levels to
soar. If there's too much sugar in your bloodstream, insulin signals
your body to shuttle it to the liver for storage, which can eventually
lead to fatty liver disease in some people. Another consequence of high
insulin levels is that the body switches from breaking down and flushing
dietary fat from the body to storing that fat, which over time can lead
to weight problems. One of the main consequences of chronically eating a
high-sugar diet and being obese is a decrease in insulin's ability to
regulate blood sugar, leading to prediabetes and diabetes.

How do insulin and blood sugar levels affect your mind? Eating sugar or
refined carbs causes blood sugar levels to spike and, subsequently,
causes them to crash. This rollercoaster effect can impact your moods
and mental wellbeing. Research shows that high-sugar diets and blood
sugar issues are associated with: Anxiety\[600\] Depression\[601\]
Schizophrenia\[602\] Irritability\[603\] Anger\[604\] Addiction to
sugar\[605\] Trouble concentrating\[606\] If you want to get your brain
right, it is imperative to get your food right. Eliminating sugar and
other refined carbohydrates from your diet can help regulate your body's
production of insulin, stabilize blood sugar levels, and facilitate the
fat breakdown process. It can also prevent the depletion of chromium, a
mineral required by insulin receptors. In a fascinating study,\[607\]
researchers from the University of Illinois looked at the nutrient
levels of patients and compared them to scans of their brains and
measurements of executive function (planning and impulse control) and
intelligence. Improved executive function was associated with higher
levels of omega-3 fatty acids, lycopene, carotenoids, vitamin D, and
vitamins B2 (riboflavin), B9 (folate), and B12 (cobalamin). The brain
functioned better with higher levels of omega-3s and carotene; and
omega-3 levels were associated with higher intelligence.

Eliminating sugar and other refined carbohydrates from your diet can
help regulate your body's production of insulin, stabilize blood sugar
levels, and facilitate the fat breakdown process.

Diabesity Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) High
fasting blood sugar levels, prediabetes, or type 1 or type 2
diabetes\[608\] Being overweight or obese\[609\] Aging
(retirement/aging) Family history of the disease (genetics) Alcohol
abuse (toxins) Exposure to environmental toxins (toxins) Being sedentary
(blood flow)

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR DIABESITY RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR
CIRCLES THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies The good news is that you can significantly lower your
risk factor of diabesity.\[610\] As with all of the BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors, you'll need a long-term perspective and lifestyle habits you
can feel happy about and maintain for the rest of your life. 1. Care
about your weight and blood sugar levels. As part of caring, you must
know your important numbers, including BMI, waist-to-height ratio,
fasting blood sugar, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), and fasting insulin level.
(See chapter 17.) 2. Avoid anything that increases the risk of
diabesity. Limit or avoid foods that increase the risk of diabesity.
These include: High caloric foods High-glycemic, low-fiber foods (pasta,
bread, white potatoes, rice, and sugar), which also promote inflammation
Processed foods Artificial dyes, sweeteners, and food additives

Potentially allergenic foods (everyone is different), such as gluten,
dairy, corn, and soy Note: In a disturbing study, children of women with
the highest gluten intake (20 g/day or more) versus those with the
lowest gluten intake (less than 7 g/day) had double the risk of
developing Type 1 diabetes over a follow-up period of 16 years.\[611\]
Avoid the mind-set of diabesity. These are beliefs and thoughts you tell
yourself that increase the risk you will never truly get healthy, such
as: "Everything in moderation," which is generally the thought just
before you are going to eat something that will hurt you. "Live a
little; you deserve it." Funny, but this is the thought of early death.
It should be rephrased as "Live a little shorter." "I just want to have
fun." But who has more fun? The person with the healthy brain or the one
with the troubled brain? No question--- the person with the healthy
brain. "I want what I want when I want it" is a fouryear-old's mind-set,
but this thought underlies why most people do not get healthy. We need
to be good parents to

ourselves and be firm about engaging in good behavior if we want to end
mental illness. "But I always do it this way" is another common thought
that tells you that your habits are destroying your mind. Don't fall for
every advertising pitch. Here's what I'd say about some common marketing
slogans: Coke's "Open Happiness"---should be rephrased as "Open
Illness." Ben and Jerry's "Eat Away Your Feelings"--- should be
rephrased as "Eat Your Way to Depression." McDonald's "I'm Lovin'
It"---should be rephrased as "I'll Start Hating My Mind and Body."
McDonald's "You Deserve a Break Today"--- should be rephrased as "You
Deserve Illness Today." Lay's Potato Chips "Betcha Can't Eat Just
One"---should be rephrased as "Bet You Can't Eat Just One Because They
Are Addictive." Trix's "Silly Rabbit, Trix Are for Kids!"---should be
rephrased as "Silly Rabbit, Trix Are for Kids Who Want to Struggle in
School and Be Overweight and Sick!"

3. Engage in regular brain healthy habits that decrease the risk of
diabesity. Develop a Brain Warrior mind-set.\[612\] As my wife, Tana,
and I reveal in our book The Brain Warrior's Way, you are in a war for
the health of your brain. Everywhere you go, someone is trying to shove
bad food down your throat that will kill you early. You need to be
armed, prepared, and aware to win the fight for your life. In the book,
we asked our readers, and I ask you here, "Are you a sheep or a
sheepdog?" Sheep are best known for their strong flocking behavior.
Sheep follow and are easily led. They go with the herd and do what the
majority of the other sheep do. When one sheep moves, the rest of the
flock tends to follow, even when it's a bad idea. In Turkey in 2005, a
sheep jumped off a cliff to its death, then 1,500 others
followed.\[613\] Sheep have two speeds---graze and stampede (group
think). Sheep are often annoyed by sheepdogs---they remind them that
trouble may be nearby. Sheepdogs are serious and purpose-driven to
protect their flock. They live to make a difference. Sheepdogs need
training to be effective. Sheepdogs love their flock, even when the love
is not returned. Sheepdogs will give their lives to protect their sheep.
Sheepdogs have a major advantage: They can survive in a hostile
environment; sheep cannot. When sheep

get attacked, they often give in to death. When sheepdogs are attacked,
they fight back and are much more likely to survive. Are you a sheep or
a sheepdog? If you want to end mental illness, you have to develop a
sheepdog's mind-set. Follow the BRIGHT MINDS diet (see chapter 18). "Eat
right to think right" is one of the most important strategies to end
mental illness. Over the years, we have developed one overriding food
rule that captures all others: "only love and consume foods that love
you back." If you can get this one rule right, it will help you feel
happy and vibrant for the rest of your life.

The most important food rule is "Only love and consume foods that love
you back."

Lose weight slowly (if you are overweight or obese). The healthiest way
to drop weight and keep it off is to lose one to two pounds a week. Here
are more tips:\[614\] Drink more water.

Have protein for breakfast to balance your blood sugar. Add more fiber
to your diet to lower the risk of Type 2 diabetes\[615\] and keep you
feeling full longer. Brain-healthy high-fiber foods include vegetables
(broccoli and brussels sprouts), berries, chia seeds, and quinoa. Green
tea has been shown to increase metabolism and decrease the risk of
diabetes. It is loaded with antioxidants, but be careful what you put in
it and only drink caffeinated green tea in small doses. Don't drink your
calories. In 1980, Americans drank an average of 225 calories a day; in
2015, it was 450 calories a day. The extra 225 calories a day will put
23 pounds of fat on your body every year! Plus, the calories you drink
are more quickly absorbed than those you have to chew. Take saunas and
eat detoxifying foods. Fat stores toxins, so it's critical to detox when
you lose weight. Weigh yourself every day because research shows it
helps keep you on track.\[616\] Don't overdo your weight loss. Being too
thin is definitely not the answer. If your BMI gets too low, you can
wind up with cognitive problems.\[617\]

Start new habits. You already have daily habits. Start new habits around
the foods that promote your mental health rather than the ones that
steal it. Most of us have about 20 meals we go to over and over. This
week, try to add five brain-healthy meals with foods you love that love
you back. Exercise! Research shows that working out improves blood sugar
levels and weight. Strength training is a must. Compared with women who
reported no strength training, women engaging in any strength training
reduced the incidence of Type 2 diabetes by 30 percent.\[618\] Any type
of regular movement matters, even walking,\[619\] but walk as if you are
in a hurry.\[620\] (See chapter 5 "B Is for Blood Flow.") Check with
your physician to see if other treatment is necessary. Depending on your
personal numbers and your genetic risks, you may be able to improve your
health without resorting to taking medication.\[621\] 4. Take
nutraceuticals that help balance blood sugar. Your physician or
integrative health-care professional can help determine which of these
will work best for you.

Omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA.\[622\] By now, you know that this
supplement will help you with many of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors;
that's why I recommend it to all my patients. It helps to maintain
proper insulin signaling in the brain, counteract nonalcoholic fatty
liver, and decrease the risk of metabolic syndrome.\[623\] (Metabolic
syndrome is defined as having at least three of the following risk
factors: high fasting blood sugar levels, abdominal obesity, high
triglycerides, low HDL cholesterol, and high blood pressure.) In a large
study in older adults, the diabetes risk was 43 percent lower among
those with the highest blood concentrations of omega-3 fats compared
with those with the lowest concentrations.\[624\] In a well-designed
placebo-controlled trial in overweight type 2 diabetics, supplementing
with the omega-3 fatty acid EPA significantly decreased serum insulin,
fasting glucose, HbA1c, and insulin resistance. \[625\] (Check out
information on the Omega-3 Index in chapter 7, which will let you know
if you're on the right track toward omega-3 protection.) Dose
suggestion: The effective daily dose seems to be 1,400 mg or more with a
ratio of approximately 60/40 EPA to DHA. Chromium as chromium picolinate
can help regulate insulin, which boosts the metabolism of glucose and
fat. Chromium picolinate also helps decrease carbohydrate cravings and
binge eating, thus impacting both blood sugar and

weight.\[626\] Some research shows that chromium picolinate
significantly lowers HbA1c in type 2 diabetics.\[627\] Dose suggestion:
The typical recommended adult dosage is 200--1,000 micrograms (mcg) a
day. Cinnamon\[628\] offers a bouquet of benefits for those at risk of
diabetes. It's been shown to lower fasting glucose levels and HbA1c and
improve insulin sensitivity.\[629\] This sweet and savory spice also
lowered cholesterol and improved working memory in older
prediabetic\[630\] adults, while improving blood flow to the prefrontal
cortex.\[631\] Plus, it has been shown to decrease abnormal tau protein
aggregation, thought to be one of the major contributors of Alzheimer's
disease. Not only can cinnamon help your blood sugar levels, but it can
also spice up your love life. Dose suggestion: The typical dose for
blood sugar control is 1--6 grams a day as a supplement. Use the spice
liberally. If you are taking medication to control your blood sugar,
talk to your doctor before taking supplemental cinnamon, as it may have
an additive effect and lower blood sugar too much.

BRIGHT MINDS: DIABESITY STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about your weight or
blood sugar levels. 2. Engage in habits that increase the risk of
diabesity.

Don't bother weighing yourself. Don't get your blood sugar levels or
HbA1c levels checked. Eat a high-sugar, low-fiber diet. Eat a lot of
processed foods. Skip meals and make up for it by eating twice as much
at the next meal. Overeat on a regular basis. Adopt a diabesity mind-set
that allows you to stay overweight and sick. When you want to lose
weight, go on a crash diet to drop pounds fast. Be a couch potato. 3.
Avoid the strategies that reduce the risk for diabesity. STEPS TO END
MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1.
Care about your weight and blood sugar levels. 2. Avoid anything that
increases the risk of diabesity. 3. Engage regularly in healthy habits
that reduce the risk of diabesity. Weigh yourself daily. Get your blood
sugar and HbA1c levels checked at least once a year. Consume a BRIGHT
MINDS diet. Add more fiber to your meals. Adopt new daily habits to
replace the habits that steal your mental health. Get moving! Engage in
strength training and cardio exercise on a regular basis. Consider
supplements that support healthy blood sugar levels.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Diabesity Tiny Habit to Start Today I will
immediately stop drinking my calories. When I eat lunch and dinner, I
will add one serving of a colorful vegetable.

At each meal, I'll make sure to include some high-quality protein and
fat to stabilize my blood sugar and reduce cravings. When I want to lose
weight, I will do it slowly so I can develop lifelong habits. When I
take my daily shower, I will weigh myself because it will keep me honest
and motivated. I will take omega-3 supplements daily.

\[585\] Cyrus A. Raji et al., "Brain Structure and Obesity," Human Brain
Mapping 31, no. 3 (March 2010): 353--64. \[586\] Andy Menke et al.,
"Prevalence of and Trends in Diabetes among Adults in the United States,
1988--2012," JAMA 314, no. 10 (2015): 1021--29. \[587\] "Adult Obesity
Facts," Overweight and Obesity, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, last reviewed August 13, 2018,
https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html. \[588\] Gregory E. Simon et
al., "Association between Obesity and Psychiatric Disorders in the US
Adult Population," Archives of General Psychiatry 63, no. 7 (July 2006):
824--30. Nancy M. Petry et al., "Overweight and Obesity Are Associated
with Psychiatric Disorders: Results from the National Epidemiologic
Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions," Psychosomatic Medicine 70,
no. 3 (April 2008): 288--97. \[589\] H. C. M. Byrd, C. Curtin, and S. E.
Anderson, "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Obesity in US
Males and Females, Age 8--15 Years: National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 2001--2004," Pediatric Obesity 8, no. 6 (December
2013): 445--53. \[590\] Michael Hinck, "How Obesity Can Affect Your
Teen's Self Esteem," Health Beat, Jamaica Hospital Medical Center,
September 26, 2014,
https://jamaicahospital.org/newsletter/how-obesity-can-affect-your-teens-self-

esteem/. \[591\] Zhang Xue-Yan et al., "Obese Chinese Primary-School
Students and Low SelfEsteem: A Cross-Sectional Study," Iranian Journal
of Pediatrics 26, no. 4 (August 2016): e3777. \[592\] Kenneth M.
Carpenter et al., "Relationships between Obesity and DSM-IV Major
Depressive Disorder, Suicide Ideation, and Suicide Attempts: Results
from a General Population Study," American Journal of Public Health 90,
no. 2 (2000): 251--57. \[593\] Cyrus A. Raji et al., "Brain Structure
and Obesity," Human Brain Mapping 31, no. 3 (March 2010): 353--64.
Kristen C. Willeumier, Derek V. Taylor, and Daniel G. Amen, "Elevated
BMI Is Associated with Decreased Blood Flow in the Prefrontal Cortex
Using SPECT Imaging in Healthy Adults," Obesity (Silver Spring, MD) 19,
no. 5 (May 2011): 1095--97. Mark Hamer, G. David Batty, "Association of
Body Mass Index and Waistto-Hip Ratio with Brain Structure," Neurology
92, no. 6 (February 2019): e594--600. \[594\] Alan R. Schwartz et al.,
"Obesity and Obstructive Sleep Apnea: Pathogenic Mechanisms and
Therapeutic Approaches," Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society 5,
no. 2 (2008): 185--92. \[595\] J. M. Zanoveli et al., "Depression
Associated with Diabetes: From Pathophysiology to Treatment," Current
Diabetes Reviews 12, no. 3 (2016): 165--78. A. M. Castellano-Guerrero et
al., "Prevalence and Predictors of Depression and Anxiety in Adult
Patients with Type 1 Diabetes in Tertiary Care Setting," Acta
Diabetologica 55, no. 9 (September 2018): 943--53. \[596\] Hirokatsu
Niwa et al., "Clinical Analysis of Cognitive Function in Diabetic
Patients by MMSE and SPECT," Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 72,
no. 2 (May 2006): 142--47. J. F. Jimenez-Bonilla et al., "Assessment of
Cerebral Blood Flow in Diabetic Patients with No Clinical History of
Neurological Disease," Nuclear Medicine Communications 17, no. 9
(September 1996): 790--94. \[597\] F. Pasquier et al., "Diabetes
Mellitus and Dementia," Diabetes and Metabolism 32, no. 5, part 1
(November 2006): 403--14. Kapil Gudala et al., "Diabetes Mellitus and
Risk of Dementia: A Metaanalysis of Prospective Observational Studies,"
Journal of Diabetes Investigation 4, no. 6 (November 2013): 640--50.
\[598\] Ewa Racicka and Anita Brynska, "Eating Disorders in Children and
Adolescents with Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes: Prevalance, Risk Factors,
Warning Signs," Psychiatria Polska 49, no. 5 (2015): 1017--24. \[599\]
Syudo Yamasaki et al., "Maternal Diabetes in Early Pregnancy, and
Psychotic Experiences and Depressive Symptoms in 10-Year-Old Offspring:
A Population-Based Birth Cohort Study," Schizophrenia Research 206
(April

2019): 52--57. \[600\] Monique Aucoin and Sukriti Bhardwaj, "Generalized
Anxiety Disorder and Hypoglycemia Symptoms Improved with Diet
Modification," Case Reports in Psychiatry 2016 (2016): 7165425. \[601\]
Ibid. \[602\] Malcolm Peet, "International Variations in the Outcome of
Schizophrenia and the Prevalence of Depression in Relation to National
Dietary Practices: An Ecological Analysis," British Journal of
Psychiatry 184, no. 5 (May 2004): 404-- 8. \[603\] "Type 1 Diabetes Low
Blood Sugar Symptoms," JDRF, accessed August 19, 2019,
https://www.jdrf.org/t1d-resources/about/symptoms/low-blood-sugar/.
\[604\] Peter Bongiorno, "Is There a Blood Sugar Monster Lurking within
You?" Psychology Today, November 13, 2014,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/inner-source/201311/is-thereblood-sugar-monster-lurking-within-you.
\[605\] Belinda S. Lennerz et al., "Effects of Dietary Glycemic Index on
Brain Regions Related to Reward and Craving in Men," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 98, no. 3 (September 2013): 641--47. \[606\] "Type 1
Diabetes," JDRF. \[607\] Chris E. Zwilling et al., "Nutrient Biomarker
Patterns, Cognitive Function, and fMRI Measures of Network Efficiency in
the Aging Brain," NeuroImage 188 (March 2019): 239--51. \[608\] E. Duron
and Olivier Hanon, "Vascular Risk Factors, Cognitive Decline, and
Dementia," Vascular Health and Risk Management 4, no. 2 (2008): 363--81.
\[609\] Rachel A. Whitmer, "The Epidemiology of Adiposity and Dementia,"
Current Alzheimer Research 4, no. 2 (April 2007): 117--22. Duron and
Hanon, "Vascular Risk Factors." \[610\] Jaakko Tuomilehto et al.,
"Prevention of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus by Changes in Lifestyle among
Subjects with Impaired Glucose Tolerance," New England Journal of
Medicine 344, no. 18 (May 3, 2001): 1343--50. \[611\] Julie C.
Antvorskov et al., "Association between Maternal Gluten Intake and Type
1 Diabetes in Offspring: National Prospective Cohort Study in Denmark,"
BMJ 362 (September 19, 2018): k3547. \[612\] Daniel G. Amen and Tana
Amen, The Brain Warrior's Way (New York: New American Library, 2016), 1,
28. \[613\] Associated Press, "450 Sheep Jump to Their Deaths in
Turkey," USA Today, July 8, 2005,
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/offbeat/2005-07-08sheep-suicide_x.htm.
\[614\] Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017),
235--36. \[615\] Andrew Reynolds et al., "Carbohydrate Quality and Human
Health: A Series of Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses," Lancet 393,
no. 10170 (February 2, 2019): 434--45.

\[616\] Cornell University, "Weighing Yourself Daily Can Tip the Scale
in Your Favor," ScienceDaily, June 17, 2015,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/06/150617134622.htm. \[617\]
Chun-Ju Chiang et al., "Midlife Risk Factors for Subtypes of Dementia: A
Nested Case-Control Study in Taiwan," American Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry 15, no. 9 (September 2007): 762--71. Heidi White et al.,
"Weight Change in Alzheimer's Disease," Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society 44, no. 3 (March 1996): 265--72. \[618\] Eric J.
Shiroma et al., "Strength Training and the Risk of Type 2 Diabetes and
Cardiovascular Disease," Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 49,
no. 1 (January 2017): 40--46. \[619\] Frank B. Hu et al., "Walking
Compared with Vigorous Physical Activity and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes in
Women: A Prospective Study," JAMA 282, no. 15 (1999): 1433--39. \[620\]
Carl J. Caspersen and Janet E. Fulton, "Epidemiology of Walking and Type
2 Diabetes," Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 40, suppl. 7
(July 2008): S519--S528. \[621\] Amen, Memory Rescue, 236. \[622\] Ibid.
\[623\] Artemis P. Simopoulos, "Dietary Omega-3 Fatty Acid Deficiency
and High Fructose Intake in the Development of Metabolic Syndrome, Brain
Metabolic Abnormalities, and Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease,"
Nutrients 5, no. 8 (July 26, 2013): 2901--23. \[624\] Luc Djoussé et
al., "Plasma Omega-3 Fatty Acids and Incident Diabetes in Older Adults,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 94, no. 2 (August 2011): 527--33.
\[625\] Shokouh Sarbolouki et al., "Eicosapentaenoic Acid Improves
Insulin Sensitivity and Blood Sugar in Overweight Type 2 Diabetic
Mellitus Patients: A Double-Blind Randomized Clinical Trial," Singapore
Medical Journal 54, no. 7 (2013): 387--90. \[626\] Kimberly A. Brownley
et al., "A Double-Blind, Randomized Pilot Trial of Chromium Picolinate
for Binge Eating Disorder: Results of the Binge Eating and Chromium
(BEACh) Study," Journal of Psychosomatic Research 75, no. 1 (July 2013):
36--42. \[627\] N. Suksomboon, N. Poolsup, and A. Yuwanakorn,
"Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of the Efficacy and Safety of
Chromium Supplementation in Diabetes," Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and
Therapeutics 39, no. 3 (2014): 292--306. H. Rabinovitz et al., "Effect
of Chromium Supplementation on Blood Glucose and Lipid Levels in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus Elderly Patients," International Journal for Vitamin
and Nutrition Research 74, no. 3 (2004): 178-- 82. \[628\] Amen, Memory
Rescue, 237.

\[629\] Ting Lu et al., "Cinnamon Extract Improves Fasting Blood Glucose
and Glycosylated Hemoglobin in Chinese Patients with Type 2 Diabetes,"
Nutrition Research (New York) 32, no. 6 (June 2012): 408--12. Paul A.
Davis and Wallace Yokoyama, "Cinnamon Intake Lowers Fasting Blood
Glucose: Meta-Analysis," Journal of Medicinal Food 14, no. 9 (September
2011): 884--89. Ashley Magistrelli and Jo Carol Chezem, "Effect of
Ground Cinnamon on Postprandial Blood Glucose Concentration in
Normal-Weight and Obese Adults," Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics 112, no. 11 (November 2012): 1806--9. Ashley N. Hoehn and Amy
L. Stockert, "The Effects of Cinnamomum cassia on Blood Glucose Values
Are Greater Than Those of Dietary Changes Alone," Nutrition and
Metabolic Insights 5 (2012): 77--83. \[630\] Mark L. Wahlqvist et al.,
"Cinnamon Users with Prediabetes Have a Better Fasting Working Memory: A
Cross-Sectional Function Study," Nutrition Research (New York) 36, no. 4
(April 2016): 305--10. \[631\] Robert Krikorian et al., "Improved
Cognitive-Cerebral Function in Older Adults with Chromium
Supplementation," Nutritional Neuroscience 13, no. 3 (2010): 116--22.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 15

S IS FOR SLEEP WASH YOUR BRAIN EACH NIGHT TO HAVE BRIGHTER DAYS The
night is the hardest time to be alive and 4 a.m. knows all my secrets. P
O P PY Z . B R I T E

CATHY AND KRISTEN

Cathy, 45, was the CEO of a large financial services company and hired
us to do a wellness program for her employees. She became passionate
about brain health. Over time, I also saw her husband for preventive
work. He had a family history of Alzheimer's disease and wanted to do
everything he could to avoid it. Then I saw their teenage daughter,
Kristen, who was anxious about starting at a new school and had panic
attacks for the first time in her life. She had frequent bouts where she
thought she was going to die: Her heart started pounding out of her
chest, she hyperventilated and felt as though she couldn't get enough
air, her hands were cold and sweaty, and she had a sense that something
terrible

was about to happen to her. The panic attacks caused her to voice
suicidal thoughts to her mother, which is when Cathy called me. As I got
to know Kristen, I learned she had many common brain-damaging teenage
habits, including a digital addiction (lots of fights happened around
her phone), a junk food addiction (it was hard to get her to eat
anything healthy), and very poor sleep habits. Yet when Kristen learned
about her brain, she became more interested in taking care of it. I had
her take our online course, Brain Thrive by 25 (www.brainthriveby25.com)
and had her keep a journal about her food and sleep. After three weeks,
it became crystal clear to both of us that when Kristen slept more than
seven hours a night, her focus was better at school and the panic
attacks vanished. This gave Kristen the motivation to engage in
brain-healthy sleep habits. She hated the attacks but now knew she had
control over them. As the chief psychiatrist at the National Training
Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin in the Mojave Desert, I often saw the effects
of sleep deprivation firsthand. The mission of the NTC was to train
soldiers for combat in the desert. The war games went for days, and many
soldiers became seriously sleep-deprived. If they went for two or more
days without sleep, some were brought to me in psychotic states, seeing
visions or being delusional. The prescription was generally not
medication but sleep. While you are sleeping, your brain is hard at work
performing some very critical functions necessary to keep it operating
at optimal levels. For example, during sleep, your brain cleans or
washes itself by eliminating cellular debris and toxins that build up
during the day (basically taking out the neural trash), consolidates
learning and memory, and prepares for the following day. The brain
processes that

occur during sleep are also important for the health of your immune
system, appetite control, and neurotransmitter production.

When you are sleeping, your brain is hard at work performing some very
critical functions necessary to keep it operating at optimal levels.

Getting adequate sleep is vital for your brain, but an estimated 50 to
70 million Americans have some form of sleep disorder.\[632\] Nearly
one-third of us suffer from shortterm bouts of insomnia, the most common
sleep disorder. And chronic insomnia affects approximately one in 10
people.\[633\] The rates are even higher among people with psychiatric
disorders.\[634\] In fact, more than 50 percent of the time, insomnia is
tied to stress, anxiety, or depression. \[635\] Sleep and brain
health/mental health issues are tightly linked. Research shows that
about 75 percent of people with depression also have insomnia.\[636\]
Sixty-nine to 99 percent of people with bipolar disorder experience
insomnia or feel a reduced need for sleep during manic episodes. \[637\]
More than half of the people with anxiety have trouble sleeping.\[638\]
And children with attention deficit disorder/attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD) are more likely to experience sleep
disorders than kids without the condition.\[639\]

The relationship between sleep and brain health/mental health issues
goes both ways. In general, a night of staring at the ceiling can make
you wake up feeling angry, irritable, sad, or stressed the next day;
lower your ability to concentrate; and impair your judgment. Over time,
sleep problems can lead to a higher risk of depression, ADD/ADHD, panic
attacks, brain fog, memory problems, and dementia.\[640\] For example,
teenagers who on average get an hour less of sleep at night are 38
percent more likely to feel sad and hopeless, 42 percent more likely to
consider suicide, 58 percent more likely to attempt suicide, and 23
percent more likely to engage in substance abuse.\[641\] Due to a lack
of sleep, shift workers have an increased risk of depression, as well as
work-related injuries, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and
obesity.\[642\] Having too few hours of sleep can have catastrophic
consequences, increasing your risk of a traumatic brain injury (TBI). In
a report from the Automobile Association of America (AAA), drivers who
slept six to seven hours were 30 percent more likely to be in a car
crash than those who got more than seven hours; those who slept for five
to six hours a night were 90 percent more likely to have an accident;
four to five hours, 430 percent more likely; and those who got less than
four hours were 1,150 percent more likely to crash.\[643\] In another
study, soldiers who got seven hours of sleep at night were 98 percent
accurate on the range; those who got six hours of sleep were only 50
percent accurate; five hours equaled 28 percent accuracy; and four hours
equaled only 15 percent accuracy (they were dangerous).\[644\] Sleep
apnea---when you snore loudly, stop breathing multiple times at night,
then feel excessively tired during the day---is bad for your health.
It's no good for your partner

either, since they can't get a good night's sleep with all that snoring
and snorting. Untreated sleep apnea triples your risk of depression and
dementia and makes it hard to lose weight. On SPECT scans, sleep apnea
often looks like early Alzheimer's disease (see scans on the next page).
Getting a diagnosis and treatment for sleep apnea is critical to keeping
your brain healthy and preventing or minimizing symptoms of mental
disorders. The gold standard for treatment is called a continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) mask, which delivers a steady stream of
air through your passageways. Some people are hesitant to use a CPAP
machine because they think the mask will be uncomfortable. This is a
mistake. Because the brain is so dependent on oxygen, untreated sleep
apnea literally kills brain cells, which doesn't bode well for your
mental wellbeing. BRAIN SURFACE SPECT SCANS

Healthy

Sleep apnea

Sleep Risk Factors (and the Four Circles They Represent) All of the four
circles contribute to your sleep patterns and can either leave you
tossing and turning at night or sleeping peacefully. Biological:
Conditions like restless leg syndrome or sleep apnea, jet lag, many
medications, poor sleep hygiene, or hormonal imbalances (especially
hyperthyroidism and low progesterone in women) can get in the way of a
good night's sleep. Psychological: Worrying about work or finances,
relationship problems, or the health of a loved one can keep you up at
night. ANTs (automatic negative

thoughts) tend to attack before bed and in the middle of the night.
Social: Doing shift work, having a job that requires a lot of travel
across time zones, staying out too late with friends, guzzling coffee
day and night, or looking at your email or scrolling through your social
media feed at all hours of the night prevents your brain from getting
the restorative sleep it needs. Spiritual: If you aren't in tune with
why you want to make sleep a priority, it will be difficult to adopt the
habits that will provide better rest. Chronic insomnia, less than seven
hours of sleep for adults and eight hours for teens (psychological
circle if stress is keeping you up at night, and social circle if you
are staying out late with friends)

HOW MODERN SOCIETY IS STEALING SLEEP AND SELLING A BROKEN SOLUTION
Companies that are open 24/7 and require employees to work odd hours,
bars and nightspots that don't close until 2 a.m., and endless
connectivity to the internet can all keep us from getting to bed at a
reasonable hour. Similarly, restaurants that serve mega-portions, coffee
vendors on nearly every corner selling caffeinated beverages at all
hours, and bars pushing alcohol on us can all interfere with

a good night's sleep. With increasing insomnia rates, sleep aid
medications have skyrocketed. But the sleep solutions our society is
pushing come with a cost. Research showed an association between sleep
medications---such as zolpidem (Ambien), eszopiclone (Lunesta), and
temazepam (Restoril)---and a more than three-fold increased risk of
death.\[645\] These sleep aids have also been associated with memory
issues, confusion, anxiety, depression, and addiction.\[646\] THE EVIL
RULER WOULD . . . 1. Mess with people's sleep by making them so addicted
to TV and social media that they tune into stressful news before bed,
read emails late into the evening, respond to texts in the middle of the
night, and tweet outrageous messages and post to Facebook or Instagram
at all hours. 2. Encourage people to regularly cross several time zones
for work, giving them jet lag. 3. Refuse to give up the outdated
practice of the twice-a-year time change that messes with people's
sleep. 4. Advocate caffeine consumption morning, noon, and night to
disrupt sleep and create an unhealthy cycle that primes people for
symptoms of mental illness. 5. Encourage starting school early to
diminish sleep time, which increases many forms of brain health/mental
health issues. THE BENEVOLENT RULER WOULD . . . 1. Limit social media
and TV time so people can go to sleep early and get the rest they need.
2. Limit excess travel to reduce the incidence of jet lag. 3. Do away
with the twice-a-year time change that messes with your sleep. 4.
Encourage people to adopt a brain-healthy sleep regimen that promotes
more restorative sleep. 5. Start school later to allow children good
sleep. 6. Start days with exercise and hold meetings at work while
walking.

PRESCRIPTIONS FOR REDUCING YOUR SLEEP RISK FACTORS (AND THE FOUR CIRCLES
THEY REPRESENT)

The Strategies 1. Love and care about your sleep. Make it a priority and
keep track of your sleep each night. There are many apps that can help.
I often use Sleep Cycle on my phone or my Fitbit watch. Strive to get
seven to nine hours, which is a healthy amount for most people. 2. Avoid
anything that hurts your sleep. Beware of health problems that steal
your sleep. These include: Sleep apnea. It leads you to stop breathing
for short periods throughout the night, which robs you of restful sleep
and leaves you dragging, unfocused, and forgetful throughout the day.
Restless leg syndrome. Thyroid conditions. Both hypo- and
hyperthyroidism can cause sleep problems. See chapter 13 to find out
about testing for thyroid issues. Congestive heart failure.

Chronic pain. Untreated or undertreated mental health issues, such as
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), depression, or anxiety. Alzheimer's
disease. Dementia patients "sundown" or rev up at night and wander.
Chronic gastrointestinal problems, such as acid reflux. Enlarged
prostate gland (benign prostatic hypertrophy). It causes many trips to
the bathroom at night, which interrupts slumber. If you suffer from any
of these and you find yourself struggling with getting adequate rest,
speak with your health-care provider about possible solutions. 3. Beware
of bad sleep habits. In our hectic, 24/7 society, we could just as
easily ask, "What doesn't cause sleep deprivation?" A seemingly endless
number of reasons cause millions of us to miss out on a good night's
sleep. This list includes some of the most common factors.

A bedroom that is too warm. The ideal temperature is personal, but it
should be on the cool side. Light in the bedroom. Consider blackout
shades if you live in a city, where light pollution is sometimes hard to
avoid. Noise. Try earplugs if you live in a noisy neighborhood or sleep
with someone who snores. Gadgets by the bed. Put your phone, tablet,
digital watch, and more in another spot, or at least turn off the
volume. Turn your digital clock toward the wall so you aren't distracted
by glowing numbers. Screens. After sundown, use blue light--blocking
glasses or screen settings when you are looking at a screen. Going to
bed worried or angry. Medications. Many drugs, including asthma and
cough meds, antihistamines, anticonvulsants, and stimulants (such as
Adderall or Concerta, prescribed for ADD/ADHD), as well as others,
disturb sleep.\[647\] Naps. Even if you are having trouble sleeping,
this is a mistake if you suffer from insomnia. Taking a nap because you
feel sleepy during the day interferes with your nighttime sleep cycle.
Caffeine. Too much of the stimulant from coffee, tea, chocolate, or some
herbal preparations--- especially when consumed later in the day or at

night---can disrupt sleep. Refrain from using them after 2 p.m. Alcohol,
nicotine, and marijuana. Although these compounds initially induce
sleepiness for some people, they have the reverse effect as they wear
off, which is why you may wake up several hours after you go to
sleep---and not be able to return to slumbering.\[648\] Exercise within
four hours of the time you hit the sack. Regular workouts are very
beneficial for insomnia, but vigorous exercise late in the evening may
energize you and keep you awake. \[649\] Changes in hormones. Whether
due to pregnancy, premenstrual syndrome (PMS), perimenopause, or
menopause, these changes can disrupt women's sleep. Snoring. It can keep
you or your spouse awake--- or anyone else in the house, if it is really
loud. Shift work. Nurses, firefighters, security personnel, customer
service representatives, truck drivers, airline pilots, and many others
toil by night and sleep by day---at least, they try to sleep. Shift
workers are especially vulnerable to irregular sleep patterns, which
leads to excessive sleepiness, reduced productivity, irritability, and
mood problems.\[650\] To improve sleep, turn on bright lights while on
the job and use blackout blinds or curtains while you sleep during the
daytime.

Stressful situations. Death, marital conflict, work deadlines, moving,
or an upcoming exam can keep you awake at night. Eating close to
bedtime. This keeps your GI tract active and your blood pressure high.
It also increases the risk of heart attack and stroke. Jet lag. Travel
between time zones messes with your body's natural sleep rhythm. To
minimize sleep disruption when traveling, begin altering your bedtime by
one hour each night for a few nights before your trip and then get on
local time as soon as you land. 4. Engage in regular brain-healthy sleep
habits. My nieces, Alizé and Amelie, weren't getting good sleep when
they first came to stay with us. Alizé had bad dreams and trouble
sleeping, while Amelie wanted anxiously to sleep with her mom. With
healthier daily habits, they both began sleeping better. Brain-healthy
sleep habits will make it easier to drift off to dreamland and get a
good night's sleep. We are all unique, so remember that what works for
one person may not work for another. Keep trying new techniques until
you find something that works for you. Set up your bedroom for sleep:
cool, dark, and quiet. Don't allow pets in your bedroom---or at least
keep them off the bed.

Address emotional problems before going to sleep. Follow the good advice
from Ephesians 4:26 to not "let the sun go down while you are still
angry." Send a positive text or email, or set an intention to deal with
the issue the next day. If you forgive the other person first, you may
just end the argument. Worriers, devote a before-bed time period (about
10 to 15 minutes) to journal or pray about your nagging concerns, and
then stop. Get into a regular sleep schedule. Try to go to bed at the
same time each night and wake up at the same time each morning, every
day of the week. Getting up at the same time each day, no matter how
long you slept, helps to set your internal body clock and prevent
insomnia. Read a book---not an e-reader or tablet, as the light keeps
your brain alert. Preferably choose something thick or tedious, such as
1 and 2 Chronicles in the Old Testament. If you read Judges in the Old
Testament or a murder mystery before bed, it is likely to keep you up.
Try sound therapy. It can induce a very peaceful mood. Consider turning
on soothing nature sounds, wind chimes, a fan, or soft music. Slow
classical music, or any music that has a slow rhythm of 60 to 80 beats
per minute, can help with sleep.\[651\] Check out sleep-enhancing music
by Grammy Award--winning producer Barry Goldstein at mybrainfitlife.com.

Drink a cup of warm, unsweetened almond milk. Add a teaspoon of vanilla
(genuine, not imitation) and a few drops of stevia. The combination may
increase serotonin in your brain and help you sleep.\[652\] Wear socks.
Research shows that if your hands and feet are warm, you may fall asleep
faster. Refrain from checking the clock if you wake up in the night. If
you know what time it is, it can make you anxious. Restrict use of the
bed and bedroom for sleep or sexual activity only. Sexual activity
releases muscle tension and a flood of natural hormones and boosts
well-being. Adults with healthy sex lives also tend to sleep better. If
you are unable to fall asleep or return to sleep easily, get up and go
to another room.\[653\] Use lavender to enhance your slumbers. The smell
of lavender can decrease anxiety and improve mood and sleep.\[654\] If
you have to resort to medication, stay away from benzodiazepines and
traditional sleep medications. I often prescribe trazodone, gabapentin,
and amitriptyline with my patients. Create a soothing nighttime routine
that encourages sleep. Turn off all electronic devices at least an hour
before bedtime, and lower the lights in your house. A warm bath or
shower, prayer, or massage can also help you relax.

(Download helpful meditations and sleeppromoting hypnosis audios at
mybrainfitlife.com.)

Getting Restful Sleep with Hypnosis Medical hypnosis is a safe and
effective tool that can enhance overall health and well-being and
promote more restful sleep. The American Medical Association recognized
hypnotherapy as a standard medical treatment back in 1958, and the
American Psychological Association followed suit by endorsing it as a
branch of psychology in 1960. I have been using hypnosis for decades.
When I was an intern at Walter Reed Army Medical Center, many of my
patients wanted sleeping pills. As you can imagine, it's hard to sleep
in a busy, noisy hospital. Before I would give them pills, I asked if I
could try hypnotizing them first. Almost everyone agreed, and hypnosis
was so helpful that many of them did not need sleeping pills at all.

5.  Take nutraceuticals that help with sleep. These are often trial and
    error to determine which ones will help you most. My patients tend
    to like a combination of melatonin, magnesium, and gammaaminobutyric
    acid (GABA). I suggest trying one of the following for several days
    and taking it 30 minutes before bedtime. Melatonin is a neurohormone
    that helps regulate the sleep cycle. Darkness triggers melatonin
    production, while light---natural or artificial---reduces it. Too
    much light at night or

too little light during the day can interfere with the production of
melatonin. Taking melatonin has been found to decrease the time it takes
to fall asleep, increase sleeping hours, and increase feelings of
alertness the following day. People with depression, seasonal affective
disorder, or panic disorder tend to have low levels of melatonin. Taking
melatonin improved depression and anxiety in a study on postmenopausal
women. Melatonin boosts serotonin production, which may play a role in
its ability to help with sleep and depression. Dose suggestion: 0.3--6
mg a day (less is often better) 5-HTP boosts production of the
neurotransmitter serotonin and helps to calm activity in the anterior
cingulate gyrus. This makes it especially helpful for worriers and
people who can't seem to turn off their thoughts at bedtime. Research
has shown that 5-HTP can be as effective as antidepressant medication.
Dose suggestion: 50--200 mg a day Magnesium glycinate or citrate is a
mineral that plays a vital role in more than 300 biochemical processes
in the human body. In the brain, it helps activate GABA receptors, which
can help calm the brain and reduce anxious thoughts at bedtime. Dose
suggestion: 50--400 mg a day GABA is an amino acid that has a calming
effect for people who struggle with anxiety or stressful thoughts. It
promotes relaxation, which can help

with sleep. Dose suggestion: 250--1,000 mg a day

BRIGHT MINDS: SLEEP STEPS TO CREATE MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND MAKE MY
NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, SUFFER 1. Don't care about sleep. 2. Engage in
habits that keep you from getting a good night's rest. Drink coffee or
energy drinks in the afternoon and at night. Drink alcohol at night.
Don't get tested for sleep apnea, and if you have it, don't use the CPAP
machine. Use your smartphone, tablet, or e-reader in bed at night, and
keep your phone on the nightstand. Eat a big dinner with fatty foods an
hour or two before bedtime to increase the likelihood of nighttime
heartburn and acid reflux. Do a hard-core cardio class a couple of hours
before you go to bed. Keep a night-light on at all times. Take naps in
the afternoon. Volunteer for the night shift at work. Travel across time
zones on a regular basis. Rely on sleep medication to get the rest you
need. 3. Avoid the strategies that encourage restful sleep. STEPS TO END
MENTAL ILLNESS . . . AND KEEP MY NIECES, ALIZÉ AND AMELIE, HEALTHY 1.
Care about getting restorative sleep. 2. Avoid anything that hurts your
sleep patterns. 3. Engage regularly in healthy habits that promote
better sleep. Create a sleep routine and stick to it. Go to bed at the
same time each night. Keep your bedroom on the cool side at night. Cut
out any caffeinated beverages in the afternoon or evening. Use soothing
music to lull you to sleep. Try a pillow with the calming scent of
lavender. Aim for seven to eight hours of sleep each night. Give
yourself four hours to digest your dinner before going to bed. Practice
stress-management techniques like meditation and prayer. Wear a sleep
mask to keep light from interrupting your sleep.

Consider taking nutraceuticals that promote calmness and help with the
production of sleep hormones.

Pick One BRIGHT MINDS Sleep Tiny Habit to Start Today When my spouse
complains that I snore and stop breathing at night, I will get assessed
for sleep apnea. When I want to sleep better, I will eliminate caffeine
during the day (gradually---to avoid headaches). When I use tech gadgets
after sundown, I will make sure they have blue light blockers. When it
gets close to bedtime, I will cool the bedroom so it's a good
temperature for sleeping. When I am ready to go to sleep, I will wear a
sleep mask or completely darken the bedroom. When I go to bed, I will
turn off my tech gadgets so they do not wake me. When I plan my day, I
will write down my sleep routine, so I don't forget it. When I take my
supplements, I will include melatonin and magnesium if I have trouble
sleeping.

When it's time for bed, I will listen to music or a hypnosis sleep
audio. When I worry too much, I will supplement with 5-HTP.

\[632\] "Sleep and Sleep Disorder Statistics," American Sleep
Association, accessed August 20, 2019,
https://www.sleepassociation.org/about-sleep/sleepstatistics/. \[633\]
Ibid. \[634\] "Sleep and Mental Health," Harvard Health Publishing,
Harvard Medical School, updated March 18, 2019,
http://www.health.harvard.edu/newsletter_article/sleep-and-mental-health.
\[635\] "Sleep Disorders: The Connection between Sleep and Mental
Health," National Alliance on Mental Illness, accessed August 20, 2019,
https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-Conditions/RelatedConditions/sleep-disorders.
\[636\] David Nutt, Sue Wilson, and Louise Paterson, "Sleep Disorders as
Core Symptoms of Depression," Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 10, no.
3 (September 2008): 329--36. \[637\] Alexandra K. Gold and Louisa G.
Sylvia, "The Role of Sleep in Bipolar Disorder," Nature and Science of
Sleep 8 (June 29, 2016): 207--14. \[638\] "Sleep and Mental Health,"
Harvard Health Publishing. \[639\] Samuele Cortese et al., "Sleep and
Alertness in Children with AttentionDeficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A
Systematic Review of the Literature," Sleep 29, no. 4 (2006): 504--11.
\[640\] Kristine Yaffe et al., "Sleep-Disordered Breathing, Hypoxia, and
Risk of Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia in Older Women," JAMA
306, no. 6 (2011): 613--19. Yo-El S. Ju, Brendan P. Lucey, and David M.
Holtzman, "Sleep and Alzheimer Disease Pathology---A Bidirectional
Relationship," Nature Reviews Neurology 10, no. 2 (February 2014):
115--19. Wei-Pin Chang et al., "Sleep Apnea and the Risk of Dementia: A
Population-Based 5-Year Follow-Up Study in Taiwan," PLOS One 8 (October
24, 2013): e78655.

Roxanne Sterniczuk et al., "Sleep Disturbance Is Associated with
Incident Dementia and Mortality," Current Alzheimer Research 10, no. 7
(September 2013): 767--75. \[641\] Tori Rodriguez, "Teenagers Who Don't
Get Enough Sleep at Higher Risk for Mental Health Problems," Scientific
American, July 1, 2015,
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/teenagers-who-don-t-get-enoughsleep-at-higher-risk-for-mental-health-problems/.
\[642\] R. Morgan Griffin, "The Health Risks of Shift Work," WebMD,
March 25, 2010,
https://www.webmd.com/sleep-disorders/features/shift-work. \[643\] B. C.
Tefft, "Acute Sleep Deprivation and Risk of Motor Vehicle Crash
Involvement," AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, December 2016,
https://aaafoundation.org/acute-sleep-deprivation-risk-motor-vehicle-crashinvolvement/.
\[644\] Gregory Belenky et al., "The Effects of Sleep Deprivation on
Performance during Continuous Combat Operations," in Food Components to
Enhance Performance: An Evaluation of Potential Performance-Enhancing
Food Components for Operational Rations, Institute of Medicine (US)
Committee on Military Nutrition Research, ed. Bernadette M. Marriott
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1994),
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK209071/. \[645\] Daniel F. Kripke,
Robert D. Langer, and Lawrence E. Kline, "Hypnotics' Association with
Mortality or Cancer: A Matched Cohort Study," BMJ Open 2, no. 1
(February 27, 2012): e000850. \[646\] "Serious Ambien Side Effects:
Memory, Depression, and More," American Addiction Centers, last updated
July 25, 2019,
https://americanaddictioncenters.org/ambien-treatment/side-effects.
\[647\] Daniel G. Amen, Memory Rescue (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2017),
248. \[648\] Daniel G. Amen and Tana Amen, The Brain Warrior's Way (New
York: New American Library, 2016), 203. \[649\] Ibid., 205. \[650\]
Ibid., 203. \[651\] László Harmat, Johanna Takács, and Róbert Bódizs,
"Music Improves Sleep Quality in Students," Journal of Advanced Nursing
62, no. 3 (May 2008): 327-- 35. \[652\] Amen and Amen, Brain Warrior's
Way, 205. \[653\] Ibid. \[654\] Namni Goel, Hyungsoo Kim, and Raymund P.
Lao, "An Olfactory Stimulus Modifies Nighttime Sleep in Young Men and
Women," Chronobiology International 22, no. 5 (2005): 889--904. Mark
Hardy, Michael D. Kirk-Smith, and David D. Stretch, "Replacement of Drug
Treatment for Insomnia by Ambient Odour," Lancet 346, no. 8976
(September 9, 1995): 701.

OceanofPDF.com

PA RT 3

PRACTICAL STRATEGIES TO END MENTAL ILLNESS NOW OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 16

MIND MEDS VERSUS NUTRACEUTICALS WHAT DOES THE SCIENCE SAY? Millions of
Americans today are taking dietary supplements, practicing yoga and
integrating other natural therapies into their lives. These are all
preventive measures that will keep them out of the doctor's office and
drive down the costs of treating serious problems like heart disease and
diabetes. ANDREW WEIL, MD

ALICIA

Alicia, 53, was struggling with brain fog, memory problems, anxiety, and
symptoms of ADD/ADHD (short attention span, distractibility,
disorganization, impulsivity) when she first came to the Amen Clinics.
Her SPECT scan showed low overall activity, especially in the prefrontal
cortex (see images below). As we attacked each of her BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors and used nutraceuticals---including omega-3 fatty acids,
multiple vitamins, ginkgo, huperzine A, and phosphatidylserine---her
brain fog cleared, and her memory

and focus were better. And one more thing that was very important to
her---her Ping-Pong game dramatically improved. ALICIA'S SURFACE SPECT
SCANS: BEFORE AND AFTER

Before: low prefrontal cortex activity

After: overall improved

Alicia had been playing Ping-Pong for months in an effort to boost her
brain (I think Ping-Pong is the best sport for your brain), but
initially she always lost to her husband because her mind would wander.
Her husband even played left-handed in order to give her an advantage.
After starting the nutraceuticals, she said, "I was beating my husband
in Ping-Pong every game, and it happened overnight . . . my husband was
really angry that I was beating him." Alicia then hired a Ping-Pong
coach because, "I want to keep beating my husband." About work, she
said, "I'm getting a lot more done, and I am happier." Her follow-up
scan was also much better. Not to be outdone, her husband started the
nutraceuticals, lost 30 pounds, and became serious about his brain
health. I'll bet they have a fierce Ping-Pong competition now. In
addition, her adult children, who saw the benefit in their mother,
started eating better, exercising, and taking nutraceuticals.

After starting the nutraceuticals, she said, "I was beating my husband
in Ping-Pong every game, and it happened overnight." At Amen Clinics we
are not opposed to medications for your mind and prescribe them when
necessary. However, we are opposed to medications being the first and
only thing you do to help your brain and your mind. As you've seen
throughout this book, there is so much more that can and needs to be
done to end mental illness now. The pharmaceutical revolution has
consumed psychiatry for the past 50 years, but unfortunately, outcomes
have not improved along with the enthusiasm. As discussed earlier, one
of the reasons outcomes lag behind is that medical professionals are
working within the wrong paradigm--- making diagnoses based on symptom
clusters without any biological information while ignoring overall brain
health and the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. I first became interested in
using nutraceuticals for brain health/mental health issues once I
started using SPECT scans. I could see that some of the medications I
was taught to prescribe, especially benzodiazepines for anxiety and
opiates for pain, were clearly associated with unhealthy looking scans.
TOXICITY ON SURFACE SPECT SCANS OF SOME MEDICATIONS

Benzos

Opiates

Thinking of the principle all physicians are taught the first year of
medical school---Primum non nocere, which is Latin for "First do no
harm"---I started looking for less toxic options for my patients and was
surprised to find a growing body of scientific literature to support the
use of

supplements for many brain health/mental health issues. In making
treatment recommendations for our patients, we always try to keep a
number of principles in mind: First, do no harm. Use the least toxic,
most effective, science-based treatments. Consider short-term pain
versus long-term gain (don't fix one problem just to cause another one).
Don't start something a patient will have a hard time stopping
(withdrawing from many anti-anxiety or antidepressant medications can be
very hard), just to deal with the anxiety of the moment. Nutraceuticals
or medications should never be the first and only thing people do. Until
we understand this concept, we will never truly get well as a society. I
always consider, What would I prescribe if this were my mother, my wife,
or my child? After nearly 40 years as a psychiatrist, I recommend more
and more treatments from nature, including foods and nutraceuticals. We
want you to use all the tools available, especially if they are science
based, effective, and cheaper, and have minimal side effects. A number
of websites are dedicated to the extensive science of nutraceuticals for
health, including brain health, such as MedlinePlus from the National
Library of Medicine (medlineplus.gov) and Natural Medicines
(naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com). They often grade
nutraceuticals from the clinical science evidence similarly to how they
rate pharmaceuticals (see chart below).

GRADE

SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE

A

Robust research conducted with more than two placebocontrolled,
double-blind clinical trials

B

Multiple studies where at least two are placebo-controlled, double-blind
trials

C

Single double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (only one study so far)

D

Open-label trials (participants and researchers know who is getting the
drug or the placebo)

F

Research suggests it does not work

A second chart on the next page shows nutraceuticals with A or B
evidence ratings for specific brain health/mental health issues. One
major flaw in prescribing nutraceuticals, as with medications, is that
they are generally recommended based on symptoms, rather than biology.
Our experience is that treatment is much more effective with
nutraceuticals and/or medications when we add the biological information
from our brain imaging work. Surveys by the CDC find most people are
deficient in one or more of these vital nutraceuticals because of their
poor-quality diet, or the nutrients are being depleted from their bodies
due to stress or the effects of certain medications. It's important to
work with a knowledgeable health-care provider to determine the best
approach and nutraceuticals for your particular brain health/mental
health issues.

SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE FOR COMMON CONDITIONS AND NUTRACEUTICALS
SYMPTOMCLUSTERS

A-LEVEL EVIDENCE

B-LEVEL EVIDENCE

Anxiety and Stress

Ashwagandha\[655\] Inositol\[659\] (OCD)\[660\] (OCD)\[656\]
(panic)\[661\]

NOTES Zinc levels low in panic

(anxious, tense, worried, nervous, obsessive thoughts, panic, OCD, PTSD)

Theanine\[657\] Omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA\[658\]

GABA\[662\] Magnesium\[663\] (better with 30mg of B6)\[664\]
Saffron\[665\] Passionflower\[666\] Lavender\[667\] 5HTP\[668\] Multiple
vitamins\[669\] NAC (OCD)\[670\] (PTSD) \[671\] Probiotics\[672\]
Rhodiola\[673\] Ginkgo\[674\] Relora\[675\]

disorder\[676\] Relora = Magnolia officinalis + Phellodendron amurense
bark extracts

Attention, Focus, and Energy

EPA omega3s\[677\] Phosphatidylserine (PS)\[678\]

Zinc\[679\] Pycnogenol\[680\] Magnesium\[681\] Rhodiola\[682\]
Ginseng\[683\] Ashwagandha\[684\] Green tea extract\[685\] Multiple
vitamins\[686\] Bacopa monnieri\[687\]

Low zinc levels associated with low mood\[688\]

Mood

EPA omega3s\[689\] St. John's wort\[690\] Saffron\[691\] SAMe\[692\]

Curcumin\[693\] Zinc\[694\] Magnesium\[695\] 5-HTP\[696\] Folate\[697\]
NAC\[698\] (16 weeks) \[699\] PS\[700\] Rhodiola\[701\] Multiple
vitamins\[702\] Vitamin D\[703\] Probiotics\[704\] Ginkgo\[705\]

SAMe seems to be more effective in males;\[706\] a few reports suggest
it may trigger mania in bipolar patients; \[707\] folate as an add-on
treatment with SSRIs;\[708\] NAC more effective when CRP is high\[709\]

Memory

Ginkgo\[710\] PS\[711\]

Omega-3s\[713\] Multiple vitamins\[714\] Huperzine A\[715\]

Alpha GPC (also Bacopa monnieri\[716\] called choline Cocoa
flavanols\[717\] alphoscerate)\[712\] Pycnogenol\[718\] Saffron\[719\]
Ashwagandha\[720\] Vitamin D\[721\] Psychotic symptoms

Sarcosine\[722\]

Sleep

Melatonin\[727\] (jet Theanine\[729\] lag)\[728\] Magnesium\[730\]
Valerian\[731\] Probiotics\[732\]

Addictions, cravings

NAC\[723\] Omega-3s\[724\] (prevention of psychotic disorders)
Folate\[725\]

Vitamin D\[734\] Huperzine A\[735\] NAC (cravings overall) \[736\]
(tobacco)\[737\] (alcohol and marijuana) \[738\] (marijuana in
teens)\[739\] (cocaine)\[740\] (methamphetamine)\[741\] (heroin)\[742\]
(gambling) \[743\] Chromium picolinate\[744\] Ashwagandha\[745\]

Sarcosine addon to antipsychotic medication has been shown to be
helpful\[726\] Combo of melatonin, magnesium, and zinc\[733\] NAC may be
most useful for preventing relapse\[746\]

My colleague Dr. Parris Kidd, who has more than 35 years of experience
working with supplements, recommends that everyone have a core
nutraceutical program that includes a broad-spectrum "multiple"
(nutraceutical multiple vitamin-mineral supplement), plus a concentrated
fish oil or vegan source of omega-3s EPA and DHA. These are all critical
for your enzyme systems to work. For more severe mental health issues,
such as schizophrenia or true bipolar disorder, I usually start with
medications, such as antipsychotics, like olanzapine

(Zyprexa), aripirazole (Abilify), or risperidone (Risperdal), or mood
stabilizers, such as lamotrigine (Lamictal). Yet, even when I am
prescribing medication, I am also recommending the support of
nutraceuticals, such as omega-3 fatty acids, multiple vitamins, and
vitamin D. This is in addition to attacking the BRIGHT MINDS risk
factors and making nutritional changes. By supporting overall brain
health in this way, people typically get better faster and have fewer
relapses. For example, here are interventions we typically recommend for
these patients.

SCHIZOPHRENIA, TRUE BIPOLAR DISORDER, AND ANY PSYCHOTIC PROCESS 1. Get
any psychotic process under control, using the appropriate medications.
2. Support with basic nutraceuticals, including multiple vitamins,
folate, and fish oil. 3. Attack the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. 4.
Eliminate artificial dyes, preservatives, and sweeteners from the diet.
5. Try an elimination diet for three weeks, eliminating sugary food,
gluten, dairy, corn, soy, and other categories of potentially allergenic
foods. Then add these back one at a time (except for sugar) and be alert
for reactions to them, which would indicate that you should permanently
avoid that food. In general, it's advisable to keep sugar out of your
diet. 6. Begin taking the following nutraceuticals:

Longvida curcumin, a formulation much more efficiently absorbed than
other curcumin supplements Magnesium Zinc Probiotics For most other
disorders, such as ADD/ADHD, anxiety, depression, insomnia, and
addictions, I often start with nutraceuticals. If they are ineffective,
then I consider medications. For example, here are the steps I recommend
for my patients for some common brain health/mental health issues before
considering prescription medications.

ADD/ADHD Symptoms of ADD/ADHD include short attention span,
distractibility, disorganization, procrastination, impulsivity, and
restlessness. 1. Attack the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. 2. Eliminate
artificial dyes, preservatives, and sweeteners from the family's diet.
3. Minimize or eliminate processed foods (anything in a box). 4. Try an
elimination diet for three weeks. (See step 5 on page 297.) 5. Try a
higher-protein, lower carbohydrate diet. Boost exercise---30 minutes or
more five times a week. 6. Increase sleep and good sleep habits. 7.
Decrease screen time.

8. Work closely with an integrative physician to check ferritin, vitamin
D, magnesium, zinc, and thyroid levels, as well as all the other lab
chemistry tests, and balance any that are not optimal. 9. Begin taking
the following nutraceuticals: EPA-rich fish oil Dose suggestion: 1,000
mg a day of EPA and DHA per 40 pounds of body weight, to maximum 3,000
mg a day EPA and DHA Phosphatidylserine (PS) Dose suggestion: 200--300
mg a day Zinc as citrate or glycinate Dose suggestion: 30 mg a day
(tolerable upper levels are 40 mg a day for adults, 34 mg a day for
adolescents; less for younger kids) Magnesium as glycinate, citrate, or
malate Dose suggestion: 100--400 mg a day 10. Consider neurofeedback.
11. Start kids a bit later in school (the youngest kids in a class are
more likely to be diagnosed with ADD/ADHD). If someone truly has
ADD/ADHD, they will still have it a few months after I first see them,
so taking some time to get their brain health/mental health optimized is
worth the investment before starting a medication that they may be on
for years or even decades. At this point, I'll recommend nutraceuticals
or medications targeted to someone's specific type of ADD/ADHD (see
Healing ADD: The Breakthrough Program That Allows You to See and Heal
the 7 Types of ADD).

In the case of ADD/ADHD, which has been one of my primary areas of
expertise, there is a great deal of negative bias against medication in
our society. I've heard countless parents say: "I'm not going to drug my
kid." "If you take this drug, you won't be creative." "You won't be
yourself." The problem is that most physicians assume ADD/ADHD is one
thing, so they start everyone on the same class of
medications---stimulants, such as Ritalin or Adderall. These medications
help many people, but they also make many others much worse. Both
"miracle" and "horror" stories about stimulants abound. One of my own
children went from being a mediocre student to getting straight As for
ten years while using a stimulant medication to optimize the low
activity in her prefrontal cortex, and she was accepted to one of the
world's best veterinarian schools. The medication stimulated her frontal
lobes, giving her greater access to her own abilities, which also
enhanced her self-esteem. On the other hand, I have another patient who
was referred to me because he became suicidal on Ritalin. His brain was
already overactive to start, so stimulating it only made him more
anxious and upset. The problem comes when physicians assume everyone
with the same symptoms has the same brain patterns, which is just not
true and invites failure and frustration.

ADDICTIONS

1. Stop the addictive substance, which is directly or indirectly a toxin
to your brain! 2. Twelve step program, such as Alcoholics Anonymous 3.
BRIGHT MINDS brain rehabilitation program, attacking all the risk
factors 4. BRIGHT MINDS diet to help prevent relapse---most treatment
programs serve very unhealthy foods that promote relapse 5. HALT to
prevent relapse---do not get too Hungry (balance blood sugar), Angry
(kill the ANTs), Lonely (connect with others), or Tired (sleep). 6.
Eliminate the ANTs (automatic negative thoughts). 7. Begin taking the
following nutraceuticals: Omega-3 fatty acids Dose suggestion: 1,400 mg
or more with a ratio of approximately 60/40 EPA to DHA NAC Dose
suggestion: 1,200--2,400 mg a day; clinical research very promising If
the above interventions are ineffective, I'll try other nutraceuticals
or medications targeted to someone's specific type of addiction (see my
book Unchain Your Brain: 10 Steps to Breaking the Addictions That Steal
Your Life).

ANXIETY DISORDERS 1. Attack the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. 2. Check for
hypoglycemia, anemia, and hyperthyroidism.

3. Eliminate artificial dyes, preservatives, and sweeteners from the
diet. 4. Try an elimination diet for three weeks. (See step 5 on page
297 for more details.) 5. Practice prayer, meditation, and hypnosis.
(Research shows they can calm stress and anxiety, and you can use
helpful audio programs for guided meditation and self-hypnosis.) 6.
Heart rate variability (HRV) training. (Anxiety is linked to low levels
of HRV,\[747\] but you can hack your way to a healthier HRV with
biofeedback apps. Read more about this in my book Feel Better Fast and
Make It Last.) 7. Diaphragmatic breathing and hand-warming biofeedback.
(Read more about these in my book Feel Better Fast and Make It Last.) 8.
Eliminate the ANTs. 9. Calming exercise, such as yoga, qi gong, and tai
chi. 10. Begin taking the following nutraceuticals: L-theanine Dose
suggestion: 200--400 mg a day GABA Dose suggestion: 500--1,000 mg a day
Magnesium as glycinate, citrate, or malate Dose suggestion: 100--500 mg
with 30 mg of vitamin B6 a day Probiotics 11. Check your Omega-3 Index
(www.omegaquant.com) and get it above 8 percent using 1,400 mg or more
omega-3 fish oil with a ratio of approximately 60/40 EPA to DHA.

12. Consider neurofeedback. Anxiety disorders are very painful, but too
often people reach for marijuana, alcohol, or prescribed
benzodiazepines, which can be of short-term benefit but can cause
long-term problems with addiction and memory issues. If the above
interventions are ineffective or only partly effective, I'll try other
nutraceuticals or medications targeted to someone's specific type of
anxiety (see my book Healing Anxiety and Depression).

DEPRESSION 1. Attack the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. 2. Check for and
correct low thyroid function. 3. Work with a nutritionally informed
physician to optimize your folate, vitamin B12, vitamin D, homocysteine,
and other nutrient levels. 4. Check your Omega-3 Index
(www.omegaquant.com) and get it above 8 percent using 1,400 mg or more
omega-3 fish oil with a ratio of approximately 60/40 EPA to DHA. (I'm
convinced that without doing these nutritional fixes, patients are very
unlikely to respond to the medications.) 5. Eliminate processed foods as
well as artificial dyes, preservatives, and sweeteners. 6. Try an
elimination diet for three weeks. (See step 5 on page 297 for more
details.) 7. Increase protein, lower carbs, and add colorful vegetables
into your diet. 8. Eliminate the ANTs.

9. Exercise.\[748\] 10. Begin taking the following nutraceuticals:
Curcumin, not as turmeric root but as Longvida, which is much more
efficiently absorbed Magnesium as glycinate, citrate, or malate Dose
suggestion: 100--500 mg with 30 mg of vitamin B6 a day Zinc as citrate
or glycinate Dose suggestion: 30 mg (tolerable upper levels are 40 mg a
day for adults and 34 mg a day for adolescents; less for younger kids)
Probiotics Depression can be devastating, but too often during quick
office visits physicians put patients on SSRIs rather than attack the
underlying cause. SSRIs are often very hard medications to stop. If the
above interventions are ineffective, I'll try other nutraceuticals or
medications targeted to their specific type of depression (see my book
Healing Anxiety and Depression).

INSOMNIA 1. Care about your sleep. Make it a priority. 2. Avoid anything
that hurts sleep, such as caffeine; blue light from gadgets; a light,
warm room; noise; alcohol; evening exercise; unchallenged negative
thoughts; and worries. 3. Treat any issues that steal your
sleep---restless leg syndrome, sleep apnea, hyperthyroidism, low
progesterone, or chronic pain.

4. Engage in positive sleep habits, such as blue-light blockers, turning
off gadgets, prayer, hypnosis, meditation, soothing music, a warm bath,
a cool room and pillow, a regular sleep schedule, and lavender
aromatherapy. 5. Begin taking the following nutraceuticals: Melatonin
Dose suggestion: 0.3--5 mg before bedtime, gradually increasing it until
it works for you Magnesium Dose suggestion: 100--500 mg a day Zinc Dose
suggestion: 15--30 mg a day 5-HTP Dose suggestion: 100--200 mg a day if
you are a worrier GABA Dose suggestion: 250--1,000 mg a day Too often,
people are prescribed addictive sleeping pills that can affect memory
without searching for the underlying cause or doing the simple
strategies first. If the above interventions are ineffective, I'll try
nonaddictive sleeppromoting medications, such as low-dose trazodone,
gabapentin, or amitriptyline. Remember, whether you use medications or
supplements or a combination of them, they are only a part of our Amen
Clinics Four Circles BRIGHT MINDS Program. Do not expect that a pill,
natural or not, by itself will change your life for the better.

PROS AND CONS OF MEDICATIONS

Based on 40 years of studying and practicing psychiatry, I have compiled
the following list of pros and cons of medications for your mind:

Pros 1. For more serious mental health conditions, such as
schizophrenia, true bipolar disorder (I say true bipolar because people
are often misdiagnosed as having bipolar disorder when they have the
lasting effects of traumatic brain injury), severe major depression, and
OCD, medications are often the most effective and fastest acting
treatments. 2. For ADD/ADHD, stimulant medications work quickly and can
be very effective, if they are given for the right type of ADD/ADHD. As
discussed earlier, stimulants work for two of the seven types of
ADD/ADHD. 3. Prazosin (Minipress---a blood pressure medication) is often
an effective, quick-acting, safe treatment for nightmares in people with
PTSD. 4. Physicians are trained in using medications for mental health
issues, so they are used to prescribing them, and they are a part of
regular medical practice. 5. Medical insurance plans often cover them.

Cons 1. Mind medications have significantly more side effects than
nutraceuticals. Most have a "black box" warning, which is the FDA's
strictest warning

associated with the labeling of prescription drugs. It is used when
there is reasonable evidence of an association of a serious hazard with
the drug. 2. They are generally much more expensive than nutraceuticals,
although they tend to be covered by medical insurance. 3. Once started,
many medications are often hard to stop. Withdrawal from antidepressant
and antianxiety medications can be long and painful. 4. Once started,
many people feel dependent on them and do not do the work to truly get
their brains healthy over time. 5. Some medications change your brain so
you then need them in order to feel normal. 6. As awful as it sounds,
taking prescription medications can affect your insurability. I know
many people who have been denied or made to pay higher rates for health
insurance because they have taken certain medications. 7. For ADD/ADHD,
if stimulants are prescribed without taking into consideration the
particular type of ADD/ADHD you have, they can do more harm than good.
For example, for five types of ADD/ADHD, stimulants can make you much
worse. An important note: Check with your health-care provider before
stopping any medication.

PROS AND CONS OF NUTRACEUTICALS

Based on more than three decades of diving into the research on
nutraceuticals to help the brain and using them in my clinical practice,
I have compiled the following list of pros and cons of taking
nutraceuticals.

Pros 1. They are often effective when prescribed properly. 2. They have
dramatically fewer side effects than most prescription medications. 3.
They are significantly less expensive than medications. 4. You never
have to tell an insurance company that you have taken them, so they will
not affect your insurability. 5. When people start to take supplements
to optimize their health, they often start to engage in other healthy
habits.

Cons 1. Even though they tend to be less expensive than medications,
insurance usually does not cover them. 2. Many people are unaware that
nutraceuticals can have side effects and need to be thoughtfully used.
Just because something is natural does not mean it is innocuous. Both
arsenic and cyanide are natural, but that doesn't mean they are good for
you. For example, St. John's wort used to be one of my favorite natural
antidepressants, but it can cause sun sensitivity and it can also
decrease the effectiveness of a number of other medications, such as
birth control pills.\[749\] Oh great! Get depressed,

take St. John's wort from the grocery store, and now you are pregnant
when you don't want to be. That may not be the outcome you were planning
on. 3. One of the major concerns about nutraceuticals is the lack of
quality control. There is variability, so you need to find trustworthy
brands. I do my very best to recommend only nutraceuticals that have
been put through stringent quality control. You can find the
high-quality products and brands we recommend to our patients on our
site (www.brainmedhealth.com). 4. Another disadvantage is that many
people get their advice about supplements from the teenage clerk at the
health food store who may not have the best information, or from
secondary sources on the Internet. You need advice from health-care
professionals who are trained and competent to give you the best advice.
Even though they have limitations, the benefits of nutraceuticals
compared with their minimal risks make them worth considering,
especially if you can get thoughtful, research-based information.

INFORMED CONSENT In the first year of medical school, all students are
taught about informed consent. When it comes to treatment for any
medical or brain health/mental health condition, it is not our job to
tell you what to do; it is our job to give you the options and inform
you about the pros and cons of each option. This is critical. Too many
physicians tell you what

treatment they'll prescribe rather than giving you all of the options.
Your doctor is not your father, mother, or boss; they should be your
partner in wellness. Ask for options.

\[655\] Dnyanraj Choudhary, Sauvik Bhattacharyya, and Kedar Joshi, "Body
Weight Management in Adults under Chronic Stress through Treatment with
Ashwagandha Root Extract: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled
Trial," Journal of Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine
22, no. 1 (January 2017): 96--106. K. Chandrasekhar, Jyoti Kapoor, and
Sridhar Anishetty, "A Prospective, Randomized Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Study of Safety and Efficacy of a High-Concentration
Full-Spectrum Extract of Ashwagandha Root in Reducing Stress and Anxiety
in Adults," Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine 34, no. 3
(July--September, 2012): 255--62. Morgan A. Pratte et al., "An
Alternative Treatment for Anxiety: A Systematic Review of Human Trial
Results Reported for the Ayurvedic Herb Ashwagandha (Withania
somnifera)," Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 20, no.
12 (December 2014): 901--8. Chittaranjan Andrade et al., "A
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Evaluation of the Anxiolytic Efficacy
of an Ethanolic Extract of Withania somnifera," Indian Journal of
Psychiatry 42, no. 3 (July--September 2000): 295--301. \[656\] Seyedeh
Pardis Jahanbakhsh et al., "Evaluation of the Efficacy of Withania
somnifera (Ashwagandha) Root Extract in Patients with
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Randomized Double-Blind
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Complementary Therapies in Medicine 27
(August 2016): 25--29. \[657\] Shinsuke Hidese et al., "Effects of
Chronic L-theanine Administration in Patients with Major Depressive
Disorder: An Open-Label Study," Acta Neuropsychiatrica 29, no. 2 (April
2017): 72--79. David J. White et al., "Anti-Stress, Behavioural and
Magnetoencephalography Effects of an L-Theanine-Based Nutrient Drink: A
Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Crossover Trial,"
Nutrients 8, no. 1 (January 19, 2016): e53. Keiko Unno et al.,
"Anti-stress Effect of Theanine on Students during Pharmacy Practice:
Positive Correlation among Salivary α-amylase Activity, Trait Anxiety
and Subjective Stress," Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 111
(October 2013): 128--35.

Ai Yoto et al., "Effects of L-theanine or Caffeine Intake on Changes in
Blood Pressure under Physical and Psychological Stresses," Journal of
Physiological Anthropology 31, no. 1 (October 29, 2012): 28. Michael S.
Ritsner et al., "L-Theanine Relieves Positive, Activation, and Anxiety
Symptoms in Patients with Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder: An
8-Week, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, 2-Center Study,"
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 72, no. 1 (January 2011): 34--42. Kristy
Lu et al., "The Acute Effects of L-theanine in Comparison with
Alprazolam on Anticipatory Anxiety in Humans," Human Psychopharmacology
19, no. 7 (October 2004): 457--65. K. Kimura et al. "L-Theanine Reduces
Psychological and Physiological Stress Responses," Biological Psychology
74, no. 1 (January 2007): 39--45. \[658\] Pamela Barbadoro et al., "Fish
Oil Supplementation Reduces Cortisol Basal Levels and Perceived Stress:
A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial in Abstinent Alcoholics,"
Molecular Nutrition and Food Research 57, no. 6 (June 2013): 1110--14.
Laure Buydens-Branchey, Marc Branchey, and Joseph R. Hibbeln,
"Associations between Increases in Plasma n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids following Supplementation and Decreases in Anger and Anxiety in
Substance Abusers," Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological
Psychiatry 32, no. 2 (February 15, 2008): 568--75. Delbert G. Robinson
et al., "A Potential Role for Adjunctive Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids for Depression and Anxiety Symptoms in Recent Onset Psychosis:
Results from a 16 Week Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial for
Participants Concurrently Treated with Risperidone," Schizophrenia
Research 204 (February 2019): 295--303. Janice K. Kiecolt-Glaser et al.,
"Omega-3 Supplementation Lowers Inflammation and Anxiety in Medical
Students: A Randomized Controlled Trial," Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
25, no. 8 (November 2011): 1725--34. Felice N. Jacka et al., "Dietary
Intake of Fish and PUFA, and Clinical Depressive and Anxiety Disorders
in Women," British Journal of Nutrition 109, no. 11 (June 2013):
2059--66. Kenta Matsumura et al., "Effects of Omega-3 Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids on Psychophysiological Symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder in Accident Survivors: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Affective Disorders 224 (December
15, 2017): 27--31. Kuan-Pin Su et al., "Association of Use of Omega-3
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids with Changes in Severity of Anxiety
Symptoms: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis," JAMA Network Open 1,
no. 5 (September 14, 2018): e182327. \[659\] Joseph Levine, "Controlled
Trials of Inositol in Psychiatry," European Neuropsychopharmacology 7,
no. 2 (May 1997): 147--55.

\[660\] P. D. Carey et al., "Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography
(SPECT) in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder before and after Treatment with
Inositol," Metabolic Brain Disease 19, nos. 1--2 (June 2004): 125--34.
\[661\] Alex Palatnik et al., "Double-Blind, Controlled, Crossover Trial
of Inositol versus Fluvoxamine for the Treatment of Panic Disorder,"
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 21, no. 3 (June 2001): 335--39.
\[662\] Adham M. Abdou et al., "Relaxation and Immunity Enhancement
Effects of γAminobutyric Acid (GABA) Administration in Humans,"
Biofactors 26, no. 3 (2006): 201--8. \[663\] Neil Bernard Boyle, Clare
Lawton, and Louise Dye, "The Effects of Magnesium Supplementation on
Subjective Anxiety and Stress--A Systematic Review," Nutrients 9, no. 5
(April 26, 2017): e429. Emily K. Tarleton et al., "Role of Magnesium
Supplementation in the Treatment of Depression: A Randomized Clinical
Trial," PLOS One 12, no. 6 (June 27, 2017): e0180067. Miriam C. de Souza
et al., "A Synergistic Effect of a Daily Supplement for 1 Month of 200
mg Magnesium Plus 50 mg Vitamin B6 for the Relief of Anxiety-Related
Premenstrual Symptoms: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Crossover Study,"
Journal of Women's Health and Gender-Based Medicine 9, no. 2 (2000):
131--39. Gordana Kovacevic et al., "A 6-Month Follow-Up of Disability,
Quality of Life, and Depressive and Anxiety Symptoms in Pediatric
Migraine with Magnesium Prophylaxis," Magnesium Research 30, no. 4
(October--December 2017): 133--41. \[664\] Etienne Pouteau et al.,
"Superiority of Magnesium and Vitamin B6 over Magnesium Alone on Severe
Stress in Healthy Adults with Low Magnesemia: A Randomized, Single-Blind
Clinical Trial," PLOS One 13, no. 12 (December 18, 2018): e0208454.
\[665\] Alireza Milajerdi et al., "The Effects of Alcoholic Extract of
Saffron (Crocus satious L.) on Mild to Moderate Comorbid
Depression-Anxiety, Sleep Quality, and Life Satisfaction in Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus: A Double-Blind, Randomized and Placebo-Controlled
Clinical Trial," Complementary Therapies in Medicine 41 (December 2018):
196--202. Adrian L. Lopresti et al., "Affron, a Standardised Extract
from Saffron (Crocus sativus L.) for the Treatment of Youth Anxiety and
Depressive Symptoms: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Study," Journal of Affective Disorders 232 (May 2018): 349--57. Mohsen
Mazidi et al., "A Double-Blind, Randomized and PlaceboControlled Trial
of Saffron (Crocus sativus L.) in the Treatment of Anxiety and
Depression," Journal of Complementary and Integrative Medicine 13, no. 2
(2016): 195--99.

Sophia Esalatmanesh et al., "Comparison of Saffron and Fluvoxamine in
the Treatment of Mild to Moderate Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A
Double Blind Randomized Clinical Trial," Iranian Journal of Psychiatry
12, no. 3 (July 2017): 154--62. \[666\] Jerome Sarris, "Herbal Medicines
in the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders: 10-Year Updated Review,"
Phytotherapy Research 32, no. 7 (July 2018): 1147-- 62. Liliane-Poconé
Dantas et al., "Effects of Passiflora incarnata and Midazolam for
Control of Anxiety in Patients Undergoing Dental Extraction," Medicina
Oral Patologia Oral y Cirugia Bucal 22, no. 1 (January 2017): e95-- 101.
\[667\] Benjamin J. Malcolm and Kimberly Tallian, "Essential Oil of
Lavender in Anxiety Disorders: Ready for Prime Time?" Mental Health
Clinician 7, no. 4 (July 2017): 147--55. A. Henneman et al., "Lavender
Oil Supplementation for the Management of Anxiety Disorder," Medical
Case Reports and Reviews 1, no. 2 (June 8, 2018): 1--5. \[668\] René S.
Kahn et al., "Effect of a Serotonin Precursor and Uptake Inhibitor in
Anxiety Disorders; a Double-Blind Comparison of 5-Hydroxytryptophan,
Clomipramine and Placebo," International Clinical Psychopharmacology 2,
no. 1 (January 1987): 33--45. Koen Schruers et al., "Acute
L-5-Hydroxytryptophan Administration Inhibits Carbon Dioxide-Induced
Panic in Panic Disorder Patients," Psychiatry Research 113, no. 3
(December 30, 2002): 237--43. E. Emanuele et al., "An Open-Label Trial
of L-5-Hydroxytryptophan in Subjects with Romantic Stress,"
Neuroendocrinology Letters 31, no. 5 (2010): 663--66. \[669\] Sara-Jayne
Long and David Benton, "Effects of Vitamin and Mineral Supplementation
on Stress, Mild Psychiatric Symptoms, and Mood in Nonclinical Samples: A
Meta-Analysis," Psychosomatic Medicine 75, no. 2 (February/March 2013):
144--53. Julia J. Rucklidge et al., "Shaken but Unstirred? Effects of
Micronutrients on Stress and Trauma after an Earthquake: RCT Evidence
Comparing Formulas and Doses," Human Psychopharmacology 27, no. 5
(September 2012): 440--54. Bonnie J. Kaplan et al., "A Randomised Trial
of Nutrient Supplements to Minimise Psychological Stress after a Natural
Disaster," Psychiatry Research 228, no. 3 (August 30, 2015): 373--79.
Julia Rucklidge et al., "Micronutrients Reduce Stress and Anxiety in
Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder following a 7.1
Earthquake," Psychiatry Research 189, no. 2 (September 30, 2011):
281--87.

\[670\] Daniel L. C. Costa et al., "Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial of N-Acetylcysteine Augmentation for
Treatment-Resistant ObsessiveCompulsive Disorder," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 78, no. 7 (July 2017): e766--73. Hamid Afshar et al.,
"N-Acetylcysteine Add-On Treatment in Refractory Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorder: A Randomized, Double-Blind, PlaceboControlled Trial," Journal
of Clinical Psychopharmacology 32, no. 6 (December 2012): 797--803.
\[671\] Sudie E. Back et al., "A Double-Blind, Randomized, Controlled
Pilot Trial of NAcetylcysteine in Veterans with Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder and Substance Use Disorders," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
77, no. 11 (November 2016): e1439--46. \[672\] Jennifer McKean et al.,
"Probiotics and Subclinical Psychological Symptoms in Healthy
Participants: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine 23, no. 4 (April 2017): 249--58.
A. P. Allen et al., "Bifidobacterium longum 1714 as a Translational
Psychobiotic: Modulation of Stress, Electrophysiology and Neurocognition
in Healthy Volunteers," Translational Psychiatry 6, no. 11 (November 1,
2016): e939. M. Takada et al., "Probiotic Lactobacillus casei Strain
Shirota Relieves Stress-Associated Symptoms by Modulating the Gut--Brain
Interaction in Human and Animal Models," Neurogastroenterology and
Motility 28, no. 7 (July 2016): 1027--36. Ali Akbar Mohammadi et al.,
"The Effects of Probiotics on Mental Health and
Hypothalamic--Pituitary--Adrenal Axis: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial in Petrochemical Workers," Nutritional
Neuroscience 19, no. 9 (2016): 387--95. Hui Yang et al., "Probiotics
Reduce Psychological Stress in Patients before Laryngeal Cancer
Surgery," Asia-Pacific Journal of Clinical Oncology 12, no. 1 (March
2016): e92--96. Michaёl Messaoudi et al., "Beneficial Psychological
Effects of a Probiotic Formulation (Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and
Bifidobacterium longum R0175) in Healthy Human Volunteers," Gut Microbes
2, no. 4 (July/August 2011): 256--61. \[673\] Mark Cropley, Adrian P.
Banks, and Julia Boyle, "The Effects of Rhodiola rosea L. Extract on
Anxiety, Stress, Cognition and Other Mood Symptoms," Phytotherapy
Research 29, no. 12 (December 2015): 1934--39. Alexander Bystritsky,
Lauren Kerwin, and Jamie D. Feusner, "A Pilot Study of Rhodiola rosea
(Rhodax) for Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)," Journal of Alternative
and Complementary Medicine 14, no. 2 (March 2008): 175--80. D. Edwards,
A. Heufelder, and A. Zimmermann, "Therapeutic Effects and Safety of
Rhodiola rosea Extract WS 1375 in Subjects with Life-Stress
Symptoms---Results of an Open-Label Study," Phytotherapy Research 26,
no.

8 (August 2012): 1220--25. \[674\] H. Woelk et al., "Ginkgo biloba
Special Extract EGb 761 in Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Adjustment
Disorder with Anxious Mood: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Psychiatric Research 41, no. 6
(September 2007): 472--80. \[675\] Shawn M. Talbott, Julie A. Talbott,
and Mike Pugh, "Effect of Magnolia officinalis and Phellodendron
amurense (Relora) on Cortisol and Psychological Mood State in Moderately
Stressed Subjects," Journal of the International Society of Sports
Nutrition 10 (August 7, 2013): 37. Douglas S. Kalman et al., "Effect of
a Proprietary Magnolia and Phellodendron Extract on Stress Levels in
Healthy Women: A Pilot, DoubleBlind, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial,"
Nutrition Journal 7 (April 21, 2008): 11. \[676\] Zabun Nahar et al.,
"Comparative Analysis of Serum Manganese, Zinc, Calcium, Copper and
Magnesium Level in Panic Disorder Patients," Biological Trace Element
Research 133, no. 3 (March 2010): 284--90. \[677\] Jane Pei-Chen Chang
et al., "Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Youths with Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis of
Clinical Trials and Biological Studies," Neuropsychopharmacology 43, no.
3 (February 2018): 534--45. E. Derbyshire, "Do Omega-3/6 Fatty Acids
Have a Therapeutic Role in Children and Young People with ADHD?" Journal
of Lipids 2017 (2017): 6285218. Dienke J. Bos et al., "Reduced Symptoms
of Inattention after Dietary Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation in Boys
with and without Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,"
Neuropsychopharmacology 40, no. 10 (September 2015): 2298--306.
Catherine M. Milte et al., "Increased Erythrocyte Eicosapentaenoic Acid
and Docosahexaenoic Acid Are Associated with Improved Attention and
Behavior in Children with ADHD in a Randomized Controlled Three-Way
Crossover Trial," Journal of Attention Disorders 19, no. 11 (November
2015): 954--64. M. Hariri et al., "Effect of n-3 Supplementation on
Hyperactivity, Oxidative Stress and Inflammatory Mediators in Children
with AttentionDeficit-Hyperactivity Disorder," Malaysian Journal of
Nutrition 18, no. 3 (December 2012): 329--35. Per A. Gustafsson et al.,
"EPA Supplementation Improves Teacher-Rated Behaviour and Oppositional
Symptoms in Children with ADHD," Acta Paediatrica 99, no. 10 (October
2010): 1540--49. \[678\] S. Hirayama et al., "The Effect of
Phosphatidylserine Administration on Memory and Symptoms of
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Randomised, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial," Journal of Human Nutrition and
Dietetics 27, suppl. 2 (April 2014): 284--91.

I. Manor et al., "The Effect of Phosphatidylserine Containing Omega3
Fatty-Acids on Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Symptoms in
Children: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial, Followed by an
Open-Label Extension," European Psychiatry 27, no. 5 (July 2012):
335--42. \[679\] L. Eugene Arnold et al., "Zinc for
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: Placebo-Controlled
Double-Blind Pilot Trial Alone and Combined with Amphetamine," Journal
of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology 21, no. 1 (February 2011):
1--19. Yasemin Üçkardeş et al., "Effects of Zinc Supplementation on
Parent and Teacher Behaviour Rating Scores in Low Socioeconomic Level
Turkish Primary School Children," Acta Paediatrica 98, no. 4 (April
2009): 731--36. Mustafa Bilici et al., "Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Study of Zinc Sulfate in the Treatment of Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder," Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and
Biological Psychiatry 28, no. 1 (January 2004): 181--90. \[680\] R.
Luzzi et al., "Pycnogenol Supplementation Improves Cognitive Function,
Attention and Mental Performance in Students," Panminerva Medica 53, no.
3, suppl. 1 (September 2011): 75--82. Zuzana Chovanová et al., "Effect
of Polyphenolic Extract, Pycnogenol, on the Level of 8Oxoguanine in
Children Suffering from Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder," Free
Radical Research 40, no. 9 (2006): 1003-- 10. Jana Trebatická et al.,
"Treatment of ADHD with French Maritime Pine Bark Extract, Pycnogenol,"
European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 15, no. 6 (September 2006):
329--35. \[681\] Farida El Baza et al., "Magnesium Supplementation in
Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder," Egyptian
Journal of Medical Human Genetics 17, no. 1 (January 2016): 63--70. M.
Mousain-Bosc et al., "Improvement of Neurobehavioral Disorders in
Children Supplemented with Magnesium-Vitamin B6," Magnesium Research 19,
no. 1 (March 2006): 46--52. Michael Huss, Andreas Völp, and Manuela
Stauss-Grabo, "Supplementation of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids, Magnesium
and Zinc in Children Seeking Medical Advice for
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Problems ---An Observational Cohort
Study," Lipids in Health and Disease 9 (September 24, 2010): 105.
\[682\] Erik M. G. Olsson, Bo von Schéele, and Alexander G. Panossian,
"A Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Parallel-Group Study of
the Standardised Extract SHR-5 of the Roots of Rhodiola rosea in the
Treatment of Subjects with Stress-Related Fatigue," Planta Medica 75,
no. 2 (2009): 105-- 12.

V. Darbinyan et al., "Rhodiola rosea in Stress Induced Fatigue---A
Double Blind Cross-Over Study of a Standardized Extract SHR-5 with a
Repeated LowDose Regimen on the Mental Performance of Healthy Physicians
during Night Duty," Phytomedicine 7, no. 5 (October 2000): 365--71. V.
Fintelmann and J. Gruenwald, "Efficacy and Tolerability of a Rhodiola
rosea Extract in Adults with Physical and Cognitive Deficiencies,"
Advances in Therapy 24, no. 4 (July/August 2007): 929--39. V. A.
Shevtsov et al., "A Randomized Trial of Two Different Doses of a SHR-5
Rhodiola rosea Extract versus Placebo and Control of Capacity for Mental
Work," Phytomedicine 10, nos. 2--3 (2003): 95--105. A. A. Spasov et al.,
"A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Study of the Stimulating and
Adaptogenic Effect of Rhodiola rosea SHR-5 Extract on the Fatigue of
Students Caused by Stress during an Examination Period with a Repeated
Low-Dose Regimen," Phytomedicine 7, no. 2 (April 2000): 85--89. A. A.
Spasov, V. B. Mandrikov, and I. A. Mironova, "The Effect of the
Preparation Rodakson on the Psychophysiological and Physical Adaptation
of Students to an Academic Load," Eksperimental'naia i Klinicheskaia
Farmakologiia 63, no. 1 (January/February 2000): 76--78. \[683\] Hae-Jin
Ko et al., "Effects of Korean Red Ginseng Extract on Behavior in
Children with Symptoms of Inattention and Hyperactivity/Impulsivity: A
Double-Blind Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Child and
Adolescent Psychopharmacology 24, no. 9 (November 2014): 501--8.
Hyeong-Geug Kim et al., "Antifatigue Effects of Panax ginseng C.A.
Meyer: A Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial," PLOS One
8, no. 4 (April 17, 2013): e61271. D. O. Kennedy, A. B. Scholey, and K.
A. Wesnes, "Dose Dependent Changes in Cognitive Performance and Mood
following Acute Administration of Ginseng to Healthy Young Volunteers,"
Nutritional Neuroscience 4, no. 4 (2001): 295--310. \[684\] Dnyanraj
Choudhary, Sauvik Bhattacharyya, and Sekhar Bose, "Efficacy and Safety
of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal) Root Extract in Improving
Memory and Cognitive Functions," Journal of Dietary Supplements 14, no.
6 (2017): 599--612. Bakhtiar Choudhary, A. Shetty, and Deepak G.
Langade, "Efficacy of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera \[L.\] Dunal) in
Improving Cardiorespiratory Endurance in Healthy Athletic Adults," Ayu
36, no. 1 (January--March 2015): 63--68. \[685\] S. Borgwardt et al.,
"Neural Effects of Green Tea Extract on Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex,"
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 66, no. 11 (November 2012):
1187--92. \[686\] Julia J. Rucklidge et al., "Vitamin-Mineral Treatment
Improves Aggression and Emotional Regulation in Children with ADHD: A
Fully Blinded, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 59, no. 3

(March 2018): 232--46. \[687\] U. P. Dave et al., "An Open-Label Study
to Elucidate the Effects of Standardized Bacopa monnieri Extract in the
Management of Symptoms of Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in
Children," Advances in Mind-Body Medicine 28, no. 2 (Spring 2014):
10--15. \[688\] Kobra Tahmasebi et al., "Association of Mood Disorders
with Serum Zinc Concentrations in Adolescent Female Students,"
Biological Trace Element Research 178, no. 2 (August 2017): 180--88.
\[689\] David Mischoulon et al., "A Double-Blind, Randomized Controlled
Trial of Ethyl-Eicosapentaenoate for Major Depressive Disorder," Journal
of Clinical Psychiatry 70, no. 12 (December 2009): 1636--44. Julian G.
Martins, "EPA but Not DHA Appears to Be Responsible for the Efficacy of
Omega-3 Long Chain Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Supplementation in
Depression: Evidence from a Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled
Trials," Journal of the American College of Nutrition 28, no. 5 (2009):
525--42. François Lespérance et al., "The Efficacy of Omega-3
Supplementation for Major Depression: A Randomized Controlled Trial,"
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 72, no. 8 (August 2011): 1054--62.
Mariangela Rondanelli et al., "Long Chain Omega 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids Supplementation in the Treatment of Elderly Depression: Effects on
Depressive Symptoms, on Phospholipids Fatty Acids Profile and on
HealthRelated Quality of Life," Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging
15, no. 1 (2011): 37--44. Mehri Jamilian et al., "The Effects of Omega-3
and Vitamin E Cosupplementation on Parameters of Mental Health and Gene
Expression Related to Insulin and Inflammation in Subjects with
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome," Journal of Affective Disorders 229 (March
15, 2018): 41--47. M. Elizabeth Sublette et al., "Meta-Analysis of the
Effects of Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA) in Clinical Trials in
Depression," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 72, no. 12 (December 2011):
1577--84. Maciej Haberka et al., "Effects of n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
Acids on Depressive Symptoms, Anxiety and Emotional State in Patients
with Acute Myocardial Infarction," Pharmacological Reports 65, no. 1
(2013): 59--68. \[690\] Klaus Linde, Michael M. Berner, Levente Kriston,
"St John's Wort for Major Depression," Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews no. 4 (October 8, 2008): CD000448. Maurizio Fava et al., "A
Double-Blind, Randomized Trial of St John's Wort, Fluoxetine, and
Placebo in Major Depressive Disorder," Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology 25, no. 5 (October 2005): 441--47. Jerome Sarris et
al., "Conditional Probability of Response or Nonresponse of Placebo
Compared with Antidepressants or St John's Wort in Major Depressive
Disorder," Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 33, no. 6 (December
2013): 827--30.

\[691\] Xiangying Yang et al., "Comparative Efficacy and Safety of
Crocus sativus L. for Treating Mild to Moderate Major Depressive
Disorder in Adults: A Metaanalysis of Randomized Controlled Trials,"
Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 2018, no. 14 (May 21, 2018):
1297--305. Graham Kell et al., "Affron a Novel Saffron Extract (Crocus
sativus L.) Improves Mood in Healthy Adults over 4 Weeks in a
Double-Blind, Parallel, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial,"
Complementary Therapies in Medicine 33 (August 2017): 58--64. Lopresti
et al., "Affron, a Standardised Extract," 349--57. Gholamali Jelodar et
al., "Saffron Improved Depression and Reduced Homocysteine Level in
Patients with Major Depression: A Randomized, Double-Blind Study,"
Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine 8, no. 1 (January/February 2018):
43--50. \[692\] A. L. Williams et al., "S-Adenosylmethionine (SAMe) as
Treatment for Depression: A Systematic Review," Clinical and
Investigative Medicine 28, no. 3 (June 2005): 132--39. Jerome Sarris et
al., "S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAMe) versus Escitalopram and Placebo in
Major Depression RCT: Efficacy and Effects of Histamine and Carnitine as
Moderators of Response," Journal of Affective Disorders 164 (August 1,
2014): 76--81. George I. Papakostas et al., "S-Adenosyl Methionine
(SAMe) Augmentation of Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors for Antidepressant
Nonresponders with Major Depressive Disorder: A Double-Blind, Randomized
Clinical Trial," American Journal of Psychiatry 167, no. 8 (August
2010): 942-- 48. R. Andrew Shippy et al., "S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM-e)
for the Treatment of Depression in People Living with HIV/AIDS," BMC
Psychiatry 4 (November 11, 2004): 38. K. M. Bell et al.,
"S-Adenosylmethionine Treatment of Depression: A Controlled Clinical
Trial," American Journal of Psychiatry 145, no. 9 (September 1988):
1110--14. P. Salmaggi et al., "Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study of
S-AdenosylL-Methionine in Depressed Postmenopausal Women," Psychotherapy
and Psychosomatics 59, no. 1 (1993): 34--40. K. M. Bell et al.,
"S-Adenosylmethionine Blood Levels in Major Depression: Changes with
Drug Treatment," Acta Neurologica Scandinavica 89, no. S154 (May 1994):
15--18. Roberto Delle Chiaie, Paolo Pancheri, and Pierluigi Scapicchio,
"Efficacy and Tolerability of Oral and Intramuscular
S-Adenosyl-L-Methionine 1,4Butanedisulfonate (SAMe) in the Treatment of
Major Depression: Comparison with Imipramine in 2 Multicenter Studies,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 76, no. 5 (November 2002):
1172S--76S.

Anup Sharma et al., "S-Adenosylmethionine (SAMe) for Neuropsychiatric
Disorders: A Clinician-Oriented Review of Research," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 78, no. 6 (June 2017): e656--67. \[693\] Adrian L. Lopresti
and Peter D. Drummond, "Efficacy of Curcumin, and a Saffron/Curcumin
Combination for the Treatment of Major Depression: A Randomised,
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study," Journal of Affective Disorders
207 (January 1, 2017): 188--96. Jayesh Sanmukhani et al., "Efficacy and
Safety of Curcumin in Major Depressive Disorder: A Randomized Controlled
Trial," Phytotherapy Research 28, no. 4 (April 2014): 579--85. Adrian L.
Lopresti et al., "Curcumin for the Treatment of Major Depression: A
Randomised, Double-Blind, Placebo Controlled Study," Journal of
Affective Disorders 167 (October 1, 2014): 368--75. Buranee
Kanchanatawan et al., "Add-on Treatment with Curcumin Has Antidepressive
Effects in Thai Patients with Major Depression: Results of a Randomized
Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Study," Neurotoxicity Research 33, no. 3
(April 2018): 621--33. Jing-Jie Yu et al., "Chronic Supplementation of
Curcumin Enhances the Efficacy of Antidepressants in Major Depressive
Disorder: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Study,"
Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 35, no. 4 (August 2015): 406--10.
\[694\] Jun Lai et al., "The Efficacy of Zinc Supplementation in
Depression: Systematic Review of Randomised Controlled Trials," Journal
of Affective Disorders 136, nos. 1--2 (January 2012): e31--39. Ann M.
DiGirolamo et al., "Randomized Trial of the Effect of Zinc
Supplementation on the Mental Health of School-Age Children in
Guatemala," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 92, no. 5 (November
2010): 1241--50. Zahra Solati et al., "Zinc Monotherapy Increases Serum
Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) Levels and Decreases Depressive
Symptoms in Overweight or Obese Subjects: A Double-Blind, Randomized,
PlaceboControlled Trial," Nutritional Neuroscience 18, no. 4 (2015):
162--68. Elham Ranjbar et al., "Effects of Zinc Supplementation on
Efficacy of Antidepressant Therapy, Inflammatory Cytokines, and
Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor in Patients with Major Depression,"
Nutritional Neuroscience 17, no. 2 (2014): 65--71. Soheila Salari et
al., "Zinc Sulphate: A Reasonable Choice for Depression Management in
Patients with Multiple Sclerosis: A Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial," Pharmacological Reports 67, no. 3
(June 2015): 606--9. T. Sawada and K. Yokoi, "Effect of Zinc
Supplementation on Mood States in Young Women: A Pilot Study," European
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 64, no. 3 (March 2010): 331--33.

\[695\] Afsaneh Rajizadeh et al., "Effect of Magnesium Supplementation
on Depression Status in Depressed Patients with Magnesium Deficiency: A
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Nutrition 35 (March
2017): 56--60. Tarleton et al., "Role of Magnesium Supplementation,"
e0180067. \[696\] Purushottam Jangid et al., "Comparative Study of
Efficacy of L-5Hydroxytryptophan and Fluoxetine in Patients Presenting
with First Depressive Episode," Asian Journal of Psychiatry 6, no. 1
(February 2013): 29--34. Brent M. Kious et al., "An Open-Label Pilot
Study of Combined Augmentation with Creatine Monohydrate and
5-Hydroxytryptophan for Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor--or
Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor--Resistant Depression in
Adult Women," Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 37, no. 5 (October
2017): 578--83. J. J. Rousseau, "Effects of a
Levo-5-HydroxytryptophanDihydroergocristine Combination on Depression
and Neuropsychic Performance: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Clinical
Trial in Elderly Patients," Clinical Therapeutics 9, no. 3 (1987):
267--72. J. Angst, B. Woggon, and J. Schoepf, "The Treatment of
Depression with L5-Hydroxytryptophan versus Imipramine. Results of Two
Open and One Double-Blind Study," Archiv für Psychiatrie
Nervenkrankheiten 224, no. 2 (October 11, 1977 \[1970\]): 175--86.
\[697\] Jonathan E. Alpert et al., "Folinic Acid (Leucovorin) as an
Adjunctive Treatment for SSRI-Refractory Depression," Annals of Clinical
Psychiatry 14, no. 1 (March 2002): 33--38. George I. Papakostas et al.,
"L-Methylfolate as Adjunctive Therapy for SSRI-Resistant Major
Depression: Results of Two Randomized, Double-Blind, Parallel-Sequential
Trials," American Journal of Psychiatry 169, no. 12 (December 2012):
1267--74. George I. Papakostas et al., "Effect of Adjunctive
L-Methylfolate 15 mg among Inadequate Responders to SSRIs in Depressed
Patients Who Were Stratified by Biomarker Levels and Genotype: Results
from a Randomized Clinical Trial," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 75,
no. 8 (August 2014): 855--63. John M. Zajecka et al., "Long-Term
Efficacy, Safety, and Tolerability of LMethylfolate Calcium 15 mg as
Adjunctive Therapy with Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors: A
12-Month, Open-Label Study following a PlaceboControlled Acute Study,"
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 77, no. 5 (May 2016): 654--60. \[698\]
Brisa S. Fernandes, et al., "N-Acetylcysteine in Depressive Symptoms and
Functionality: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry 77, no. 4 (April 2016): e457--66. Michael Berk et
al., "N-Acetyl Cysteine for Depressive Symptoms in Bipolar Disorder---A
Double-Blind Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial," Biological Psychiatry
64, no. 6 (September 15, 2008): 468--75.

Kyoko Hasebe et al., "Adjunctive N-acetylcysteine in Depression:
Exploration of Interleukin-6, C-Reactive Protein and Brain-Derived
Neurotrophic Factor," Acta Neuropsychiatrica 29, no. 6 (December 2017):
337--46. \[699\] Michael Berk et al., "The Efficacy of Adjunctive
N-Acetylcysteine in Major Depressive Disorder: A Double-Blind,
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
75, no. 6 (June 2014): 628--36. \[700\] M. Maggioni et al., "Effects of
Phosphatidylserine Therapy in Geriatric Patients with Depressive
Disorders," Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 81, no. 3 (March 1990):
265--70. Teruhisa Komori, "The Effects of Phosphatidylserine and Omega-3
Fatty Acid-Containing Supplement on Late Life Depression," Mental
Illness 7, no. 1 (February 24, 2015): 5647. D. Benton et al., "The
Influence of Phosphatidylserine on Mood and Heart Rate When Faced with
an Acute Stressor," Nutritional Neuroscience 4, no. 3 (2001): 169--78.
\[701\] Jun J. Mao et al., "Rhodiola rosea versus Sertraline for Major
Depressive Disorder: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial,"
Phytomedicine 22, no. 3 (March 15, 2015): 394--99. V. Darbinyan et al.,
"Clinical Trial of Rhodiola rosea L. Extract SHR-5 in the Treatment of
Mild to Moderate Depression," Nordic Journal of Psychiatry 61, no. 5
(2007): 343--48. \[702\] Phuong H. Nguyen et al., "Impact of
Preconceptional Micronutrient Supplementation on Maternal Mental Health
during Pregnancy and Postpartum: Results from a Randomized Controlled
Trial in Vietnam," BMC Women's Health 17, no. 1 (June 17, 2017): 44.
\[703\] Zahra Sepehrmanesh et al., "Vitamin D Supplementation Affects
the Beck Depression Inventory, Insulin Resistance, and Biomarkers of
Oxidative Stress in Patients with Major Depressive Disorder: A
Randomized, Controlled Clinical Trial," Journal of Nutrition 146, no. 2
(February 2016): 243--48. Farideh Vaziri et al., "A Randomized
Controlled Trial of Vitamin D Supplementation on Perinatal Depression:
in Iranian Pregnant Mothers," BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 16 (August
20, 2016): 239. Ying Wang et al., "Efficacy of High-Dose Supplementation
with Oral Vitamin D3 on Depressive Symptoms in Dialysis Patients with
Vitamin D3 Insufficiency: A Prospective, Randomized, Double-Blind
Study," Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 36, no. 3 (June 2016):
229--35. Nahereh Khoraminya et al., "Therapeutic Effects of Vitamin D as
Adjunctive Therapy to Fluoxetine in Patients with Major Depressive
Disorder," Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 47, no. 3
(March 2013): 271--75.

R. Jorde et al., "Effects of Vitamin D Supplementation on Symptoms of
Depression in Overweight and Obese Subjects: Randomized Double Blind
Trial," Journal of Internal Medicine 264, no. 6 (December 2008):
599--609. F. M. Gloth, W. Alam, and B. Hollis, "Vitamin D vs Broad
Spectrum Phototherapy in the Treatment of Seasonal Affective Disorder,"
Journal of Nutrition Health and Aging 3, no. 1 (1999): 5--7. Allen T.
Lansdowne and Stephen C. Provost, "Vitamin D3 Enhances Mood in Healthy
Subjects during Winter," Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 135, no. 4
(February 1998): 319--23. \[704\] Ghodarz Akkasheh et al., "Clinical and
Metabolic Response to Probiotic Administration in Patients with Major
Depressive Disorder: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Trial," Nutrition 32, no. 3 (March 2016): 315-- 20. Fariba Raygan et
al., "The Effects of Vitamin D and Probiotic Cosupplementation on Mental
Health Parameters and Metabolic Status in Type 2 Diabetic Patients with
Coronary Heart Disease: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled
Trial," Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry
84, part A (June 8, 2018): 50--55. Michaël Messaoudi et al., "Beneficial
Psychological Effects of a Probiotic Formulation (Lactobacillus
helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum R0175) in Healthy Human
Volunteers," Gut Microbes 2, no. 4 (July/August 2011): 256--61. Ruixue
Huang, Ke Wang, and Jianan Hu, "Effect of Probiotics on Depression: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials,"
Nutrients 8, no. 8 (August 6, 2016): e483. Ebrahim Kouchaki et al.,
"Clinical and Metabolic Response to Probiotic Supplementation in
Patients with Multiple Sclerosis: A Randomized, DoubleBlind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Clinical Nutrition 36, no. 5 (October 2017):
1245--49. Guo-Lin Mi et al., "Effectiveness of Lactobacillus reuteri in
Infantile Colic and Colicky Induced Maternal Depression: A Prospective
Single Blind Randomized Trial," Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 107, no. 6 (June
2015): 1547-- 53. Laura Steenbergen et al., "A Randomized Controlled
Trial to Test the Effect of Multispecies Probiotics on Cognitive
Reactivity to Sad Mood," Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 48 (August 2015):
258--64. \[705\] Chun-Xiao Dai et al., "Role of Ginkgo biloba Extract as
an Adjunctive Treatment of Elderly Patients with Depression and on the
Expression of Serum S100B," Medicine (Baltimore) 97, no. 39 (September
2018): e12421. Oleksandr Napryeyenko and Irina Borzenko for the
GINDEM-NP Study Group, "Ginkgo biloba Special Extract in Dementia with
Neuropsychiatric Features. A Randomised, Placebo-Controlled,
Double-Blind Clinical Trial," Arzneimittelforschung 57, no. 1 (2007):
4--11.

\[706\] Jerome Sarris et al., "Is S-Adenosyl Methionine (SAMe) for
Depression Only Effective in Males? A Re-Analysis of Data from a
Randomized Clinical Trial," Pharmacopsychiatry 48, nos. 4--5 (July
2015): 141--44. \[707\] Hesitha Abeysundera and Ramandeep Gill,
"Possible SAMe-Induced Mania," BMJ Case Reports 2018 (June 27, 2018):
bcr-2018-224338. \[708\] Papakostas et al., "L-Methylfolate as
Adjunctive Therapy," 1267--74. \[709\] Mauro Porcu et al., "Effects of
Adjunctive N-acetylcysteine on Depressive Symptoms: Modulation by
Baseline High-Sensitivity C-Reactive Protein," Psychiatry Research 263
(May 2018): 268--74. \[710\] R. F. Santos et al., "Cognitive
Performance, SPECT, and Blood Viscosity in Elderly Non-demented People
Using Ginkgo biloba," Pharmacopsychiatry 36, no. 4 (July 2003): 127--33.
Meng-Shan Tan, Jin-Tai Yu, Chen-Chen Tan et al. "Efficacy and Adverse
Effects of Ginkgo biloba for Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 43,
no. 2 (2015): 589--603. S. I. Gavrilova et al., "Efficacy and Safety of
Ginkgo biloba Extract EGb 761 in Mild Cognitive Impairment with
Neuropsychiatric Symptoms: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled,
Double-Blind, Multi-Center Trial," International Journal of Geriatric
Psychiatry 29, no. 10 (October 2014): 1087-- 95. Horst Herrschaft et
al., "Ginkgo biloba Extract EGb 761 in Dementia with Neuropsychiatric
Features: A Randomised, Placebo-Controlled Trial to Confirm the Efficacy
and Safety of a Daily Dose of 240 mg," Journal of Psychiatric Research
46, no. 6 (June 2012): 716--23. Ralf Ihl et al., "Efficacy and Safety of
a Once-Daily Formulation of Ginkgo biloba Extract EGb 761 in Dementia
with Neuropsychiatric Features: A Randomized Controlled Trial,"
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 26, no. 11 (November
2011): 1186--94. Napryeyenko et al., "Ginkgo biloba Special Extract in
Dementia," 4--11. Albert Attia et al., "Phase II Study of Ginkgo biloba
in Irradiated Brain Tumor Patients: Effect on Cognitive Function,
Quality of Life, and Mood," Journal of Neuro-Oncology 109, no. 2
(September 2012): 357--63. R. Kaschel, "Specific Memory Effects of
Ginkgo biloba Extract EGb 761 in Middle-Aged Healthy Volunteers,"
Phytomedicine 18, no. 14 (November 15, 2011): 1202--7. \[711\] P. J.
Delwaide et al., "Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Study of
Phosphatidylserine in Senile Demented Patients," Acta Neurologica
Scandinavica 73, no. 2 (February 1987): 136--40. T. H. Crook et al.,
"Effects of Phosphatidylserine in Age-Associated Memory Impairment,"
Neurology 41, no. 5 (May 1991): 644--49.

T. Cenacchi et al., "Cognitive Decline in the Elderly: A Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Multicenter Study on Efficacy of Phosphatidylserine
Administration," Aging (Milano) 5, no. 2 (April 1993): 123--33. Akito
Kato-Kataoka et al., "Soybean-Derived Phosphatidylserine Improves Memory
Function of the Elderly Japanese Subjects with Memory Complaints,"
Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition 47, no. 3 (November
2010): 246--55. V. Vakhapova et al., "Phosphatidylserine Containing
Omega-3 Fatty Acids May Improve Memory Abilities in Non-Demented Elderly
with Memory Complaints: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial,"
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders 29, no. 5 (June 2010):
467--74. \[712\] L. Parnetti et al., "Multicentre Study of
l-alpha-Glyceryl-Phosphorylcholine vs ST200 among Patients with Probable
Senile Dementia of Alzheimer's Type," Drugs and Aging 3, no. 2 (March
1993): 159--64. R. Di Perri et al., "A Multicentre Trial to Evaluate the
Efficacy and Tolerability of alpha-Glycerylphosphorylcholine versus
Cytosine Diphosphocholine in Patients with Vascular Dementia," Journal
of International Medical Research 19, no. 4 (July/August 1991): 330--41.
Maria de Jesus Moreno Moreno, "Cognitive Improvement in Mild to Moderate
Alzheimer's Dementia after Treatment with the Acetylcholine Precursor
Choline Alfoscerate: A Multicenter, Double-Blind, Randomized,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Clinical Therapeutics 25, no. 1 (January
2003): 178-- 93. Francesco Amenta et al., "The ASCOMALVA (Association
between the Cholinesterase Inhibitor Donepezil and the Cholinergic
Precursor Choline Alphoscerate in Alzheimer's Disease) Trial: Interim
Results after Two Years of Treatment," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease
42, no. s3 (2014): S281--88. \[713\] Nadine Külzow et al., "Impact of
Omega-3 Fatty Acid Supplementation on Memory Functions in Healthy Older
Adults," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 51, no. 3 (2016): 713--25.
Claudie Hooper et al., "Cognitive Changes with Omega-3 Polyunsaturated
Fatty Acids in Non-Demented Older Adults with Low Omega-3 Index,"
Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging 21, no. 9 (2017): 988--93.
Hussein N. Yassine et al., "Association of Docosahexaenoic Acid
Supplementation with Alzheimer Disease Stage in Apolipoprotein E ε4
Carriers: A Review," JAMA Neurology 74, no. 3 (March 2017): 339--47.
Yacong Bo et al., "The n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Supplementation
Improved the Cognitive Function in the Chinese Elderly with Mild
Cognitive Impairment: A Double-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial,"
Nutrients 9, no. 1 (January 10, 2017): e54.

Karin Yurko-Mauro, Dominik D. Alexander, and Mary E. Van Elswyk,
"Docosahexaenoic Acid and Adult Memory: A Systematic Review and
MetaAnalysis," PLOS One 10, no. 3 (March 18, 2015): e0120391. Yan-Ping
Zhang et al., "Effects of DHA Supplementation on Hippocampal Volume and
Cognitive Function in Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment: A
12-Month Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of
Alzheimer's Disease 55, no. 2 (2017): 497--507. \[714\] Natalie A. Grima
et al., "The Effects of Multivitamins on Cognitive Performance: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 29,
no. 3 (2012): 561--69. \[715\] Zhi-Qiang Xu et al., "Treatment with
Huperzine A Improves Cognition in Vascular Dementia Patients," Cell
Biochemistry and Biophysics 62, no. 1 (January 2012): 55--58. Z. Zhang
et al., "Clinical Efficacy and Safety of Huperzine Alpha in Treatment of
Mild to Moderate Alzheimer Disease, a Placebo-Controlled, Double-Blind,
Randomized Trial," Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 82, no. 14 (July 25, 2002):
941--44. Q. Q. Sun et al., "Huperzine-A Capsules Enhance Memory and
Learning Performance in 34 Pairs of Matched Adolescent Students,"
Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao 20, no. 7 (July 1999): 601--3. S. S. Xu et al.,
"Huperzine-A in Capsules and Tablets for Treating Patients with
Alzheimer Disease," Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao 20, no. 6 (June 1999):
486--90. S. S. Xu et al., "Efficacy of Tablet Huperzine-A on Memory,
Cognition, and Behavior in Alzheimer's Disease," Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao
16, no. 5 (September 1995): 391--95. R. W. Zhang et al., "Drug
Evaluation of Huperzine A in the Treatment of Senile Memory Disorders,"
Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao 12, no. 3 (May 1991): 250--52. \[716\] Sangeeta
Raghav et al., "Randomized Controlled Trial of Standardized Bacopa
monniera Extract in Age-Associated Memory Impairment," Indian Journal of
Psychiatry 48, no. 4 (October--December 2006): 238--42. Luke A. Downey
et al., "An Acute, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Crossover Study of
320 mg and 640 mg Doses of a Special Extract of Bacopa monnieri (CDRI
08) on Sustained Cognitive Performance," Phytotherapy Research 27, no. 9
(September 2013): 1407--13. Annette Morgan and John Stevens, "Does
Bacopa monnieri Improve Memory Performance in Older Persons? Results of
a Randomized, PlaceboControlled, Double-Blind Trial," Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine 16, no. 7 (July 2010): 753--59.
Carlo Calabrese et al., "Effects of a Standardized Bacopa monnieri
Extract on Cognitive Performance, Anxiety, and Depression in the
Elderly: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal
of Alternative

and Complementary Medicine 14, no. 6 (July 2008): 707--13. Steven
Roodenrys et al., "Chronic Effects of Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri) on Human
Memory," Neuropsychopharmacology 27, no. 2 (August 2002): 279-- 81.
\[717\] Sara Neshatdoust et al., "High-Flavonoid Intake Induces
Cognitive Improvements Linked to Changes in Serum Brain-Derived
Neurotrophic Factor: Two Randomised, Controlled Trials," Nutrition and
Healthy Aging 4, no. 1 (2016): 81--93. Daniela Mastroiacovo et al.,
"Cocoa Flavanol Consumption Improves Cognitive Function, Blood Pressure
Control, and Metabolic Profile in Elderly Subjects: The Cocoa,
Cognition, and Aging (CoCoA) Study---a Randomized Controlled Trial,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 101, no. 3 (March 2015): 538--48.
Giovambattista Desideri et al., "Benefits in Cognitive Function, Blood
Pressure, and Insulin Resistance through Cocoa Flavanol Consumption in
Elderly Subjects with Mild Cognitive Impairment: The Cocoa, Cognition,
and Aging (CoCoA) Study," Hypertension 60, no. 3 (September 2012):
794--801. \[718\] J. Ryan et al., "An Examination of the Effects of the
Antioxidant Pycnogenol on Cognitive Performance, Serum Lipid Profile,
Endocrinological and Oxidative Stress Biomarkers in an Elderly
Population," Journal of Psychopharmacology 22, no. 5 (2008): 553--62. R.
Luzzi et al., "Pycnogenol Supplementation Improves Cognitive Function,
Attention and Mental Performance in Students," Panminerva Medica 53, no.
3, suppl. 1 (September 2011): 75--82. \[719\] S. Akhondzadeh et al.,
"Saffron in the Treatment of Patients with Mild to Moderate Alzheimer's
Disease: A 16-Week, Randomized and PlaceboControlled Trial," Journal of
Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics 35, no. 5 (October 2010): 581--88.
Shahin Akhondzadeh, Sabat M. Shafiee, and M. H. Harirchian et al., "A
22-Week, Multicenter, Randomized, Double-Blind Controlled Trial of
Crocus sativus in the Treatment of Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer's
Disease," Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 207, no. 4 (January 2010):
637--43. \[720\] Dnyanraj Choudhary, Sauvik Bhattacharyya, and Sekhar
Bose, "Efficacy and Safety of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera (L.)
Dunal) Root Extract in Improving Memory and Cognitive Functions,"
Journal of Dietary Supplements 14, no. 6 (2017): 599--612. K. N. Roy
Chengappa et al., "Randomized Placebo-Controlled Adjunctive Study of an
Extract of Withania somnifera for Cognitive Dysfunction in Bipolar
Disorder," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 74, no. 11 (November 2013):
1076-- 83. \[721\] Jacqueline A. Pettersen, "Does High Dose Vitamin D
Supplementation Enhance Cognition?: A Randomized Trial in Healthy
Adults," Experimental Gerontology 90 (April 2017): 90--97.

V. A. Andreeva et al., "Midlife Dietary Vitamin D Intake and Subsequent
Performance in Different Cognitive Domains," Annals of Nutrition and
Metabolism 65, no. 1 (October 2014): 81--89. \[722\] Hsien-Yuan Lane et
al., "A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Comparison Study of
Sarcosine (N-Methylglycine) and D-Serine Add-on Treatment for
Schizophrenia," International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 13, no.
4 (May 2010): 451--60. Hsien-Yuan Lane et al., "Sarcosine
(N-Methylglycine) Treatment for Acute Schizophrenia: A Randomized,
Double-Blind Study," Biological Psychiatry 63, no. 1 (January 1, 2008):
9--12. Guochuan Tsai et al., "Glycine Transporter I Inhibitor,
N-Methylglycine (Sarcosine), Added to Antipsychotics for the Treatment
of Schizophrenia," Biological Psychiatry 55, no. 5 (March 1, 2004):
452--56. Dominik Strzelecki, Olga Kałużyńska, and Adam Wysokiński, "BDNF
Serum Levels in Schizophrenic Patients during Treatment Augmentation
with Sarcosine (Results of the PULSAR Study)," Psychiatry Research 242
(August 30, 2016): 54--60. Dominik Strzelecki, Małgorzata
Urban-Kowalczyk, and Adam Wysokiński, "Serum Levels of TNF-Alpha in
Patients with Chronic Schizophrenia during Treatment Augmentation with
Sarcosine (Results of the PULSAR Study)," Psychiatry Research 268
(October 2018): 447--53. \[723\] Soo Liang Ooi, Ruth Green, and Sok
Cheon Pak, "N-Acetylcysteine for the Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders:
A Review of Current Evidence," BioMed Research International 2018
(October 22, 2018): 2469486. \[724\] G. Paul Amminger et al.,
"Long-Chain ω-3 Fatty Acids for Indicated Prevention of Psychotic
Disorders: A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Archives of General
Psychiatry 67, no. 2 (February 2010): 146--54. Nilufar Mossaheb et al.,
"Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids for Indicated Prevention of Young
Patients at Risk for Psychosis: When Do They Begin to Be Effective?"
Schizophrenia Research 148, nos. 1--3 (August 2013): 163--67. G. Paul
Amminger et al., "Longer-Term Outcome in the Prevention of Psychotic
Disorders by the Vienna Omega-3 Study," Nature Communications 6 (August
11, 2015): 7934. \[725\] Joshua L. Roffman et al., "Biochemical,
Physiological and Clinical Effects of Lmethylfolate in Schizophrenia: A
Randomized Controlled Trial," Molecular Psychiatry 23, no. 2 (February
2018): 316--22. P. S. A. Godfrey et al., "Enhancement of Recovery from
Psychiatric Illness by Methylfolate," Lancet 336, no. 8712 (August 18,
1990): 392--95. \[726\] Chun-Yuan Lin et al., "Adjunctive Sarcosine Plus
Benzoate Improved Cognitive Function in Chronic Schizophrenia Patients
with Constant Clinical Symptoms: A Randomised, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," World Journal of Biological Psychiatry 18,
no. 5 (August 2017): 357--68.

\[727\] Kamal Patel, "Melatonin," Examine.com, last updated September
30, 2018, https://examine.com/supplements/melatonin/. Patrick Lemoine et
al., "Prolonged-Release Melatonin Improves Sleep Quality and Morning
Alertness in Insomnia Patients Aged 55 Years and Older and Has No
Withdrawal Effects," Journal of Sleep Research 16, no. 4 (December
2007): 372--80. Ingeborg M. van Geijlswijk et al., "Evaluation of Sleep,
Puberty and Mental Health in Children with Long-Term Melatonin Treatment
for Chronic Idiopathic Childhood Sleep Onset Insomnia,"
Psychopharmacology (Berlin) 216, no. 1 (July 2011): 111--20. Remy
Luthringer et al., "The Effect of Prolonged-Release Melatonin on Sleep
Measures and Psychomotor Performance in Elderly Patients with Insomnia,"
International Clinical Psychopharmacology 24, no. 5 (September 2009):
239--49. \[728\] Andrew Herxheimer and Keith J. Petrie, "Melatonin for
the Prevention and Treatment of Jet Lag," Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, no. 2 (2002): CD001520. \[729\] Michael R. Lyon,
Mahendra P. Kapoor, and Lekh R. Juneja, "The Effects of LTheanine
(Suntheanine) on Objective Sleep Quality in Boys with Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): A Randomized, Double-Blind,
PlaceboControlled Clinical Trial," Alternative Medicine Review 16, no. 4
(December 2011): 348--54. \[730\] Behnood Abbasi et al., "The Effect of
Magnesium Supplementation on Primary Insomnia in Elderly: A Double-Blind
Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial," Journal of Research in Medical
Sciences 17, no. 12 (December 2012): 1161-- 69. Mariangela Rondanelli et
al., "The Effect of Melatonin, Magnesium, and Zinc on Primary Insomnia
in Long-Term Care Facility Residents in Italy: A Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial," Journal of the American Geriatric
Society 59, no. 1 (January 2011): 82--90. Yingting Cao et al.,
"Magnesium Intake and Sleep Disorder Symptoms: Findings from the Jiangsu
Nutrition Study of Chinese Adults at Five-Year Follow-Up," Nutrients 10,
no. 10 (September 21, 2018): e1354. \[731\] Simin Taavoni et al.,
"Effect of Valerian on Sleep Quality in Postmenopausal Women: A
Randomized Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial," Menopause (New York) 18,
no. 9 (September 2011): 951--55. M. Isabel Fernández-San-Martín et al.,
"Effectiveness of Valerian on Insomnia: A Meta-analysis of Randomized
Placebo-Controlled Trials," Sleep Medicine 11, no. 6 (June 2010):
505--11. \[732\] M. Takada et al., "Beneficial Effects of Lactobacillus
casei Strain Shirota on Academic Stress-Induced Sleep Disturbance in
Healthy Adults: A DoubleBlind, Randomised, Placebo-Controlled Trial,"
Beneficial Microbes 8, no. 2 (2017): 153--62.

\[733\] Mariangela Rondanelli et al., "The Effect of Melatonin,
Magnesium, and Zinc on Primary Insomnia in Long-Term Care Facility
Residents in Italy: A DoubleBlind, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial,"
Journal of the American Geriatric Society 59, no. 1 (January 2011):
82--90. \[734\] Amir Ghaderi et al., "Clinical Trial of the Effects of
Vitamin D Supplementation on Psychological Symptoms and Metabolic
Profiles in Maintenance Methadone Treatment Patients," Progress in
NeuroPsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 79, part B (October
2017): 84-- 89. \[735\] Richard De la Garza et al., "Safety and
Preliminary Efficacy of the Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitor Huperzine A
as a Treatment for Cocaine Use Disorder," International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology 19, no. 3 (March 2016): pyv098. \[736\] Michael
Silvio Duailibi et al., "N-Acetylcysteine in the Treatment of Craving in
Substance Use Disorders: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis," American
Journal on Addictions 26, no. 7 (October 2017): 660--66. Soo Liang Ooi,
Ruth Green, and Sok Cheon Pak, "N-Acetylcysteine for the Treatment of
Psychiatric Disorders: A Review of Current Evidence," BioMed Research
International 2018 (October 22, 2018): 2469486. \[737\] Eduardo Prado et
al., "N-Acetylcysteine for Therapy-Resistant Tobacco Use Disorder: A
Pilot Study," Redox Report 20, no. 5 (September 2015): 215--22. Gregory
L. Powell et al., "Chronic Treatment with N-Acetylcysteine Decreases
Extinction Responding and Reduces Cue-Induced NicotineSeeking,"
Physiological Reports 7, no. 1 (January 2019): e13958. \[738\] Lindsay
M. Squeglia et al., "Alcohol Use during a Trial of N-Acetylcysteine for
Adolescent Marijuana Cessation," Addictive Behaviors 63 (December 2016):
172--77. \[739\] Kevin M. Gray et al., "A Double-Blind Randomized
Controlled Trial of NAcetylcysteine in Cannabis-Dependent Adolescents,"
American Journal of Psychiatry 169, no. 8 (August 2012): 805--12.
\[740\] Steven D. LaRowe et al., "Is Cocaine Desire Reduced by
N-Acetylcysteine?" American Journal of Psychiatry 164, no. 7 (July
2007): 1115--17. Steven D. LaRowe et al., "A Double-Blind
Placebo-Controlled Trial of NAcetylcysteine in the Treatment of Cocaine
Dependence," American Journal on Addictions 22, no. 5 (September/October
2013): 443--52. \[741\] Seyed Ghafur Mousavi et al., "The Efficacy of
N-Acetylcysteine in the Treatment of Methamphetamine Dependence: A
Double-Blind Controlled, Crossover Study," Archives of Iranian Medicine
18, no. 1 (January 2015): 28-- 33. \[742\] Ritchy Hodebourg et al.,
"Heroin Seeking Becomes Dependent on Dorsal Striatal Dopaminergic
Mechanisms and Can Be Decreased by NAcetylcysteine," European Journal of
Neuroscience, special issue, March 7, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.13894.

\[743\] Jon E. Grant, Suck Won Kim, and Brian L. Odlaug, "N-Acetyl
Cysteine, a Glutamate-Modulating Agent, in the Treatment of Pathological
Gambling: A Pilot Study," Biological Psychiatry 62, no. 6 (September 15,
2007): 652--57. Jon E. Grant et al., "A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled
Trial of NAcetylcysteine Plus Imaginal Desensitization for
Nicotine-Dependent Pathological Gamblers," Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 75, no. 1 (January 2014): 39--45. \[744\] Stephen D. Anton et
al., "Effects of Chromium Picolinate on Food Intake and Satiety,"
Diabetes Technology and Therapeutics 10, no. 5 (2008): 405--12. Kimberly
A. Brownley et al., "A Double-Blind, Randomized Pilot Trial of Chromium
Picolinate for Binge Eating Disorder: Results of the Binge Eating and
Chromium (BEACh) Study," Journal of Psychosomatic Research 75, no. 1
(July 2013): 36--42. \[745\] Dnyanraj Choudhary, Sauvik Bhattacharyya,
and Kedar Joshi, "Body Weight Management in Adults under Chronic Stress
through Treatment with Ashwagandha Root Extract: A Double-Blind,
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial," Journal of Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine 22, no. 1 (2017): 96--106.
\[746\] Rachel L. Tomko, et al., "N-Acetylcysteine: A Potential
Treatment for Substance Use Disorders," Current Psychiatry 17, no. 6
(June 2018): 30--55. \[747\] John A. Chalmers et al., "Anxiety Disorders
Are Associated with Reduced Heart Rate Variability: A Meta-Analysis,"
Frontiers in Psychiatry 5 (July 11, 2014): 80. \[748\] Massachusetts
General Hospital, "Physical Activity as a Preventive Strategy against
Depression: Genetic Data Suggests Physical Activity Can Protect against
the Risk of Depression," ScienceDaily, January 23, 2019,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/01/190123112333.htm. \[749\]
Daniel G. Amen and Tana Amen, The Brain Warrior's Way (New York: New
American Library, 2016), 179.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 17

YOU CANNOT CHANGE WHAT YOU DO NOT MEASURE PREVENTION STARTS BY KNOWING
YOUR IMPORTANT HEALTH NUMBERS If you can't measure it, you can't improve
it. PETER DRUCKER

To end mental illness, it is essential to know if your brain and body
are working right and to optimize them if they are not. I have written
about this in several of my books because it is critical to know your
important health numbers. Check these numbers annually and whenever you
feel out of sorts. The important numbers you need to know are organized
below according to the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors.

BLOOD FLOW AND VASCULAR FACTORS (CHAPTER 5) Days a week you exercise:
Aim for 5 days a week for 30 minutes or more.

Blood pressure:\[750\] Good blood pressure is critical for brain health.
High blood pressure is associated with lower overall brain function,
which means bad decision-making. Recently, the American Heart
Association and the American College of Cardiology announced revised
guidelines that now mean anyone with blood pressure of 130/80 milligrams
of mercury will be diagnosed with Stage 1 hypertension. Previously, a
blood pressure of 140/90 was considered hypertension. (The category of
"prehypertension" no longer exists.) That means more Americans than
ever---half of all men and 38 percent of women, or 103 million people
versus 72 million before this change---are now considered to have
hypertension.\[751\] Here are the blood pressure numbers you should
know: Optimal Systolic 90--120 Diastolic 60--80 Stage 1 Hypertension
Systolic 130--139 Diastolic 80--89 Stage 2 Hypertension Systolic \>/=
140 Diastolic \>/= 90 Hypotension---too low can also be a problem
Systolic \< 90 Diastolic \< 60 Blood lipid panel: Cholesterol and
triglycerides (fats) can impact blood delivery to the brain. Cholesterol
that is either too high or too low is bad for the brain. Surprisingly,
higher

cholesterol later in life has been associated with better cognitive
performance\[752\] and a decreased risk of dementia.\[753\] Normal
levels are: Total cholesterol (135--200 mg/dL; below 160 has been
associated with depression, suicide, homicide, and death from all
causes, so 160--200 mg/dL is optimal) HDL (\>/= 60 mg/dL) LDL (\<100
mg/dL) Triglycerides (\<150 mg/dL) Ask your health-care professional to
also test the particle size of your LDL cholesterol because larger
particles are less toxic than smaller ones. If you want to find out more
about cholesterol, read The Great Cholesterol Myth by Stephen Sinatra
and Jonny Bowden. Complete blood count (CBC): This blood test measures
your red and white blood cells. People with a low red blood cell count
can feel anxious and tired and have trouble with memory. Enlarged red
blood cells can indicate too much alcohol consumption. Too many white
blood cells can reveal an infection. Homocysteine (blood test): High
homocysteine levels (\>10 micromoles/liter) is linked with
atherosclerosis (hardening and narrowing of the arteries) and an
increased risk of heart attack, stroke, blood clot formation, and
possibly Alzheimer's disease. Homocysteine levels also reveal whether
you are deficient in folate (see page 310).

RETIREMENT AND AGING (CHAPTER 6)

General metabolic panel (blood test): This reveals the health of your
liver, kidneys, sodium levels, and more. Ferritin (blood test): This is
a measure of your iron stores. High levels are associated with
inflammation (chapter 7) and insulin resistance (chapter 14). Low levels
are associated with anemia, restless leg syndrome, ADD/ADHD, and low
motivation and energy. A level of 50--100 nanograms/mL is ideal. Women
often have lower iron stores than men because of menstruation. Some
theorize that this is one of the reasons that women tend to live longer
than men. If your level is low, consider taking iron. If it is high,
donating blood may help.

This is me donating blood.

INFLAMMATION AND GUT HEALTH (CHAPTER 7)

C-reactive protein (CRP; blood test): This measures the inflammation
level in your body. Inflammation is associated with chronic illnesses
such as depression, dementia, and pain syndromes. A healthy CRP range is
0.0--1.0 mg/L. Omega-3 Index (a drop of blood):\[754\] This measures the
total amount of omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA in red blood cells and
directly reflects their levels in the brain. The test is a clinically
validated biomarker of the health of your brain. Your risk of cognitive
decline rises by as much as 77 percent when your Omega-3 Index is low.
Aim for a level above 8 percent. Vitamin B12 (blood test): This is
critically important for healthy brain function. A vitamin B12
deficiency can potentially cause severe and irreversible damage,
especially to the brain and nervous system. Symptoms such as fatigue,
depression, and poor memory can occur at levels only slightly lower than
normal. Vitamin B12 also can be depleted by medications, particularly
those that impair stomach and intestinal function, such as proton pump
inhibitors for acid reflux. Its deficiency can cause symptoms of mania
and psychosis and even masquerade as dementia. A normal range is 211 to
946 picograms per milliliter; optimal is greater than 600.

GENETICS (CHAPTER 8) Know your genetic risks: Diagram your family tree
and take notice of any genetic issues that run in your family.

Consider genetic testing: Genomind (www.genomind.com) and GeneSight
(www.genesight.com) are two companies our clinicians use at Amen
Clinics. Folate (blood test): This aids in the production of DNA and
other genetic material. It is required for the healthy regulation of
genes and is especially important when cells and tissues are growing
rapidly, such as in infancy, adolescence, and pregnancy. Folate works
together with vitamins B6 and B12 and other nutrients to control blood
levels of homocysteine. It is common to have low levels of folate as a
result of alcoholism, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), celiac disease,
and certain medications. A normal level is 2 to 20 ng/mL; optimal is
thought to be greater than 3 nanograms per milliliter.

HEAD TRAUMA (CHAPTER 9) Number of past concussions with or without loss
of consciousness.

TOXINS (CHAPTER 10) How many alcoholic beverages you consume each
day/week, how many cigarettes you smoke, how often you vape, and how
often you use drugs (including marijuana). There are tests for heavy
metals and mold, but you do not need to do them routinely unless you are
experiencing symptoms or you know you've been exposed to high levels.

MIND STORMS (CHAPTER 11)

QEEG/SPECT tests: There aren't specific numbers associated with
mindstorms, but these tests can be extremely helpful if you suspect a
problem.

IMMUNITY/INFECTIONS (CHAPTER 12) CBC to look at your white blood cell
count. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) measures inflammation, which
is high in autoimmune disorders. Antinuclear antibodies
(ANA)---antibodies fight infection, but ANAs often attack your body's
tissues. ANAs are often high in autoimmune disorders. Vitamin D (blood
test):\[755\] Low levels of vitamin D have been associated with obesity,
depression, cognitive impairment, heart disease, reduced immunity,
cancer, and all causes of mortality. The blood test to get is
25hydroxyvitamin D level. A normal vitamin D level is 30--100 ng/mL,
with the most optimal range being 50 to 100 ng/mL.

NEUROHORMONES (CHAPTER 13) Thyroid panel (blood test): If your thyroid
hormone levels are abnormal, it could explain the cause of anxiety,
depression, forgetfulness, weight problems, and lethargy. Hypothyroidism
(low) decreases overall brain activity, which can impair your thinking,
judgment, and self-control, and it can make it nearly impossible to
manage weight effectively. Hyperthyroidism (high) is associated with
anxiety, insomnia, and feeling agitated. If you have symptoms, don't
settle for just a TSH test, which measures your thyroid stimulating

hormone. TSH levels can be normal even when you have an undiagnosed
thyroid problem. Instead, insist that your doctor order all of the
following: TSH---according to the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, anything over 3.0 is abnormal and needs further
investigation. Free T3---active thyroid; see the normal ranges for the
individual laboratory you use. Free T4---inactive thyroid; see the
normal ranges for the individual laboratory you use. Thyroid antibodies
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPO) Thyroglobulin antibodies (TG); see
the normal ranges for the individual laboratory you use. Liver function
tests---95 percent of T4 is "activated" in the liver, so having a
healthy liver is essential. Ferritin level---Ferritin is like the bus
that drives active T3 into the cells; ferritin needs to be above 50 for
this to occur. An important note: While thyroid tests can be helpful,
your doctor should treat you, not the blood test. I've seen too many
hypothyroid patients who haven't been treated because their thyroid
numbers were low but "within normal limits." That's a little like saying
a vitamin D level of 31 is normal (the normal range is 30 to 100). I
have never wanted to be at the bottom of any class I was in. How a
patient feels and functions (e.g., low energy, constipation, dry hair,
dry skin, poor cognition, low body temperature) is more important in
assessing thyroid function than using arbitrary normal ranges on blood
tests. All of the above tests could be "normal," and someone could still
have a problem.

Cortisol (saliva): This is best done at four intervals throughout the
day (to understand your daily cycle): when you first wake up, around
lunch time, around dinner time, and just before you go to sleep.
Ideally, your cortisol levels are high in the morning (to wake you up)
and taper off slowly during the day and evening, allowing you to fall
into a restful sleep at night. When cortisol levels are too high, you
feel wired. When they are too low, you feel exhausted, spacey, or
sluggish. DHEA-S (blood test): Normal blood levels of DHEA-sulfate can
differ by sex and age. Typical ranges for females: Ages 18--19: 145--395
mcg/dL (micrograms per deciliter) Ages 20--29: 65--380 mcg/dL Ages
30--39: 45--270 mcg/dL Ages 40--49: 32--240 mcg/dL Ages 50--59: 26--200
mcg/dL Ages 60--69: 13--130 mcg/dL Ages 70 and older: 17--90 mcg/dL
Typical ranges for males: Ages 18--19: 108--441 mcg/dL Ages 20--29:
280--640 mcg/dL Ages 30--39: 120--520 mcg/dL Ages 40--49: 95--530 mcg/dL
Ages 50--59: 70--310 mcg/dL Ages 60--69: 42--290 mcg/dL Ages 70 and
older: 28--175 mcg/dL

Free and total serum testosterone (blood test): Having an optimal level
of testosterone is important for your health and well-being. Too much
can cause behavioral problems, such as aggression, but too little is
associated with depression, poor memory, and low libido. Normal levels
for adult males: Total testosterone: 280--800 nanograms ng/dL---optimal
is 500--800 ng/dL Free testosterone: 7.2--24 picograms pg/mL---optimal
is 12--24 pg/mL Normal levels for adult females: Total testosterone:
6--82 ng/dL---optimal is 40--82 ng/dL Free testosterone: 0.0--2.2
pg/mL---optimal is 1.0--2.2 pg/mL Estrogen and progesterone for
women:\[756\] Depending on the circumstances, these are measured in
blood or saliva. Menstruating women are usually tested on day 21 of
their cycle, while postmenopausal women can be measured any time.
Estrogen is responsible for vaginal lubrication, helps with libido and
memory---and so much more. Progesterone calms emotions, contributes to a
restful sleep, and acts as a diuretic. See the normal ranges for the
individual laboratory you use.

DIABESITY (CHAPTER 14) Body mass index (BMI):\[757\] This measurement is
the result of comparing weight to height. An optimal BMI is between 18.5
and 25; the overweight range falls between

25 and 30; over 30 indicates obesity, and over 40 indicates morbid
obesity. Just Google "BMI Calculator" and fill in your height and weight
to determine your BMI. Take this number seriously, because being
overweight or obese is associated with having a smaller brain, and when
it comes to your brain, size matters! Plus, obesity increases the risk
for depression and Alzheimer's disease. In a new study, 40 percent of
all cancers have been linked to excess weight. \[758\] Waist-to-Height
Ratio (WHtR):\[759\] This is another way to measure the health of your
weight. Some researchers believe this number is even more accurate than
BMI because the most dangerous place to carry weight is in the abdomen.
Abdominal fat, which is associated with a larger waist, is metabolically
active and produces various hormones that can cause harmful health
effects, such as elevated blood pressure, high cholesterol and
triglyceride levels, and diabetes. WHtR is calculated by dividing waist
size by height. A woman with a 32-inch waist who is 5′10″ (70 inches)
would divide 32 by 70 to get a WHtR of 45.7 percent. Generally speaking,
it's healthy to stay under 50 percent---in other words, your waist size
in inches should be less than half your height. When measuring your
waist size, use a tape measure! Don't hazard a guess or rely on your
pants' size, which can vary among manufacturers. In my experience, 90
percent of people will underestimate their waist circumference. Lab
tests: Get blood tests for your fasting blood sugar, insulin, and
hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) every year. If they are abnormal, think of it as
a health crisis to be taken very

seriously. Fasting blood sugar Normal: 70--105 mg/dL Optimal: 70--89
mg/dL Prediabetes: 105--125 mg/dL Diabetes: 126 mg/dL or higher
Hemoglobin A1c: This test helps diagnose diabetes and prediabetes by
revealing average blood sugar levels over the past few months. Normal
results for someone without diabetes are in the range of 4 to 5.6
percent; optimal is under 5.3 percent. Levels of 5.7 to 6.4 percent
indicate prediabetes. Higher numbers usually indicate diabetes. Fasting
insulin: High insulin levels, usually due to a diet high in simple
carbs, are associated with many negative health consequences, including
fatty liver, abdominal obesity, excessive cravings, elevated blood
sugar, acne, polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), hair loss in women in
the male pattern (front and sides), increased risk of gout, high blood
pressure, and swollen ankles. Normal is 2.6 to 25; optimal is less than
10. High levels are an early marker for diabetes.

SLEEP (CHAPTER 15) Number of hours you sleep each night. Number of sleep
disruptions: If you suspect you might have sleep apnea, get a sleep
test. Symptoms include daytime fatigue, morning headaches, and
irritability; untreated sleep apnea triples your risk of depression and
dementia.

KNOW YOUR NUMBERS . . . THEN WHAT? Knowing your important health numbers
is the first step. Optimizing them is critical to helping your brain,
emotions, and moods work right. If any of them are abnormal, the
function of your brain and mental health can be troubled too. Work with
your healthcare provider to help get these numbers into the most optimal
range possible.

Get in the habit of testing your brain and checking out your important
health numbers on an annual basis.

\[750\] Daniel G. Amen, Feel Better Fast and Make It Last (Carol Stream,
IL: Tyndale, 2018), 309--10. \[751\] Gina Kolata, "Under New Guidelines,
Millions More Americans Will Need to Lower Blood Pressure," New York
Times, November 13, 2017,
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/13/health/blood-pressure-treatmentguidelines.html?\_r=0.
Susan Scutti, "Nearly Half of Americans Now Have High Blood Pressure,
Based on New Guidelines," Health, CNN, November 14, 2017,
https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/13/health/new-blood-pressureguidelines/index.html.
\[752\] Penelope Elias et al., "Serum Cholesterol and Cognitive
Performance in the Framingham Heart Study," Psychosomatic Medicine 67,
no. 1 (January/February 2005): 24--30.

\[753\] M. M. Mielke et al., "High Total Cholesterol Levels in Late Life
Associated with a Reduced Risk of Dementia," Neurology 64, no. 10 (May
24, 2005): 1689--95. Annelies W. E. Weverling-Rijnsburger et al., "Total
Cholesterol and Risk of Mortality in the Oldest Old," Lancet 350, no.
9085 (October 18, 1997): 1119-- 23. \[754\] Amen, Feel Better Fast, 313.
\[755\] Daniel G. Amen, Change Your Brain, Change Your Life, rev.
ed. (New York: Harmony Books, 2015), 83--84. \[756\] Daniel G. Amen,
Unleash the Power of the Female Brain (New York: Harmony Books, 2013),
80--81. \[757\] Amen, Feel Better Fast, 309. \[758\] "Cancers Associated
with Overweight and Obesity Make Up 40 Percent of Cancers Diagnosed in
the United States," CDC Newsroom, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, last updated October 3, 2017,
https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2017/p1003-vs-cancer-obesity.html.
\[759\] Amen, Change Your Brain, 80.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 18

FOOD MADE INSANELY SIMPLE THE BRIGHT MINDS DIET TO END MENTAL ILLNESS
Eating crappy food isn't a reward---it's a punishment. DREW CAREY (HE
GETS IT!)

No disease that can be treated by diet should be treated with any other
means. M A I M O N I D E S , M E D I E VA L P H I LO S O P H E R A N D
PHYSICIAN

When my nieces, Alizé and Amelie, first came under the care of my wife
and me, Alizé was obsessed with Flamin' Hot Cheetos. Our first trip to
the grocery store together was painful. She wanted junk food (Flamin'
Hot Cheetos) for herself and her sister, but I was having none of it.
Instead, I tried to teach her how to read the ingredient label on the
snack package and understand what each substance does to brain, body,
and mental health: Vegetable oil (corn, canola, and/or sunflower oil)---
proinflammatory Sugar---proinflammatory, promotes aging, increases
diabesity

Monosodium glutamate (MSG)---often triggers mind storms Artificial Color
Red Dye #40---often triggers mind storms She looked at me as if I were
an evil ruler. The big breakthrough came a few months later, when we
went to Summer House, a fun restaurant frequented by the locals in
Corona Del Mar, and she ordered a salmon salad. And she liked it! In the
two years since, her diet has dramatically improved, and she feels
better than ever. When she cheats, she notices how it drains her energy
and messes with her mind. Increasingly, researchers are concluding that
the diets of people with brain health/mental health disorders are
lacking in key nutrients for brain health. A growing body of evidence
suggests that nutritional treatment may help prevent, treat, or improve
depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, attention deficit
disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADD/ADHD), autism,
addiction, and eating disorders.\[760\] And the scientific community is
finally beginning to see how food is so strongly linked to brain
health/mental health. In 2015, a group of 18 scientists concluded that
"the emerging and compelling evidence for nutrition as a crucial factor
in the high prevalence and incidence of mental disorders suggests that
diet is as important to psychiatry as it is to cardiology,
endocrinology, and gastroenterology."\[761\] In this chapter, I am going
to make food insanely simple and tell you which foods to eat for a
better brain and which ones to limit or avoid all together. I've written
about many of these foundational food principles before, but here I'll
help you connect the dots to your mental health. Yes, there is a lot of
conflicting health information about food, but

there is also a lot of agreement. If you follow these 11 BRIGHT MINDS
rules (details to follow), your brain health/mental health will start to
improve within days. 1. Only love foods that love you back. 2. Go for
the highest-quality calories you can find---and not too many of them if
you need to lose weight. 3. Hydrate, but do not drink your calories. 4.
Eat high-quality protein at every meal to balance blood sugar and keep
cravings away. 5. Eat and cook with high-quality fat. 6. Go for smart
carbohydrates (colorful, low-glycemic, and high-fiber). 7. Use herbs and
spices like medicine. 8. Make your food as clean as possible (eliminate
artificial sweeteners, colors, preservatives, and foods in plastic
containers) and read the labels. 9. If you struggle with any brain
health/mental health or physical issue, eliminate any potential
allergens or internal attackers, such as sugar, MSG, gluten, corn, soy,
and dairy for a month to see if you improve. 10. Use intermittent
fasting to supercharge your brain. 11. Get a routine that serves your
health rather than hurts it; find 24 foods you love that love you back.

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #1: Only Love Foods That Love You Back.

If you get this one idea, it will go a long way to ending mental illness
in you or your loved ones. But you must first be honest with
yourself---you are in a war for the health of your brain. Nearly
everywhere you go (schools, work, shopping malls, movie theaters,
airports, ball parks, and so on) someone is trying to sell you
low-quality, tasty food that will hurt your brain health/mental health
and kill you early. The standard American diet (SAD) is filled with
proinflammatory, allergenic foods laced with artificial chemicals that
will damage and prematurely age your brain\[762\] and increase your risk
for depression, ADD/ADHD, anxiety disorders, diabetes, hypertension,
heart disease, cancer, and dementia.\[763\] The real weapons of mass
destruction are foods that are highly processed pesticide sprayed
high-glycemic (spikes blood sugar) low-fiber food-like substances
artificially colored and sweetened laden with hormones tainted with
antibiotics stored in plastic containers THE REAL WEAPONS OF MASS
DESTRUCTION DESTROYING THE HEALTH OF AMERICA

These low-quality "foods" are destroying the brain health/mental health
of America, yet corporations pay big money to professional athletes and
coaches to visibly drink Coke, Pepsi, or Gatorade (all filled with
sugar, artificial colors, and preservatives) on the sidelines of games,
effectively marketing these products to children and teens. They also
get children hooked on "happy meals" with fun toys that create diabesity
and inflammation---definitely not a prescription for happiness. My niece
tells me the middle school she attended had days when they would serve
Pizza Hut or McDonald's for lunch---foods that can give you brain fog
and make it harder to concentrate on learning. Not so smart! Without
thinking, we are destroying the mental and physical health of our
children. Many corporations also brag about the addictive nature of
their foods: "Bet you can't eat just one." They hire food scientists to
combine fat, sugar, and salt with the perfect "texture," "crunchiness,"
"meltiness," and "aroma" to overwhelm the brain with flavor to trigger
the "bliss point"

in your brain, which is akin to taking a hit of cocaine, making you
literally fall in love with low-quality foods. This is one of the
reasons people say they "love" candy, doughnuts, pastries, French fries,
and bread---and can't ever conceive of giving them up. They are not
eating to live; they are eating for momentary pleasure and to feed
addictions that were artificially created for a corporate profit motive.
One woman told me that she would rather get Alzheimer's disease than
give up sugar. I wondered aloud if she dated the bad boys in high
school. Being in love with something that hurts you is an abusive
relationship that needs serious intervention. No food of any kind
belongs in the same emotional place in your brain as the love you have
for your spouse, children, or grandchildren. We must do better because
our children will never be able to afford the tsunami of illness headed
their way. Of the health-care dollars in the United States, 75 percent
are spent on chronic preventable illnesses,\[764\] most of which are
driven by poor nutrition. In a fascinating study about diet and
depression,\[765\] researchers went to two remote islands in
Australia---one with plentiful fast food and lower fish consumption, the
other without fast food and higher fish consumption. Of the people on
the island with fast food, 16 percent had moderate-to-severe depression,
compared to only 3 percent on the island without, which correlated with
the omega6/omega-3 fatty acid ratio (more on this in rule #5). That is a
500 percent increased risk of depression, based on diet! Eat This: Foods
you love that love you back Skip or Limit That: Anything you "love" that
increases your risk of brain health/mental health issues

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #2: Go for the highest-quality calories you can
find---and not too many of them if you need to lose weight. Calories
matter. If you tend to eat when you're feeling depressed, stressed, or
anxious and you struggle with your weight, know the amount of calories
you consume in a day; but also know that the quality of the calories
matters more. If you only eat 800 calories of Twinkies a day, you may
lose weight in the short term, but it will definitely make you sicker in
the long run. Obesity runs in my family, but I am not overweight because
I really care about my health. To counteract the obesity gene, I weigh
myself every day (so I always know the truth about my weight), and
whenever I gain a few pounds, I start counting calories with a simple
note app on my phone. Some professionals will tell you calories don't
count, but do not believe them. Supersize your meals, and you'll be
supersized too. Calories are like money. I hate wasting money. The same
is true for my calories. Maybe you are like me and are a value spender,
so spend calories only on high-quality foods. Eat This: The
highest-quality foods you can find that are also calorie smart Skip or
Limit That: Low-quality foods that increase your risk of brain
health/mental health issues

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #3: Hydrate, but do not drink your calories.

Drink 8 to 10 glasses of water a day to stay properly hydrated. Your
brain is comprised of 80 percent water, and being even mildly dehydrated
can negatively impact your moods---making you feel more anxious, tense,
depressed, or angry---in addition to sapping your energy levels and
lowering your ability to concentrate.\[766\] In fact, being dehydrated
by just 2 percent impairs performance in tasks that require attention,
immediate memory skills, and physical performance.\[767\] It is also
associated with brain atrophy (shrinkage)\[768\] and performance. Pilots
who were dehydrated had poorer performance in the cockpit, especially as
it related to working memory, spatial orientation, and cognitive
performance.\[769\] Replace sugary drinks with water. Just cutting out
sugary drinks and fruit juice cuts an average of 400 calories per day
from the average American diet! That's either a lot more healthy food
you will get to eat instead or a lot of calories you will be losing if
you need to lose weight. (Actually, if you do not replace those
calories, it equates to losing 40 pounds a year!) Be deliberate about
your water intake, and limit anything that dehydrates you (caffeine,
alcohol, and diuretics). When you sweat through exercise, make sure to
rehydrate. Drink This: Water, plain sparkling water, water flavored with
slices of fruits (spa water), water with flavored stevia from Sweet
Leaf, coconut water, herbal tea, green tea, and black tea (in small
amounts if caffeinated) Skip or Limit That: Calorie-laden drinks,
cocktails, energy drinks, sodas, and diet drinks---all of which increase
your risk of brain health/mental health

issues

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #4: Eat high-quality protein at every meal to balance
blood sugar and keep cravings away. Protein helps to balance your blood
sugar, keeps you full, and provides the building blocks for many
neurotransmitters. Protein plays a major role in the healthy growth and
functioning of your cells, tissues, and organs. After water, protein is
the most abundant substance in your body. At Amen Clinics, we think of
protein as medicine that should be taken in small doses with every meal
and snack, at least every four to five hours, to help balance your blood
sugar levels and decrease cravings. Protein helps you feel fuller longer
and burn more calories than you do after eating high-carb, sugar-filled
foods. Your body can produce some of the amino acids it needs, but not
all of them---those that can't be manufactured in your body must come
from food. These are called essential amino acids, and they are
precursors for neurotransmitters, including serotonin and dopamine,
which play an important role in brain health/mental health. They must be
included in your diet on a regular basis because your body can't store
them for future use. Plant foods---such as nuts, seeds, legumes, and
some grains, and vegetables---contain only some of the 20 amino acids
you need. Fish, poultry, and most meats contain all of them.\[770\]
Small amounts of high-quality protein are crucial to good health. But
more is not better. Our bodies are simply not designed to effectively
process large quantities of protein at

a time. Eating too much causes increased stress and inflammation in the
body. This contributes to accelerated aging and disease, and it can be
hard on some people's kidneys and liver. Quality is more important than
quantity. High-quality animal protein is free of hormones and
antibiotics, free range, and grass fed. It is more expensive than
industrial farm-raised animal meats, but your brain health/mental health
is worth the investment. Compared with grass-fed meat, industrially
raised meat is about 30 percent higher in unhealthy fat, which is
associated with cardiovascular disease. Eat This: Healthy proteins
include: Fish Lamb Turkey Chicken Beef Pork Beans and other legumes Raw
nuts High-protein veggies, such as broccoli and spinach Skip or Limit
That: Low-quality proteins raised with pesticides, hormones, or
antibiotics, and excessive protein, which strains your body systems.

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #5: Eat and cook with high-quality fat.

Of the solid weight of your brain, 60 percent is fat. Low-fat diets are
not good for your brain. Focus on healthy fats, such as avocados, nuts,
seeds, and sustainable, clean fish. Fat is not the enemy. Good fats are
essential to your brain health/mental health. For example, omega-3 fatty
acids have been found to reduce symptoms of depression. In a study from
the Mayo Clinic, people who ate a fat-based diet had a 42 percent lower
risk of developing Alzheimer's disease; those who ate a protein-based
diet had a 21 percent lower risk of developing Alzheimer's disease; but
those who ate a simple-carbohydrate-based diet (think bread, pasta,
potatoes, rice, and sugar) had an almost 400 percent increased risk of
developing Alzheimer's.\[771\] It's the sugar, and foods that turn to
sugar, not the fat, that's the problem. However, not all fats are equal.
Avoid trans fats (found in foods like processed crackers, baked goods,
and frozen pizza), which are associated with an increase in depression.
Also skip fats that are higher in omega-6 fatty acids, such as many
refined vegetable oils, which are associated with an increase in
inflammation. Eat This: Healthiest fats and oils

Healthiest Fats Avocados Cocoa butter Coconut Grass-fed beef, bison, and
lamb Nuts (walnuts are associated with less depression\[772\]) Olives
Organic free-range poultry

Seafood---anchovies, arctic char, catfish, herring, king crab, mackerel,
wild salmon, sardines, sea bass, snapper, sole, trout, tuna, clams,
mussels, oysters, and scallops Seeds

Healthiest Oils Avocado oil Coconut oil Flax oil Macadamia nut oil Olive
oil Sesame oil Walnut oil Skip or Limit That: Unhealthiest fats and oils
Canola oil Corn oil Vegetable oil Industrial farm-raised animal fat and
dairy Processed meats Safflower oil Soy oil Trans fats

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #6: Go for smart carbohydrates (colorful, low
glycemic, and high fiber). I think of "smart" carbohydrates as those
packed with nutrients that balance your blood sugar and reduce cravings.
Most vegetables and legumes are low glycemic (unlikely to raise blood
sugar). So are many fruits, such as

apples, pears, and berries. High-glycemic, low-fiber carbohydrates
(sugar, breads, pastas, potatoes, and rice) in significant amounts steal
your health because they promote inflammation, diabetes, and
depression.\[773\] A Swedish study compared the effects on blood sugar
of a grain-free diet (Paleo) and a Mediterranean diet, which relies, in
part, on whole grains. After 12 weeks, the blood sugar levels were
markedly lower in the Paleo group (--26 percent) than in the
Mediterranean group (--7 percent). At the end of the study, all patients
in the Paleo group had normal blood glucose, which was not true for the
Mediterranean group. A diet containing more high-glycemic foods was also
associated with a higher incidence of depression and fatigue.\[774\]
Fiber is a special type of carbohydrate that enhances digestion, reduces
the risk of colon cancer, and helps to balance blood pressure and blood
sugar. The average American consumes far too little---less than 15 grams
of fiber daily. Women should consume 25 to 30 grams of fiber every day;
men, 30 to 38 grams. High-fiber foods---such as broccoli, berries,
onions, flax seeds, nuts, green beans, cauliflower, celery, and sweet
potatoes (the skin of one sweet potato has more fiber than a bowl of
oatmeal!)---have the added benefit of making you feel full faster and
longer. \[775\] Colorful vegetables and fruits are full of brain
health/mental health benefits, providing nutrients, vitamins, minerals,
and antioxidants. They boost the level of antioxidants in your body,
which reduces the risk of developing cognitive impairment and
depression. Antioxidants neutralize the production of free radicals in
the body, which play a major role in many illnesses, including
cardiovascular disease, autoimmune disorders, Alzheimer's

disease, Parkinson's,\[776\] schizophrenia,\[777\] and
depression.\[778\] Increasing antioxidants has been found to help many
conditions, including anxiety and depression. \[779\] Here is a list of
antioxidant-rich foods and spices, by oxygen radical absorbance capacity
(ORAC) value or potency.\[780\] Cloves: 290,000+ Oregano (dried):
175,000+ Rosemary: 165,000 Cinnamon: 131,000+ Sage (dried): 119,000+
Acai fruit: 102,000+ Cocoa powder: 80,000+ Parsley (dried): 73,000+
Basil (dried): 61,000+ Ginger root: 14,000+ Walnuts: 13,000+ Artichokes,
cooked: 9,400+ Cranberries: 9,000+ Kidney beans: 8,600+ Blackberries:
5,900+ Blueberries: 5,000+ Raspberries: 5,000+ Pomegranates: 4,400+ Red
cabbage, cooked: 3,000+ Broccoli, cooked: 2,000+ A recent study found
that happiness is correlated to how many fruits and vegetables you eat.
The more colorful fruits and vegetables you eat (up to eight servings a
day), the

happier you become---almost immediately. No antidepressant works this
fast\![781\] I suggest a two-to-one ratio of vegetables to fruits. Eat
This: Smart carbs: colorful, low-glycemic, high-fiber vegetables,
fruits, and legumes Skip or Limit That: High-glycemic, low-fiber foods,
such as breads, pasta, potatoes, rice, and sugar that increase your risk
of brain health/mental health issues

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #7: Use herbs and spices like medicine. Herbs and
spices are as powerful as medicines. Hippocrates listed more than 500
medicinal uses for herbs and spices, including ways to prevent illness
and increase longevity. Unlike pharmaceutical drugs, which often come
with an alarming range of side effects, herbs and spices have minimal
consequences. Eighty percent of the developing world still relies on
natural and herbal remedies as their primary source of medicines.\[782\]
Although they are chemically processed, most of today's medications
actually come from plants. For example, many pain medications originate
from poppy seeds. Herbs and spices pack a double punch: nutrition and
flavor. They support your health and tantalize your taste buds. I wonder
why we don't store them in the medicine cabinet rather than the spice
cabinet. The seasonings we cook with come from some of the same plants
for which our ancestors risked their lives or paid a lot of money to
obtain pain relief, vitality, and healing.

Here is a short list of herbs and spices to help each of the BRIGHT
MINDS risk factors: In multiple studies, a saffron extract was found to
be as effective as antidepressant medication in treating people with
major depression. Turmeric, used in curry, contains a chemical that has
been shown to decrease the plaques in the brain thought to be
responsible for Alzheimer's disease. Scientific evidence shows rosemary,
thyme, and sage help boost memory. Cinnamon has been shown to help
improve attention and blood sugar regulation. It is high in antioxidants
and is a natural aphrodisiac. Garlic and oregano boost blood flow to the
brain. The hot, spicy taste of ginger, cayenne, and black pepper comes
from gingerols, capsaicin, and piperine, compounds that boost metabolism
and have an aphrodisiac effect. Eat This: Lots of herbs and spices
tailored to your risk factors and needs Skip or Limit That: Artificial
colors and flavors geared to hijack your brain

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #8: Make your food as clean as possible (eliminate
artificial sweeteners, colors, preservatives, and foods in plastic
containers) and read the labels.

Go organic, hormone-free, antibiotic-free, grass-fed, and free-range
whenever possible. You are not only what you eat, but you are also what
the animals you eat ate. Pesticides used in commercial farming can
accumulate in your brain and body, even though the levels in each food
may be low. As much as possible, eliminate food additives,
preservatives, artificial dyes, and sweeteners. That means you must read
food labels. If you do not know what is in a food item or it is not real
food, don't eat it. Similarly, it's important to think about how your
food is stored. The plastic containers used for many foods and beverages
can leech into food and cause issues. Become thoughtful about the food
you eat, and your brain will thank you. I understand that you may not be
able to afford to eat solely organic and sustainably raised food. The
Environmental Working Group produces an annual list on the foods that
are a must to eat organic and those with lower levels of pesticides.
Stay updated at www.ewg.org. Here is the current list:

Fifteen foods with the lowest levels of pesticide residues Avocados
Sweet corn Pineapples Cabbages Onions Sweet peas (frozen) Papayas
Asparagus Mangoes Eggplants Honeydew melons

Kiwis Cantaloupes Cauliflower Broccoli

Twelve foods with the highest levels of pesticide residues (buy organic
or don't eat them) Strawberries Spinach Nectarines Apples Grapes Peaches
Cherries Pears Tomatoes Celery Potatoes Sweet bell peppers Fish is a
great source of healthy protein and fat, but it's important to consider
the toxicity in some fish. Here are a couple of general rules to guide
you in choosing more healthful fish: 1. The larger the fish, the more
mercury it may contain, so go for the smaller varieties. 2. From the
safe fish choices, eat a fairly wide variety of fish, preferably those
highest in omega-3s, like wild Alaskan salmon, sardines, anchovies,
hake, and haddock.\[783\] Learn more at www.seafoodwatch.org.

Eat This: Clean, whole foods, sustainably raised, whenever possible Skip
or Limit That: Foods raised with pesticides, hormones, and antibiotics,
or containing artificial sweeteners, dyes, and preservatives

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #9: If you struggle with any brain health/mental
health or physical issue, eliminate any potential allergens or internal
attackers, such as sugar, MSG, gluten, corn, soy, and dairy for a month
to see if you improve. Subtle but important food allergies may result in
brain inflammation that contributes to many of the brain health/mental
health issues we see at Amen Clinics. These food allergies can be
delayed, in the sense that bodily reactions to the food items may occur
up to several days after consuming them. Conventional medicine has
tended to ignore these reactions to foods. However, we believe that
these food issues create a metabolic disorder that can lead to many
"mental" symptoms, including fatigue, brain fog, slowed thinking,
irritability, agitation, aggression, anxiety, depression and bipolar
conditions, ADD/ADHD, learning disabilities, autism, schizophrenia, and
even dementia. To test the theory that food allergies may be involved in
your issues, follow an elimination diet---essentially a dairy-, gluten-,
corn-, sugar-, and soy-free diet for one month. See instructions on
pages 334--335 detailing how to do an elimination diet.

An example of how effective an elimination diet can be comes from
researchers from the Netherlands, who showed a highly restricted diet
brought about rapid, lasting improvement in ADD/ADHD and oppositional
defiant disorder (ODD) in children.\[784\] The children ate only rice,
turkey, lamb, vegetables, fruits, tea, pear juice, and water. No milk
products, wheat, or sugar products. No food additives or artificial
colors. In the study, 85 percent of children who followed the diet
showed an improvement of 50 percent or more and no longer met criteria
for ADD/ADHD, and 67 percent who had ODD no longer met criteria for ODD.
The researchers repeated this study and found similar results. In
another study using the same diet, physical symptoms (headaches and
bellyaches) and sleep also improved.\[785\] Food additives and colorings
can cause hyperactivity in children with no history of the problem,
according to a study in the prestigious journal the Lancet (and we
believe adults may be affected too).\[786\] The study, involving nearly
300 children, found that additives caused symptoms of hyperactivity in
both young and older children. These effects occurred not just in
children diagnosed with ADD/ADHD but also in those with no overt
behavior problems. Over the years, elimination diets have been one of
the most important weapons against brain health/mental health issues. If
we can get our patients to try an "elimination diet" for just a month,
it often makes a dramatic difference. Since we are all unique, not
everyone has to lose these substances forever, unless they are sensitive
to them. At the moment, I find food allergy lab tests unreliable. The
best

way to see if you are sensitive to certain foods is to eliminate all the
potential culprits and add them back one at a time.

Why you should limit or avoid some foods 1. Sugar: When you consume
sugar---even if it's natural honey or maple---it causes your blood sugar
to spike then drop, impacting your mood and sense of well-being.
High-sugar diets increase inflammation, cause fatigue and cravings, lead
to erratic brain cell firing that has been implicated in aggression, and
alter memory and learning.

Top 15 Names for Sugar Because two-thirds of packaged goods contain
added sugar, it is critical to read food labels when you shop and know
all the different aliases for sugar. \[787\] 1. Sugar 2. Molasses 3.
Caramel color 4. Barley malt 5. Corn syrup or corn syrup solids 6. Cane
juice 7. High fructose corn syrup 8. Honey 9. Sorbitol 10. Fructose 11.
Cane juice crystals 12. Maltose 13. Fruit juice concentrate 14.
Maltodextrin 15. Dextrose Read food labels!

2. Artificial sweeteners: Artificial sweeteners--- including aspartame
(NutraSweet, Equal), saccharine (Sweet'N Low), and sucralose
(Splenda)---can lead to chronically elevated insulin levels, which
raises your risk for depression, Alzheimer's disease, heart disease,
diabetes, and other health problems. And they are associated with
metabolic syndrome and may actually be contributing to obesity.\[788\]
3. Gluten: Gluten---found in breads, cereals, and pasta, as well as
everything from salad dressings and chicken broth to spice mixes and
veggie burgers--- has been linked to a rising number of health issues,
including celiac disease, Type 1 diabetes, and Hashimoto's
thyroiditis---all of which are autoimmune conditions. And approximately
18 million Americans have gluten sensitivity, according to the Center
for Celiac Research. Gluten sensitivity and celiac disease are related
to a number of brain health/mental health symptoms,\[789\] including:
Anxiety disorders Depression Mood disorders ADD/ADHD Autism spectrum
disorders Schizophrenia Indeed, adopting a gluten-free diet has been
associated with improvements in people with mental health conditions.
Research found a decrease, or even full remission, of symptoms in a
subset of patients with schizophrenia.\[790\] And going glutenfree
produced a decrease in symptoms in some people with autism, ADD/ADHD,
and depression.

\[791\] In a summary of 13 studies involving 1,139 subjects, a
gluten-free diet significantly improved depressive symptoms.\[792\] The
evidence is clear: If you are suffering from a brain health/mental
health disorder, it's a good idea to try getting rid of gluten to see if
it minimizes your symptoms.

When combined with stomach acid, gluten in wheat, casein in dairy,
albumin in rice, and zein in corn turn into exorphins, which can have
opiatelike effects on the brain, making it very hard to stop eating
them.

In a fascinating article titled, "Bread and Other Edible Agents of
Mental Disease,"\[793\] Italian researchers Drs. Peter Kramer and Paolo
Bressan argue that because of their lack of training in gastroenterology
and nutrition, psychologists and psychiatrists typically fail to
appreciate the impact food has on their patients. They argue that
bread 1. Makes the gut lining and the blood brain barrier more
permeable, allowing food particles and toxins to enter into the
bloodstream. 2. Sets off the immune system reaction to attack these
substances, which can cause brain fog, depression, inflammation, and
allergic

reactions. 3. Releases opioid-like compounds, capable of causing brain
health/mental health issues, including cravings for the substances that
are causing harm. Of note, not only gluten in wheat, but also casein in
dairy, albumin in rice, and zein in corn have opiate-like effects, which
is why it can be so hard to stop eating them.\[794\] Kramer and Bressan
also argue that something is changing in the population where blood
markers for celiac disease and gluten sensitivity have quadrupled in the
United States in the last 50 years and doubled in Finland in the last 20
years. They conclude that "the evidence is overpowering that
hypersensitivity to gluten can bring with it mental disturbances like
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression, anxiety, and autism in
vulnerable individuals. . . . A grain-free diet, although difficult to
maintain (especially for those who need it the most), could improve the
mental health of many and be a complete cure for others."\[795\] On
brain SPECT scans, patients with celiac disease (severe gluten
sensitivity) also show lower blood flow, especially to the front part of
the brain (focus, forethought, and impulse control).\[796\] When gluten
was removed, blood flow to the frontal lobes improved.\[797\] Gluten has
also been implicated in up to 40 percent of cases with cerebellar ataxia
(severe coordination issues), which improves when gluten is
eliminated.\[798\] If you want to think right and be able to run in a
straight line, hold the gluten!

Is Schizophrenia Rare Where Grains Are Rare? If grains like wheat are
one of the causes of schizophrenia, then it should be rare in societies
where grains are rare. In an article by Dr. F. C. Dohan and colleagues,
they tested this idea by examining the work of anthropologists on people
who ate little or no grain. "Only two overtly insane chronic
schizophrenics were found among over 65,000 examined or closely observed
adults in remote regions of Papua New Guinea, Malaita, Solomon Islands,
and Yap, Micronesia." Yet, when these populations started to eat wheat,
barley, beer, and rice, the numbers of schizophrenics rose to Western
society levels.\[799\] Dr. Dohan also published a study comparing 59
hospitalized schizophrenic men treated with a dairy-free, wheat-free
diet to 56 controls who continued to eat dairy and wheat. The
dairy-free, wheat-free group was discharged from the hospital about
twice as fast as the control group. When wheat was secretly added to the
cereal-free diet, it eliminated the positive effect.\[800\]

4.  Soy: Soy, a protein derived from soybeans, contains components that
    may impact some of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors, including: a high
    concentration of lectins, carbohydratebinding proteins that can be
    toxic, allergenic, and inflammatory (Toxins, Inflammation) large
    amounts of omega-6 fatty acids (Inflammation) phytoestrogens that
    may contribute to the development of cancer, early puberty in girls,
    and impotence in men (Neurohormones)
5.  Corn: Corn's fatty acid profile is among the most unhealthy of all
    grains and can have a negative effect on the BRIGHT MINDS risk
    factors because it

is: High in omega-6s and very low in omega-3s (Inflammation) Damaging to
the intestinal lining and triggers intestinal permeability issues
(Inflammation) Often sprayed with the glyphosate pesticide Roundup, one
of the most toxic substances to human cells\[801\] that is associated
with ADD/ADHD,\[802\] depression, Parkinson's disease, MS,
hypothyroidism, cancer, and liver disease\[803\] (Toxins) 6. Milk: Milk
can raise the risk for several of the BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. For
example, it is converted to galactose and glucose, which raises blood
sugar levels and can lead to inflammation and diabesity. And a milk
protein called casein is an excitotoxin that can lead to brain
inflammation and neurodegenerative diseases. (Inflammation)

HOW TO FOLLOW AN ELIMINATION DIET 1. Cut out the six potential food
allergens (sugar, artificial sweeteners, gluten, soy, corn, and milk)
for one month. 2. After a month, slowly reintroduce food items one at a
time every three to four days. Eat the reintroduced food at least two to
three times a day for three days to see if you notice a reaction.

3. Look for symptoms, which can occur within a few minutes or up to 72
hours later. (If you notice a problem right away, stop consuming that
food immediately.) Reactions to foods to which you have allergies can
include: brain fog difficulty remembering mood issues (anxiety,
depression, and anger) nasal congestion chest congestion headaches sleep
problems joint aches muscle aches pain fatigue skin changes changes in
digestion and bowel functioning 4. If you have a reaction, note the food
and eliminate it for 90 days---and maybe forever. This will give your
immune system a chance to cool off and your gut a chance to heal. When
our patients follow an elimination diet, it often makes a dramatic
difference. Remember, you don't have to lose all of these foods forever,
unless you are sensitive to them. Eat This: Clean whole foods Skip or
Limit That: Sugar, artificial sweeteners, preservatives and dyes,
gluten, corn, soy, and dairy

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #10: Use intermittent fasting to supercharge your
brain. Focus on brain-healthy eating throughout the day, but fast for at
least 12 hours between dinner and breakfast. Intermittent fasting, or
"time-restricted feeding," has been shown to significantly improve
memory,\[804\] mood,\[805\] fat loss,\[806\] weight, blood pressure, and
inflammatory markers.\[807\] Nightly 12-to-16-hour fasts turn on a
process called autophagy, which helps your brain "take out the trash" it
accumulates during the day.\[808\] This can help you think more clearly
and feel more energetic. This type of fasting is simple---if you eat
dinner at 6 p.m., don't eat again until 6 to 10 a.m. the next day. Your
brain will have the time it needs to cleanse itself. Not eating within
two to three hours of bedtime also reduces your risk of heart attack and
stroke.\[809\] In healthy people, blood pressure drops by at least 10
percent when they go to sleep, but blood pressure in late-night eaters
stays high, increasing the risk of vascular problems. New research also
suggests that if you have more calories at lunch and then eat a light
dinner, you are more likely to lose weight than the other way
around.\[810\]

BRIGHT MINDS RULE #11: Get a routine that serves your health rather than
hurts it; find 24 foods you love that love you back.

We are all creatures of habit. Once you allow your brain to do
something, it will want to do it again, whether or not it is good for
you. The secret to changing your foods is to find ones you love that
love you back. A diet full of nutrition is not boring. On the contrary,
it can be loaded with meals that taste amazing. Once you eliminate the
adulterated foods loaded with sugar, salt, unhealthy fat, and artificial
chemicals, in about 10 days, your taste buds will come back to life, and
whole foods will taste amazing. Here are 24 foods I love that love me
back (four breakfasts, four lunches, four snacks, four dinners, five
desserts, three drinks). Make a list of your own from the rules given
above. For more suggestions check out my wife Tana's cookbooks,
especially The Brain Warrior's Way Cookbook, and the recipes on her
website at www.tanaamen.com, where you can find all of the recipes of
the foods listed on the next page.

For more suggestions, check out my wife Tana's cookbooks, especially The
Brain Warrior's Way Cookbook, and the recipes on her website at
www.tanaamen.com, where you can find many of the recipes of the foods
listed below.

Breakfasts 1. Smoothie---Mint Cherry Blast (yum) 2. Super Simple Tanana
Pancakes (delicious and filling) 3. Delicious Low Carb Waffles

4. One-Minute Avocado Egg Basket (so quick and easy)

Lunches 5. Spiced Cacao Turkey Chili (a longtime favorite) 6. Kale
Citrus Salad (unbelievable; people steal my leftovers) 7. Brain Fit
Fajitas (loaded with nutrients) 8. Guiltless Chicken Breast Tenders
(kids love them--- even big kids) Snacks (carry them with you in your
car, purse, or computer bag) 9. Nuts or seeds (especially pumpkin seeds)
10. Go-Well Trail Mix 11. Cut veggies with hummus or guacamole 12. Whole
fruit and nut butter Dinner 13. Rosemary Thyme Chicken, Sweet Potatoes,
and Asparagus 14. Pan-Seared Salmon with Vegetables 15. Cauliflower
Pizza 16. Lentil Vegetable Soup Desserts 17. Nutty Butter Cups 18. Fudgy
Brownie Bites 19. Healthy Apple Cinnamon Crisp 20. Fresh Berries with
Macadamia-Nut Sauce 21. Amazing Avocado Gelato Drinks 22. Water flavored
with fresh cuts of fruit, such as peaches, oranges, or watermelon

23. Sparkling water with chocolate stevia from Sweet Leaf 24. Pumpkin
Spice-Up Cappuccino

BRIGHT MINDS FOOD STARS Below is a simple chart of foods to choose and
foods to lose, based on each of the 11 BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. Focus
on your personal risk factors.

FOOD MADE INSANELY SIMPLE\[811\] Blood Flow EAT THIS Herbs and spices:
cayenne, cinnamon, parsley, rosemary, turmeric Beets, beet juice,
celery, radishes, green, leafy, and colorful vegetables Pumpkin seeds,
almonds, hazelnuts, and sunflower seeds SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Caffeine and
alcohol Sugary sodas Baked goods Foods fried in vegetable or animal fat
Powdered coffee creamers

Retirement/Aging EAT THIS Antioxidant-rich herbs and spices: cloves,
oregano, thyme, cinnamon, rosemary, turmeric Antioxidant-rich foods:
cocoa, acai, berries, artichokes, pomegranates, olive oil, green tea

Choline-rich foods to support memory:\[812\] shrimp, eggs, scallops,
chicken, turkey, beef, cod, salmon, shiitake mushrooms, chickpeas,
lentils, collard greens SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Sugar High-glycemic foods
Charred foods Trans fats Red meat if ferritin levels are high

Inflammation EAT THIS Anti-inflammatory spices: turmeric, cayenne,
ginger, cloves, cinnamon, oregano, pumpkin pie spice Omega-3 foods:
salmon, sardines, avocados, flaxseeds Prebiotic-rich foods: asparagus,
chia seeds, beans, cabbage, artichokes, raw garlic, onions, leeks
Probiotic-rich foods: sauerkraut, kimchi, kefir, miso soup, pickles,
spirulina, kombucha tea SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Low-quality omega-6 fatty
acids, corn, soy, processed foods

Genetics EAT THIS Polyphenol rich foods: chocolate, green tea,
blueberries, kale, onions, apples, cherries, cabbage SKIP OR LIMIT THAT
High-glycemic foods with lots of saturated fat---think fast-food pizza,
ribeye steak and mashed potatoes, pancakes with syrup and bacon
Processed cheeses and microwave popcorn

Head Trauma EAT THIS Spices to support brain healing: turmeric,
peppermint Choline-rich foods: shrimp, eggs, scallops, sardines,
chicken, turkey, tuna, cod, beef, collard greens, brussels sprouts
Omega-3-rich foods SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Alcohol Caffeine Sugar Fried foods
Processed foods

Toxins EAT THIS Liver nourishing foods: green, leafy vegetables,
brassicas (any color cabbage, brussels sprouts, cauliflower, broccoli,
kale), oranges and tangerines Kidney-nourishing foods: water, nuts and
seeds---such as cashews, almonds, and pumpkin seeds for magnesium;
green, leafy vegetables; blueberries Skin-nourishing foods: green tea,
colorful fruits and vegetables, avocados, olive oil, wild salmon SKIP OR
LIMIT THAT Foods that inhibit detoxification Processed meats, such as
bacon and smoked turkey Conventionally raised produce (pesticides and
herbicides), dairy (hormones and antibiotics), meats (hormones,
antibiotics, grain-fed), farmed fish (grain-fed, PCBs) Excess phosphates
(processed cheeses, canned fish, processed meats, flavored water, sodas,
nondairy creamers, bottled coffee drinks, iced teas)

Mind Storms EAT THIS GABA-rich foods---to stabilize brain electrical
activity: broccoli, almonds, walnuts, lentils, bananas, beef liver,
brown rice, halibut, gluten-free whole oats, oranges, rice bran, spinach
SKIP OR LIMIT THAT High-glycemic foods MSG Red Dye #40

Immunity/Infections EAT THIS Immunity-boosting spices: cinnamon, garlic,
turmeric, thyme, ginger, coriander Allicin-rich foods: raw, crushed
garlic, onions, shallots Vitamin C--rich foods: oranges, tangerines,
kiwi, berries, red and yellow bell peppers, dark green leafy vegetables
(such as spinach and kale), broccoli, brussels sprouts, cauliflower,
cabbage, tomatoes, peas Vitamin D--rich foods: fatty fish, including
salmon, sardines, tuna; eggs; mushrooms (maitake, shiitake); beef liver,
cod liver oil Zinc-rich foods: oysters, beef, lamb, spinach, shiitake
and cremini mushrooms, asparagus, sesame and pumpkin seeds Mushrooms:
shiitake,\[813\] white button, portabella\[814\] Selenium-rich foods:
nuts (especially Brazil nuts), seeds, fish, grass-fed meats, mushrooms
SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Western diet---including fast foods and processed
foods Sodas and diet sodas Alcohol Simple sugars---including table sugar
and honey

High Omega-6s---found in most vegetable oils (corn, soybean, sunflower,
safflower) Fried foods Pesticide-laden foods---choose organically
grown/raised food whenever possible Dairy Gluten

Neurohormone Issues EAT THIS Fiber-rich foods containing lignin: green
beans, peas, carrots, seeds, and Brazil nuts Lignin binds harmful
estrogens in the digestive tract, so they can be excreted in the feces
instead of being reabsorbed. Dietary fiber also improves the composition
of intestinal bacteria, so that harmful estrogen metabolites can be
excreted from the body. It also decreases the conversion of testosterone
into estrogens, maintaining a healthy testosterone level.
Hormone-supporting spices: turmeric, ginger, garlic, sage, parsley,
anise seed, red clover, hops Eggs: Many hormones are made from
cholesterol, so make sure you have enough cholesterol in your diet
Testosterone-boosting foods: pomegranate, olive oil, oysters, coconut,
brassicas (including cabbage, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cauliflower),
garlic Estrogen-boosting foods: whole soybeans, flaxseeds, sunflower
seeds, beans, garlic, yams, foods rich in vitamins C and B, beets,
parsley, aniseed, red clover, licorice, hops, sage Thyroid-boosting
foods (selenium-rich): seaweed and sea vegetables, brassicas, maca SKIP
OR LIMIT THAT Sugar and simple carbohydrates Protein from animals raised
with hormones or antibiotics Processed foods Gluten

Soy protein isolate Excitoxins---substances that can kill neurons,
including MSG, aspartame, hydrolyzed vegetable protein, sucralose,
"natural flavors" (these often contain MSG) Foods/drinks that lower
testosterone levels: spearmint tea, soy products and licorice

Diabesity EAT THIS Spices: cinnamon, sage, nutmeg Fiber-rich foods to
balance blood sugar: raspberries, broccoli, spinach, lentils, green
peas, pears, winter squash, cabbage, green beans, avocados, coconut,
figs, artichokes, chickpeas, hemp and chia seeds Best vegetables:
low-glycemic, such as celery, spinach, broccoli, brassicas (broccoli,
brussels sprouts, cauliflower) Best fruits: low-glycemic, such as
apples, oranges, blueberries, raspberries, blackberries, strawberries
SKIP OR LIMIT THAT High-glycemic, low-fiber foods, such as white and
wheat bread, pasta, white potatoes, rice Sugar---no nutritional benefit,
depletes chromium and other valuable vitamins and minerals Corn
Processed foods Dried fruits: prunes, apricots, figs, cranberries;
raisins, dates High-glycemic fruits---such as pineapple, watermelon,
ripe bananas

Sleep EAT THIS Sleep-enhancing spices: ginger root Foods rich in
melatonin---the hormone of sleep: tart cherry juice concentrate, sour
cherries, walnuts, ginger root, asparagus, tomatoes

Serotonin-rich foods: combine tryptophan-containing foods, such as eggs,
turkey, seafood, chickpeas, nuts and seeds (building blocks for
serotonin), with healthy carbohydrates, such as sweet potatoes and
quinoa, to elicit a shortterm insulin response that drives tryptophan
into the brain. Dark chocolate also increases serotonin Chamomile or
passion fruit tea SKIP OR LIMIT THAT Alcohol, including wine---hard
liquor is worse for your brain; snoring is worse with alcohol
Caffeine---including dark chocolate (which also contains theobromine)
Energy drinks (duh!) Spicy foods---especially at night Grapefruit---due
to acidity may cause heartburn at night Foods that contain
diuretics---celery, cucumbers, radishes, watermelon (they will keep you
up going to the bathroom) Foods that contain tyramine---it increases
norepinephrine, a stimulating neurotransmitter: tomatoes, eggplant, soy,
red wine, aged cheeses Unhealthy fatty foods, such as burgers, fries,
and cheese pizza, which all have harder-to-digest saturated fats Black
bean chili---it will keep your GI tract rumbling High-protein
foods---they are harder to digest

\[760\] T. S. Sathyanarayana Rao et al., "Understanding Nutrition,
Depression and Mental Illnesses," Indian Journal of Psychiatry 50, no. 2
(April--June 2008): 77-- 82. \[761\] Jerome Sarris et al., "Nutritional
Medicine as Mainstream in Psychiatry," Lancet 2, no. 3 (2015): 271--74.
\[762\] Felice N. Jacka et al., "Western Diet Is Associated with a
Smaller Hippocampus: A Longitudinal Investigation," BMC Medicine 13
(September 8, 2015): 215.

\[763\] Felice N. Jacka et al., "Dietary Patterns and Depressive
Symptoms over Time: Examining the Relationships with Socioeconomic
Position, Health Behaviours and Cardiovascular Risk," PLOS One 9, no. 1
(January 29, 2014): e87657. Behnaz Shakersain et al., "Prudent Diet May
Attenuate the Adverse Effects of Western Diet on Cognitive Decline,"
Alzheimer's and Dementia 12, no. 2 (February 2016): 100--109. Amber L.
Howard et al., "ADHD Is Associated with a 'Western' Dietary Pattern in
Adolescents," Journal of Attention Disorders 15, no. 5 (July 2011):
403--11. Giovanni Tarantino, Vincenzo Citro, and Carmine Finelli, "Hype
or Reality: Should Patients with Metabolic Syndrome-Related NAFLD be on
the HunterGatherer (Paleo) Diet to Decrease Morbidity?" Journal of
Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases 24, no. 3 (September 2015): 359--68.
\[764\] National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, The Power of Prevention: Chronic Disease . . . the Public
Health Challenge of the 21st Century, US Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2009,
https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/pdf/2009-Power-of-Prevention.pdf.
\[765\] Maximus Berger et al., "Cross-Sectional Association of Seafood
Consumption, Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Depressive Symptoms in Two
Torres Strait Communities," Nutritional Neuroscience, August 3, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.1080/1028415X.2018.1504429. \[766\] Lawrence E.
Armstrong et al., "Mild Dehydration Affects Mood in Healthy Young
Women," Journal of Nutrition 142, no. 2 (February 2012): 382--88.
Matthew S. Ganio et al., "Mild Dehydration Impairs Cognitive Performance
and Mood of Men," British Journal of Nutrition 106, no. 10 (November 28,
2011): 1535--43. \[767\] Ana Adan, "Cognitive Performance and
Dehydration," Journal of the American College of Nutrition 31, no. 2
(2012): 71--78. \[768\] Kunio Nakamura et al., "Correlation between
Brain Volume Change and T2 Relaxation Time Induced by Dehydration and
Rehydration: Implications for Monitoring Atrophy in Clinical Studies,"
NeuroImage: Clinical 6 (2014): 166-- 70. \[769\] Paul D. Lindseth et
al., "Effects of Hydration on Cognitive Function of Pilots," Military
Medicine 178, no. 7 (July 2013): 792--98. \[770\] Daniel G. Amen and
Tana Amen, The Brain Warrior's Way (New York: New American Library,
2016), 113. \[771\] Rosebud O. Roberts et al., "Relative Intake of
Macronutrients Impacts Risk of Mild Cognitive Impairment or Dementia,"
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease 32, no. 2 (2012): 329--39. \[772\] Lenore
Arab, Rong Guo, and David Elashoff, "Lower Depression Scores among
Walnut Consumers in NHANES," Nutrients 11, no. 2 (January 26, 2019):
e275.

\[773\] James E. Gangwisch et al., "High Glycemic Index Diet as a Risk
Factor for Depression: Analyses from the Women's Health Initiative,"
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 102, no. 2 (August 2015):
454--63. \[774\] Kara L. Breymeyer et al., "Subjective Mood and Energy
Levels of Healthy Weight and Overweight/Obese Healthy Adults on High-
and Low-Glycemic Load Experimental Diets," Appetite 107 (December 1,
2016): 253--59. \[775\] Daniel G. Amen, Feel Better Fast and Make It
Last (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2018), 212--13. \[776\] Bayani Uttara
et al., "Oxidative Stress and Neurodegenerative Diseases: A Review of
Upstream and Downstream Antioxidant Therapeutic Options," Current
Neuropharmacology 7, no. 1 (March 2009): 65--74. \[777\] Gora Dadheech
et al., "Evaluation of Antioxidant Deficit in Schizophrenia," Indian
Journal of Psychiatry 50, no. 1 (January--March 2008): 16--20. \[778\]
Tao Liu et al., "A Meta-Analysis of Oxidative Stress Markers in
Depression," PLOS One 10, no. 10 (October 7, 2015): e0138904. \[779\]
Medhavi Gautam et al., "Role of Antioxidants in Generalised Anxiety
Disorder and Depression," Indian Journal of Psychiatry 54, no. 3 (July--
September 2012): 244--47. \[780\] See "List of Foods," ORAC Database,
accessed August 25, 2019,
https://oracdatabase.com/list-of-foods/list-of-foods/. Numbers have been
rounded down. \[781\] University of Warwick, "Fruit and Veggies Give You
the Feel-Good Factor," ScienceDaily, July 10, 2016,
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/07/160710094239.htm. \[782\]
Daniel G. Amen, Change Your Brain, Change Your Life, rev. ed. (New York:
Harmony Books, 2015), 137. \[783\] Amen and Amen, Brain Warrior's Way,
142. \[784\] Lidy M. Pelsser et al., "A Randomised Controlled Trial into
the Effects of Food on ADHD," European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
18, no. 1 (January 2009): 12--19. \[785\] Lidy M. Pelsser et al.,
"Effects of Food on Physical and Sleep Complaints in Children with ADHD:
A Randomised Controlled Pilot Study," European Journal of Pediatrics
169, no. 9 (September 2010): 1129--38. \[786\] Donna McCann et al.,
"Food Additives and Hyperactive Behavior in 3-YearOld and 8/9-Year-Old
Children in the Community: A Randomised, DoubleBlinded,
Placebo-Controlled Trial," Lancet 370, no. 9598 (November 3, 2007):
1560--67. \[787\] Rachel B. Acton et al., "Added Sugar in the Packaged
Foods and Beverages Available at a Major Canadian Retailer in 2015: A
Descriptive Analysis," CMAJ Open 5, no. 1 (January 12, 2017): e1--6.
\[788\] Michelle Pearlman, Jon Obert, and Lisa Casey, "The Association
between Artificial Sweeteners and Obesity," Current Gastroenterology
Reports 19, no. 12 (2017): 64.

\[789\] Jessica R. Jackson et al., "Neurologic and Psychiatric
Manifestations of Celiac Disease and Gluten Sensitivity," Psychiatric
Quarterly 83, no. 1 (March 2012): 91--102. \[790\] Megan Anne Arroll,
Lorraine Wilder, and James Neil, "Nutritional Interventions for the
Adjunctive Treatment of Schizophrenia: A Brief Review," Nutrition
Journal 13 (September 16, 2014): 91. Elena Lionetti et al., "Gluten
Psychosis: Confirmation of a New Clinical Entity," Nutrients 7, no. 7
(July 8, 2015): 5532--39. \[791\] Helmut Niederhofer, "Association of
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Celiac Disease: A Brief
Report," Primary Care Companion to CNS Disorders 13, no. 3 (2011):
e1--31. Paul Whiteley et al., "The ScanBrit Randomised, Controlled,
Single-Blind Study of a Gluten- and Casein-Free Dietary Intervention for
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders," Nutritional Neuroscience 13,
no. 2 (2010): 87-- 100. Antonio Di Sabatino et al., "Small Amounts of
Gluten in Subjects with Suspected Nonceliac Gluten Sensitivity: A
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Cross-Over Trial,"
Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology 13, no. 9 (September 2015):
1604--12.e3. S. L. Peters et al., "Randomised Clinical Trial: Gluten May
Cause Depression in Subjects with Non-coeliac Gluten Sensitivity---An
Exploratory Clinical Study," Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
39, no. 10 (May 2014): 1104--12. \[792\] Eleanor Busby et al., "Mood
Disorders and Gluten: It's Not All in Your Mind! A Systematic Review
with Meta-Analysis," Nutrients 10, no. 11 (November 8, 2018): e1708.
\[793\] Paola Bressan and Peter Kramer, "Bread and Other Edible Agents
of Mental Disease," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 10 (March 29, 2016):
130. \[794\] Leo Pruimboom and Karin de Punder, "The Opioid Effects of
Gluten Exorphins: Asymptomatic Celiac Disease," Journal of Health,
Population and Nutrition 33 (November 24, 2015): 24. \[795\] Bressan and
Kramer, "Bread and Other Edible Agents," 130. \[796\] P. Usai et al.,
"Frontal Cortical Perfusion Abnormalities Related to Gluten Intake and
Associated Autoimmune Disease in Adult Coeliac Disease: 99mTcECD Brain
SPECT Study," Digestive and Liver Disease 36, no. 8 (August 2004):
513--18. A. De Santis et al., "Schizophrenic Symptoms and SPECT
Abnormalities in a Coeliac Patient: Regression after a Gluten-Free
Diet," Journal of Internal Medicine 242, no. 5 (November 1997): 421--23.
\[797\] Giovanni Addolorato et al., "Regional Cerebral Hypoperfusion in
Patients with Celiac Disease," American Journal of Medicine 116, no. 5
(March 1, 2004): 312--17.

Maurizio Gabrielli et al., "Association between Migraine and Celiac
Disease: Results from a Preliminary Case-Control and Therapeutic Study,"
American Journal of Gastroenterology 98, no. 3 (March 2003): 625--29.
\[798\] M. Hadjivassiliou et al., "Dietary Treatment of Gluten Ataxia,"
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 74, no. 9 (September
2003): 1221-- 24. \[799\] F. C. Dohan et al., "Is Schizophrenia Rare if
Grain Is Rare?" Biological Psychiatry 19, no. 3 (March 1984): 385--99.
\[800\] F. C. Dohan and J. C. Grasberger, "Relapsed Schizophrenics:
Earlier Discharge from the Hospital after Cereal-Free, Milk-Free Diet,"
American Journal of Psychiatry 130, no. 6 (1973): 685--88. \[801\] Robin
Mesnage et al., "Potential Toxic Effects of Glyphosate and Its
Commercial Formulations below Regulatory Limits," Food and Chemical
Toxicology 84 (October 2015): 133--53. \[802\] K. R. Fluegge and K. R.
Fluegge, "Glyphosate Use Predicts ADHD Hospital Discharges in the
Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project Net (HCUPnet): A Two-Way
Fixed-Effects Analysis," PLOS One 10, no. 8 (August 21, 2015): e0133525,
retraction August 21, 2015, PLOS One,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0137489. \[803\] "15 Health
Problems Linked to Monsanto's Roundup," EcoWatch, January 23, 2015,
https://www.ecowatch.com/15-health-problems-linked-to-monsantosroundup-1882002128.html.
\[804\] Abdulaziz Farooq et al., "A Prospective Study of the
Physiological and Neurobehavioral Effects of Ramadan Fasting in Preteen
and Teenage Boys," Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
115, no. 6 (June 2015): 889-- 97. \[805\] N. M. Hussin et al., "Efficacy
of Fasting and Calorie Restriction (FCR) on Mood and Depression among
Ageing Men," Journal of Nutrition, Health and Aging 17, no. 8 (2013):
674--80. Kathryn C. Fitzgerald et al., "Effect of Intermittent vs. Daily
Calorie Restriction on Changes in Weight and Patient-Reported Outcomes
in People with Multiple Sclerosis," Multiple Sclerosis and Related
Disorders 23 (July 2018): 33--39. \[806\] Tatiana Moro et al., "Effects
of Eight Weeks of Time-Restricted Feeding (16/8) on Basal Metabolism,
Maximal Strength, Body Composition, Inflammation, and Cardiovascular
Risk Factors in Resistance-Trained Males," Journal of Translational
Medicine 14, no. 1 (October 13, 2016): 290. \[807\] M. E. Faris et al.,
"Intermittent Fasting during Ramadan Attenuates Proinflammatory
Cytokines and Immune Cells in Healthy Subjects," Nutrition Research 32,
no. 12 (December 2012): 947--55. \[808\] Andrea R. Vasconcelos et al.,
"Intermittent Fasting Attenuates Lipopolysaccharide-Induced
Neuroinflammation and Memory Impairment," Journal of Neuroinflammation
11 (May 6, 2014): 85.

\[809\] Ben Spencer, "Why You Should NEVER Eat after 7pm: Late Night
Meals 'Increases the Risk of Heart Attack and Stroke,'" Daily Mail,
August 31, 2016,
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3767231/Why-NEVER-eat-7pmLate-night-meals-increases-risk-heart-attack-stroke.html.
\[810\] Ameneh Madjd et al., "Beneficial Effect of High Energy Intake at
Lunch Rather Than Dinner on Weight Loss in Healthy Obese Women in a
Weight-Loss Program: A Randomized Clinical Trial," American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 104, no. 4 (October 2016): 982--89. \[811\] I
published a similar list in Memory Rescue (Tyndale, 2017), but this list
is narrowed down to the foods that will help or hurt mental health
issues. \[812\] Coreyann Poly et al., "The Relation of Dietary Choline
to Cognitive Performance and White-Matter Hyperintensity in the
Framingham Offspring Cohort," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 94,
no. 6 (December 2011): 1584--91. \[813\] Xiaoshuang Dai et al.,
"Consuming Lentinula edodes (Shiitake) Mushrooms Daily Improves Human
Immunity: A Randomized Dietary Intervention in Healthy Young Adults,"
Journal of the American College of Nutrition 34, no. 6 (2015): 478--87.
J. M. Gaullier et al., "Supplementation with a Soluble β-glucan Exported
from Shiitake Medicinal Mushroom, Lentinus edodes (Berk.) Singer
Mycelium: A Crossover, Placebo-Controlled Study in Healthy Elderly,"
International Journal of Medical Mushrooms 13, no. 4 (2011): 319--26.
\[814\] Lawrance C. Chandra et al., "White Button, Portabella, and
Shiitake Mushroom Supplementation Up-Regulates Interleukin-23 Secretion
in Acute Dextran Sodium Sulfate Colitis C57BL/6 Mice and Murine
Macrophage J.744.1 Cell Line," Nutrition Research 33, no. 5 (May 2013):
388--96.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 19

HOW TO MAKE A MASSIVE DIFFERENCE BRAIN HEALTH IN FAMILIES, SCHOOLS,
BUSINESSES, CHURCHES, AND ANYWHERE PEOPLE CONGREGATE You never change
things by fighting the existing reality. To change something, build a
new model that makes the existing model obsolete. R. B U C K M I N S T E
R F U L L E R

Brain health issues do not just affect the person who suffers. They
affect everyone around them, and nearly a million families every year
break apart under the stress. When I first started scanning people, I
realized that I needed to be concerned about all of the brains in the
family. Family dynamics are never based on just one brain, so I needed
to understand all of them. For example, my nieces, Alizé and Amelie,
were seriously impacted by the brain dysfunction of their parents. Their
mother, Tamara, had been impacted by the brain health of her mom and
dad. If you spend a lot of time with parents who are depressed, anxious,
or abusing drugs, the stress can reshape your brain to make you more
vulnerable to depression and substance abuse. If you have a

spouse or an adult child with brain health/mental health issues, you
know the impact it can have on everyone in the family. Few people talk
about the incredible toll these brain health/mental health issues take
on families: from being blamed as the cause of the problem to the
chronic stress they feel, the financial pressure, and the grief and
sadness they experience. Helping families help each other is such an
important part of the healing process. If we want to truly end mental
illness, we must work to support everyone in the family by: Encouraging
communication. People cannot read your mind. They haven't had your
experiences, so they likely don't know what you're going through unless
you tell them. Here are some magic words to open communication: "I'm
concerned about you." "I'm here for you." "Can we talk about how you're
feeling?" "Is there someone else you might feel more comfortable talking
to?" Teaching everyone about brain health. Just focusing on the person
who suffers invites frustration and failure. Showing people that asking
for help is a sign of strength, not weakness. Imagine if a business was
having problems and the owners just ignored them or denied them. The
business would go bankrupt. The same thing happens when brain
health/mental health issues are ignored. This is one of the reasons so
many families break apart.

Being cautious with tough love---it works for people whose brains work
right, but for people who have brains that are struggling, tough love is
like smashing your computer when it has a problem. It can cause lasting
damage. Teaching family members to be curious, not furious and
judgmental, when one family member has a setback. As you have seen in
this book, behavior is much more complicated than most people think.

BRAIN HEALTH EDUCATION IN SOCIETY In 2017, I was invited to the White
House to discuss prison reform, the opiate epidemic, and mental illness
in America. In the same way our society can work against us to create
mental illness, it can also enable us to enhance brain health and end
mental illness. My central recommendation was to create a national
campaign that teaches brain health in schools, prisons, churches,
recovery programs, and workplaces. This recommendation was based on
three largescale programs I helped to create. Here are details of these
programs.

1.  Brain Thrive by 25 In 2005, Dr. Jesse Payne and I created a high
    school and college course to teach students how to love and care for
    their brains. Called Brain Thrive by 25 (www.brainthriveby25.com),
    it has been taught in all 50 states and in seven countries.
    Independent research has shown that it reduces drug, alcohol, and
    tobacco use; decreases depression; and improves self-esteem. In the
    course, we teach kids to love and care for their brains,

including lessons on basic brain facts, the developing brain, gender
differences, the impact of drugs and alcohol on the brain, nutrition,
stress management, killing ANTs (automatic negative thoughts), and how
to throw a brain-healthy party. It has been a popular course that has
changed lives. I am confident that teaching brain health in schools on a
nationwide basis would have a huge positive effect on our young people
and could help them avoid developing brain disorders/mental illnesses.
And by ending mental illness in young people like my nieces, Alizé and
Amelie, it would help end it in their children, grandchildren, and so
on.

Brain Thrive by 25 reduces drug, alcohol, and tobacco use; decreases
depression; and improves self-esteem.

Here are just a few of the testimonials from students who have taken
Brain Thrive by 25:

I was told my whole childhood that I was stupid by my dad. Now, I am on
a quest to learn how to hack life, and this course has made a huge
difference for me. I am making my brain stronger and becoming healthier
overall.

I noticed that I had a pretty big social media addiction that was
harming my ability to process emotions and control my impulses. I have
now minimized my addiction, which has helped me feel better overall. My
dream is to be a musician, and I am nervous about the drug and alcohol
culture within the music industry. It will be easier staying clean from
drugs now that I realize how bad they are for me and, most importantly,
for my brain. 2. The Daniel Plan In 2010, I went to my own church and
saw them serving doughnuts, bacon, hot dogs, and ice cream, and I was
horrified that I was going there to get my soul fed, yet these people
were trying to kill my body. At that service, I prayed that God would
use me to change the culture of food at church. Two weeks later, Pastor
Rick Warren, the senior pastor at Saddleback Church, one of the largest
churches in America with 20 campuses around the world, called me and
said, "I'm fat; my church is fat. Will you help me?" Together with
Pastor Warren, Dr. Mehmet Oz, and my friend Dr. Mark Hyman, we created
The Daniel Plan, based on the principles of the four circles. The first
week, 15,000 people signed up, and over the first year they lost more
than 250,000 pounds and reported better energy, focus, creativity,
sleep, and mood, plus reductions in stress, blood pressure, blood sugar,
sexual dysfunction, and many medications. Together, we went on to write
a #1 New York Times and international bestselling book, The Daniel Plan:
40 Days to a Healthier Life. The Daniel Plan has been implemented in
thousands of churches

worldwide. Whenever I am on one of the Saddleback campuses, I hear story
after story of how people's lives have been changed. As you've seen in
this book, diabesity is a BRIGHT MINDS risk factor that contributes to
brain health/mental health. If all churches implemented simple
strategies that minimize these risk factors---such as serving
brain-healthy foods and encouraging physical activity---it could help
millions of people reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression, improve
focus and attention, and more. And if each of those people shared what
they learned with their family and friends, it would improve brain
health/mental health on a national level.

I no longer take antidepressant medication. My mood is so much more
stable and positive. I just finished chemo. Everyone is amazed at how
much energy I have and how fast my hair is returning. I am running
circles around a friend who is 10 years younger and doesn't have cancer.
(He is not on the plan.) I'm off my high blood pressure meds . . . and
am working on getting off of my type 2 diabetes and cholesterol meds.
Odd to say this in church, but my sex life has dramatically improved!

The Daniel Plan helps people get better together.

3. Creating BRIGHT MINDS at Work If you are like many Americans, work
creates stress and sours their mood. You grind your teeth in traffic to
get to the office where you have an inbox full of urgent emails waiting
for you. But before you get to your cubicle, you pass by the break room
where you find doughnuts, leftover cake from yesterday's birthday
celebration, coffee with artificial creamer and sugar, and a bowl of
jelly beans. Helping yourself to them just sets your brain up for more
stress, a lack of focus, and mood swings, as well as increasing your
BRIGHT MINDS risk factors. It's not a recipe for success. It doesn't
have to be this way. The BRIGHT MINDS at Work program gives companies
and other organizations the tools needed to help teams boost brain
health and create a more positive, productive environment where everyone
is happier, less stressed, and primed for success. When incorporated as
part of a comprehensive wellness program, this brain-healthy approach
has also been shown to contribute to improved immune systems and a
decrease in absenteeism. Imagine if every workplace promoted a
brain-healthy lifestyle. It could greatly cut down on the risk factors
that make people vulnerable to brain health/mental health issues.

Just a few of our many testimonials show how this information can change
lives.

Discovering Dr. Amen's brain health initiative could not have come at a
more opportune time for me. My mother was recently diagnosed with
predementia, meaning I have a higher risk for dementia or Alzheimer's
disease. Dr. Amen's BRIGHT MINDS approach helped me to understand key
risk factors for memory decline and behavioral changes that I can make
to help mitigate my risk. Starting with simple things like eliminating
caffeine, becoming more disciplined about diet and exercise, and
introducing supplements, I have already seen a reduction in my
cholesterol and triglycerides (the source of restricted blood flow to
the brain in my mother's case). Learning that there are things I can do
to delay the inevitable decline in memory function is empowering, and I
am thankful to have been introduced to Dr. Amen while there is still
time for me to implement these changes. I can't say thank you enough to
express how grateful I am for the opportunity that our company provided
us to meet Dr. Amen. He inspired me to be the best version of myself. He
taught me how to love my mind and my body. Since I have started his
classes, I no longer blame myself for not being the best. I no longer
let my body have nonhealthy and chemical foods. And also, I no longer
judge people and overthink, which was killing me in the past few years.
I just lost 17 pounds and reached my weight goal! 140 pounds! I'm so
happy!

When I started the BRIGHT MINDS program six months ago, I had no idea
how profoundly it would affect my life. Because of Dr. Amen's
recommendation to 'Know Your Numbers,' I got lab work done that showed a
serious problem with my cardiovascular system, putting both my brain and
my heart at risk. As a 50-year-old woman with no health symptoms, I
would have never known that I was at risk without the encouragement of
Dr. Amen to take charge of my own health and live my best possible life.
Thank you, Dr. Amen and our company, for this wonderful program! To end
mental illness, we must create brain health in ourselves, in our
families, in our communities, and in our organizations.

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX A

How to Find a BRIGHT MINDS Brain Health Practitioner

My mission has always been to teach other medical and mental health
professionals the techniques we have learned at Amen Clinics. We have
trained more than 3,000 brain health certified coaches
(www.brainhealthcoaching.com). To find professionals who will have a
similar integrative mindset to the one expressed in this book, visit
https://AmenUniversity.com/ReferralDirectory. You can also go to the
Institute for Functional Medicine (www.ifm.org) or American Academy of
Anti-Aging Medicine (www.a4m.com) websites to see if there is a
functional medicine doctor near you.

OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX B

10 Common Genes That May Influence Brain Health/Mental Health

GENES

IMPORTANCE/INTERVENTIONS FOR VARIANTS

1.  MTHFR--- methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase Enzyme critical for
    making methylfolate, essential for making neurotransmitters such as
    norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin.

Nonideal variants associated with depression, \[815\] bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia,\[816\] and autism.\[817\] Leads to high homocysteine and
vascular disease. Associated with brain shrinkage.\[818\] Supplementing
with methylfolate (0.4--15 mg a day) can improve depression.\[819\]

2.  COMT---catechol-Omethyltransferase (warrior or worrier gene) Enzyme
    that breaks down dopamine in prefrontal cortex (PFC). Estrogen
    decreases COMT, increasing dopamine in PFC. Females have higher
    anxiety, fewer ADD/ADHD diagnoses.

One variant breaks down dopamine faster in PFC, which leads to lower
dopamine levels and higher impulsivity, risk-taking behavior,
extroversion, poorer working memory, being less of a rule follower, and
less neuroticism. It has been associated with ADD/ADHD.\[820\] Performs
better under stress (more likely to run toward fires). Responds better
to stimulant medications, modafinil, green tea, tyrosine, exercise, and
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Some studies show that teens
with a variant of COMT have an increased risk of psychosis with
marijuana use.\[821\]

Another variant breaks down dopamine slower in PFC, leading to higher
levels of dopamine and lower risk-taking behavior, less impulsivity,
being more of a rule follower, more introversion, more neuroticism,
better working memory. OCD and bipolar disorder are higher in this
group. \[822\] Performs worse under stress (less likely to run toward
fires). More likely to benefit from early interventions to prevent the
onset of panic after childhood adversities.\[823\] 3. BDNF---brain
derived neurotrophic factor Protein involved in neurogenesis and
neuroplasticity, helping to encourage the growth of new neurons.

One variant is associated with impaired working memory, depression,
increased stress response, and PTSD. Physical exercise helps to
ameliorate the trouble it can cause.\[824\] Another variant had a three
times better response to SSRI medications.\[825\] Lithium (300 mcg) has
been shown to increase BDNF levels. High saturated fat and sugar
decrease BDNF.

4.  MAOA---monoamine oxidase A Involved in dopamine, norepinephrine, and
    serotonin levels that affect mood, focus, energy, addictions, sleep,
    and carb cravings.

One variant tends toward carb cravings, addictions, ADD/ADHD,
depression, weight gain, being depressed on diet, and wakefulness at
night Another variant can lead to being easily startled, aggression,
headaches from cheese or wine, difficulty falling asleep, mood swings,
irritability, and addictions.

5.  DAO---diamine oxidase Decreases histamine, mainly in gut. Affects
    allergic response to various foods; may be associated with food
    sensitivity.

Variants associated with food sensitivities, leaky gut, allergic
reactions, autoimmune risk, headaches, irritability, racing heart, itchy
skin, and bloody nose. Consider low-histamine diet and fresh foods,
avoid leftovers, improve gut health, treat leaky gut, manage stress,
exercise, have a healthy sleep routine, avoid environmental
toxins/allergens, and avoid aspirin/NSAIDs.

6.  SLC6A4---serotonin transporter protein Codes for serotonin
    transporter protein responsible for serotonin uptake.

Studies have shown those with one or two copies of the short form
allele(s) are more likely to have a poorer or slower response to SSRI
medications and more side effects.\[826\] Not all

Antidepressant activity of SSRI medications is achieved through
inhibition of this protein.

studies agree. One study found elderly people with the short allele had
a better response. \[827\] Those with the short allele(s) also have more
anxiety personality traits\[828\] and increased activity in the amygdala
(an area of the brain more active when anxious).\[829\] Higher rate of
PTSD, mood disorders, and stress reactivity.

7.  CACNA1C---gated calcium channel Involved in nerve cell firing.

May lead to excessive glutamate, the most prevalent stimulating
neurotransmitter, which can be toxic in high amounts. Found to be higher
in those with treatmentresistant depression, bipolar disorder, and
schizophrenia.\[830\] Mood-stabilizing medications and Omega-3 fatty
acids may be helpful.

8.  ANK3---ankyrin-G Belongs to a family of proteins that have a role in
    nerve-cell firing.

May lead to excessive glutamate, the most prevalent stimulating
neurotransmitter, which can be toxic in high amounts. Studies have shown
a correlation between this variation and bipolar disorder, mood
instability, and schizophrenia.\[831\] Mood stabilizing medications and
omega-3 fatty acids may be helpful.

9.  APO E---apolipoprotein E gene type Helps in development, repair, and
    maintenance of nerve cell membranes. Also involved in waste
    management and clearing cellular debris.

Three versions: APOE e2, e3, and e4. APOE e4 has been associated with an
increased risk of Alzheimer's disease, hypertension, and
atherosclerosis.\[832\] Not everyone with the e4 gene will develop
Alzheimer's disease; in fact, 75 percent will not. APOE e4 gene is
associated with overall lower blood flow to the brain;\[833\] take care
of blood vessels if you have it. Exercise, vitamin D, Mediterranean
diet, and omega-3 fatty acids may help.

10. Cytochrome P450 Different genotypes code for blood levels that
    Metabolism of medications and may be significantly higher or lower
    than hormones predicted based on dose: Poor metabolizers (PM) have
    two nonfunctional genes so have little to no enzyme activity,
    increased drug levels, and more side effects.

Intermediate metabolizers (IM) have one nonfunctional gene and one
normally functioning gene, therefore, have decreased enzyme activity.
Extensive metabolizers (EM)---have two normally functioning genes and
normal enzyme activity. Ultrarapid metabolizers (UM) have more than two
copies of functional genes that results in increased enzyme activity
compared to EM; may have decreased drug levels and a poor response. May
need higher than normal dosages. Practical note: Citalopram (Celexa)
should be avoided in CYP2C19 poor metabolizers (2--7 percent of
population).

\[815\] Simon Gilbody, Tracy Lightfoot, and Trevor Sheldon, "Is Low
Folate a Risk Factor for Depression? A Meta-analysis and Exploration of
Heterogeneity," Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 61, no. 7
(2007): 631--37. \[816\] Odette L. J. Peerbooms et al., "Meta-Analysis
of MTHFR Gene Variants in Schizophrenia, Bipolar Disorder and Unipolar
Depressive Disorder: Evidence for a Common Genetic Vulnerability?"
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 25, no. 8 (November 2011): 1530--43.
\[817\] Naushad Shaik Mohammad et al., "Aberrations in Folate Metabolic
Pathway and Altered Susceptibility to Autism," Psychiatric Genetics 19,
no. 4 (2009): 171--76. Robin P. Goin-Kochel et al., "The MTHFR 677C→T
Polymorphism and Behaviors in Children with Autism: Exploratory
Genotype--Phenotype Correlations," Autism Research 2, no. 2 (April
2009): 98--108. \[818\] Priya Rajagopalan et al., "Common Folate Gene
Variant, MTHFR C677T, Is Associated with Brain Structure in Two
Independent Cohorts of People with Mild Cognitive Impairment,"
NeuroImage: Clinical 1, no. 1 (2012): 179--87. \[819\] Arnold W. Mech
and Andrew Farah, "Correlation of Clinical Response with Homocysteine
Reduction during Therapy with Reduced B Vitamins in Patients with MDD
Who Are Positive for MTHFR C677T or A1298C Polymorphism: A Randomized,
Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study," Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
77, no. 5 (May 2016): 668--71.

\[820\] Steven Taylor, "Association between COMT Val158Met and
Psychiatric Disorders: A Comprehensive Meta-analysis," American Journal
of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 177, no. 2,
special issue (March 2018): 199--210. \[821\] Avshalom Caspi et al.,
"Moderation of the Effect of Adolescent-Onset Cannabis Use on Adult
Psychosis by a Functional Polymorphism in the
Catechol-O-Methyltransferase Gene: Longitudinal Evidence of a Gene X
Environment Interaction," Biological Psychiatry 57, no. 10 (May 15,
2005): 1117--27. \[822\] Taylor, "Association between COMT Val158Met and
Psychiatric Disorders," 199--210. \[823\] Eva Asselmann et al.,
"Interplay between COMT Val158Met, Childhood Adversities and Sex in
Predicting Panic Pathology: Findings from a General Population Sample,"
Journal of Affective Disorders 234 (July 2018): 290--96. \[824\] Kirk I.
Erickson et al., "The Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor Val66Met
Polymorphism Moderates an Effect of Physical Activity on Working Memory
Performance," Psychological Science 24, no. 9 (September 2013):
1770--79. \[825\] Romain Colle et al., "Brain-Derived Neurotrophic
Factor Val66Met Polymorphism and 6-Month Antidepressant Remission in
Depressed Caucasian Patients," Journal of Affective Disorders 175 (April
1, 2015): 233-- 40. \[826\] M. Kato and A. Serretti, "Review and
Meta-Analysis of Antidepressant Pharmacogenetic Findings in Major
Depressive Disorder," Molecular Psychiatry 15, no. 5 (May 2010):
473--500. A. Serretti et al., "Meta-Analysis of Serotonin Transporter
Gene Promoter Polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) Association with Selective
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Efficacy in Depressed Patients," Molecular
Psychiatry 12, no. 3 (March 2007): 247--57. Stefano Porcelli, Chiara
Fabbri, and Alessandro Serretti, "Meta-analysis of Serotonin Transporter
Gene Promoter Polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) Association with Antidepressant
Efficacy," European Neuropsychopharmacology 22, no. 4 (April 2012):
239--58. \[827\] Davide Seripa et al., "Role of the Serotonin
Transporter Gene Locus in the Response to SSRI Treatment of Major
Depressive Disorder in Late Life," Journal of Psychopharmacology 29, no.
5 (2015): 623--33. \[828\] Srijan Sen, Margit Burmeister, and Debashis
Ghosh, "Meta-Analysis of the Association between a Serotonin Transporter
Promoter Polymorphism (5HTTLPR) and Anxiety-Related Personality Traits,"
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics
127B, no. 1 (May 15, 2004): 85-- 89. \[829\] Ahmad R. Hariri et al., "A
Susceptibility Gene for Affective Disorders and the Response of the
Human Amygdala," Archives of General Psychiatry 62, no. 2 (February
2005): 146--52.

\[830\] Manuel A. R. Ferreira et al., "Collaborative Genome-Wide
Association Analysis Supports a Role for ANK3 and CACNA1C in Bipolar
Disorder," Nature Genetics 40, no. 9 (September 2008): 1056--58. \[831\]
Ferreira et al., "ANK3 and CACNA1C in Bipolar Disorder," 1056--58. Fei
Wang et al., "The Association of Genetic Variation in CACNA1C with
Structure and Function of a Frontotemporal System," Bipolar Disorders
13, nos. 7--8 (November/December 2011): 696--700. Daixing Zhou et al.,
"AnkyrinG Is Required for Clustering of Voltage-Gated Na Channels at
Axon Initial Segments and for Normal Action Potential Firing," Journal
of Cell Biology 143, no. 5 (1998): 1295--304. T. G. Schulze et al., "Two
Variants in Ankyrin 3 (ANK3) Are Independent Genetic Risk Factors for
Bipolar Disorder," Molecular Psychiatry 14, no. 5 (May 2009): 487--91.
\[832\] Sabrina Schilling et al., "APOE Genotype and MRI Markers of
Cerebrovascular Disease: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis," Neurology
81, no. 3 (July 16, 2013): 292--300. \[833\] Madhav Thambisetty et al.,
"APOE ε4 Genotype and Longitudinal Changes in Cerebral Blood Flow in
Normal Aging," Archives of Neurology 67, no. 1 (January 2010): 93--98.

OceanofPDF.com

Gratitude and Appreciation

So many people have been involved in the process of creating The End of
Mental Illness. I am grateful to them all, especially the tens of
thousands of patients and families who have come to Amen Clinics and
allowed us to help them on their healing journey. I am grateful to the
amazing staff at Amen Clinics, who work hard every day serving our
patients. Special appreciation to Frances Sharpe, who helped me craft
the book to make it easily accessible to our readers. Also, to my
friends and colleagues Dr. Parris Kidd, Dr. Rob Johnson, and Natalie
Buchoz for their input, love, and support. I am also grateful to Jan
Long Harris and the team at Tyndale for their belief in the book and
help in getting it to the world, and my editor, Andrea Vinley Converse,
who helped make this book the best it can be. I am grateful to my
amazing wife, Tana, who is my partner in all I do, and to my family, who
has tolerated my obsession with making brains better. I love you all.

OceanofPDF.com

About Daniel G. Amen, MD

The Washington Post has called Dr. Daniel G. Amen the most popular
psychiatrist in America, and Sharecare, a digital health company
designed to help people manage their health in one place, named him the
web's most influential expert and advocate on mental health. Dr. Amen is
a physician, double board--certified psychiatrist, 10-time New York
Times bestselling author, and international speaker. He is the founder
of Amen Clinics in Costa Mesa, Los Angeles, and San Francisco,
California; Bellevue, Washington; Reston, Virginia; Atlanta; New York;
and Chicago. Amen Clinics have one of the highest published success
rates treating complex psychiatric issues, and they have built the
world's largest database of functional brain scans, totaling more than
170,000 scans on patients from 121 countries. Dr. Amen is the lead
researcher on the world's largest brain imaging and rehabilitation study
of professional football players. His research has not only demonstrated
high levels of brain damage in players, it has also shown the
possibility of significant recovery for many with the principles that
underlie his work. Together with Pastor Rick Warren and Mark Hyman, MD,
Dr. Amen is also one of the chief architects of Saddleback Church's
Daniel Plan, a program to get the world healthy through religious
organizations.

Dr. Amen is the author or coauthor of more than 70 professional
articles, seven book chapters, and more than 30 books, including the #1
New York Times bestsellers The Daniel Plan and Change Your Brain, Change
Your Life; as well as Magnificent Mind at Any Age; Change Your Brain,
Change Your Body; Use Your Brain to Change Your Age; Healing ADD; The
Brain Warrior's Way; The Brain Warrior's Way Cookbook; Captain Snout and
the Super Power Questions; Memory Rescue; and Feel Better Fast and Make
It Last. Dr. Amen's published scientific articles have appeared in the
prestigious journals Brain Imaging and Behavior, Nature's Molecular
Psychiatry, PLOS ONE, Nature's Translational Psychiatry, Nature's
Obesity, the Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
Minerva Psichiatrica, Journal of Neurotrauma, the American Journal of
Psychiatry, Nuclear Medicine Communications, Neurological Research,
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,
Primary Psychiatry, Military Medicine, and General Hospital Psychiatry.
His research on posttraumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury
was recognized by Discover magazine in its Year in Science issue as one
of the "100 Top Stories of 2015." Dr. Amen has written, produced, and
hosted 14 popular shows about the brain on public television. He has
appeared in movies, including After the Last Round and The Crash Reel,
and in Emmy Award--winning television shows, such as The Truth about
Drinking and The Dr. Oz Show. He was a consultant on the movie
Concussion, starring Will Smith. He has also spoken for the National
Security Agency (NSA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), Harvard's
Learning & the Brain Conference, the Department of the Interior, the
National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges, and the Supreme
Courts of Delaware, Ohio, and Wyoming. Dr.

Amen's work has been featured in Newsweek, Time magazine, the Huffington
Post, the BBC, the Guardian, Parade magazine, the New York Times, the
New York Times Magazine, the Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, Men's
Health, and Cosmopolitan. Dr. Amen is married to Tana. He is the father
of four children and grandfather to Elias, Emmy, Liam, Louie, and Haven.
He is also an avid table tennis player.

OceanofPDF.com

Resources

AMEN CLINICS www.amenclinics.com Amen Clinics, Inc. (ACI), was
established in 1989 by Daniel G. Amen, MD. We specialize in innovative
diagnosis and treatment planning for a wide variety of behavioral,
learning, emotional, cognitive, and weight issues for children,
teenagers, and adults. ACI has an international reputation for
evaluating brain-behavior problems, such as ADD/ADHD, depression,
anxiety, school failure, traumatic brain injury and concussions,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, aggressiveness, marital conflict,
cognitive decline, brain toxicity from drugs or alcohol, and obesity. In
addition, ACI works with people to optimize brain function and decrease
the risk for Alzheimer's disease and other agerelated issues. One of the
primary diagnostic tools used at ACI is brain SPECT imaging. ACI has the
world's largest database of brain scans for emotional, cognitive, and
behavioral problems. ACI welcomes referrals from physicians,
psychologists, social workers, marriage and family therapists, drug and
alcohol counselors, and individual patients and families. Our toll-free
number is (888) 412-1607. Amen Clinics Orange County, Amen Clinics
Northern

California 3150 Bristol St., Suite 400 Costa Mesa, CA 92626

California 350 N. Wiget Ln., Suite 105 Walnut Creek, CA 94598

Amen Clinics Northwest 616 120th Ave. NE, Suite C100 Bellevue, WA 98005

Amen Clinics Los Angeles 5363 Balboa Blvd., Suite 100 Encino, CA 91316

Amen Clinics Washington, D.C. 1875 Campus Commons Dr. Reston, VA 20191

Amen Clinics New York 16 East 40th St., 9th Floor New York, NY 10016

Amen Clinics Atlanta 5901-C Peachtree Dunwoody Road, N.E., Suite 65
Atlanta, GA 30328

Amen Clinics Chicago 2333 Waukegan Rd., Suite 100 Bannockburn, IL 60015

Our website, www.amenclinics.com, is educational and interactive, geared
toward mental health and medical professionals, educators, students, and
the public. It contains a wealth of information and resources to help
you learn about optimizing your brain. The site contains more than 300
color brain SPECT images, thousands of scientific abstracts on brain
SPECT imaging for psychiatry, a free brain health assessment, and much,
much more.

BRAIN FIT LIFE www.mybrainfitlife.com Based on Dr. Amen's 35 years as a
clinical psychiatrist, he and his wife, Tana, have developed a
sophisticated online community that includes:

Detailed questionnaires to help you know your brain type and a
personalized program targeted to your own needs WebNeuro, a
neuropsychological test that assesses your brain Fun brain games and
tools to boost your motivation Exclusive, award-winning, 24-7 brain gym
membership Physical exercises and tutorials led by Tana Hundreds of
Tana's delicious, brain-healthy recipes Exercises to kill the ANTs
(automatic negative thoughts) Meditation and hypnosis audios for sleep,
anxiety, pain, and more Brain-enhancing music by Grammy Award winner
Barry Goldstein Online forum and a community of support Access to
monthly live coaching calls with Daniel and Tana

BRAINMD www.brainmdhealth.com For the highest quality brain health
supplements, courses, books, and more.

OceanofPDF.com

Index

A acetylcholine 124 acrylates 190 action potential 207 addictions
299--300 aging challenges of 117--124 of population 120 alcohol 183--184
allergens 219 most common food 221 aluminum 190 Alzheimer's disease 120
Amen Clinics xv--xvi, 359--360 referral network 349 American Academy of
Anti-Aging Medicine 349 amygdala 66 anesthesia 188--189 ANK3 gene 353
Anterior cingulate cortex 66, 67 antibiotics 138--139 antidepressants 4,
28--29 effectiveness 13 antinuclear antibodies (ANA) 231, 311
antiseizure medications 212 ANTs (automatic negative thoughts) 81--84
anxiety genetics and 152 anxiety disorders 4, 300--301 APO E gene 353
artichoke extract 199 artificial sweeteners 196, 331 asylums 23--24

attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADD/ADHD) 122, 298--299 autoimmune disorders 222 mental health issues
and 220--221 treatment of 221--222 aviation fuel 188

B basal ganglia 66, 67 BDNF 352 beauty products. See cosmetics
benzodiazepine 28 betaine (trimethylglycine) 143 BHA 196 BHT 196
biological circle 79--80 bipolar disorder 297 black pepper 327 blood
flow 101--115 prescription 107--113 risk factors 104--105 blood lipid
panel 308 blood pressure 307--308 blood tests 25-hydroxyvitamin D 231
antinuclear antibodies 231, 311 blood lipid panel 308 cholesterol and
triglycerides 308 complete blood count 231, 308 C-reactive protein 309
DHEA-S 312--313 erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 231, 311 estrogen
and progesterone 313 fasting blood sugar 314 fasting insulin 314
ferritin (iron) 309 folate 310 general metabolic panel 309 hemoglobin
A1c 314 homocysteine 134, 308 kidney function 194 liver function 194
Omega-3 Index 135, 309 testosterone 313 TGF Beta-1 195

thyroid panel 311--312 vitamin B12 309--310 vitamin D 231, 311 body mass
index 313 brain 63--72, 112, 161 anatomy of 65--67 brain health 4--5 12
principles of 63--72 brain imaging 37--62 uses of 47--48 brain injury.
See traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) BrainMD xvi Brain Thrive by 25 xvi,
344--345 Brain Warrior's Way Cookbook 336 brain waves 171 BRIGHT MINDS
7, 77 blood flow 101--115 diabesity 261--273 food recommendations chart
338--342 four circles 76--97 genetics 147--158 head trauma 159--174
immunity and infections 217--237 inflammation 131--146 mind storms
203--215 neurohormone issues 239--259 retirement/aging 117--130 sleep
275--287 toxins 175--202 BRIGHT MINDS at Work 347--348 burst training
110

C CACNA1C gene 353 cadmium 182 caffeine 281--282 calcium D-glucarate 257
calories 321--322 Candida albicans 228--230 carbohydrates 324--326
differences between 265--266 cayenne pepper 327 cerebellum 67
chemotherapy 189 chlordiazepoxide. See Librium

chlorpromazine. See Thorazine cholesterol 104 chromium picolinate 271
chromosomes 150 chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) 222 cigarettes 184--185
cinnamon 272, 327 clean eating 327--329 cocoa flavanols 112 complete
blood count 231, 308 COMT gene 351 concussion 162 contact sports
168--169 coordination activities 110 corn 334 cortisol 94, 109, 128,
200, 241, 243--245, 250, 254, 257--258, 312 cosmetics 190, 198 harmful
chemicals in 190--191 CPAP machine 277 C-reactive protein 309 curcumin
143--144 cytochrome P450 gene 354

D Daniel Plan xvi, 346--347 DAO 352 deep limbic system 66, 67 depression
2--4, 301--302 inflammation and 133 DHEA 241, 243--245, 256, 258, 313
diabesity 261--273 prescriptions for 267--272 risk factors 266 diabetes
105, 262--263 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) 30--31 symptom
clusters and 12--14 diet and nutrition 317--342 allergens 329--335 clean
eating 327--329 elimination diet 329--335 fats 323--324 fish 144, 320,
322--323, 329 food additives 196, 210--211, 327, 330 food detox 197
gluten 197, 230, 243, 267, 329--335

herbs and spices 326--327, 338 organic foods 196, 327--328 protein 213,
322--323 sugar 101, 105, 265, 329--331 vegetables and fruits 325--326
diindolylmethane (DIM) 256 dopamine 124, 351--352 Dreyfus, Jack 205--206

E e-cigarettes. See vaping EEG biofeedback. See neurofeedback
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 27 elimination diet 329-- 335 endocrine
disruptors 255 Environmental Working Group pesticide levels in food 196,
328 Skin Deep database 190 erectile dysfunction 105, 107 erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) 231, 311 estradiol 246--247 estriol 247
estrogen 241, 246--257, 313, 341 symptoms of imbalance 248 estrone 247
exercise 108--110, 200, 270--271, 282 benefits of 108--109

F fast food 320 fasting 127, 335--336 fats healthy vs. unhealthy
323--324 ferritin See iron fiber 199, 270, 324--326, 340, 341
fibromyalgia 222 fish 144, 320, 322--323, 329 fish oil supplements
139--140, 144 5-HTP 285 flame retardants 191, 255 fluoxetine. See Prozac
folate 143, 172, 250, 310 food additives 196, 210--211, 327, 330 food
allergies brain inflammation and 329

food coloring 211 food detox 197 football 70, 140, 155, 162--163, 166,
168--169, 253 formaldehyde 185, 190 four circles 76--97 fragrance 191,
198 Frankl, Viktor 94 Freud, Sigmund 25--26

G GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) 51, 124, 208, 214, 241, 246, 247--248,
285, 286 gabapentin 212, 214, 284, 303 garlic 107, 327, 338, 340, 341
gastrointestinal tract 135--139 general metabolic panel 309 genetics
147--158 prescriptions 154--155 risk factors 150--152 testing 154, 310
ginger 325, 327, 338, 340, 341, 342 ginkgo biloba 112, 172, 199
glutamate 208, 246, 353 gluten 197, 230, 232, 243, 267, 297, 298, 318,
329--335 glyphosate 182, 199, 334 gratitude, power of 85--86 green tea
113, 127, 214, 270, 338, 339 green tea catechins (GTC) 113

H Hashimoto's disease 243, 261 head trauma 159--174, 253, 339
prescriptions 168--172 risk factors 162--163, 167 hemoglobin A1c 314
herbicides 182, 197, 254 herbs and spices 326--327, 338--341 hippocampus
66 Hippocrates 22 HIV 220, 222 homocysteine 134, 143, 308, 310 huperzine
A 60, 127--128 hydration 321--322 Hyman, Mark 222, 346 hyperbaric oxygen
therapy (HBOT) 37, 49, 103, 110--112 hypertension 104, 107, 150, 155,
263, 307--308

hyperthyroidism 242--243, 278, 280, 300, 302, 311 hypnosis 25, 195, 233,
284--285, 300, 303, 360 hypnotherapy 284--285 hypothyroidism 49,
242--243, 247, 280, 311

I imipramine. See Tofranil immune system 89, 132, 138, 195, 217--237
blood tests 195, 231 disorders of 219--222 function of 219 immunity and
infections 222--237 prescriptions 231--234 risk factors 230 immunity
disorders 219--222 impulse control issues 56, 66, 205, 333 infections
220, 222--237 fungal 228--230 infectious diseases 222--237 inflammation
131--146 prescriptions 142--144 risk factors 134--135 insomnia 276, 278,
302--303 Institute for Functional Medicine 349 insulin 27, 241,
265--266, 314 interictal dysphoric disorder (IDD) 208--209 Irlen
syndrome 167 iron 119, 123--124, 127, 309, 312 balancing levels 127

J jet lag 282

K ketamine treatment for addiction and depression 33--34 ketogenic diet
213 Kraepelin, Emil 26, 208

L lamotrigine 206, 212, 297 lavender 284, 302 lead 182, 187--188, 200,
254 leaky gut 135--137 learning

importance of 122--123 Librium 28 Lincoln, Abraham 2--3, 25, 38, 149
lobotomy 27--28 loneliness 90--91, 121, 125, 127 effects of 123
L-tyrosine 256, 257 Lyme disease 47, 195, 222, 224--226

M magnesium 107, 199, 213--214, 250, 285--286 MAOA 352 marijuana 33, 184
as psychiatric treatment 33 Medical Diagnostic Laboratories 231
medications 12--13, 28--34, 138, 212, 281, 297, 303--305 introduction of
psychiatric 29 pros and cons of 303--304 meditation 108, 212, 233, 300,
302 MedlinePlus 294 melatonin 285, 342 menopause 247, 250--251 mental
exercises 126 mental health 1--15, 63--72 mental health issues allergies
and 220 among teens 3 autoimmune disorders and 220--222 cancer and 220
current diagnostic paradigm and 14 diet and 319--342 genes and 351--354
genetics and 148--149 gluten sensitivity and 331 head trauma and
164--166 menopause and 250--251 neurohormones and 241--259 nutrition and
317--342 prevalence 3--4 sleep and 275--287 sleep problems and 276--277
smoking and 185 sugar and 265--266 thyroid dysfunction and 241--243
mercury 182, 200, 329

Mesmer, Franz Anton 25 metabolic syndrome 271, 331 methylphenidate. See
Ritalin microbiome 137--139 milk 334 mindful exercise 110 mind storms
203--215 prescriptions 210--214 risk factors of 209 minocycline 225--226
mold 186--187 testing for exposure 195 Moniz, António Egas 27 MSG
(monosodium glutamate) 196, 210, 317 MTHFR 351 Mushrooms 338, 340
benefits of 233 psilocybin 33

N N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 127, 172, 199 Natural Medicines website 294
neurofeedback 169--172, 213 neurohormone issues 239--259 prescriptions
255--257 risk factors 254--255 neurons 63, 66, 68, 109, 135, 137, 171,
207--208 neurotransmitters 206, 207--208, 246 effects of declining
levels 124 nutraceuticals 112--113, 127--128, 143--144, 172, 199, 200,
213--214, 233--234, 256-- 257, 271--272, 285--286, 291--306. See also
supplements pros and cons of 305--306 scientific evidence for 294--296

O obesity 89, 107, 134, 261--273, 313, 321 omega-3 fatty acids 112, 135,
139--140, 144, 172, 200, 271, 323 Omega-3 Index 135, 309 opiates 3,
292--293 oral contraceptives 249--250 oregano 327, 338 organic foods
196, 327--328 oxcarbazepine 212 oxybenzone 191

P painbody 82--83 PANDAS 227--228, 230 PANS 228, 230 parabens 191 PCBs
(polychlorinated biphenyls) 193 perimenopause 247, 250--251 pesticides
180--182, 196, 197, 255, 327--328 phosphatidylserine (PS) 128, 172
photophobic seizures 212 phthalates 191, 196, 198 pituitary gland 161,
172, 253 Pizzorno, Joseph 190 plastic 182, 196, 318, 327 polyethylene
glycols 191 potassium bromate 196 prayer 94, 108, 212, 233, 284, 300
prediabetes 105, 107, 134, 262, 265, 266, 314 pregabalin 212
pregnenolone 256 probiotics 142, 143, 257 processed meats 197, 339
progesterone 239, 241, 246--251, 254, 256, 313 symptoms of imbalance 249
protein 213, 322--323 Prozac 29--30, 40, 55, 58 psychedelic drugs as
psychiatric treatment 33--34 psychiatry history of 21--34 psychoanalysis
25--26 psychological circle 80--88 psychopharmacology 28--30

Q QEEGs (quantitative electroencephalograms) 2, 38, 172

R red dye #40 196, 210, 211, 317, 340 resveratrol 113 retirement/aging
117--130 prescriptions 125--128 risk factors 123--124 Ritalin 12, 28,
40, 299

rosemary 127, 327, 338 Rush, Benjamin 24--25

S saffron 128, 327 sage 128, 327, 341 Sakel, Manfred 27 sauna 200, 270
schizophrenia 225--226, 297--298, 333--334 screen time 211--212
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRIs) 29, 55, 58, 302 serotonin
34, 55, 58, 124, 137, 208, 241, 244, 246, 285, 342 shift work 282 silver
amalgams 195 SLC6A4 353 sleep 275--287 disorders 276--277 habits
281--284 medications 279 prescriptions 280--281 risk factors 278
schedule 283 sleep apnea 277, 280 smoking 105, 107, 119, 125, 134,
184--185, 195 social media 87, 90 sodium benzoate 196 sodium nitrate 196
soy 197, 334 SPECT (single photon emission computed tomography) scan 1,
9, 37--39, 41--62, 102, 219 spices 326--327 spiritual circle 93--97
strength training 110, 271 strep throat 227 stress 89, 90, 233, 243--245
ways to reduce 233 sugar 101, 105, 114, 210, 265--266, 330--331 benefits
of eliminating 265--266 suicide 3 supplements 5-HTP 55, 285 artichoke
extract 199 betaine (trimethylglycine) 143 calcium D-glucarate 257
chromium picolinate 271

cinnamon 272, 327, 338, 340, 341 cocoa flavanols 112 curcumin 143--144
DHEA 72, 241, 243--245, 256, 258, 312 diindolylmethane (DIM) 256 fish
oil 139--140, 144 folate 143, 172, 250, 310 GABA 51, 124, 208, 214, 241,
246, 247--248, 285, 286 ginkgo biloba 112, 172, 199 green tea catechins
113 huperzine A 60, 127--128 L-tyrosine 256, 257 magnesium 107, 199,
213--214, 250, 285--286 melatonin 285 N-acetylcysteine 127, 172, 199
omega-3 fatty acids 112, 135, 139--140, 144, 172, 200, 271, 323
phosphatidylserine (PS) 128, 172 pregnenolone 256 probiotics 142, 143,
257 resveratrol 113 saffron 128, 327 sage 128, 327, 341 vitamin B6 143,
172, 250 vitamin B12 143, 172, 250, 309--310 vitamin C 199 vitamin D
172, 200, 231, 234--235 vitamin E 200, 250 zinc 256, 257, 298, 302, 303
sweating 200 syphilis 223

T tartrazine dye 196 testosterone 241, 246, 247, 250, 251--252,
254--255, 257, 313, 341 symptoms of imbalance 252 TGF Beta-1 195 Think
Dirty app 198 Thorazine 28 thyme 327, 338, 340 thyroid 172, 193, 218,
241--243, 257, 280, 311, 312 tobacco. See smoking Tofranil 28 topiramate
212 toxins 175--202, 339 damage from 177--178

list of 181--182 prescriptions 195--200 testing for 194--195 toxoplasma
gondii 226--227 transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 32--33 traumatic
brain injury (TBI) 48, 52--54, 159--174, 277 triclosan 191 turmeric 327,
338, 339, 340, 341 25-hydroxyvitamin D test 231

V valproic acid 212 vaping 184--185 video games 107, 171--172, 211--212
vitamin B6 143, 172, 250 vitamin B12 143, 172, 250, 309--310 vitamin C
199, 340 vitamin D 172, 200, 231, 234--235, 311, 340 vitamin E 200, 250
volatile organic compounds 198

W Wagner-Jauregg, Julius 27 waist to height ratio (WHtR) 267, 313--314
water 107, 199, 321--322 checking purity of 199 weight loss 270 workouts
282 for brain 125--126

X Xanax 28--29, 91, 218, 239

Z zinc 256, 257, 298, 302, 303, 340

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com


